RHEMES AGAINST ROME: Or, THE REMOOVING OF THE GAGG OF THE NEW Gospel, and
rightly placing it in the mouths of the ROMISTS, by the RHEMISTS; in their
English Translation of the Scriptures.

Which Counter-Gagg is here fitted by the industrious hand of RICHARD BERNARD,
Rector of Batcomb, in the County of Sommerset.



AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kingston, for Ed. Blackmore, and are to be sold
at his shop at the great South door of Paul's. 1626.



TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND WORTHILY HONORED, SIR RALPH HOPTON, Knight of
the BATH, increase of all true happiness, even to that Glory which never
fades.
Right worthy Sir,
I Read, that in ancient times among the Romans, those were adorned with the
dignity of Knighthood, which had with valorous minds exercised themselves in
the wars, men of courage, and of life honest. These so qualified, were much
honored, and had many privileges granted them by the Vt fuse docet Claud.
Coteraeus. de Priuilegijs, and iure Militum.
Civil Law; their deserts meriting such an esteem and their worth reward due
for the same. Now, in a Christian Knight what can be more excellent, then by a
virtuous life to worship the true God, and out of a valorous Spirit to expose
himself unto imminent dangers for his Countries honor and safety?

Your dignity you have obtained in the service of your Sovereign, to the
peril of your person, and to your large expenses, in maintayning your choice
company of Followers, in their distresses. For this your bounty have I heard
them praise you worthily, and pray for you heartily. Sure I am, you went out
with a resolute band, and more then so, with a Company, by means of good
instruction, well ordering themselves. Your glory stands not in the issue of
the designement, being so warrantable, and honorable; howbeit it lay not in
your power to make it prosperous: but in your noble resolution, wherein you may
receive comfort, Nam Conscientia rectae voluntatis max ima consolatio est rerum
incommodarum. Cic. Fam. 6. ep. 4.
and so much the more, having such impediments, as might seem able to
countermand you otherwise to resolve: as the gray hairs of that wise Lady,
your aged Grandmother, laying it to heart; your love of that worthy Lady, your
second self, so tenderly affectionated toward you; your so high esteem and
reverence to your natural and dear Father, so well beloved of his Country
deservedly: whose very life, I may say, (as Judah spoke to Joseph, of his
Father Jacob, concerning Beniamins return;) was bound up in your life, being
his only Son, the hopeful Heir of so great an estate.

This threefold cord so strongly tying you, besides the infolded loving twists
of Uncles and Sisters, could not possibly have bin unloosed, if Generosity of
Spirit had not bin predominate, and your obliged faithfulness to that
euerlastingly-renowned name of an afflicted Princess, bin of that commanding
power to have pressed you forward.

As at your departure, for your so praiseworthy resolution, I did my best
service, according to my calling: and as at your return, I could not neglect
my duty: so now having so good an occasion again to express my truly
honoring of you, I desire you to accept this, as a Memorial thereof for the
time to come. For, though I know my self by profession to be a Preacher of
Peace, yet, indeed, as I ever have, so still I cannot but magnify a valiant
mind, and a Martially Spirited Gentleman, especially, if the same be
accompanied with true piety, the Crown of Knighthood. Of which so qualified,
the Lord, the God of hoasts, increase the number, in these days of warlicke
employments. And thus, in all dutiful respect, I for this present humbly take
leave.

Your Worships, to be commanded in Christ, RIC. BERNARD.
Batcombe, May. 22. 1626.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, CONCERNING SOME PASSAGES IN the
Gaggers Preface; as also showing this Authors general intent.
IT is hard to say, whether boldness, or ignorance be predominant in the Writer
of the Pamphlet, styled, The Gagg of the new Gospel. In his Thrasonicall
Preface, he braggeth, that our own Bibles are so clear to all the World, for
the establishing of the Roman doctrine, and condemning our own, that nothing
is needful thereto, but that a man know to read, and have his eyes in his
head, to behold the same at the opening of our Bible. And yet among the
differences between them and us, this (not the least concerning the deciding
of controversies) is maintained and orged by him, that the Scripture is obscure
and difficult, shut up with many seals, subject to contrary interpretations,
not to be cleared by conferring place with place: and therefore that the people
ought to be restrained from reading of them. If so, how can his Catholic
Reader at the first sight, by the same, refute our doctrines? How needs he
nothing, but to have his eyes in his head, when by their own law, he may not
use his own eyes without the Popes spectacles?

He deploreth, or rather ^^^ffeth at the multitude and variety of our
Translations, and Editions of the Bible in English: and yet in the while will
not remember the manifold swarms of their translations, corrections, and
editions of their own vulgar Latin, even since the making it authentical by
the Council of Trent. Had we, as they, advanced, beyond and above the
Originals, any of our authorized Translations, attributed infallibility to
every tittle of any of them, or in diversity of varying Copies come near the
Romish for multitude, such imputations might be laid against us, but not by
Romanists.

Like a doughty daring Champion, or grand Goliath, upon displaying his banner of
manifold Scripture-proofes for the Roman cause, he proclaims of and against
our party, that all the pack of them put together, is never able in their
defense to do the like, that is, to produce so many places in number, so
express and clear, and for so great a quantity of controversies. I wish that
this Thraso had to the 276. places by him cited out of our Bible, added but
this one, Let not him that girdeth on his harness, 1 Kings 20. 11.
boast himself, as he that puts it off.

Among this pack (as he is pleased in his peddling eloquence to style us) I
acknowledge my self to be of the meanest and coursest stuff, far inferior
to most of my learned and judicious brethren, who are able with one finger, not
only to gagg, but also to choke this babbler. Yet should I think my self
unfit to bear the name of a Minister in this Reformed and Renowned Church of
England, if upon one cursory view of some parts of the Scriptures, I were not
able to observe and rank out more pertinently, and with better conscience, and
directer consequence, many more authorities and arguments for the defense of
our Church, and beating down Popery, then he has pretended to do on the
contrary.

True it is, that my principal calling and daily endeavor is (like David's in
his minority) to keep and attend sheep in the Country, my furniture is
rather the Crook and Scripp, then the Sword or Sling. Yet if wild beasts
range and rauage among our flocks, we are awaked to stretch forth our hands,
and rescue our Lambs. And well may we answer with David: Thy servant kept his
fathers 1. Sam. 17. 34.
She^pe: and there came a Lion, and likewise a Bear, and took a Sheep out of
the Flock: and I went out after him, and smote him, and took it out of his
mouth.

Plain Shepheardly David, had he trusted in his own strength, and not rather
in the goodness of his cause, being Gods quarrel, might easily have been
discouraged not only by the braues and threats of the Philistine, but much
more by the checks and snappes of his elder brother Eliab; who (perhaps being
better furnished with abilities both for war, and for Court) thought to
frown his rural brother out of the field. But God is pleased to advance his
truth and cause the rather by plain and weak means. For my part, nothing
has moved me to this encounter, but the zeal of Gods truth, and desire to
instruct the meaner sort, and establish our less learned Christian brethren.
As for curiosities and subtle contemplations, I leave them unto others, or
rather to be left of all others, so far as they tend to engendring of strife
among our selves, and prejudice to our Church. And accordingly in pressing the
passages of Scripture, and vindicating the same from violent and absurd
interpretations, I have labored to deliver the plain, true, and native
exposition, arising out of the literal sense, and natural context, together
with the circumstances thereof. Which manner of interpretation, as most sound
and solid, has in all ages, and will find approbation with the judicious.

As for the style and words of Scriptures, I desire (as this adversary dealt
with us by way of repercussion,) so to repay him in coin of his own stamp:
and therefore I still plead out of their own vulgar English Translation of
the whole Bible, written and perfited by the Seminary Priests at Rhemes, as
appears by the first words of their Preface to the New Testament printed
there. Though the other part thereof, being the old Testament, was afterward
printed at Doway, and thereupon is commonly called the Doway Bible.

The Rhemists Priests, for making any Translation at all of the Bible into the
English tongue (though out of the vulgar Latin, though obscured by affected
phrases, and distorted by their corrupt Annotations) yet are said to have bin
beshrewed by their own more subtle Masters and Superiors, as having thereby
laid open to the people the nakedness and deformity of their Romish
doctrines. And therefore have I the more willingly produced the same against
themselves; the power and luster of Gods Word, though clouded and disguised by
their purposed obscurity and improprieties, yet competently shining forth, for
their conviction, by this unwilling wounding of Rome by the out-workes of
Rhemes.

Unto the places cited out of their Bible, I have added not only (sutably to
the Gaggers proofs) the testimonies of diverse ancient Fathers and Doctors of
the Church: but also, for ouer-measure, the consent of diverse modern Writers
very passable, and laudable in the Romish Church.

Lastly, in handling this Popish Gagg (varyed and furbished in diverse Editions)
I thought it not worth the while to go through every particular question: some
being frivolous, or of small moment, or weak and naked enough of themselves,
but have rather chosen to insist upon those which are most pertinent and
weighty. The discussing whereof might tend to seasonable edification. The
judgment of which my poor labors, I humbly submit to our Reverend and
blessed Mother the Church of England.

And so, Christian Reader, I commit my endeavors to thy charitable acceptance,
and withal desire to have my part in thy devout and brotherly prayers, resting

Thine in the Lord, R. B.

The Contents of this Counter-Gagg.
Three Principles premised for deciding Controversies.
THere is one only Rule of Faith. page. 1. 2. This Rule is, and ever has
been the Word of God. p. 3. 3. This Word of God is now no where to be found,
but only in the Holy Scriptures. p. 6.
Principal popish errors refuted in this Counter. Gag, by express Texts of the
approved English-Rhemish Bible, as also by Testimonies of Antiquity, and of
their own Writers.
1. That the holy Scriptures are not the only Rule of our Faith and life in all
matters necessary to salvation. p. 13. 2. That the Scriptures are imperfect,
and insufficient to instruct us in all things necessary to salvation. p. 21. 3.
That the Scriptures be obscure, and hard to be understood, even in things
necessary. p. 29. 4. That the Script do not interpret themselves, and that the
true sense may not be fetched out of themselves. p. 40. 5. That the Scriptures
are not to be allowed to be read of the people, nor heard by them in a known
tongue. p. 44. 6. That the common liberty for all to read the Scriptures, does
breed heresies. p. 50. 7. That the Scriptures cannot of themselves be known to
be the Word of God, unless the Church do give witness unto them, that they
are so. p. 53. 8. That Traditions, which they call the unwritten Word, are the
Rule of Faith. p. 60. 9. That the present Churches determination is the
absolute unquestionable Rule of the peoples faith, on which they are to rest,
believing their teachers, without farther inquiry. p. 70. 10. That the Church
is no where in Scripture taken for the Invisible Church. p. 77. 11. That the
Church is ever gloriously conspicuous in the world. p. 79. 12 That the Church
cannot err. p. 88. 13. That the Church of Rome cannot err. p. 106. 14. That
the Bishop of Rome cannot err. p. 109. 15. That Councels may not err, being
confirmed by the Pope. 115. 16. That the Church of Rome is the Catholic
Church. p. 120. 17. That the Church of Rome has ever bin in perfect unity
within it self. p 127. 18. That Saint Peter was Prince of the Apostles, and
had a primacy of power, and authority above all the other Apostles. p. 130. 19.
That Saint Peter was Head of the Church. p. 137. 20. That Peter was the only
Vicar of Christ here upon earth. p. 152. 21. That the public Service of the
Church ought not to be in a vulgar and known tongue. p. 155. 22. That Images
are to be in Churches, and that not only for instruction, but also to be
adored. p. 159. 23. That the Lords Supper is to be administered to the people
in one kind only. p. 170. 24. That these words, This is my body, are to be
taken literally, without any figure: the Bread being transubstantiate, and
Christ there corporally, the substance of Bread being taken away, and Christ's
true Body in the room thereof, though the accidents of Bread remain. p. 177.
25. That Prayers are to be made to Saints departed, and Angels. p. 183.
Scriptures objected for praying to Angels, answered. 187. Saints, page 189.

Scriptures objected, 1. That Angels pray in particular for us. p. 129.
answered. 2. That Saints departed know what is here done on earth. p. 194. 3.
That the Saints departed, do pray for us particularly. p. 179. 4. That we may
pray to have our petitions granted in favor and merits of the Saints departed.
p. 201.

26. That Confession, commonly called Auricular, or Sacramental, is of
necessity. p. 203. 27. That there is a place, commonly called Purgatory, into
which, souls after the dissolution of the body, do go, wherein, as in a
prison, such as here have not satisfied by temporal pain due for sins, do
make satisfaction in suffering hellish torment, it is uncertain how long. p.
211. 28. That good works do merit, and are the cause of our salvation. p. 231.
Of free will, and the strength thereof. p. 245. 29. That man's will has a
natural power in it self, coworking with Gods grace, in the very first
instant act of a sinners Conversion; to which actiuity of the will such
conversion in part is to be attributed. p. 247. 30. That some sins are in
their own nature venial, and do not deserve eternal punishment. p. 259. Of
keeping Gods Commandments. p. 269. 31. That a regenerate man by assistance of
Gods grace, is able to keep all and every Commandment of God, in every part,
at all times, in thought, word, and deed, perfectly, as God in his Law
requires of him. p. 270. Scriptures objected for works of supererogation
answered. p. 279. Of Justification by Faith only. p. 284. 32. That a man is not
justified before God by faith only. p. 286. 33. That no true believer
particularly can in this life be certain of his salvation, without a miracle,
or extraordinary revelation. p. 293. That the faith of the Elect once had,
cannot be utterly lost. p. 310. Places of Scripture objected, that Justifying
faith once had, may be lost, and a true believer finally perish: And therefore
no certain assurance of salvation. The same places answered. p. 317.
CERTAIN POSITIONS CONCERNING THE RVLE OF FAITH, as a Preface before the
handling of the ensuing questions between us and our Adversaries the Papists.
I. Position. There is one, and but one only rule of our Christian faith.
THis, even their own Bible of Doway and Rhemes, teaches, it does not make
mention of rules, but speaks ever singularly as of one rule, Romans 12. 6. Gal.
6. 16. and of the same rule, Phil. 3. 16. Seeing also that there is but one
God, one Lord, one Spirit, one body, (or Church) one Faith, one Hope, one
Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. 1. Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. how can there be more then one
Rule? The ancient Fathers speak of no more then one, as afterward shall be
showed.

And reason may tell us, that a competent rule can be but only one, to that
whereof it is a rule, the same also an entire and perfect rule, and not
partial, or a rule only in part.

For if the rule be not one, but two for one and the same thing; then they must
either agree, and so are they but one entire: or else they differ: if so in any
thing, then cannot they be both rules for one and the same thing.

For then res regulata, the thing ruled, must differ from it self, in being
framed to the difference of the rules between themselves: now, the rules
disagreeing, what can accord them? or what can they agreeingly measure, when
they are themselves at odds?

If any one say, that the one may be a rule to the other; then there should be
a rule of a rule, and so run in infinitum, whereof there is no certain
knowledge; and so no sure rule for any thing.

If it be granted, as needs it must, that a rule is only one, and that there
cannot be either two rules for one thing, or a rule of a rule; yet perhaps it
will be said, that one and the same rule may have two parts, whereof neither
part is a perfect rule of it self, but both together make a full rule.

But this cannot be: For if it be a rule in part, then is it imperfect, and
needs a supply, but an imperfit rule there is not, be it never so short. For
suppose an inch, or an half inch rule, yet is it as true, as full, and as
perfect a rule, as truly measuring that to which it is laid, as the rule of an
ell long, though it cannot measure so much at once. Therefore say the learned,
that a rule is a ^av^^us. Theo p^^lact. in Phil. cap. 3. Phocius apud Occum^n.
in ^ (...) 3.
measure which does not deceive; which admits neither of addition, or
detraction; neither of putting to, nor taking from. For put any thing (says
another) to a rule, or take from it, the rule is corrupted, and is denied
indeed to be a rule.

As for the parts of the same rule (if any such were) these parts must agree in
every thing: and if they do so, then is either part the other fully; and so
the one of them sufficient, and the other superfluous; or if they agree not,
how can they be one rule for the same thing? which of them can give the even
measure? Neither of them indeed, by reason of their disagreement. The device
therefore of a rule in part, is absurd, and unreasonable; A piece of a rule is
not a rule.
and a rule, if it be at all a rule, must be one, and the same ever infallible
in it self; which if the ignorant do handle untowardly, the fault is in the
men, and not in the measure.

II. Position. This one Rule of our faith is only Gods Word.
1. FOr by the Word of God comes faith, Romans 10. 14. in that respect it is
called the Word of faith, which the Apostles preached, Romans 10. 8. Now, without
the Word of God, no faith, no pleasing of God, Heb. 11. 6. and so no true
Religion: therefore must it needs be the ground and rule thereof; and ^i. 3.
ca. 10. de Verbo Dei.
Bellarmine says, that the Word of God is the first foundation of our faith.

2. We are commanded of God, to do as he commands, Deuteronomy. 5. 32, 33. and 12.
32. Numb. 15. 39, 40. Ezech. 20. 19. Josh. 1. 7. Prou. 4. 2. and that we may
know how strictly we are tied to this Word, we are charged not to add to it,
Deuteronomy. 12. 32. and 28. 14. nor to take from it, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Josh. 1. 7 Revel.
22. 18. lest that God reprove us, and we be found liers, Prou. 3. 6. neither
are we to turn aside from it, either to the right hand, or to the left Deuteronomy.
5. 32. and when at any time we are in danger of turning aside, this must be
our director to preserve us from erring, Isai. 30. 31.

3. God from heaven has said of Jesus Christ his Son, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him, Matthew. 17 5. binding us to his
Word, which is the Word of his Father, Ioh. 8. 26.

Lastly, it is very evident, that this Word of God has always, from the very
beginning of the Church, been her warrant and guide in all her faith in God,
and service to God.

First, Before the flood, as appears, first, by the commendation of Abels
sacrifice, by faith offered, Heb. 11. Now, faith presupposes a Word of God,
Romans 10. 17. Secondly, by Gods accepting of his sacrifice, which he so did
offer, as being performed according to his will. Thirdly, by the praises of
their obedience, to be as God commanded, Genesis 6. 9, 22. and 7. 5.

Secondly, After the flood till Moses; for God smelt a sweet sacrifice when
Noah sacrificed, Genesis 8. 21. which he would not have done, had not Noah been
warranted by him, so to sacrifice to him., First, by this Word of God was
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob guided, as the History shows, if we consider these
places, where God is said to speak unto them, giving them precepts, Genesis 12.
1. and 13. 17. and 15. 1. and 17. 9, 10. and 31. 3. and 35. 1. Secondly, making
them promises, Genesis 12 2, 3, 4, 7. and 13. 15, 16. and 15. 5, 13, 18. Thirdly,
their going to enquire of God, Genesis 25. 2. Exodus 18. 15. Fourthly, Gods
commending their obedience in keeping his way, charge, commandments, statutes
and laws, Genesis 18. 19. and 26. 5.

Thirdly, When Moses was appointed by God to guide the people, they were
exhorted to hearken to Gods voice, and to his commandments, Exodus 15. 26. they
iournyed toward Canaan according to the commandment of the Lord, Exodus 17. 1.
And concerning Moses this is said of him, that according to all the Lord
commanded, so did he, Exodus 40. 16. He spoke that which was commanded him,
Exodus 34. 34. Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 14. and according to all that the Lord had given him
in commandment, Deuteronomy. 1. 3. and made them know the Statutes of God and his
Laws, Exodus 18. 16. The Tabernacle was for the parts, the matter, manner and
end, in all and every thing exactly done, only according to Gods Word, and the
pattern showed him from God, Exodus 25. 9, 40. nothing left to Moses device,
Exodus 26. 30. and 27. 8. So was the Temple built afterward by Gods
commandment and direction only, 1. Chr. 28. 11, 12, 19. 1. King. 6. 38. 2.
Chron. 3. 3. The Prophets taught only the Word of the Lord, Ezech. 3. 4. for
they say, Thus says the Lord; Hear the Word of the Lord, when they executed
their Ministry, and they spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet.
1. 20. Nehemiah 9. 30. Heb. 1. 1.

Fourthly, When Christ came, he spoke not of himself, Ioh. 12. 49. not his
own words, Ioh. 40. 10. and 17. 8. neither was his doctrine his own, Ioh. 7.
16. and 14. 24. he did nothing of himself, Ioh. 8. 28. and 5. 19. but he
taught the words of his Father, Ioh. 17. 8. his Doctrine and Word was his that
sent him, Ioh. 7. 16. and 14. 24. what he had heard and seen with the Father,
that did he speak, Ioh. 8. 26. 38. of whom he received a commandment what
he should say and speak, Ioh. 12. 49. And before his Ascension, choosing his
Apostles, he gave them a commandment and charge, to teach whatsoever he
commanded them, Matthew. 28. 20. and gave them the words which his Father gave
unto him, Ioh. 17. 8.

Fifthly, After he was ascended, according as he had promised, Ioh. 14. 26. he
sent down upon his Apostles the holy Ghost, Act. 2. which Spirit of God spoke
not of himself, but whatsoever he heard, that he spoke, Ioh. 16. 13. By this
holy Spirit, the Spirit of the Father, spoke the Apostles, Mat. 10. 20. Mark.
13. 1. which guided them into all truth, Ioh. 16. 13. teaching and remembering
them of all things, whatsoever Christ had said unto them, Ioh. 14. 26. So that
what the holy Ghost taught them, was the Word of Christ, and Christ's Word was
the Word of the Father; thus strictly was the Word of God observed.

Sixthly, The holy Apostles observed this Rule, in whom, and by whom the holy
Ghost did speak, Mark. 13. 11. whose direction they did follow, Act. 15. 28.
and gave themselves to the Ministry of the Word, Acts 6. 4. preaching the Word
of the Lord, Act. 8. 25. and 15. 35, 36. and 16. 32. what they did teach, was
the Word of God, Acts 18. 11. and 19. 10, 20. the counsel of God, Act. 20. 27.
the Gospel of God, Romans 1. 1. the commandments of the Lord, 1. Cor. 14. 37.
delivering what they had received from the Lord, 1. Cor. 11. 23. and 15. 3.

And lastly, That which the Church, and the Saints, and believers heard, was
the Word of the Lord, Acts 13. 44. this they received as Gods Word, 1. These. 2.
13. and glorified the same, Act. 13. 40. Thus was Gods Word from the beginning,
before the Law, under the Law, in Christ's time, and all the Apostles days, the
Churches instruction and direction, and must be so unto the worlds end.
Therefore it is the only infallible rule of our faith, by which we must ever
be directed and guided.

III. Position. This Word of God is now no where to be found, but in the holy
Scriptures.
THe truth of this will appear, if we consider, how God did cause all those
things which were necessary to be believed and practiced of the Church, to be
afterward written, which before had been delivered by word of mouth.

1. Before the Law till Moses, the Church was guided by Gods Word unwritten:
this we acknowledge, and the Papists seek to make advantage thereof, for an
unwritten Word still: but their arguing hence is vain, because that all that
same Word unwritten in all necessary points of the worship and service of God,
was afterward written by Moses: so as that unwritten Word became to be the
written Word. The proof of this is manifest.

For Moses first wrote the same Historically in the books of Genesis and
Exodus, unto the giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. which Law God
himself wrote, Exodus 31. 18. Afterward Moses wrote the same by way of
precept, which other of the Prophets after him explained and enlarged, as they
were moved by the holy Ghost. For the better clearing of this point, see the
same more fully in the particulars.

Before the Law they were taught by the unwritten Word: To sanctify the
Sabbath day, Genesis 2. 2. The very same after the giving of the Law by the
written Word: So in Exodus 20. 8. and 31. 13. Leuit. 23. 32. To build an Altar
to the Lord, Genesis 8. 20. and 13. 18. So in Exodus 27. 1. and 20. 24. Deuteronomy. 27.
5. To offer sacrifice, Genesis 4. 3, 4. and 8. 20. So in Numb. 28. 2, 3. To make a
distinction of beasts and other creatures, clean and unclean, and to offer
only of the clean to God, So in Leu. 11. 2, 13, 31, 47. and 20. 25. and 22.
20, 25. Genes. 7. 8. and 8. 20. To call upon the Name of the Lord, Gen 4. 26.
and 21. 23. So in Psalm. 50. 16. Joel 1. 14. To eat no blood, Genes. 9. 4. So
in Leuit. 17. 14. Deuteronomy. 12 16. To power out drink offerings, and to offer
burnt offerings, Genesis 35. 14. and 28. 18. So in Numb. 6. 15, 17. and 29. 11,
16, 21. To have daily burnt offerings, Job 1. 5. So in Numb. 28. 3, 6. To
acknowledge a high Priest, Genesis 14. 18. So in Leuit. 8. 6. and 21. 10. To pay
tithes, Genesis 28. 22. and 14. 20. So in Leuit. 27. 30. To preach and prophecy,
Jude, verse. 14. 1. Pet. 3. 19, 20. 2. Pet. 2. 5. and to teach the people. So in
Deuteronomy. 33 10. Leuit. 10. 11. Ier. 1. 17. Ezech. 3. 4. Malach. 2. 7. To enquire
of God, Genes. 25. 22. So in 2. King. 13. 11. and 22. 13. To make vows unto
God, Genes. 28. 20. So in Numb. 30. 2, 3. Deuteronomy, 12. 25. To keep feasts unto
God, Exodus 5. 1. So in Leuit. 23. 4. To know the Covenant of God with them,
Genes. 15. 18 and 17. 2. and 8. 21, 22 and 9. 11. So in Deuteronomy. 5. 2. To know the
promised seed, Genesis 3. 15. and 22. 18. and the Messiah, Ioh. 8. 56. Gal. 3. 16.
Luke 1. 55. So in Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 18. Isai. 11. 1. and 6. 10. Ioh. 12. 41. To
have faith in coming to God, and offering sacrifice, Heb. 11. 4. So in 2.
Chron. 20. 20. To be justified and accounted righteous by faith, Genesis 15. 6.
Romans 4. 3. So in Hab. 2. 4. To receive the Sacraments, as first, Circumcision,
Genesis 17. 10. then the Passover, Exodus 12. So afterward in Josh. 5. 2. Deuteronomy.
16. 1. To be vpright-hearted, and to walk with God, Genesis 15. 22. and 6. 9. and
17. 2. to fear God, and to eschew evil, Job 1. 1. So in Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Josh.
24. 14. 2. Kin. 20. 3. Eccles. 12. 13. To know the commandments of God, and to
teach others the same, Genesis 18. 19. So in Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. and 4. 9. and 6.
7. and 11. 19. Lastly, Abraham had a charge from God, Commandments, Statutes
and Laws which he kept, Genesis 26. 5. So the Israelites had a charge from God,
Commandments, Statutes, and Laws, as Moses and Prophets and Psalms every
where teach.

Thus we see, that what was first by tradition, was afterward particularly
written; and so the unwritten Word was the same with the written.

First also, before the Word was written with pen and ink, the whole moral law
written in the heart, was to be observed, as may be showed in the books of
Genesis, Exodus and Job; as well as the ceremonial Law and the Sacraments,
Sacrifices, and other parts of Gods worship before mentioned: all which
afterward were written in books. Therefore the traditionall Word before the Law
written, helps nothing for a traditional Word now, seeing God would have that
same written afterward; whereby of a traditionall Word, it became the written
Word of God.

Secondly, in the time of Moses, God spoke to him, and he to the people: but
it is said, that Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, Exodus 24. 4. Deuteronomy. 31.
9, 19, 24. The Prophets also spoke, first, by word of mouth, which were for the
most part interpretations, and more special applications of the Word already
written by Moses, which also were after written, as the books extant do
witness.

Thirdly, In the time of Christ and his Apostles they taught by word of mouth
the Word of God; but their Word was not then an unwritten Word: For first,
Christ taught out of the Scriptures of Moses, of the Prophets and Psalms, as
his interpreting Luke 24.
of them, citing them, and confuting the adversaries by them do show: he
therefore taught the written Word. And what he himself either did, or farther
spoke in all necessary things touching his life and doctrine, they are now
written by the Evangelists, Luke 1. 1, 5. Act. 1. 1. So in like manner the
Apostles, before they wrote, taught not an unwritten Word, but the Word and
Gospel, Acts 8. 25. and this same written in the Scriptures of the Prophets,
Romans 1. 1, 2. and 16. 26. Act. 26. 22. and 28. 23. According as Saint Jerome
says; Whatsoever the Apostles preached In Mat. 13.
in the Gospel, they preached it by the words of the Law and the Prophets. For
if they had preached any thing not in the Scriptures, it had been in vain for
the Bereans to have searched the Scriptures daily, to see whether those things
which they had heard of them were so or no, Acts 17. 11. It is clear
therefore, that they taught a written Word: and what they received from Christ,
and taught, for the effect and use thereof, they also afterward did write, as
may be gathered from these ensuing places of Scripture.

In Romans 15. 15. the Apostle wrote, putting them in mind; to wit, of that which
had been taught them by word of mouth.

In 1. Cor. 11. 23. he tells them, that he delivered (by word of mouth) that
which he had received of the Lord: then he writes down in the same verse and
the rest following, that which he had received.

In 1. Cor. 15. 1. he tells them, that now by writing, he declared unto them
the Gospel which he had preached, and which they had received: so that he
wrote that, which before he had taught them.

In 2. Cor. 1. 13. he says, that he wrote none other things unto them, then
that which they did read, or did acknowledge.

In Phil. 3. 1. he wrote the same things; to wit, which he had preached, it
not being to him grievous, and to them safe.

In 2. These. 2. 5. he says; Remember ye not, that when I was with you, I told
you these things? to wit, which he then in that Epistle wrote: he wrote then,
what by mouth he had taught. And howsoever in the verse 15. of this Chapter,
he mentions Traditions, yet those were such, as were then by him written:
there the word traditions is equally and alike referred to ( word) and (
epistle:) as if he had said; If that I delivered by word, be forgotten, yet
have you now my Epistle, to keep them in your mind; and therefore in verse. 5.
he says; Remember ye not? having written down in verse. 3. and 4 what he
before had told them, and so in verse 6. proceeding to set down the traditions
before delivered, unto verse. 13. Then writes he to them, to stand fast, and
keep the traditions, taught by word before, or by his epistle now, as being
all one and the same, delivered now both by word and writing.

In 2. These. 3. 6. he there also makes mention of tradition: but what? of a
tradition unwritten? Yes, before it was written: but now Paul wrote it, as you
may read in verse. 10. where he tells us particularly what it was.

In 2. Pet. 1. 12. Saint Peter endeavors to put them always in remembrance,
that they might after his decease keep in mind always the things which they
knew, and the truth wherein they were settled; to wit, by his and others
preaching. Now if he wrote not these things, they could not so well remember
them after his departure? And did Peter care only for those present, or for
Gods Church after? If he did, then surely he so wrote, to remember those
present of that which they had learned, as the same might also instruct others
in the same truth, such as should afterward live, and had never heard him by
word of mouth.

In 2. Pet. 3. 1, 2. Here Saint Peter tells them, what was the end of writing
both his Epistles, to wit, to remember them, and to mind them of two things,
first, of the words which were spoken by the Prophets, and then, of the
Commandments of the Apostles; he therefore wrote these.

In 1. Ioh. 4. 13. Saint John writes of Antichrist, of whom before they had
heard: and in Chap. 1. 3. he writes what he had seen and taught before.

S. Jude, he writes what they (to whom he sends his Epistle) before knew, and
had bin preached by the Apostles, v. 15. 17. 18.

Saint Luke writes those things, which were delivered by word of mouth, for the
more certainty of the things taught, Luke 1. 2, 3, 4. even of all that Christ
began to do, and to speak, unto his Ascension, Act. 1. 1.

By all these places it is clear, that what was first taught, was afterward
written: and our adversaries cannot show any necessary point of faith, or of
good life left out of the written Word, which as a point of doctrine before was
delivered by tradition, for the Churches necessary instruction from the worlds
beginning. To this the ancient Fathers give witness.

Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 1. The Apostles preached the Gospel, and afterward by
the will of God, they delivered it unto us in Scriptures, to be the pillar and
ground of our faith. Saint Jerome on Phil. 3. says, that Saint Paul wrote,
that is, made rehearsal of the same things, which he, when he was present with
them, had told them by mouth. Theophylact on Luke, chap. 1. speaks in Lukes
person, and says, I instructed thee before without writing, now I deliver unto
thee a written Gospel, that thou may not forget those things which were
delivered without writing. Nicephorus lib. 2. cap. 34. says, that what Saint
Paul in presence plainly taught by mouth, the same things afterward in absence
he called to their minds by his Epistle. And that this was not but by Gods
commandment, S. Austine de consens. Euangel. lib. 1. cap. 35. witnesses; When
the Disciples wrote, says he, what Christ showed and said unto them, we may
not say, that he did not write: for the members wrote that which they learned,
by the inditing of the head. For whatsoever he would have us to read of the
things which he did and said, he gave it in charge to them, as his hands to
write the same. So that we may conclude that true, which Saint Paul wrote to
Timothy, 2. Tim. 3. 16. both of all the old Testament, as also of all the new;
and particularly of that very same place it self, when he had written it,
which is, that all Scripture is of divine inspiration; seeing he also wrote by
divine instinct, and by Christ's commandment, and made this attribute of
diuinely-inspired, to be a property of the Scriptures, and so all necessary
things being written which were taught, we must acknowledge the Word of God to
be found now only in the holy Scriptures, and not elsewhere.

And therefore may it be necessarily concluded from the premises, and more
fully also in the next immediately ensuing questions touching holy Scripture,
that the only Rule of our faith, is the holy Scriptures.

We are therefore to be guided by them in matter of faith and religion, and not
by that which seems right in our own eyes, Deu. 12. 8. Numb. 15. 39. for
there is a way which seems right to a man, but the end thereof leads to
death, Pro. 14. 12. Not by our own hearts, Ezech. 13. 2. for man's heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, Ier. 17. 9. Not by the
will of man, 2. Pet. 1. 21. for it is perverse and crooked. Not by humane
wisdom, though fair in show, Col. 2 23. for man's wisdom is enmity with God,
Romans 8. 7. and the wisdom which is not from above, is earthly, sensual and
devilish, Iam. 3. 15. Not by our own spirit, Ezech. 13. 3. for we know not of
what spirit we are, Luke 9. 55. Not by any private interpretation, 2. Pet. 1.
20. for this is after man, and not from holy Scripture, which is not of any
private interpretation, but after the guiding of the holy Spirit, 2. Pet: 1.
20, 21. Not by a pretended revelation, or spirit, 2. These. 2. 2. for this has
deceived, 2. These. 2. 3. 1. King. 22. 23. Not by the commandments nor
doctrines of men, Col. 2. 2. Mat. 7. 7. for such worship as is performed to God
on such grounds, is vain, Mat. 15. 18. Mark. 7. 8. and God rejects it,
threatening to punish the same with loss of wisdom and understanding, Esaias 29.
13, 14. Not by traditions, though received from our fathers, 1. Pet. 1. 18. for
with such deceits false Teachers deceived the people, even in the Apostles
days, Acts 15. 24. 2. These. 2 2. Not by writings of men, as if Apostolical, 2.
These. 2. 2. for so the deceiuets in S. Paul's time sought to beguile the people,
as this place witnesses. Not by statutes, judgments, or examples of our
forefathers, Ezech. 20. 18. for their hearts might not be aright, Psalm. 78. 8,
37, 57. Not by custom, Leuit. 18. 3. for it may be vain, Ier. 10. 3. and
idolatrous, 2. King. 17. 33, 40. And custom which God approves, is that which
is kept; as it is written; a custom observed from the written Word, Esd. 3. 4.
Not by number and multitude, Exo. 23. 2. for here we see they may do ill: and
examples in Scripture show, that multitudes have erred, when the fewer have had
the truth. Not by the bare credit of any one teaching otherwise, then we have
received from the Word. Saint Paul in this respect forbids to credit Man or
Angel, Gal. 1. 7, 8. and an old Prophet seduced a young Prophet to his
destruction, 1. King. 13. and that under pretended authority of an Angel,
verse. 18. 24. Not by any rising from the dead, much less by supposed
apparitions, seeming to be of such as were dead, Luke 16. 31. for this the
Lord allowed not of, as a sufficient means to instruct: we are to be sent to
the written Word, to Moses and to the Prophets. Not by signs and wonders, or
foreshewing things to come: for these may false teachers do, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2.
by the power of Satan, 2. These. 2. 9. Revel. 13. 13. deceiving the people,
Revel. 19. 20. Not by vain and falsely so called Philosophy, Col. 2. 8. or
oppositions of Sciences falsely so called, 1. Tim. 6. 20. for these be vain
and deceitful. None of these are sufficient to lead us: but we are to be
ruled by the written Word.

The Errors of our time. The Romanists maintain these ensuing Propositions.
I. Proposition. That the holy Scriptures are not in all matters necessary to
salvation, the only rule of our faith and life.
Confuted by their own English Bible.
THeir Bible teaches, that there is a Rule, Romans 12. 6. Gal. 6. 16. This Rule
one and the same, Phil. 3. 16. Now that this Rule is the holy Scriptures, which
is the written Word of God, it is clear by the same Bible.

I. It makes the Word written, to be the rule and guide in matters of
controversy, Deuteronomy 17 11. In this place the Priests and Judges are bound to
proceed according to the Law. But that Law was written in a book, called The
book of the Law of the Lord: which the Priests and Levites had with them in
Iehosophats days, to teach the people, 2. Chron. 17. 9. Bellarmine, lib. de
Verbo Dei, cap 2. says on this place: Holy Moses teaches here, that
controversies arising among Gods people, are to be judged according to the Law.

II. Their Bible teaches, that God urges, To the Law, and to the testimony
(which is written as aforesaid) and condemns them that speak not according
to this Word, Esaias 8. 20.

III. By it we are taught, that the Church is straightly charged, to keep to
the written Word, as in Josh. 23. 6. Only take courage, and be careful that
you keep all things, which be written in the volume of the Law of Moses, and
decline not from them, neither to the right hand, nor to the left, Josh. 1 8.
Let not the volume of this Law depart from thy mouth: but thou shall meditate
in it days and nights, that thou may keep and do all things that be
written in it. Is not this testimony clear? What can be spoken more plainly?
These places urge to keep to the written Word, and withal, not to decline from
it. S. Paul having spoken against division, schism, and syding with teachers
in the Church of Corinth, some of them holding of one, some of another: to
remedy this evil, he warnes them not to be puffed up one against another,
above that which is written, 1. Cor. 4. 6. To these places may be added, Deuteronomy.
30. 10. The Lord promised great blessings unto Israel, with this annexed
condition, saying; If thou hear the voice of thy Lord thy God, and keep his
precepts: where their obedience is commanded, and his voice made the rule
thereof. Now, lest they should doubt, where to find this his voice, and these
his precepts, Moses adds these words; which are written in this Law: which
Law he wrote, and commanded the same to be read before all Israel, for this
end, to learn to fear the Lord, and to fulfill all his words in that Law,
Deuteronomy. 31. 9, 12. yea, a curse is denounced against such as keep not to the
Written Word, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 1. 10. and a plague is threatened for not
observing the same, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. Hence is it, that we shall find the praises
of holy men very often in Scripture, That they did according as it was written,
2. Chron. 35. 12. they couenanted, that they would doethe things that were
written, 2. Chron. 34. 31. See out of their own Bible more for this, 2. Chr.
23. 18. 1. Esdr. 3. 2. 4. and 6. 18. 2. Esdr. 8. 14 15. and 10. 34, 36. 4 King.
23. 21. 3. King. 2. 3. 2. King. 1. 18. And not to do as was written, was a
sin, for which they were to humble themselves, and beg pardon of God, 2.
Chron. 30. 6, 18.

1. By their own Bible we learn, that Jesus Christ, the chief Shepherd and
Bishop of our souls, did nothing regard traditions, he never named them but
with dislike, but advanced very highly the dignity of the Scriptures, as the
only and alone rule, and means of our instruction in all things necessary to
eternal life: for thus their Bible tells us;

1. That he took for the ground of his teaching, Scripture, Luke 4. 17. but
we read not any where, that he taught upon tradition.

2. That he interpreted the Scriptures, and out of them taught the things
concerning himself, Luke 24. 27. not for traditions, nor any thing out of them.

3. That he opened the understanding of his Disciples, that they might
understand the Scriptures, Luke 24. 25. He never did so concerning traditions.

4. That he often cited the Scriptures, Mark. 7. 6, 10. Matthew. 9. 13. and 12 3.
and 13. 14. and in many other places; but never traditions.

5. That he exhorts to the searching of the Scriptures, Ioh. 5. 39. but never
to the searching of traditions.

6. That he cleared the Scriptures from abuse and corrupt expositions, Mat. 5.
21, 22, 27, 28, 33. 24. 25, 36, 37, 38, 39. etc. but never traditions.

7. That he used the Scriptures in disputing with Satan, Mat. 4. and in
confuting his adversaries, Mat. 22. 31. and 19. 4. Luke 10 26. never traditions.

8. That he defended his own doctrine and his manner of teaching by the
Scriptures, Mat. 13. 10, 15. and also the act of his Disciples in plucking
ears of corn, Mat. 12. 3, 4, 5. but never by traditions.

9. That he took care always in every thing to fulfill the Scriptures, Ioh.
12. 14, 15, 16. Mat. 4. 14. Luke 24. 44, 46. yea, so far as to suffer death,
to make good the truth of them, Matthew. 26. 54. Luke 22. 37. but no such regard
had he to traditions.

10. That he did oppose Scriptures against traditions, Mat. 15. 4. but never
traditions against Scriptures, or for interpretation of Scripture in matter of
faith.

11. That he preferred the witness of Scripture before the witness of men,
Ioh. 5. 34, 39, 41. yea, the power of them for instruction, before the voice of
any that should be raised from the dead, Luke 16. 27. never so traditions.

12. That he put the trial of himself to Scriptures: so true and sure a Judge
he took them to be, Ioh. 5. 39. not to traditions.

IV. Lastly, he taught, how his own words could take no place, if the written
Word were not regarded, Ioh. 5. 47. What traditionall word is there then of any
mortal man, or of all the mortal men in the world, which may receive so much
as equal authority; how much less then supreme authority over the
Scriptures?

V. Their own Bible teaches, that the Apostles taught not an unwritten, but a
written Word: for the Gospel was that which they preached: but that was
written, Romans 1. 1, 2. and was made manifest by the Scriptures of the Prophets,
Romans 16. 26. Our Savior taught his Disciples out of Moses, Prophets See
Treneus, lib. 4. cap. 66 in fine: and a little book entitled, The Messiab
already come, for the particulars.
and Psalms. Luke 24. 27. in which books his Names, his Natures, his Offices,
his Birth where and when, and of whom; his Life, Doctrine and Miracles; his
Death, Burial, Resurrection and Ascension; his sitting at Gods right hand, and
what benefit we reap by him, are lively depainted and written. The Apostles
Sermons were taken out of the Scriptures, Act. 2. 16, 25, 35. and 7. 2, 51. and
8. 35. and 10. 34, 35, 43. and 13. 16, 23, 27, 33, 36, 40. by which Scriptures
they confirmed what they did teach, and thereby confounded the adversaries,
Acts 17. 2. and 18. 28. the decrees of the Council at Jerusalem, made by the
Apostles and whole Church were grounded upon Scripture, Act 15. 15 19 Saint
Paul's faith and service to God, was the written Word in the Law and in the
Prophets, Act. 24. 14. And those Evangelical doctrines found in his Epistles,
which are so full of comfort to a true believer, though our adversaries spurn
at them, he found written in the old Testament: There could he find the
Kingdom of Christ, Act. 28 23. There he found written, that the works of the
Law before God justify not, Rom 4. 2 6. and 3 20. That election is of mere
grace, without respect to will, or work of man, Romans 9 11, 16. That man is
blessed by imputation through faith, without works of the Law, and freely
justified by grace through faith, Romans 3. 21. for all these he gathers out of
the old Testament, as in the quoted places may be seen. Saint Peter taught out
of the Scriptures remission of sins through faith in Christ's name, Act. 10.
43. Yea the Salvation of our souls, and the grace which should come by Jesus
Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 9. 10, 11. Therefore he commends to the whole Church, in
his second Epist, 2. Pet. 1. 19 20, 21. the holy Scriptures, to which they do
well to attend, as to a candle, says he, shining in a dark place. This he
calls a Prophetical Word most sure. Now, that this might not be taken for an
unwritten Word, first, he tells them in verse. 20. what he means hereby,
even the Prophecy of Scripture, a Word written, and then gives a reason, why
he calls it a most sure Word: for that, says he, it was not by any private
interpretation, nor brought by man's will, but it was that which holy men taught,
inspired with the holy Ghost, Psalm. 20 21. All Scripture therefore being
inspired of God, (2 Timothy 3. 16. is this most sure Word, which is to be
attended unto. And if it be (...), a Word surer then any other, then every
other word must be ruled by it. No other word then can equal it, (for two
superlatiues of the same thing there cannot be) much less a word to ouer-top
it. This is the rule then, and not any traditionall word, which is but a mere
popish fiction, and subtle device to deceive by.

VI. Their own Bible tells us by way of commendations, that the Church of
Berea did hold the Scriptures to be the rule to examine doctrine by, Act. 17.
11. which heard the Word delivered by preaching, and received it, but no
otherwise then they found it written in the Scriptures, by which they did try
it, daily searching the Scriptures, if those things were so. Where note, 1.
That the Bereans held not themselves tied to the Priests lips. 2. That they
heard that which was taught them with relation to the written Word. 3. That
they held the Scriptures to be the trial of the truth of their Teachers
doctrine. 4. That they having heard, did bring that which they had heard, to
the touchstone of holy Writ, for their greater confirmation in the truth; which
things are written for their praise, for our instruction also in imitation. For
if the holy Scriptures of the old Testament, were then the rule to try the
Apostles preaching, is not both the Old and New, the rule to try men's teaching
now?

VII. And lastly, Our Adversaries grant us, that the Word of God is that one
only and infallible rule of Faith, which is vndoubtable true; for what can be
the rule to us of Gods service, but Gods will? And how can we know what is his
will, but by his Word? Therefore this Word, now being no where to be found, but
in holy Scriptures, as is proved by their own Bible, they must needs yield,
that the Scriptures are then the one only infallible rule of our faith: which
if they will yet obstinately deny, they must deny antiquity, which they so
vainly boast of.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Their own Clement tells us, lib. 1. Recog. That from the divine Scriptures
the firm and sound rule of Faith must be taken.

Tertul. contra Hermog. calls the Scriptures the Rule of Faith.

Saint Basil. lib. 1. Contr. Eunom. calls the Scriptures the Canon of that
which is right, and the rule of Truth.

Saint Jerome, lib. 1. cap. 1. in Mat. The holy Scriptures are the Limits of
the Church, out of the which we may not go.

Chrysostom, Hom. 3. in 2. Cor. calls them a most exquisite Rule, and an
exact Square and Balance to try all things.

Saint Augustine, lib. de bono viduit. cap. 1. The holy Scripture has fixed
the Rule of our Doctrine, that we may not presume to be more wise, then we
ought.

Greg. Nyssen. in orat. de eis, qui adierunt Hieros. calls the Scriptures, a
right and inflexible Rule.

Gregory, the great, Hom. 4. in Ezechiel, compares the Scriptures to a
measuring Reed, which meteth out both the active and contemplative life of man.

By which testimonies of the Fathers, we may see how they contrary our
Adversaries tenent: for in plain terms the Fathers call the Scriptures a
Rule, right, exquisite, and inflexible, and the only Rule, the Limits of the
Church. But our new Roman Masters stick not to slighten and vilify the same,
by calling the Book of God, a piece of a rule, a Lesbian crooked rule, a
leaden rule, a nose of wax; and we must be Heretics, for not partaking in
such blasphemies. We may therefore conclude with the words of Isiodorus
Pelusiota, lib. 1. Epist. 369. who says, We ought to refuse whatsoever is
taught, unless it be contained in the volume of the Bible; and with that of
Cyril. Hier. in 4. Catech. Concerning, says he, the Divine and holy mysteries
of our Faith, not any the least thing must be tendered, without warrant of
divine Scripture.

Gainesayed by their own men.
Gerson de commun. sub vtraque specie: The Scripture is the Rule of our faith.
And the same man says, Li. de examine. doct. part. 2. cons. We must take heed
whether the doctrine be agreeable to holy Scripture, as well in it self, as
in the manner of delivery.

Petrus de Aliaco, the Cardinal, calls the Scriptures, the Sacred Canon.

Clemangis, loc. 3. cap. 29. affirms the Scripture to be the infallible Rule
of Truth, yea, the measure, and Judge of all Truth.

Durand. Episcopus, praefat. in lib. sent. The holy Scripture, says he,
sets out the measure of Faith: we may not write, or speak any thing, which
may differ from the same.

Picus Mirand. in Apologia, was bold to say, that there was no infallible truth
without the Bible.

Our faith (says Aquinas) does stay upon the Canonical In sum. part. 1. q. 1.
Art. 8. and 10.
books, and the Church does not decree but of things not necessary to Salvation.

Ferus, on Mat. 13. says, that the holy Scriptures are the sole Rule of
verity, and whatsoever differs or contradicts the same, it is error and
Cockle, with whatsoever show it comes forth.

Franciscus a Victoria, de Sacra. pa. 120. says, I do not think it sure and
certain, although all Writers agree thereto, because it is not to be found in
the holy Scriptures.

Villa Vincentius teaches, that the doctrine of the Books Li. 2. de form.
Conci. ca. 2.
of the Prophets and Apostles is alone the Rule and foundation of Truth.

Their Canon Law tells us, that the divine Scriptures contain Did. 37. 6.
Relat.
the whole and firm Rule of faith.

Andradius, lib. 3. Defens. Trid. Con. in initio. Their opinion dislikes me
not, who say, that therefore the Scriptures are called Canonical, because they
contain the most ample Canon, that is the Rule and Square of Piety, Faith, and
Religion.

Bellarmine lets fall this truth; that the sacred Scripture is De Verbo Dei,
lib. 1. ca. 2.
the most certain, and most sure Rule of Faith.

If so in the Superlatiue degree; then nothing there is to ouerrule or equal
it: and therefore we may more safely cleave to it, only as the most sure and
the most certain Rule. For nothing (says the same man, a little before in the
same place) is more known, nothing more certain then the holy Scriptures,
which are contained in the Prophetical and Apostolic writings.

Besides these testimonies so clear, as no Protestant can speak better in
this point; I add their own practice against themselves; For whatsoever they
conceit to be a Rule, whether a Traditionall word, or their Popes Definitive
sentence, they are constrained to run unto the Scriptures for the ground of
their assertions, and to procure credit to their supposed rule.

The Gagger has objected no Scriptures to disprove the Scriptures to be the
only Rule of Faith.

II. Proposition. That the Scriptures are imperfect, and insufficient to
instruct us in all things necessary to salvation,
Confuted by their own Bible.
THeir Bible proves the undeniable fullness, perfection, and sufficiency of
the Scriptures, by setting down the true ends thereof, both for the whole and
parts, which being so appointed of God, cannot be frustrated, nor
insufficiency found in any means which he ordayneth: for they do perfectly
conduce to their ends, except any dare imagine impiously, and will say, that
either the Scriptures are not sufficient for the ends, whereto they are
appointed of God, (which none but Atheists will affirm) or that the ends are
not enough to make the Scriptures perfectly sufficient, to instrtct us in all
things necessary to Salvation. But if the Scriptures be granted to be
sufficient for their ends whereto they be appointed (as needs must) and the
ends therein set down be proved sufficient in all matters necessary to
salvation, it will necessarily follow, that the Scriptures are sufficient.

The ends, why the Scriptures were written, proved sufficient to direct us in
all matters necessary to salvation.
The Scriptures were and are written for our learning, Romans 15 4. to teach, to
argue, to correct and to instruct in justice, 2. Tim. 3. 16. that we might have
faith and life in the Son of God, Ioh. 20. 31. and hope also by the patience
and consolation of the Scriptures, Romans 15 4. which can instruct to salvation,
2. Tim. 3. 15. that the man of God may be perfect, instructed to every good
work. If it can instruct and make perfect to every good work, then every good
work may be learned out of the Scriptures; and that which can make a man to
every good work perfect, is in it self a perfect instruction thereto. And
what instruction is farther required, then to good works, and to every good
work? where instruction is for every such thing, there is no defect. This were
proof enough for the sufficiency of the Scriptures: but yet more.

Moses, as their own Bible shows, wrote that the people might learn, that
they might fear the Lord their God all their days, and keep and fulfill all
the words of the Law, Deuteronomy. 31. 9, 12, 13. and his words, and ceremonies, that
were commanded in the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 19.

David and others wrote the Psalms, to teach the fear of God, Psalm. 33. 11.
for instruction for the just, for comfort in adversity, for praising and
thanksgiving in prosperity, with many other ends, which their own Bible
plentifully sets out in their contents before every Psalm, according to their
Doway translation.

Solomon wrote his Proverbs, to know wisdom and discipline, to understand the
words of prudence, and to receive instruction of doctrine, justice, and
equity, that subtilty (that is, as they expound it) profound and solid wit,
may be given to little ones, knowledge and understanding to young men, Prou. 1.
2, 3, 4.

The Prophets wrote, to discover men's sins, to threaten judgments, to call
them to repentance, to comfort the humbled, to foretell things to come, either
of some particulars, or of the state of the whole Church, either then or
afterward, as the Prophesies do witness.

The Evangelist S. Luke wrote, that we might know the verity, Luke 1. 3, 4. of
all those things which Jesus began to do and teach, until the day that he was
assumpted, Act. 1. 1, 2.

S. Paul wrote to the Romans, to put them in remembrance what he had taught,
Romans 15. 15. to the Corinthians, to admonish them, 1. Cor. 4. 14. not to keep
company with such as professed Christ, and lived lewdly, 1. Cor. 5. 9, 11. to
instruct them how to carry themselves to an excommunicate penitent, 2. Cor. 2.
3, 9.

To the Ephesians he wrote, that by reading, they might understand his wisdom
in the mystery of Christ, Ephe. 3. 3, 4. to Timothy, how he ought to converse
in the house of God. 1. Tim. 3. 15. To these may be added the end and scope of
all the rest of his Epistles.

S. Peter wrote to admonish always the Saints, 2. Pet. 1. 12. to stir them
up by admonition, ver. 13. and after his decease, to keep a memorial of the
things taught, ver. 15. that they might be mindful of those words which he
before had told them from the holy Prophets and the Apostles, of the precepts
of our Lord and Savior, 2. Pet. 3. 2. and to testify, that this was the true
grace of God wherein they stood, 1. Pet. 5. 12.

S. John, he wrote, that we might not sin: but if any did, to let us know,
that we have Jesus Christ our Advocate and propitiation for our sins, 1. Ioh.
2. 1, 2. that we also might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God, Ioh. 20. 31. and that we might know, that we which believe in the Name of
the Son of God, have eternal life, 1. Ioh. 5. 13. that so we might rejoice,
and that our joy might be full, 1. Ioh. 1. 4. He wrote, that we might know the
things which he had seen, the things that were, and that which was to be done
afterward; even to the worlds end, Revel. 1. 19.

Now therefore seeing it is clear, as before is proved; that all Scriptures
are inspired of God, and he the Author thereof: as also that upon what occasion
soever, or to whomsoever they were first written, that they were not written
for their sakes alone, but for ours also, as their own Bible justifies, Romans
4. 23, 24. and 15. 4. 1. Cor. 9. 10. and 10 11. Psalm. 101. 19. and that they
were appointed for all th^se forenamed ends, to teach the Churches to argue
against errors, to correct sin and vice, to instruct in virtue, to keep us
from sin; to work faith, fear, hope, love, patience, comfort and fullness
of joy: to know the Author of our salvation, and what Jesus Christ taught and
did; to know the words of the Prophets and Apostles; also whether we stand in
the true grace of God, or no; how to demean our selves in Gods Church, and to
be wise to salvation, to believe in the Son of God, and in believing, to have
life through his name, and to know the Churches state from the beginning to the
worlds end. These with other before mentioned, being the maine ends of holy
Scripture; what can be further desired to set out the perfection of it?
especially considering fourthly, that the particulars either in express words,
or by a necessary conclusion, which are in every book, do fully show the
sufficiency of the whole Bible, according to these ends, so as nothing is to
be held necessary for instruction and direction in Gods Church, but is therein
contained.

For would we know what we are to believe?

All the twelve Articles of our Christian faith are there to be found, almost
in so many words expressly.

Would we know our duty to God and man?

There are the ten Commandments of God wholly set down, with the explanation
thereof by exhortations, dehortations, and examples throughout the Bible.

Would we know how to pray aright?

There is the Lords Prayer fully set down, to teach us to pray; and holy men's
prayers as a commentary for our direction.

Would we know what Sacraments Christ ordained?

The two, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, are plainly showed to be
instituted and commanded by Christ, Matthew. 28. 19. and 26. 26, 27, 28.

Would we have controversies decided?

If men without wrangling will rest in that which is sufficient to quiet the
conscience, the Scriptures will end them in any necessary point of faith, and
good life. I will for example instance in some between Papists and us, their
own English Bible being judge.

1. Whether public service ought to be in an unknown tongue?
No, say we. Yes, say they. Hear the Judge, 1. Cor. 14. 9. By a tongue
unless thou utter a manifest speech, how shall that be known which is said?
for thou shall but speak in the air. Verse. 15. I will pray with
understanding, I will sing with understanding.

Whether any Images, or likeness of God may be made?
Yes, say they. No, say we. Hear the Judge, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 17. Keep your souls
carefully: ye saw no similitude in that day that our Lord spoke to you in
Horeb from the midst of the fire, lest perhaps deceived, you might make you a
graven similitude or image of male or female, etc.

3. Whether the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be to be administered in one kind?
Yes, say they. No, say we. Hear the Judge, Mat. 26. 26. Jesus took bread,
verse. 26. and took the Chalice, saying, Drink you all of this, verse. 27. 1.
Cor. 11. The Lord Jesus took bread, verse. 23. also the Chalice, after he had
supped, verse. 25. This was the Churches practice, 1. Cor. 10. 16.

4. Whether the words, This is my Body, are to be taken properly, or
figuratively?
Figuratively, say we. No, properly, say they. Hear now the Judge in the like
sacramental phrase, Genesis 17. 10. God speaking of Circumcision, says of it,
This is my Covenant. Also speaking of the eating of the Lamb, and manner
thereof, calls it the Passover; it is the Phase (that is, the passage) of
the Lord, as their Bible has it, and as ours, it is the Lords Passover, Exodus
12 11. Saint Paul in 1. Cor. 10. 4. says, The Rock was Christ. It is usual
to call the sign by the name of the thing signified, Revel. 1. 20. The seven
Candlestickes are the seven Churches.

5. Whether a sacrifice properly so called, is now to be offered for the
forgiveness of sins?
They say yes; else their Mass is marred: but we say no. Hear the Judge: Heb.
10. 18. Now there is no oblation for sins: for 1. Ioh. 2. 1, 2. We have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Just, and he is the propitiation for
our sins.

6. Whether Saints be our Mediators to God, and so there be more then one
Mediator between God and us.
They say, yea: we deny it. Hear the Judge, 1. Tim. 2. 5. There is one God,
and one Mediator between God and man, which is the Man Christ Jesus.

7. Whether we be justified and saved freely through faith in Christ, or by
works before God.
We say yea, by faith in Christ freely. By merit of works before God, say
they. Hear the Judge, Romans 3. 20. By the works of the Law, no flesh shall be
justified before him. Chap. 4. 2. If Abraham was justified by works, he has
to glory; but not with God. Chap. 3. 24. For by grace you are saved through
faith, and not of your selves; for it is the gift of God. Romans 9. 16. It is not
of the willer, nor of the runner, but of God that shows mercy. Romans 11. 16.
If by grace, not now of works; otherwise, grace now is not grace. Romans 3. 28.
For we account a man to be justified by faith, without the works of the Law.
Ephesians. 2. 9. Not of works, that no man glory. The place in James, Chap. 2. 24.
is of declaring a man to be just before men; for in the Law no man is justified
with God; Gal. 3. 11. because the just lives by Faith; but such a Faith as
works by love, and is not a fruitless Faith, of which James speaks.

Thus might I run through all the maine controversies between us and them, to
show the sufficiency of the Scriptures, which they hold imperfect, and
insufficient.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Ireneus, lib. 2. ca. 47. We know very well, that the Scriptures are perfect.
And li. 3. ca. 1. the foundation and pillar of Faith.

Justin. in Tryph. We must fly to the Scriptures, that in all things we may
be safe.

Tertul. contra. Hermog. I adore the plenitude, or fullness of the Scriptures.
And against Praxeas: The Scripture is sufficient of it self.

Cyprian, or the Author de dupl. mart. ca. 42. There is no sickness of the
soul, for which the Scripture does not afford a present remedy.

Athanas. li. contr. Gentes. The Scriptures inspired of God, are sufficient for
all discussing and manifesting of the Truth.

August. Tract. 49. in Johan. They are choice things which have been written,
and thought sufficient for the salvation of believers.

Chrysostom. hom. 41. in Mat. or whosoever was that ancient Author: Whatsoever is
required to salvation, is all accomplished in the Scripture, neither is there
any thing wanting there, that is needful for man's salvation.

Cyril, lib. 12. in Johan. in ca. 20. 31. Such things as the Apostle saw
sufficient for our Faith and manners, are written.

Hilar. li. 2. de Trinit. speaking of Gods Book: What is there concerning man's
salvation, that is not contained therein? What does it want, or what is there
obscure in it? All things are there full and perfect, as being of him that is
full and perfect.

Vincentius Lyrin. yields the Canon of the Scriptures to be perfect, and in
it self abundantly sufficient for all matters.

Thus we see how the Ancients ran upon the perfection of the Scriptures, and
do not vilify them, putting upon them imperfectnesse and insufficiency, as
our Adversaries very wickedly do, to get way hereby to their own inventions.

Gainesaid by the learned on their own side.
Antoninus, Archbishop of Florence: God has spoken but In sum. part. 3. tit.
18. cap. 3.
once, and that in the holy Scriptures, so fully to all doubts and cases, and
to all good works, that he needs speak no more.

Scotus in 1. Sent. q. 2. The holy Scripture is all true, necessary and
sufficient for him that walks here below, to bring him to salvation, in all
that concerns believing, hoping, and doing.

Gerson in sermon. in die Circum. Dom. consul. 1. The sacred Scripture is
sufficient.

Caictan. in Deuteronomy. 4. 2. wills us, to gather from it, that the Law of God is
perfect. Yea, on 2. Tim. 3. says he: Its proper to the holy Scripture, to
teach the ignorant, that he may be perfect in all things.

Lyra on Ioh 20. 3. acknowledges the sufficiency of the Scriptures, in respect
of Christ's excellency in work and doctrine.

Trithemius the Abbat, li. 8. quaest. ad Maximil. Caesar, q. 4. It is necessary
that we hold the Scriptures perfect in all things, and we must believe that
they be true, right, entire, sound, diuinelyinspired, and abundantly
sufficient to confirm the Christian Faith.

Villa-Vincentius de rat. stud. Theol. li. 1. ca. 3. The Scriptures, and they
alone are able to teach us to salvation. And he groundeth his assertion on 2.
Tim. 3. 16, 17. In which words, says he, the Apostle comprehends all things
that are necessary to salvation.

Canus, loc. theol. li. 7. ca. 3. The Canon of the Scripture is perfect, and
most sufficient of it self to every end.

Espencaeus on 2. Tim. 3. 15, 16. If any thing be needful to be known or
done, the Scriptures teach, they can instruct a man to salvation, and make him
sufficiently learned.

Roffensis, Art. 37. aduers. Luthera. pa. 411. The holy Scripture is a
storehouse of all truths, which are needful to be known of Christians.

Bellarm. de Verbo Dei, li. 4. ca. 11. All things are written of the Apostles,
which are necessary for all, and which they openly did preach commonly to all.
We here then see, that the Scriptures contain, and that sufficiently, all the
things which be necessary for man's salvation, by the many witnesses among the
Papists themselves.

See Doctor Reply to Fishers answer.
White, pa. 42. producing Anselmus, Scotus, Gerson, Bonauentura, Occham,
Waldensis, Gabriel, Aquinas, Lyra and Durand.

Here may be brought in against the sufficiency and perfection An Objection
answered.
of them, their common objection, which is, that many books are lost. Let it
be so: what then? This proves not the insufficiency of these Scriptures: for,
first I have proved, that they are sufficient, to wit, these which we have:
for of these now we dispute. Secondly, the ancient Fathers speeches before,
are of these, and their sufficiency, not regarding the Books lost. Thirdly, of
these also do their own men speak in their before-cited testimonies, though
they know well enough this triuiall objection.

III. Proposition. That the Scriptures be obscure and hard to be understood,
even in things necessary.
THis question is to be understood of all things necessarily to be believed,
and done in the way of salvation. For we do not say, that all and every
thing, and all and every word, sentence, speech and prophecy in Scripture is
plain and easy to be understood: but all the places speaking of matters of
faith and good life necessary to salvation, are plain and easy to be
understood; and yet not of all men neither, but of all such as in humility
with prayer, diligently and constantly read and hear them, having a godly
purpose and a true endeavor to live after them; for such shall understand these
things, Prou. 2. 1, 5. verse. 24, 9. Ioh. 7. 17. The question being thus
conceived, to say, that the Scriptures are to such dark, and hard to be
understood, in such necessary points of salvation, is untrue.

Confuted by their own Bible.
Psalm. 18. 18. The testimony of our Lord is faithful, giving After our Bible,
Psalm. 19.
wisdom to little ones, Verse. 9. The precept of our Lord is lightsome,
illuminating the eyes.

Psalm. 118. 105. Thy Word is a lamp to my feet, and a light to Psalm. 119.
my paths, Verse. 130. The declaration of thy words does illuminate, and gives
understanding to little ones.

Prou. 6. 23. The commandment is a lamp, and the Law a light.

2. Pet. 1. 19. We have a Prophetical Word most sure, which you do well
attending unto, as to a candle shining in a dark place.

By all these places it is evident, that the Scriptures being a light, a lamp,
candle shining, lightsome, illuminating the eyes, and giving understanding to
little ones, must be plain and easy, and not obscure and dark. For if it
were, how can it be called light? how can it be said to enlighten our eyes, and
be a lamp to our feet? And what need have we to attend to it for direction,
and guideance in a dark place, if it were not a shining light unto such as
attend unto it?

Contraried by ancient Fathers.
Clem. Alex. protrept. pa. 25. It is a common light, shining to all men, there
is no obscurity in it.

Epiphanius, Haeres. 69. All things in the Scripture be manifest to them, which
repair to them with a religious heart.

Saint August. in Psalm. 8. God has bowed down the Scriptures, even to the
capacity of babes, and sucklings. And in Epist. ad Volus. The Scripture, like
a familiar friend, speaks those plain things, which it contains without
glosing, to the heart of the learned and unlearned* de doct. Chr. li. 2. ca. 9.
In these things which are set down plainly in the Scriptures, are to be
found all those things, which contain faith and good manners.

Chrysostom. in 2. These. 2. Hom. 3. All things are clear and plain in divine
Scriptures: whatsoever things are necessary, are manifest. The same Father in
Hom. 1. in Matthew. says; That the Scriptures are easy to understand, and are
laid open to the conceit and apprehension of every servant and plowman, widow
and boy, and him that is most simple.

So says Isiod. Pelusiota li. 2. epist. 5. de Lazer. and gives us a reason of
the plainness. God penned the Scriptures (says he) by the hands of
Publicans, Fishermen, Tent-makers, Shepherds, Neat-heards, and unlearned men,
in that none of the simple might have any excuse to keep them from reading,
that so they might be easy to be understood of all; of the Artificer, the
Householder, the Widow woman, and of him that is most unlearned; yea, the
Prophets and Apostles, as Schoolmasters to all the world, made their writings
plain and evident to all men.

Origin. cont. Celsum. The Scripture is delivered as common Theodoret and
Socrat. lib. 1.
meat, in such sort, as it is fitted altogether to the capacity of the
multitude. The Fathers therefore clear the Scriptures, in all necessary
matters to salvation, from obscurity.

Constantine prescribing laws for the disputation in the Council of Nice,
said, That the Evangelical and Apostolical books, and the Oracles of the
ancient Prophets do plainly teach us, what is to be judged of divine matters.

See more testimonies of Austin, Chrysostom, Jerome, Fulgentius, Hugo, Victor,
Theodoret, Lactantius, Theoph. Antiochenus, In his reply to Fishers answer.
Clem. Alexandrinus; cyted by D. White, page 36.

Gainesaid by learned men of their own.
Scotus 1. sent. q. 2. The Scripture is clear and sufficient, and the
undoubted way to salvation.

Espencaeus in 2. Tim. 3. alleges out of Prosper, that little ones and great
ones, strong and weak, may be nourished and fully satisfied.

Gregory de Valentia: Such verities concerning our faith, as are absolute and
necessary to be known, and to be believed of all men, are plainly taught in
the Scriptures themselves.

Saunders in his Rock, pa. 193. We have most plain Scripture in all points for
the Catholic Faith.

Costerus in Enchir. We deny not, but that these chief points which are
necessary to be known of all Christians for salvation, are clearly enough
comprehended in the Apostles writings. It is not to be denied, that many things
are perspicuous in the holy Scriptures.

Laurentius Iustinianus, sermon. de natiu. Ioh. Baptist. The Scripture is a fair
burning lamp, illustrious and conspicuous. See in Reply to Fishers answer.
Doct. White, pa. 36. Aquinas, Vasques, Gonzales.

Objected Scriptures answered.
2. Pet. 3 16. In which are certain things hard to be understood, which the
unlearned and unstable deprave, as also the rest of the Scriptures to their
own perdition.

Answ. 1. This place is alleged by Papists, to deter from the reading of the
Scriptures, contrary to Saint Peter's meaning: for he knew this that here he
writes, before he did sit down to write this Epistle: and yet in chap. 1. 19
he commends the care and study of the Scriptures to all, which by their
allegation, this place should cross, and so should he be made to write
contrary to himself: thus they abuse him and this his text of Scripture.

2. The words hard to be understood, are to be referred to things, (...).
and not to Paul's Epistles, nor to the Scriptures which do treat of those
things: for the words may be plain, and yet the matter sometimes hard:
obscure things may be expressed in evident speech, and in words that may easily
be understood; so as here they confound words and matter, the manner of
delivery, and the thing delivered.

3. Its said, that certain things are hard to be understood, not all things;
so that from some things to all things, is no good conclusion. And we our
selves confess, that some things are hard to be understood, and some places,
yea, many; but they are not so necessary to salvation. And in that which
concerns the Gospel and saving knowledge, the obscurity is not in the style
of the Spirit, but in the peruersitie and hardness of man's heart, 2. Cor. 4.
3, 4 and 3. 14, 15, 16.

4 Saint Peter by only saying, that certain things are hard, he yields, that
all the rest are easy to be understood: for exception only to some, clears
the rest from obscurity: and if for some things hard, they will conclude the
obscurity of Scripture, how much more may we conclude the clearenesse of
Scripture, from the easiness to understand all the rest? for all the points of
life and salvation are in Scripture: and if only some things be hard, then
many things are easy; therefore from the great part of the Scripture easy to
be understood, we may rather conclude the Scriptures plainness, then from
some things hard, to put obscurity upon all the Scripture.

5. Saint Peter tells us to whom, and to what sorts of persons these hard
things come to be mistaken, yea, and not only the hard, but also the rest, the
things easy to be understood; even only to the unlearned and unstable.
Therefore not to other which be learned and stable, such as be taught of God,
and do constantly endeavor to know the Lords will. Is this good reasoning,
Some men understand not: Ergo, None can? Some abuse the Scripture: Ergo, All
do?

6. To whom did Peter and Saint Paul, and the rest of the Apostles write? To
whom were the Epistles sent to be read? Only to the Clergy, or to the Laity
also? Verily to all sorts, as we may read, 1. These. 5. 27. Col. 4. 16. And
therefore they were not hard to be understood, but might be understood of all
sorts, else had it been vain to read them unto all.

7. If we consider it well, the Scriptures are clear to all sorts, as they
come prepared to the reading thereof. Let the natural man come with the Law
within himself, Romans 2. 14. and with such common principles as are left in all
by nature, and he reading, will find those things easily, and with
understanding speak of them. Let the honest Moralist come and read, and he
will easily understand the places of virtues and vices, the examples of both,
the threats and promises, the rewards and punishments; in which things a great
part of Scripture is spent. Let Artists come, one with the Grammar, and another
with Logic, another with Rethorick, and they will see easily the Grammar, the
Logic, the Rethorick therein contained; and so will other learned in other
Sciences; The natural Philosopher will see the Philosophy; they that have
skill in Laws, in Military affairs, in Chronologies, and many other things,
too long to recite, will see by their skill these things easily in the
Scriptures. Now let in like manner a man endued with knowledge in Divinity,
and acquainted with the ground of Christianity, and catechized therein, come
to the Scriptures so furnished and prepared, and he shall find them clear and
easy to be understood, in all necessary points of faith, as experience gives
witness, and every true Christian can testify.

Lastly, if the Scriptures be obscure, then much more the writings of men; and
if Scriptures be hard to be understood, then much more men's writings. For man,
when he has written, is not at hand to instruct his Reader, but is either
absent far off, or perhaps dead; so that he cannot inform the Reader of his
mind: but God is ever the living God, and both can and does inform by his holy
Spirit, such as in reading his books do read devoutly, and beg of God humbly
his gracious direction. Man's knowledge is but in part, he cannot certainly
foresee all his Readers, what they shall be, how they will understand him: but
Gods knowledge is as himself, infinite, and he foreknoweth all that shall
read his book, and thereafter frames his Word, as is best for their profit.

To conclude therefore, let our Adversaries impute to the Scriptures what they
will, let them (if they will be still so wickedly blasphemous) call them a dumb
Judge, inkie divinity, a leaden rule, and what else, the very same and more
also may be spoken of men's writings, upon the forenamed reasons; what way
soever they do weaken the credit of the Scriptures, by the very same do they
much more take away credit from men's writings. And therefore let them lay all
writings aside, Popes decrees, and Decretals, Canons of Councels, the writings
of Fathers, of Schoolmen, of Doctors, of Priests and Jesuits, and other
petty Writers, Pamphlets whatsoever, if the Scriptures be neglected.

Act. 8. 30. Philip said, Understand thou what thou read? And he said,
How can I, except some man should guide me?

Answ. 1. Here is a Layman well exercised, and had his liberty, without
dispensation for money, to read the Scriptures, verse. 28. which was never
denied to any of the Jewish, or Christian Church, till the times of this Romish
Antichrist.

2. This place is spoken of a Proselyte, a Noucie in Religion, one that dwelt
not amongst Gods people, to hear the Law and Prophets daily read and
expounded, as they were in Judea, Act. 15. 21. and 13. 15. Will it follow
therefore, that what was obscure to him, was, and is yet obscure to others,
living in the bosom of the Church? It will perhaps follow among Papists, who
have Scriptures read in an unknown tongue, and are prohibited to have them
translated, and freely to be read of all, but not elsewhere.

3. This is but one place, and that Prophetical too. What will they hence
conclude? One place, and that Prophetical, was not understood of one man, a
young beginner, and that at the first: Ergo, all the holy Scriptures are
obscure to all the people, and that for ever? In Romish Divinity, a goodly
conclusion.

4. He understood it after by Philips guiding, and believed in Christ, verse.
36. 37. We acknowledge the people to need a guide; but let them read freely,
as the Eunuch here, and where they doubt, let them ask their Teachers, or let
Teachers, like Philip, go to them, and direct them in reading; but take not
Bibles from them, and burn both them and it, as furious Firebrands have done,
without all example of any good men from the worlds beginning.

Luke 24. 25, 27. O Fools and slow of heart, etc. Beginning at Moses and all
the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures, the things
concerning himself.

Answ. 1. Christ reproves not simply their ignorance of Scripture, but rather
their slownesse of heart to believe and apply all that the Prophets had spoken.

2. Expounding argues not obscurity in the Scriptures, but want of
understanding in the men, and yet not that altogether, but in some degree or
measure.

3. The things were not every thing in the Scripture, but that which concerned
Christ himself, touching his suffering and rising again to glory, which being
then unperformed and future, were the more obscure, even to the Disciples
themselves before their illumination. Christ's words therefore are proper to
those persons, and to that time, till he had better informed them, and not to
be applied to this time, when all those things are plainly taught us by the
publication of the Gospel, and doctrine of those Apostles and Disciples, who
therefore received miraculous illuminatio^ by the spirit, that they might
preach and write clearly to us, even to all people, of those things.

Revel. 5. 4. And he (to wit, John) wept much, because no man was in Heaven or
in Earth found worthy to open the book, and to read the book neither to
look thereon.

Ans. 1. This may be meant metaphorically of some other book of Gods Counsels
and Decrees; and if of the Bible, yet not of the whole Bible, but of the book
of the Revelation, except the Papists will have John at this time one that
never had been worthy to open, or to read, or to look into Gods Word. What,
none, neither in Heaven nor earth? Never a Prophet? Never an Apostle, to have
hitherto opened the Bible? How then was Moses and the Prophets read unto the
people, before John was in Pathmos?

2. This speaks not of the obscurity of the book, but of the unworthiness
of any, save Jesus Christ, to unloose the seals, and to open it, verse. 9.

3. This is but of one book, and that, before it was unsealed and opened; will
it therefore follow, that all the rest of the books are hard to be understood,
being all open, and none prohibited by God to read them?

2. Pet. 1. 20. No prophecy of Scripture is made by private interpretation.

Ans. 1. Who will deny this, or which of us holds ye contrary?

2. Here is nothing for the Scriptures obscurity, but rather this proves their
plainenes: for it speaks of their interpretation, accounting holy men's
speaking in the Scriptures, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, to be an
interpretation, and that not a private, but a public interpretation, not made
of their own will, or of man's will, but of the will of God, as his Spirit led
them.

Mat. 13. 11, 36. To you is given to know the mysteries, etc. Expound to us the
Parable, etc.

Answ. 1. This place may be brought as well against the Word unwritten, as
written: for Christ wrote not, but spoke the Parable, which they desired to
have expounded; what will become then of their unwritten word, if that be
obscure too? He that alleged this against the plainness of the written
Word, much forgot himself, and his unwritten word.

2. Understanding this of the written Word, nothing can be more against
themselves: for here it is said, that it is the gift given to the Church to
understand the Mysteries of the kingdom of God.

3. They desired Christ to expound the parable. What then? Ergo, the Scripture
is obscure? A gross conclusion: for it was Christ's not written, but as then
his unwritten Word, and a Parable which they understood not, but he plainly
expounded it afterward, verse. 37. 43. and now it is written. So that, what at
first was not understood, was after explained, understood, and the same also
written; And therefore the Scripture is not obscure by this Parable, but rather
the more clear, because it is written, and the interpretation thereof also.

Luke 24. 45. Then he opened their understandings, that they might understand
the Scriptures.

Answ. 1. This place is to be understood of such things as concerned the
Messiah, touching Christ his suffering, as before in verse. 25. 26.

2. This is nothing to the obscurity of the Scripture: for the Scripture was
clear, but their understanding was not, till he opened it, and what they then
understood not, now every ordinary Christian does know, and can find it laid
down plainly in the Scriptures of the New Testament, by the Apostles
themselves. Therefore if their ignorance at that time of those things may
conclude obscurity of Scripture, then the same after known of them, and taught
fully to us in Scripture, may make for the Scriptures clearenesse.

3. We acknowledge, that all need to have their understandings opened by
Christ, to read the Scriptures; because the natural man perceiues not the
things of God, but are spiritually discerned, 1. Cor. 2. 14. But is the Sun
dark, because God does make a blind man to see it? Yet thus our adversaries
reason, The Scriptures are obscure, because God opens men's understanding to see
the things therein delivered.

1. Cor. 12. 20. To another, discerning of spirits; to another, kind of
tongues; to another, interpretation of Languages.

Answ. Here is not a word of the obscurity of holy Scriptures, but of
extraordinary gifts then by Gods Spirit bestowed upon some, for the Churches
good, to make the Scriptures easy.

Luke 8. 10. To you it is given to know, etc.

The answer to this is, as to the place in Mat. 10. 11. but they allege
moreover, Luke 18. 34. And they understood none of these things.

Answ. 1. This place is not against the Word written: For all those things then
not understood, they after understood, and wrote them, and we plainly do
understand them in Scriptures.

2. This place speaks of the Word delivered by Christ's mouth: I hope they
will not have that Word obscute too: what will then become of the Traditionall
word, which they so prattle of? But the Gagger heaps up any thing to make a
show, though he speak at unawares against themselves.

3. Still here is of things, and not of the Scriptures; and of only some
things; but not of all. They cannot therefore conclude the general, that the
Scriptures are obscure.

Luke 2. 50. And they understood not the Word he spoke unto them.

Answ. 1. The fault is laid upon their understanding.

2. It is not of the Scripture but of a word then not written.

3. Joseph and Mary understood not then that Word. Ergo, none now? Is it not
now written? and do not every one now know, that he spoke of his heavenly
Fathers business? Belike, if the blessed Virgin Mary were now upon the earth,
the papists would not allow her to read the Scriptures.

2. Tim 3. 7. Always learning, and never attaining to the knowledge of truth.

Answ. 1. Here is no Scripture mentioned.

2. If they will have this to be of their learning the Scriptures, then this
shows that women in those days, meddled with Scriptures, which the Papists
now cannot abide to hear of.

3. The fault is not laid upon the truth; but upon those learners negligence or
dullness.

4. Consider what learners they were. First, silly women: Secondly, laden with
sins. Thirdly, led with diverse lusts. Fourthly, led captive by false
Teachers, verse 6. It is no marvel that these could not come to the knowledge
of the truth: and because such could not attain to it, therefore is it hard to
be attained to of all others? This is an excellent Scripture, to show why the
collapsing women, and such Apostates as fall from us now to them, cannot
attain to the knowledge of the truth; because indeed, they are laden with
sins, led with diverse lusts, and by false Teachers led captive to their
destruction, because here they never had a true love to the Truth.

1. Ioh. 4. 6. He that knows God, hears us: he that is not of God, hears
us not: in this we know the Spirit of Truth and the spirit of error.

Answ. What they can conclude hence touching the Scripture, I see not: The
Spirit of Truth in man, which teaches him to know God, teaches him also to
hear those which are sent of God: and likewise, where the spirit of error is,
and such as are not of God, cannot listen and give ear to such as are of God:
for the spirit of error opposes the true Teachers; as Papists do us.

Psalm. 119. 18, 34. Open thou mine eyes, etc. and give me understanding, etc.

Answ. We teach, that to come to knowledge, all must pray to God to instruct
them, even the best learned.

2. David, that now prayed, had a great deal of understanding, as he
confesses in verse. 11. 54, 97, 98, 99, 100, 104, 105. therefore here he
prays to be more and more acquainted with heavenly knowledge, desiring the
increase thereof: for the godliest have not al knowledge at once. It is not the
word of Scripture, that David desires understanding in, nor to have his eyes
open to see what the Words of Gods Laws were; but he would see the wondrous
things thereof. And, trow we, when your infallible Doctor, the Pope, shall
take upon him to expound Scripture in Cathedra, will he not first pray to God
to open his eyes, and give him understanding? Surely his eyes were not open
that made this objection.

3. There is a litterall, Historical, and outward knowledge of the holy
Scriptures, which David was not ignorant of; but there is also an internal, a
spiritual and heavenly understanding thereof, which God only must open our
eyes to see; and this David prayed for, and these things so heavenly and
spiritual, he held to be maruailous; and these prayed he to have his eyes open
to see, also to increase in the understanding of them.

IV. Proposition. That the Scriptures do not interpret themselves, and that
the true sense may not be fetched out of themselves:
Confuted by their own Bible.
1. THeir Bble teaches us, that the Scriptures are of God, 2. Tim. 3. 16. that
he himself wrote some, Exodus 24. 4. Deuteronomy. 9. 10. Hos. 8. 12. othersome his
Prophets, Exodus 24. 4. Deuteronomy. 31. 9, 24. Esaias, 8. 1. and 30. 8. Ier. 29. 1. his
Evangelists, Luke 1. 3. his Apostles, 2. Cor. 10. 11. And these the Lords
Scribes were so commanded to write, Exodus 17. 14. and 34. 27. Deuteronomy. 27. 8. and
31. 9. Ier. 30. 2. Heb. 2. 2. Reu. 1. 11, 19. The Scriptures therefore are
called the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 3.

Now thus then I reason, All wise men's writings carry such a coherence and
dependancie in them, whether they be Wills, Letters, Histories, or other
learned speeches, either of humane or divine matters, as the judicious Readers
may, and do collect the Authors true meaning out of them, though the Authors
themselves be not there, to give their own meaning. And shall we think, that
the Writings and Scriptures of our God, wherein is his Will, his Laws, his
Histories, and other holy Instructions given of purpose to teach all, in all
ages, to the worlds end, will not afford us the sense of them out of
themselves? especially if we do consider him ever living, and ayding his
humble and godly Readers with his holy Spirit to understand his mind? To deny
this to Gods Word, were to make it herein inferior to men's writings.

2. Their own Bible shows us, that the Scriptures do plainly interpret
themselves, expounding words, Iud. 15. 17. Ramach lechi, which is interpreted,
the lifting up of the Iaw-bone, Iud. 12. 6. Schibboleth, which is interpreted,
an ear of corn. So in Mat. 1. 23. Mark. 5 4. Ioh. 1. 38, 41, 42. and 9. 7.
Act. 4. 36. and 13. 8. Heb. 5. 4. Thus it expounds its own words.

3. Short sentences, as Mark. 15. 34. Eloi, Eloi, Lamasabachtani: which is,
being interpreted; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? So in Dan. 5. 25,
26, 27.

4. Whole Speeches and Parables, as Mat. 13. the Parable in verse. 3. to the 9.
is expounded in verse. 18. to 23. so the Parable in verse. 24. to 30. is
expounded in verse. 37. to 42.

5. Visions, and Dreams and Prophesies of things to come, as in Genesis 40. 9 12,
13. and 16. 19. and 41. 2, 8. and 25. 32. Ier. 24. 1, 3. and 5. 8. Dan. 4. 16.
27. so in the 8. Chapter, and in other Prophets; yea in the Revelation, the
words and things in it are in many places interpreted very plainly, as in
Chap. 1. 12, 20. and 17. 1, 15. verse, 3, 9 10, 18. and 4. 5. and 5. 6. and 19.
8.

6. Whole books. For what is Deuteronomie, but an explanation of Exodus, and
other places of Moses? What are the Prophets, but interpreters and appliers of
Moses to the times, places, and persons? What is the new Testament, but a large
and clear Commentary upon the old? In which was the Gospel, Romans 1. 2. and
the mystery kept secret in a manner, but now made manifest by the Scriptures,
Romans 16. 25, 26.

Lastly, the Scripture every where expounds it self, either the Sea S. Austin.
de Verbo Dei, ser. 49.
place considered by it self in the full circumstances thereof, or by some
other being conferred with it.

The places which might be produced for proof, are infinite; Origin, on Mat.
chap. 13.
concerning any necessary point of controversies in Christian Religion.

The Answers of our learned men to their objected Scriptures against our
Tenants, may be instance for evidence of these things, even out of their own
Bible. See these answers before, and the rest following, and consider thereof
without partiality.

Contraried by the Ancients.
Irenaeus lib. 4. aduers. Haeres. cap. 63. The most lawful exposition of the
Scriptures, and without danger, is that which is according to the Scriptures
themselves. In lib. 2. cap. 46. the Scripture expounds it self, and suffers
none to err.

Hillar. lib. 1. de Trinit. says, God is a sufficient witness for himself,
and who is not to be known, but by himself; and further he says: It is
unlawful to impose a meaning, but we must rather receive a meaning from holy
Scriptures.

S. August. de doct. lib. 2. cap. 6. There is almost nothing in these
obscurities, but in other places one may find it most plainly delivered. And in
Ser. 2. de Verb. Dom. he says, that the words of the Gospel carry their
exposition with them.

Basil. Regul. contract. qu. 267. The things which are doubtful, and seem to
be spoken obscurely, are made plain by those things, which are evident in
other places.

Chrysostom. Hom. 13. in Genesis The holy Scripture expounds it self. And in Hom.
9. 2. Cor. The Scripture every where, when it speaks any thing obscurely,
interprets it self again in another place.

Hieron. Com. in Esa. cap. 19. It is the manner of Scripture, after things
obscure, to set down things manifest.

Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Ser. 8. If thou knock at the gate of the Scriptures
with the hand of thy mind, thou shall gather the reason of the sayings, and the
gate shall be opened unto thee; and that by none other, but by the Word of God.
And the selfsame says Aug. lib. 2. contra Donatist. cap. 6.

What can be more fully spoken against this their false Tenent, then here is
uttered by these Fathers?

Gainesaid by the learned on their own side.
Gerson, tract. contra assertiones Mag. Joan. parui. The sacred Scripture does
expound her rules by themselves, according to the diverse passages of the
Scripture.

Steuchius in Genesis 2. God was never so inhumane, as to suffer the world in all
ages to be tormented with the ignorance of the sense of the Scripture; but if
we consider it well, we may interpret it: and for this he cites Theodoret, who
says, that the Scripture uses, when it teaches any high matter, to expound
it self, and not to suffer us to run into error.

Iansenius, Episc. Gandau. on Mat. page 413. part 2. Christ has taught to
confer Scripture with Scripture, if we will not err in reading of the
Scriptures.

Acosta the Jesuit, lib. 3. de Chro, Revel. cap. 21. page 479. There is
nothing seems to me so to open the Scripture, as the Scripture it self.

Canus loc. Theol. lib. 7. cap. 3. number. 13. cites out of Pope Clement, Epist.
5. ad discipulos Hier. these words: You must not from without seek a foraine
and strange sense, but out of the Scriptures themselves receive the meaning of
the truth.

What Scriptures our Adversaries have to object against us, and to defend this
their falsitie by, I find not in the Gagger.

1. I know, they babble much against a man's private spirit, and a man's private
interpretation, which we also disallow: but Gods Spirit is not any private
spirit, but the public spirit; and the same also in every member of the
Church, 1. Cor. 12. neither is the Scriptures interpretation, any private
interpretation, though showed out of a private man's mouth, according to that of
Panormitan, in cap. signif. Extra. de electis In things concerning faith, the
saying of one private man, is to be preferred before the words of the Lord
Pope, if he bring better reasons out of the new and old Testament. To which
agrees that of Gerson part 1. de examine. doct. More credit is to be given to a
private simple man alleging the Gospel, then either to the Pope, or Council.

2 Also that they allege, how Moses did judge causes, the Priests also and the
Levites, and that the people ought to learn of them. But this is to be
understood, as Moses spoke from God, and as the Priests and Levites judged and
taught according to the Law, as in the place of Deuteronomie is before answered.

V. Proposition. That the Scriptures are not to be allowed to be read of the
people, nor heard by them in a known tongue:
Confuted by their own Bible.
1. IT teaches, that the Scriptures were written to all sorts: the books of
Moses to all Israel, Deuteronomy. 31. 91 9, 22, 30, 32. So the Prophets, Psalms, and
Historical books, and all these were commended to the Churches keeping, Romans
3. 2. Act. 7. 38. We see in the new Testament, some books written to noble
Personages, Luk 1. Act 1. to Ladies, 2. Ioh. ver. 1. to Bishops and Deacons,
Phil. 1. 1. to Pastors over Congregations, Revel. 1. 11. and 2. and 3. to old
men, 1. Ioh. 2. 14. to young men, 1. Ioh. 2. 13, 14. yea generally to all the
Saints, Rom 1. 7. 1. Cor. 1 2. As the general Epistles of James, Peter, John,
and Jude do witness.

2. It teaches, that they were written for the benefit and guiding of all
sorts: for kings, Deuteronomy. 17 18 19. Josh. 1. 8. for Elders, and Magistrates of
the people, Deuteronomy. 31. 9. and for others to make use of, Pro. 1. 4.

3. It teaches, that the reading, searching, and attending to them, was
commended to all sorts without any exception, Deuteronomy. 30. 10. Josh. 23. 6. Ioh. 5
39 2. Pet. 1. 19. Ephesians. 6. 17. Revel. 1. 3.

4. It teaches, that they were commanded to be read unto all sorts, Deuteronomy. 31.
11, 12. Ier. 36. 6, 10. Col. 4. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27. and so were read to them,
Exodus 24. 7. Josh. 6. 34, 35. Neh. 8. 2 3. and 2. Chron. 34. 30. Act. 13. 15.
and 15. 21.

5. It shows us, that they were read of all sorts, and never reproved for any
evil in them; as of Josias, 2. Chron. 34. 30. of the noble Eunuch, Act. 8. 32.
of the noble Bereans, Act. 17. 11. of godly women, as Lois, and Eunice,
trayning up Timothy from his childhood therein, 2. Tim. 1. 5. with 3. 15. It
is clear therefore by their own Bible, that all and every one might read
Scriptures, that could and would read them, and that without hinderance.

The Papists are far from Moses spirit; who wished from his heart, that all
the Lords people could prophecy, Number. 11. 29. But they that do evil, hate
therefore the light, and will not permit people to come unto it, lest thereby
their deeds be reproved, Ioh. 3. 20.

Contraried by Antiquity.
S. Augustine, l. 3. c. 1. de doct. Christ. A man that fears God, does
diligently enquire after his will in the Scriptures. And in Sermon. 55. it is not
sufficient, that ye hear the Divine Scriptures in the Church, but also in your
houses, either read them your selves, or else desire some other to read them,
and give you diligent ear thereto.

The Nicene Synod (says Corn. Agrippa. lib. de van. Scient.) decreed, that no
Christian should be without the Bible in his house.

Chrysostom. exhorts men to get the Bible, the most wholesome remedy for the
soul, if not all, yet some part; to take the holy books into their hands,
before and after meat at home, and not in the Church only; Yea, he tells
his hearers, that, to think Gods Word needless, comes of the devil, and ye
it was as an infecting Pestilence for the people, to think that it appertained
to men of the Church to read them, and not to others, whereas he tells them
that it was much more necessary for them, then for the other. See for these
his speeches at large, Hom. 10. on Genesis and 29. Hom. 1. on Ioh. Hom. 13. on
Mat. Hom. 2. on 2 Thessalonians. Hom. 3.

S. Jerome, on Col. 3. 16. We see hear (says he) that lay people should not
have only knowledge of the Scriptures sufficiently, but abundantly, that so
one might be able to teach another: many of his writings were written to women,
as to Paula, Epist. 8. 9. 10. 12. 14.
Eustochium, Saluina, Demetria, Furia, Celantia, and others, commending them
for their reading and study of Scriptures: Epist. ad Laetam.
yea, he instructed one Laeta, how she should bring up her daughter in holy
Scriptures, to learn the Psalter, the^ Proverbs, then Ecclesiastes, then Job,
and so to go to the Gospels; after these, the Prophets, Moses, and Historical
books. He herein was then no Papist.

S. Basil regul. contract. q. 95. It is necessary and consonant to reason,
that every man learn that which is needful, out of the Scriptures, whose
Nurse (one Macrina) taught himself the Scriptures from a child, Bas. Epist. 74.

Theophylact on Ephesians. 6. Say not (says he) that it belongs Lib. 5 de curand.
Graec. affect.
only to Religious men to read the Scriptures: for it is the duty of every
Christian, and most of all, of such as deal in worldly affairs, because they
being as it were shaken with a tempest, have greater need of spiritual
succor. And Theodoret writes of his times, that Cobblers, Smiths, Websters,
and all kind of Artificers, all the women, not only such as could read, but
See also, Eusebius. lib. 1 cap. 6. de demonstrat. Euangel.
Semsters, Maidseruants, and waiting-women, Citizens, Husbandmen, Ditchers,
Neatheards, Woodsetters, understood the points of faith, and could discourse of
them. What can be more clear then this, that in former ages from the
beginning, every one had liberty to read the Scriptures? and for their help
Socrat. lib. 4 cap 33.
were they translated into vulgar tongues into all languages. For the truth of
this, see Aug. de doct. Chri. lib. 2. cap. 5. Theodoret in his forenamed Book.
Beda, Hist. lib. 1. cap. 1. Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in Johan. Yea, do we not know,
how Lay men, for their divine Knowledge, were chosen to be Teachers in the
Church? Nectarius a Judge, made Bishop of Constantinople; Ambrose, a deputy,
Bishop of Millan; with other more.

Gainesaid by some of themselves.
The Rhemists, though they hold the false Tenent, yet in their Preface before
their translation, cannot deny the Scriptures to have been in the vulgar
Languages of diverse Nations: as in the Armenian, the Sclauonian, Gothic,
Italian, French, English tongue; yea, in the Languages of almost all the
principal Provinces of the Latin Church of later times. The mere Politic
caution and limitation of the Trent Conuenticle was not devised in former ages,
that the Scriptures should not be read indifferently of all men, but of such as
have license. License to read holy Scripture, was not thought of in the
Primitive Church, nor many hundred years after. The very translation of the
Scriptures aforetimes show, that the godly Translators minded to put Gods Bible
into all men's hands, without any Popes license.

Acosta li. 2. de Chron. Reu. ca. 2. pa. 65. is enforced to confess, that our
gracious God has maruerlously provided in holy Writ, that the most rude,
reading in humility, may profit thereby: and in chap. 5. speaking by
experience, I have seen (says he) some men utterly unlearned, and scarce
knowing Latin, who have gathered out of Scripture such profound knowledge,
that I marueiled at them: but the spiritual man judges all things.

Espencaeus in 2. Tim. 3. pa. 116. testifies, that the Jews did use to
instruct their children from five years old. A custom continued till this
day. So that (says he) many Christians may be ashamed of their negligence,
which is not only my complaint (says he,) but also of the ancient Fathers;
marueiling that that custom should be judged now dangerous and pestiferous,
which the Ancient so often commended for profitable and wholesome.

Lorinus on Acts 17. 2. (speaking of the Act of the noble Bereans) says, That
it was no more then Christ commanded, when he said, Search the Scriptures, that
is (says he) as Chrysostom and Euthymius expound it) not only to read it,
but also exactly and diligently to discuss it.

But I need not speak more of this; for among us, we see many of them take
liberty to read not only their own Translations, but ours too.

Their practice then here with us, is against their doctrine, and their
practice elsewhere: for in other places their doctrine is against reading of
Scriptures translated: and they also do not suffer them to be read. See
plentiful testimonies cited by Doct. White in his Orthodox Faith, page 47. 48.
So they disallow, and allow; some of one mind, some of another; here with us,
differing from themselves in Papisticall Countries: for all is as the Iuggler
plays fast or loose, for their grand Masters advantage.

Objected Scriptures answered.
Deuteronomy. 10. 5. The two Tables were written by God, and put by Moses into the
Arc.

Answ. What then? Therefore the Scriptures are not to be common and freely
read of all? If the putting of the Tables into the Arc might force such a
conclusion, the Scriptures might not only be kept from the people, but from
the Clergy too: for those put into the Arc, were neither for Priest nor
people to read. But I answer more particularly:

1. That these were not all the Scriptures of God, although all that God
himself did immediately write with his own finger.

2. These commandments in the Tables were also written out by Moses in Exodus
20. and in Deuteronomy. 5. which Books after were also copied out, and so were in the
hands of the Priests, Princes and people.

3. The putting them into the Arc, was not that thence man should learn not
to meddle with holy Scriptures, which none ever dreamed of, but these Romists.
For God commanded to teach them to his people, Deuteronomy. 6. 1. and they were to
instruct their children therein, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. but they were put into the Arc
for other ends:

1. To keep them safe there, as a testimony against Israel.

2. To learn to keep them in their heart, as they were kept in the Arc.

3 Because the Arc was a type of Christ, in whom this Law of commandments was
written, and in whom the Lords people should be accounted obseruers of the same.

Deuteronomy. 31. 9, 26. There was but one copy of the Law, and it was committed to
the Priests of the Levites to keep, and was hid for a long time, till it was
found in Josias days, 2. King. 22. 8.

Therefore the Scriptures were not common to all.

Answ. Its true, that there was but one original that was kept: but other
copies were commanded to be written out, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. and the same to be read
diligently, verse. 19. Joshua had a copy of it, Josh. 8. 34. Esdras had so,
Neh. 8. 2. In Iehosaphats See the Dowaies on Neh. 8. 2. for Copies.
time a copy was carried up and down, 2. Chron. 17. 9. Daniel had books,
Dan. 9. 2. Christ tells us in the Parable, Luke 15. 29. that they had Moses
and the Prophets. The Law and Prophets were read in their Synagogues from old
time, Act. 13. 15. and 15. 21. How also could the Bereans search the
Scriptures, if they had not had them? Act. 17. 11. And S. Paul says, that to
the Jews were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. The book of the Law
was written, to be read and heard of the people, Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12. So were also
the Prophets writings, Ier. 36. 6, 10, 14, 15. and free for any to read them,
that could get copies of them, as we may see in the Eunuch, Act. 8. 28. By all
which it is clear, that the Scriptures were common for all.

Nehem. 8. Here they would gather, that the Scriptures were read in Hebrew, and
yet the people understood not the language: so by certain words in the
Evangelists, not Hebrew, which were then spoken of the people, as Golgotha,
Mat. 27. 33. Talitha cumi, Mark 5. 41. Acheldama, in Act. 1. 19.

Answ. That the Scriptures of the old Testament were in the Hebrew tongue, is
true: but that the people understood not that tongue, is as false as the other
true: for its said, as their own Bible has it, Neh. 8. 3. that Esdras read
plainly in the presence of the men and women, and of those that understood,
and the ears of all the people were attent to the Book, verse. 8. and they
understood when it was read. And though they were 70. years in Captivity, yet
had they not lost the knowledge of the Hebrew tongue: for many thousands, and
not a few, of note and place, which went into captivity, lived to return
again, Esdras 2. 1, 2, 3, 42, 65. and 3. 12. And shall we think, that these
had lost their native tongue? After their return, they had some strange words
mixed with the Hebrew; but yet they generally spoke the Jews language, Neh.
13. 24. and the Prophets Haggai, Zachary, and Malachi, wrote in the Hebrew:
and the people hundreds of years after understood the Hebrew tongue when it was
spoken, Act. 21. 40. and 22. 2. and could read it written, Ioh. 19. 20. yea,
it was so common, that Christ spoke Hebrew, and in no other Language to Paul
from Heaven, Act. 26. 14. And as for the words of Christ on the Cross, Matthew.
27. 46. which some hearing, said, He calls for Eliah: if they were spoken of
the Jews, they did it in mockage. If of the Roman soldiers, they being
strangers, and not understanding him, it makes nothing to the purpose, or
point in question.

Ioh. 7. 49. The people which knows not the Law, are cursed. Hence they would
gather, that the Jews understood not the Hebrew language, in which the Law was
written.

Answ. 1. The Pharisees arrogated knowledge to themselves, and contemned the
people for want of knowledge, to wit, of the sense and meaning of the Law, but
not of the letters, words and language, wherein it was written.

2. Neither is it true, that the people knew not the Law, because these enemies
of Christ said so; no more then that they were cursed, because they so said of
them, in hatred against them for following Christ.

VI. Proposition. That the common liberty for all to read the Scriptures,
does breed heresies:
Confuted by their own Bible.
1. IT teaches, that the ignorance of the Scripture, is the cause of error,
Mat. 22. 29. Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures. Error then is from
ignorance of the Scriptures. The Apostles doubting of Christ's resurrection, a
maine point of Faith, without which all is vain, 1. Cor. 15. is ascribed to
their ignorance of the Scriptures: for as yet (says their Bible) they knew not
the Scriptures. The Israelites erring in heart so continually, is ascribed to
the want of knowledge in Gods ways, Psalm. 94 10, 11. These always err in
heart, and these have not known my Psalm. 95.
ways.

Secondly, it tells us whence otherwise errors proceed, from Philosophy,
vain fallacy, Col. 2. 9. from humane traditions, Whence proceed errors.
Mark. 7. 8. from pretended Apostolical traditions, Acts 15. 24. from
pretended revelations of the Spirit, a feigned word, and forged writings, 2.
These. 2. 2. from Satan's strange delusions in the Man of sin and his
followers, 2. These. 2. from lying signs and wonders, seducing people, Revel.
13. 13, 14. 2. These. 2. 9. from doctrines and commandments of men, Col. 2. 22.
from vnlearnednesse and unstableness of men's own selves, 2. Pet. 2. 16. from
false Teachers, Act. 20. 29. Jude, verse. 4. 2. Pet. 2. 2. Tim. 3. 6. from men's
giving heed to Seducers, 1. Tim. 4. 1. and such like means, God giving men
over to believe lies, because such have not a love of the truth, 2. These. 2.

3. Their Bible clears Scriptures from being cause of error: for it tells
us, that no lie is of the truth, 1. Ioh. 2. 21. Now, error in divine matters is
a lie: the Scriptures are Gods Word inspired by the holy Ghost, 2. Tim. 3. 16.
Gods Word is truth, Ioh. 17. 17. and therefore no error can arise from it; and
to reason from abuse, to hinder the use, is absurd.

4. It tells us, that the holy Scriptures are the Rule of faith and life, as
before is proved, and therefore cannot be the cause of error.

5. It pronounces the Readers blessed, Reu. 3. 3. How can this be, if it breed
errors in men?

6. It tells us, that by Scripture Christ confuted Satan, the false doctrine
of Scribes and Pharisees, the heresy of the Sadduces: so did the Apostles the
Jews, Act. 17. 2. and 18. 28. Therefore heresies are overthrown by Scripture,
and get no ground at all from Scripture.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Chrysostom. Hom. de Lazar. The ignorance of the Scriptures has bred heresies:
In Hom. 58. on John. The Scriptures do lead us to God, do drive away
heretics, and do not suffer us to go out of the way.

Tertullian. de resurr. tells us, that heretics fly the light of the
Scriptures. Surely hereby its clear then, that this Father did not believe,
that the Scriptures would make heretics

S. Jerome in Esaias c. 8. wills us in things doubtful to have recourse unto
the Scriptures to know the truth; otherwise, says he, ye shall not have the
light of truth, but remain ever in darkness of error. Therefore Scriptures
expel the mist of errors, and do not breed them in the judgment of Saint
Jerome. It is witnessed before by Augustine, Chrysostom, Tertullian, Basil,
Jerome, Gregory-Nyssen: that the Scriptures are the sound Rule of Faith;
therefore cannot they be any ground for error.

Gainesaid by some of their own.
Petrus de Aliaco says, The new Testament is the hammer that kills all
heresies, the Lantern that lighteneth us.

Gerson in tract. de distinct. The sacred Scriptures are the shop wherein is
laid up the royal stamp of spiritual coin: if a penny differs from the
stamp never so little, undoubtedly its counterfeit. It is also witnessed
before by Gregory, Gerson, Clemangis, Aliacus, Durand, Mirandula, Aquinas,
Ferus, Villa-Vincentius, the Canon law, and by Bellarmine, that the Scriptures
are the Rule of Faith: how can they then breed error?

Our Adversaries have here no Scripture against us: for indeed the Scripture
speaks for it self, and not against it self. But Papists will here say,
they mean, that the Scriptures breed heresies, when they are misunderstood or
abused, or not rightly interpreted.

Answ. If thus they mean in good sooth, 1. why blame they the Scriptures, when
the fault is in men, and not in them?

2. Why do not they likewise so accuse all men's writings whose soever? are not
they subject to be mis-conceiued, misunderstood and perverted?

3. Why do they, in this respect, fear the Scriptures to breed heresies more
in the people, then in the Priests? Were Arius, a Presbyter; Macedonius, a B.
Pelag. a Monk, and Eutyches, an Abbat.
they of the Lay People only, which were the Authors of former heresies, or of
the Clergy? Was Arius, was Macedonius, was Eutyches, Pelagius, and other
damnable first-broachers of heresies, Laymen? No man, says Jerome, can frame
an heresy, but he that is of excellent gifts. Gerson and Aeneas Syluius do De
defect viror. Eccles 48 Hist. Austr. 8 52.
allege the same saying of Saint Jerome, That there never happened any
notorious evil in the Church, but Priests were the cause thereof.

Lastly, by thus reasoning from the abuse, either through ignorance, or
wilfulness in any thing, we should disallow every thing; we should not eat,
because some gluttonize at meat; nor drink wine nor strong drink, because
some thereby become drunk; nor wear costly apparel, as men of place may,
because some grow thereby proud; nor use the Art of Rhetoric, because some
men abuse it, setting their tongues to sale; nor Logic, for that some pervert
it from the right end, to iangling Sophistry. Jesus Christ saw how Satan
abused Scripture, yet he did use it, and exhorted other to search the
Scriptures. This point of Popery Christ then knew not, nor any of his Apostles.

VII. Proposition. That the Scriptures cannot of themselves be known to be the
Word of God, unless the Church do give witness unto them, that they are so;
Confuted by their own Bible.
1. IT plainly avouches the contrary: 1. By teaching that Christ's sheep knew
his voice, Ioh. 10. 4.

2. That Christ has promised, that such as do his will, shall understand all
the doctrine, whether it be of God, Ioh. 7. 17.

3. That to his Disciples it is given to know the Mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 13. 11. Now, the Scriptures inspired of God, 2. Tim. 3. 16. are
his voice, are his doctrine; and there are the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
heaven, even that great Mystery, opened by the Scriptures, Romans 16. 26. in the
Law and Prophets, Acts 28. 23. Therefore if Christ's sheep and Disciples can
know his Voice, his Doctrine, and the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, then
they can know the Scriptures to be the Scriptures of God.

II. It tells us by whom, and by what we have this knowledge. 1. By the
Spirit of God: for what things God has prepared for them that love him, has
he revealed to us by his Spirit, which we have received, that we may know the
things, that of God are given unto us, 1. Cor. 2. 9. 10, 12. Now, the
Scriptures are of those things which God has given unto us: therefore by the
Spirit of God can we know them to be of God. And indeed all Scripture being
inspired of Gods Spirit, who can better inform our knowledge of them, then the
blessed Inditer and Author of them?

2. By the Scriptures themselves, which bear witness of themselves, that they
are justified in themselves, Psalm. 18. 10. that Psalm. 19.
they are all inspired of God, 2. Tim. 3. 16. that they are holy Scriptures,
Romans 1. 6. the Scriptures of the Prophets, Romans 16. 26. who were guided by the
holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. 20. as also were the Apostles, Mat. 10. 20. Mark. 13.
11. And Paul tells us, that he wrote the Commandments of God, 1. Cor. 14. 37.

III. As their Bible tells us, that by the Spirit, and by the Scriptures
themselves, we know the Scriptures to be of God; so also the same Bible
teaches us: 1. That the testimony of the Spirit is truth, 1. Ioh. 5. 6. and
is no lie, 1. Ioh. 2. 27. which Spirit of Christ all the Children of God have,
Gal. 4. 6. and all that are Christ's; else they are none of his, Romans 8. 9.

2. That the testimony of the Scriptures are of more credit then the testimony
of men; for the witness of God is greater then men, 1. Ioh. 5. 9. And Christ
preferred the testimony of the Scriptures before man's testimony, yea, though a
Prophet: for he says, he received not testimony of man, speaking of John Bapt.
Ioh. 5. 33, 34. and yet he referred himself to the testimony of the Scriptures,
testifying of him, verse. 39. Yea, he says, that his own words would not be
believed, if the Scriptures be not believed, ver. 47. So that the Scriptures
testimony of themselves, being the Word of God, and so the testimony of God,
are sufficient witness to take them for the Scriptures of God; which whosoever
refuses or questioneth, the testimony of no men, no, not of Christ, if he were
here on earth, would be believed, to make us to receive them for Gods Word.
This their own Bible does teach us.

IV. Their Bible does not only show, how the Scriptures give witness of
themselves thus in general terms, but more particularly informs us, that
the Scriptures do prove the particular books of holy Writ to be the Word of
God. Moses witnesses of his own writings, that he wrote by commandment,
Deuteronomy. 31. 9, 19. and what he delivered, was that which was commanded him Exodus
34. 34. All the Prophets witness their Prophecies to be of God, Esaias 1, 2.
Ier. 1. 2. Ezech. 1. 3. Dan. 10. 1. Hos. 1. 1. Joel 1. 1. Amos 1. 3. Obadiah 1.
1. Jonah 1. 1. Mich. 1. 1. Nah. 1. 1. Hab. 1. 1. Zeph. 1. 1. Hag. 1. 1. Zach.
1. 1. Mal. 1. 1. Jesus Christ gave approbation to the authority of Moses, the
Prophets, and the Psalms, Luke 24. 26, 24. And so the Apostles, Act. 26. 22.
Romans 16. 23. not only in expounding, but also by alleging one where or other
some thing out of every book; as out of Genesis, Mat. 23. 35. Act. 7. 3. and
3. 25. Ioh. 4. 5. out of Exodus, Mat. 5. 38. and 22. 32. Act. 13. 17, 18.
Leuiticus, Romans 10. 5. Mat. 5. 38. Numbers, Ioh. 3. 14. and 6. 31. Deuteronomy,
Mat. 4. 4, 7. and 5. 31. or 7. 37. Joshua, Act. 7. Heb. 11. 31. Iam. 2. Judges,
Act. 13. 20. Heb. 11. 32. Ruth, Mat. 1. 2, 3 12. Samuel, Kings and Chronicles,
Mat. 1. 2, 3, 6, 7. and 12. 3, 42. and 23. 35. Luke 4. 25, 26, 27. Act. 13. 21,
22. Romans 11. 3. Heb. 11. 32. Job, Iam. 5. 11. Psalms the whole book, Act. 1.
16, 20. and parts thereof, Mat. 13. 35. and 21. 16, 42. Proverbs, Romans 12. 26.
Iam. 4. 6. Heb. 12. 6. Esaias, Mat. 21. 5, 13. Ioh. 12. 38. Jeremy, Mat. 27. 9.
Ezechiel, 2. Cor. 6. 18. Revel. 4. 7. and 20. 8. Daniel, Mat. 24. 15. So might
I go through all the small Prophets, but that whole book of the Prophets is
approved, Act. 7. 42. And all the Scriptures of the old Testament, are called
by Saint Paul, the words of God, Romans 3. 2. and are confirmed in particular, as
the rest: as Hosea, Mat. 9. 13. and 12. 7. To. 9. 25, 26. Joel, Act. 2. 16.
Jonas, Mat. 12. 40. Amos, Act. 7. 43. Micha, Mat. 2. 6. Zachary, Mat. 27. 9.
Habacuk, Romans 1. 17. Gal. 3. 11. Nahum, Romans 10. 15. Haggai, Heb. 12. 26.
Malachy, Mat. 17. 11, 12.

Thus the old Testament bears witness to it self, and the New also to the
Old; so does the Old to the New, foreshewing what in the New is revealed,
besides the record it bears of it self: For John tells us, that his
writings are the truth of God, Ioh. 19. 35. Revel. 1. 1. Saint Paul, that his
are the commandments of God, 1. Cor. 14. 37. Saint Peter confirms the
authority of all Paul's Epistles, 2. Pet. 3. 16. And thus must we think of all
the Apostles writings, as the divine truth of God, because they were all led by
the same Spirit, Ioh. 15. 26. into all truth, Ioh. 16. 13. which called the
words of Christ to their remembrance, Ioh. 14. 26. which Spirit Christ gave
them, and they had received, Ioh. 17. 8. Neither is it to be doubted, but as
their words in their Ministry were the words of God, Mat. 10. 20. Mark. 13.
11. so were their words written of God also, seeing they wrote what they
taught, as these places show, Luke 1. 1, 3, 4. Act. 1. 1. 1. Cor. 15. 1. 2.
Cor. 1. 13. Phil. 3. 1. 2. These. 2. 5. and as before is proved at large.

V. Their own Bible tells us, that the Word is a lamp and a light, Psalm.
118. 105. 2. Pet. 1. 19. This is spoken of the written (...). 11 9.
Word. Now a lamp and a light need no man to point to them, that has eyes to
see, if the same be before them, but they show themselves to such clearly
enough; even so does the light of Gods Word in Scripture show it self. Gods
works show themselves to be his works out of themselves, Act. 14. 16. He lest
not himself without testimony, Romans 1. 20. Psalm. 18. 1. His Psalm. 19.
works show him, and show themselves to be his; and shall not Gods Word show
it self to be Gods Word? Is there to a godly man a less print of the Deity
in his Word to discern it, then in a very natural man to discern his works?
Moreover, shall the writings of men discover their Authors, of what profession
and learning they be and shall not Gods Word be able to show it self to be of
God? For let one man write like an Artist; another, as a Philosopher; the
third, as a Moralist; the fourth, as a Statist; the fifth, as a Divine: No man
that is an Artist, a Philosopher, a Moralist, a Statist or Divine, but he can
discern of all these writings distinctly, though he have not some to tell
him, what they be. So let a man, endued with Gods Spirit, and spiritual
understanding, come to the holy Scriptures, he will discern them to be of God,
and of his Spirits inditing, though none bear witness to them, and tell him
so much. For the spiritual man judges all things, 1. Cor. 2. 15. and if he
can judge, he also can discern of the^. Weigh also, that those which be good
Bankers, know money at the first sight, whose image and superscription it
bears. The work of an Apelles is easily discerned from that, which is an
ordinary Painters. And we know, that men well read, are so quicksighted, as
that they can discern learned men's writings from the counterfeites of them.
How much more then may the writings of God, so infinitely surmounting all
others in all manner of grace, dexterity and majesty of themselves, be
severed and sundred from all other writings, and be known to be of the Lords
own inditing?

Lastly, as in general the Scriptures show themselves to be Gods Word, and
also more particularly, that the several books thereof are his Word: So these
very books, which we at this day acknowledge, and have in account for Gods
Word, and so believe them to be, do witness for themselves, that they are
indeed the very Word of God, though the Church should be silent in her duty
so to profess, and teach them to be. And this is clear:

1. From the Penmen, who according to the wisdom given to them, as Peter
speaks, 2. Pet. 3. 15. have written the truth of God, Ioh. 19 35. and the
commandments of God, 1. Cor. 14. 37. Now, who were the Penmen of these books,
we know: 1. By the titles of them. 2. By the inscriptions, as that to the Romans
chap. 1. 1. to the Corinth. chap. 1. 1. 2. Cor. 1. 1. to the Gal. chap. 1. 1.
and so of the rest of the Epistles of Saint Paul. Likewise that of Saint James,
Peter, and Jude, and the Revel. 1. 1, 4. are known by their inscriptions. 3.
By the subscription in some, as 1. Cor. chap. 16. 21. The salutation of me Paul
with mine own hand. 4. By apparent testimony within them, telling us who
wrote them. John says, he wrote the Gospel ascribed to him, Ioh. 21. 24. So
Saint Paul his Epistles, 2. Cor. 10. 1. 1. Corinthians. 15 9. 1. Tim. 1. 13. That
to the Hebrews, in many places discouers it self to be Saint Paul's. So the
Gospel to be Saint Lukes, and the Acts too; for he that wrote the one, wrote
the other also, Acts 7. 7.

2. From the purity, the verity, the integrity, the godly plainness and
simplicity, and yet powerful majesty thereof, euincing all gaine-sayers, and
manifesting these very books to be the Word of God. What true and evident
properties soever can be showed to be the properties of Gods Word to know it
by, the very same these books challenge to themselves, to approve themselves
to be Gods Word to the conscience of every true Christian. See Scotus his ten
arguments, 1. Sent. prol. Art. 1. Also Gregor. de Valent. tom. 3. p. 329. Let
our adversaries speak herein.

3. From the witness of Gods Spirit, making the reading, studying, meditation,
preaching, and hearing of the things contained in these books, very powerful
upon men's consciences, working conversion to God, and so persuading to believe
them to be of God, as hereupon they do yield obedience thereto, fear to
offend against the commandments therein, believe with comfort the promises,
yea, and so fully to give themselves to the guiding thereof, as they think in
them to find eternal life, and are so persuaded, as that they can forsake all,
yea, if need were, also to suffer death upon the faith of these saving truths
therein contained, as holy Martyrs have done very chearefully and constantly
through the Spirits assistance, bearing witness to them, and by which they and
we know them to be the things given us of God, 1. Cor. 2. 12.

This works faith, and makes us believe them, and therefore is called the
Spirit of Faith, 2. Cor. 4 13. This teaches us, Ioh. 6. 45. and is truth, 1.
Ioh. 5. 6. and ever accompanies the Word, Esaias 59. 21. to make it the power of
God to salvation, Romans 1. and the savor of life unto life, to them that are
saved, 2. Cor. 2.

The Church is to testify of them, to interpret them out of themselves, to
keep them, and to defend them; but she cannot either make them to be Gods
word, if they were not so already: for she cannot make a word to be man's, if
man never spoke it; neither can she make Gods word to be his word unto us upon
her own credit, if it self bare not witness of it self, and the Spirit did
not confirm the same, and not work this faith in us. If her authority could
work this belief, then were she to blame for not bringing all to the faith of
them. To work divine faith in our hearts, is of God, and not of men.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Saluianus, lib. 3. de prouidentia, says, All that men say, need reasons and
witnesses; but Gods Word is witness to it self: for whatsoever the incorrupt
Truth speaks, must needs be an incorrupt witness to it self.

Ambrose. lib. 5. Epist. 31. Whom may I believe in the things of God, better
then God himself?

Hilarie, lib. 1. de Triniate. God is a witness for himself; and he is not to
be known but by himself. Now, God and his Word is one; and therefore says
Nilus, it is all one to accuse God, as Decausis dissent. Eccl. page 2.
to challenge the Scriptures.

Origin, lib. 4. cap. 2. de Princip. Whosoever with all diligence and
reverence, as is meet, shall consider the words of the Prophets, it is
certain, that in the reading and diligent view thereof, having his mind and
understanding knocked at by a divine inspiration, he shall know that the words
which he reads, were not uttered by man, but are the words of God; and of
himself shall perceive, that these books were written, not by humane Art, not
by the word of mortal man, but by a Majesty Divine.

Gainesaid by some of their own.
Gregory de Valentia, Comment. in Thom. cap. 3. page 31. The Revelation of the
Scripture is believed, not upon the credit of another Revelation, but for it
self.

Canisius cites, cap. de praecept. Eccl. Number. 16. We believe, adhere, and give
the greatest authority to the Scripture, for the testimonies sake of the holy
Ghost speaking in them.

Bellarmine, de Verbo Dei, lib. ca. 2. Nothing is more known, nothing more
certain then the Scripture, that it were the greatest madness in the world,
not to believe them. If he says truth, as he does; then is it madness, not to
believe the Scripture bearing witness of it self, that it is all of it self
inspired of God. What farther Testimony need we? A Papist now of late in His
guide of Faith, says thus: We believe the Scriptures S. N. Guide of faith.
chap. 7. number. 3.
for the divine Authority, which is the formal object of Faith, and of
infinite force and ability to persuade immediately by it self, without the
help of any formal inducement whatsoever.

Stapleton says, That all the former writings of the Bible may Defens. Eccl.
Autho. lib. 1. cap 9. Tripl incoat. Aduers W^itak. in admonit.
be assured to us by the latter; the old Testament by the new: and the inward
Testimony of the Spirit is so effectual for the believing of any point of
faith, that by it alone any part may be believed, though the Church hold her
peace and never be heard. Note this saying well, you Papists, that persuade
your selves, that the Scripture is not Scripture to you, but because the Church
tells you so.

They have no Scripture for defense of this their Position, to S. N. Guide of
Faith. chap. 7. number. 2. and 3.
object against us. Atheistical objections some have made, as if they would
uphold the Turkish Alcoran, unworthy any Christian, and no more worthy any
answer, then the blasphemy of Rabshekah, 2. King. 18 36. against which King
Hezekias commandment was; Answer him not a word, Esa. 36. 21.

VIII. Proposition. That traditions, which they call the unwritten word, are
the Rule of Faith:
Confuted by their own Bible.
I. IT has been proved before, that the word delivered by mouth, both before
and under the Law, and after, till the new Testament was written, in all
substantial and necessary points of faith, is now either expressly set down,
or by a necessary conclusion comprehended in the Scriptures.

II. That therefore the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, which before
also is fully proved.

III. Their own Bible in many places, and diverse ways, does condemn
traditions: 1. In calling them traditions of men, Col. 2. 8. of Fathers, 1.
Pet. 1. 18. your traditions; that is, the traditions of Scribes and Pharisees,
Mat. 15. 1, 3. commandments and doctrine of men, Mat. 15. 9. Rudiments of the
world, Col. 2. 8, 20. not calling them the tradition, doctrines, and
commandments of God, or his Word, or the word of his Prophets any where.

2. In declaring to us, that the worship which is after such traditions, is a
vain worship, Mat. 15. 9. and but a show of wisdom in superstition, Col. 2.
23. and that the conversation also which is after Fathers tradition, is but
vain, 1. Pet. 1. 18. So as we see, traditions may not be either a Rule of
worship, or of conversation of life.

3. In setting down the evils which have come to the Church, and true Religion
of God by such traditions. Their Bible tells us, that for traditions the
Commandments of God were left, transgressed, made frustrate, and his Word
defeated, Mat. 15. 3. Mar. 7. 8, 9, 13. It was tradition, by which the Scribes
and Pharisees had diminished the integrity of the Law, taken from it, added to
it, and corrupted the meaning thereof, which Christ freed it from, Mat. 5. 18,
20, 22, 23, 28, 29, 34, 35. It was a pretended Apostolical word, which first
greatly troubled the Church of Antioch, and was the cause of gathering the
Council at Jerusalem to confute and condemn the same, Act. 15. 1, 2, 5, 6,
23, 24. The decrees thereof were written; the Epistle sent abroad, verse. 30.
31. and so they had a written Word to strengthen them against that
traditionall, corrupt and counterfeit Word.

Lastly, it was a pretended Apostolical word, which troubled the
Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. which by his Epistle, and so by the written Word
was confuted.

If I should add out of Story, to this out of Scripture, what evils have
hereby happened to the Church in and among Heretics, who used traditions, to
defend their Heresies, in and Irenaeus. l. 5. c. 66. l. c. 13. ^ert. de
praescript. Epiphan. de Haeres. l. 1. c. 23. 24, 38.
among the Fathers misse-led and misleading others by false traditions, whereby
some of them became Chiliasts; and now in and among the Papists, who, under the
color of traditions, fill the world full of their inventions, superstitions,
and Idolatries; I should be ouer-long, and so prove tedious. But let the
desirous Reader peruse D. Whitakers De traditionibus.

4. In teaching us, that the Apostle gives the Church warning not to be
deceived by word, by Philosophy, by vain fallacy according to men's
traditions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2, 3. Col. 2. 8.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Iustine in Triphonem: If we will be safe in all things, we must fly to the
Scriptures: we must believe God only, and rest only upon his institutions, and
not on men's traditions.

Irenaeus li. 3. ca. 13. says of the Apostles, that what they preached by
mouth, they left us in writing, to be the pillar and groundwork of our Faith.

Tertul. de praescrip. It were a folly to think that the Apostles knew all
things, but revealed the same to few, delivering some things openly to all,
reserving some other things to be spoken in secret to some. What can more
plainly be delivered contradictorie to Papists, and to tax them of folly and
falsehood in this point?

Theoph. Alexand. in 2. Paschali: It is a devilish spirit to think any thing
divine, besides the Authority of the holy Scriptures.

Basil. in sermon. de fide: It is a manifest defection from the faith, to bring
in any thing that is not written. When he uttered this, did he dream of a
traditionall word?

Jerome in Hag. cap. 1. All traditions, pretended to be Apostolic, if they
have not their authority from the Scriptures, are cut off by the Sword of God.

Nazianzen in Epimedio Athanasij, calls this unwritten word, An invocation,
and opposite to written Piety.

See further Tertul. Origin, Hippolytus, Athanasius, Ambrose, Basil, Greg.
Nissene, Jerome, Augustine, Cyril. of Alexan. S. Antonie, and Theodoret, cited
by Bishop Usher in his last book, in the Controversy of traditions.

Gainesaid by some of themselves.
This is to be seen in the words of Gregory, Gerson, Petrus See question the
first before.
de Aliaco, Clemangis, Durandus, Picus-Mirandula, Aquinas, Ferus, and other,
auouching the whole Scriptures to be the Rule of faith. Also of Antoninus,
Scotus, Gerson, Trithemius, Villa-Vincentius, Caictan, Lyra, and other, who
maintain that the the Scriptures be perfect and sufficient every way: their
words See question the second before.
are cyted before, and so do gainesay this traditionall word.

Objections out of the Scriptures answered.
2. These. 2. 15. Stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been
taught, whether by word, or by our Epistle.

Answ. This place, though in show, at the first sight may seem to help them;
yet considering well what they in the Question understand by traditions, it
helps them nothing at all.

1. Traditions here are such, as all the Thessalonians received, and which the
Apostles had taught to them all: but traditions which the Papists maintain, are
certain secret traditions delivered, not to all, but to some sorts of men, for
the better guiding of the Church. Therefore these traditions here, are not
those, these being common to all, and theirs proper to some only.

2. This place speaks of Traditions written, which we maintain: but they in
this question understand traditions; beside Scripture, or a word not written in
the Scriptures: how then does this place help them?

3 This place does speak indeed of traditions delivered by word and by
writing, but not of diverse traditions; as one sort spoken, and another sort
written: but of a diverse way of delivering the very same traditions: for first,
traditions are but once here named, and applied to both Word, and Epistle.
Secondly, the word Whether may be as well taken coniunctiuely, as it is in 1.
Cor. 15. 11. and 13. 8. Romans 14. 8. Col. 1. 20. as disiunctiuely: and albeit
here it be taken disiunctiuely, yet it proves not diversity of traditions,
but the same diversely delivered.

5. By this place it is clear, that traditions were first by word: but will it
therefore follow that they were not written? The contrary is to be showed from
the beginning. 1. Before the Law the Word was not written, but as before is
proved, it was afterward written. 2. Moses and the Prophets delivered Gods
will, first by word of mouth, but afterward the same was written. Thirdly,
Christ taught by word, which afterward the Euangilists wrote, Luk, 1. 2, 3.
Fourthly, the Apostle Saint Paul taught by word as other did, but Saint Paul
tells us, that he was set apart to teach the Gospel, Romans 1. 1. which he
calls the Word of God, 1. These. 2. 2, 13. This Word of the Lord Jesus he
only taught every where, and by him it was spread abroad, Act. 18. 11. and 19.
10. to which he commended the Church, Act. 20. 32. This Word and Gospel spread
so far by him, Romans 15. 19. he tells us, was written before in the holy
Scriptures, Romans 1. 2. so that he taught not an unwritten, but a written Word,
and a written Gospel, Act. 26. 22. and 28. 23. Romans 16. 26.

5. The traditions here mentioned, first taught by word, are written
traditions, which he calls in 1. These. 4. 2. Commandments; but these
Comandements given by word of mouth before, after in writing to them, he here
sets down verse. 3. 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12. yea, what lets to understand
these traditions by word to be those things, which in the 5. verse of this
chapter, he says, He remembers them of, set down in verse. 3. 4? If so, then
are these traditions written, and not now unwritten, though at the first taught
by word.

6. Though it were granted, that the traditions taught by word, were not all
written by the Apostle then, in neither of these Epistles; I demand first, how
can they be able hence to prove, that neither he elsewhere, nor any other
Apostle wrote them, but that they remain to this day unwritten? Secondly, how
can they tell what these were, if they be not written? Thirdly, how are they
able to prove, that these traditions not written and taught by the Apostle, are
their Popish traditions, which they stand for? Three necessary questions
unresolved hitherto.

7. And lastly, If they thus will reason, that there is yet an unwritten word
to be a rule, because S. Paul taught traditions first by word; then is there
much more a written word to be a rule, for that those spoken, were after
written: for that which is spoken and written, is with all men more certain
and sure then that which only is spoken. Now, of one and the same thing to be
ruled, there cannot be two rules, as before is proved. Therefore let us cleave
to the Word written, as the most certain and surest rule, because it is both
the word spoken and written.

2. These. 3. 6. And not according to the tradition which they have received of
us.

Answ. Here is mention of a tradition, which the Apostle had taught, and the
Thessalonians had received; but this is not an unwritten tradition, but
written: for the Apostle in verse. 10. sets it down, and tells us plainly
what it was, to wit, That if any would not work, let him not eat. So as this
is nothing for their unwritten traditions.

1. Cor. 11. 2. And I pray you, brethren, etc. that you keep the precepts as I
delivered them unto you.

Answ. 1. We grant, that the Apostle delivered and taught by word of mouth,
before he wrote: but the question is, whether the same he taught, be writ, or
no? They say, they be not: which this place proves not, neither can they bring
any place either expressly, or by necessary conclusion. To this purpose, we
say they be, and do prove it by many Scriptures before set down, as also in
answer to the first place, of which nature is this Scripture: for the Apostle
says here, I delivered them unto you: and in verse. 23. he has the very same
words, and withal sets down, what he delivered to them, in verse. 23, 24
25. So that what he delivered by word, is now in his writings.

Secondly, this place, according to their translation, is of precepts, they
here avoid the word traditions: if it be not for traditions, why do they
allege it? And if it be for traditions, why do they not name the Word here;
as elsewhere in other places? But let them be precepts: what then? If precepts
of necessary and substantial matters of the Gospel, then were the same
written: for Paul preached them only out of the Scriptures, Act. 26. 22. and
28. 23. according to the Scriptures, 1. Cor. 1 5 3, 4. For, as is proved, his
Gospel was a written Gospel, and what he preached, the same substantial
points himself did afterward write, as appears in the same Epistle, chap.
15. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. And Eadem scrifiere, hoc e^, eadem repetere quae praseus
dixeram.
in Phil. 3. 1. as also Saint Jerome expounds the place. Being then written
precepts, here is no proof for their unwritten traditions. If they understand
them of precepts, in and about matters of indifferency, rites, and decences in
the Church, etc. the place is nothing to the question in hand; and yet precepts
in such matters are also written, 1. Cor. 6. 12. and 8. 9, 13. and 10. 23, 31,
32. and therefore taken which way they please, they are now written, and not
unwritten precepts.

1. Tim. 6. 20. O Timothy, keep the depositum (that is, say the Rhemists) the
whole doctrine of our Christianity, and Catholic truth descending from the
Apostles by succession of Bishops even unto the end, and is all one with
tradition (say they, in their annotation) given to the Bishops to keep, and not
to Laymen. The Gagger alleges the third verse also, and so, as it seems,
does take the word doctrine, as here the word depositum, that is, as Bellarmine
expounds it, the treasure of unwritten doctrine.

Answ. 1. Here is no mention of tradition, neither does this place prove, that
this depositum is now an unwritten doctrine.

2. He speaks of a depositum committed to Timothy his trust: but whether
written, or only spoken, is not set down here, and so proves not the point
in question.

3. Of themselves there be that expound this depositum far otherwise. Caietan
expounds it of the flock committed to him So also Lyra: their Gloss takes it
to be his office. So Hugo Cardinalis: Aquinas interprets it of every good
thing, which any man has committed to him of God to keep, and to increase.
Thus they agree not among themselves: if they cannot agree about the sense of
the word; is this then a sound proof of so great a point as is in question?
Must a Rule to rule holy Scripture, and the holy Church, be grounded upon such
an uncertain meaning?

4. But let the Rhemists interpretation of the word go for sound; it is enough
to overthrow their tenent: for this depositum they make the whole doctrine of
our Christianity. If this be the Treasure of unwritten doctrine, as Bellarmine
will have it, what does the Scripture contain? Saint Paul tells us, 1. Tim.
1. 11. that the glorious Gospel was committed to his trust, as this depositum
was committed to Timothy his trust; if these two be one, as they are: for was
another thing committed to the trust of Timothy, then was committed to Saint
Paul's trust? Then the Gospel is the whole doctrine of our Christianity, except
there be doctrines of Christianity which are not Gospel: but the Gospel is
written, as before is proved, and therefore also is this a written depositum,
and not an unwritten doctrine.

5. This place wicked heretics so expounded; and to defend Tertul. de
praescript. aduersus Haeret. ca. 25.
their heretical falsities, feigned such a sense of this place, of certain
unwritten traditions, as the Papists do; by which they may see whence they be.

2. Tim. 1. 13. Have thou a form of sound words, which thou have heard of me:
the same is mentioned, Romans 6. 17.

Answ. 1. This shows, that a form of words were delivered by mouth; but
hence will it not follow, that the same is not now written. Saint Paul
instructed by word of mouth; Ergo, may it be concluded, that he wrote not the
same? How in reason will this follow? And yet this is the thing to be proved,
or else nothing to the purpose.

2. The place shows in what things this form of words is to be kept, to
wit, in faith and in love; but the form of the words of our belief is in the
Scripture, Ioh. 20. 31. Act. 8. 37. and also of our love, Mat. 22. 37, 39.

3. If by form of words they will understand the compendium of Christianity
concerning Faith, Obedience, Prayer, and form of administering the holy
Sacraments; all these be also in the Scriptures, as our Creed, the ten
Commandments, the Lords Prayer, as before is showed. For baptism, read Mat.
28. 19. and for the Lords Supper, Mat. 26. 26, 27, 28. 1. Cor. 11. 23, 24 25.
Therefore here is no form of words left unwritten, as out of this place the
Papists pretend.

2. Tim. 2. 2. And the things which thou have heard, etc.

Answ. 1. This still speaks of Paul's preaching, but proves not the same not
to be written.

2. It has been before proved, that Paul preached openly the Scriptures, and
therefore by the things heard from him, must be meant those which he taught out
of the Scriptures.

3. It is probable, that S. Paul himself preaching out of the Scriptures, and
only according to the Scriptures, also highly commending Scriptures to
Timothy, to be able to make perfect the man of God to every good work, 2. Tim.
3. 16, 17. that he would have any thing commended by Timothy to other
Teachers, but what was to be found in holy Scriptures?

This place therefore helps not for unwritten traditions.

Ioh. 20. 30. Many other signs did Jesus, etc. which are not written in this
book.

Answ. 1. The Evangelist says, they were not written in this book. But what
then? May they not be written in other Evangelists?

2. Here he speaks of signs, and Acts of Christ, and not of his doctrine by
tradition, which is the matter in question: and so this text is nothing to the
purpose.

Ioh. 21. 25. There are many other things which also Jesus did, etc.

Answ. This place also speaks of that which Jesus did, and not of that which
he taught. Here is not one syllable of a traditionarie word.

Ioh. 16 12. Many things I have to say to you, but you cannot bear them now.

Ans. 1. This place tells us not what Christ said, but what he concealed, to
wit, many things which he had to speak, but then spoke not: so as this proves
not a traditionall word, nor any word at all, except they will conclude, that
what one can say, therefore he does say it.

2. If Christ had said all things to the Apostles then, yet would it not
follow, that the same were not at all written in Scripture: for Jesus Christ
taught, what was written in the Scriptures, expounded them, cited them, and by
them confuted the Adversaries. And Saint Luke makes a profession, that his
Gospel was A Treatise of all that Jesus began both to do and speak, unto the
day of his Ascension, Act. 1. 1, 2.

3. Can our Adversaries tell what things Christ had to say? If they can; first,
let them show to us what they were: secondly, that they were differing from
those things taught by him, and written now in the new Testament: thirdly, that
they were never written by the Apostles. If these they cannot demonstrate to
us, they gain nothing hence for their pretended traditionary August. 77.
tract. in John.
word. This place heretics abused for their traditions.

1. Cor. 11. 16. We have no such custom, nor the Church of God.

Answ. 1. This speaks not affirmatively of a custom, but negatiuely of no
such custom.

2. Though it had spoken of a custom, what is this to a traditionall word? Is
custom, doctrine? Or is it not rather applied to actions, as in Genesis 31. 35.
Ioh. 18. 39?

3. The Scriptures allow not custom to be a Rule, Leu. 18. 2. See Doway
Translation.
Ier. 10. 2. 2 King. 17. 40.

1. Cor. 11. 34. The rest will I dispose, when I come.

Answ. Here is no speech of any word of Doctrine, but of order among the
Corinthians.

Ioh. 2. 12. and Ioh. 3. 13. Having more things to write unto you, I would not
by paper and ink: For I hope that I shall be with you, and speak mouth to
mouth.

Answ. These places show indeed, that in the two short Epistles John wrote not
all those things, which he might have written, because he would speak to them
of them. But can our Adversaries prove; first, that John ever came to utter the
things unwritten? If he did, what were they? If he did not, then so much of
their conceited traditionall word is lost. Secondly, that those more things left
unwritten, were either things necessary, or they were not things already
written. Til they can show these things, this place does them no good.

Acts 16. 4. They delivered unto them the Decrees, which chap. 15. 28. were
decreed by the Apostles.

Answ. What of all this? The Decrees were written. The Apostles wrote letters,
Acts 15. 23. and the Epistle was sent, verse. 30. and read with comfort, verse.
31. Here is then no traditionary unwritten word.

Thus we may see, how their traditionall word unwritten, is confuted by their
own Bible, and has no footing at all in holy Scripture.

IX. Proposition. That the present Churches determination, is the absolute
unquestionable Rule of the peoples Faith, on which they are to rest, believing
their Teachers, without farther inquiry:
Confuted by their own Bible.
Romans 12. 6. Prophecy according to the Rule of Faith. Here is a gift bestowed
upon the Church, which is Prophecy, expounded by the Rhemists to be the
interpretation of the Scriptures. Then here is mention of a Rule, according to
which, they that have the gift of interpretation, are to expound. Where we see
the Churches action, and the rule to be two distinct things, Phil. 3. 16. Let
us continue in the same rule. Here in the word us, is to be understood the
Church; in the word continue, the Churches duty. Here is also mention of the
Rule, a thing distinct from the Church, Gal. 6. 16. And whosoever shall follow
this Rule, peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. The
Church is here the Israel of God. The Rule is that, which she, and all that
look for peace and mercy, must follow. The Church therefore, and the Rule, are
two distinct things. In Genesis 26. 5. Abraham is commended for his obedience; he
and his were the Church. But what was now the Rule? Even the Voice of God, his
Charge, Commandments, Statutes and Laws.

These places sufficiently teach, that the Rule and the Church are two things.
The Rule being that, according to which she is to be ruled in teaching and
living. Yea, so far is the practice, custom, and voice of the Church
(speaking only from her self) from having the honor to be a Rule in
necessary points to salvation, as she has not absolute unlimited authority
in matters of any inferior kind, but therein is tied to certain obseruances,
as these Scriptures teach, 1. Cor. 6. 12. and 8. 13. and 10. 32. Romans 14. 19.
1. Cor. 9. 19, 22. and 14. 14. and 10. 31.

Contraried by Antiquity.
See before in the first question, Jerome, Basil, Tertullian, Chrysostom,
Austin, Greg. Nyssen, Isi dorus, Pelusiota, and Cyril of Hieros. who make a
difference between the Rule and the Church: affirming the Scriptures to be
that Rule, and the same the Churches limits, out of which she may not go.

Gainesayd by their own men.
See also in the same question, twelve or thirteen testimonies from among
themselves; that the Scriptures are the Rule: and therefore not the Church,
which is to be ruled by the Scriptures.

The Scriptures objected answered.
Matthew. 23. 2, 3. Upon the Chair of Moses have sitten the Scribes and
Pharisees: all things therefore whatsoever they shall say to you, that observe
and do ye.

Answ. The scope is not to tie men to whatsoever they should teach, without any
exception, but to take away the scandal of their ill lives, that they might
not offend the hearers, when they taught that which was right and good. This is
evident by the reason added; But according to their works do ye not, for they
say, and do not. That in every thing they taught, they were not to be heard,
it is clear:

1. If we consider the ground of the speech in the word therefore, that is, for
that they had sitten in Moses Chair: what is that? Let the Papists tell us,
who say, To sit in Moses chair, is Gloss. in Mat. 23. 2. Gorham. ibid. Arias
Montan. elucid, on the same.
to teach according to the doctrine and Rule of Moses Law, and to command
things agreeable thereunto. And so say the ancient Fathers.

Cyril, Catech. 12. The Chair of Moses, is the power of doctrine.

Origin, Hom. 24. on Matthew. They sit in Moses Chair, which interpret Moses
sayings well, they sat well that understood the Law.

So Theophylact on Mat. 23. They sit in Moses Chair, that teach the things
that are in the Law; with this consideration then they are to be heard, and not
otherwise.

2. It is manifest, that Christ's words cannot be taken without restriction,
because in this same Chapter he calls them foolish blind guides, and taxes
them for false doctrine, ver. 16, 22. shutting the kingdom of heaven before
men, ver. 13. laboring to get a Proselyte; and then to make him the child of
hell double more, then themselves. ver. 15 He also calls them Hypocrites,
Serpents, Vipers brood, ver. 33. denouncing many woes against them, and
foretells how they should scourge, persecute, kill, and crucify such
faithful Teachers as he should send amongst them, ver. 33.

These things duly considered, is it any way likely that Christ should speak
without limitation, and will them to do whatsoever such should teach? whom
First, he calls foolish Blindguides, Hypocrites, Serpents, Vipers-brood, and
persecuters of faithful men; Secondly, whom before he had confuted for their
foul corrupt glosses, and vain traditions, by which they have broken the
Commandments of God, and made them of none effect, Mat. 5. 43, 44. and 15. 11,
14. Mark. 7. Thirdly, whom he plainly gave his hearers a Caveat to take heed
of touching their leaven, Mat. 16. 6. that is, their doctrine, verse. 12.
Fourthly, Christ in so an unlimited speech should have overthrown his
Doctrine, and so his own heavenly Kingdom, for then the people should have
taken him for a deceiuer, for a companion of Publicanes and sinners, for one
that had a devil in him, and for such a one as had cast out devils by
Beelzebub, the chief of the Devils, all which they broached, yea and in a full
Counsel condemned Christ for a wicked blasphemer.

3 If this speech had been to be understood without limitation, why did the
Apostle refuse afterward to observe and do what these (sitting in Counsel)
commanded them? Act. 4. 18, 19. and 5. 28.

4. And lastly, Papists themselves on this place do comment Iansenius. Em. Sa.
on this place, Barradut and Maldonat. Canus loc. l. 5. c. 4. Ferus on this
place.
thus; This place binds not us to obey them, if they teach that which is
evil, for that is to teach against the chair. All things are here meant,
which are not against the Law and Commandments of God.

All things keep (says another) when the Scribes and Pharisees do recite,
explain, teach and propound them. This place therefore is rather for the
Authority of holy Scriptures, and nothing at all to establish men's doctrine
contrary or beside Scripture.

Luke 10. 16. He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

Answ. These words are not to be understood as spoken absolutely, that
whatsoever the seventy Disciples (to whom these words were spoken) should
teach, and the people hear from them, should be taken as Christ speaking in
them, but with condition, as they should teach, what he charged them to teach.
For the Apostles had their lesson given them, to teach whatsoever Christ
commanded them, Mat. 28. 20. And these seventy were taught what to do and say,
Luke 10. 3, 12. which they observing, Christ was heard in them. So the meaning
is; He that hears you delivering my message, and teaching what I command,
hears me, as if I were there in very person; and he that shall despise you so
discharging your duty, despises me, and him that sent me, even God himself;
as also Saint Paul speaks, 1. These. 4. 8. For albeit the Apostles had an
vn^rring Spirit, assisting them in the Ministry, Mat. 10. 20. Mar. 13. 11.
John 16. 13. of whom these words may be taken absolutely, yet of all other
succeeding, they are to be understood with the former limitation. Else why are
we allowed, yea, and charged not to believe every spirit, but to try the
spirits, 1. Ioh. 4. 1. to try all things, 1. These. 5? And why are the Bereans
(who not knowing Paul's Apostolical function, but taking him as a Teacher, as
other were) commended (as Bellarmine confesses, l. 1. de Verbo Dei) for
searching the Scriptures, and left as an example for us to follow, Act. 17. 11.
if the Teacher were to be credited in every thing he should speak?

Mat. 16. 19. Whatsoever thou shall bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven,
etc.

Answ. This is to be done by the Keys which Christ gave him, as the words
before going show: I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: then
follows whatsoever thou shall bind, etc. to wit, by these keys of Christ.
Not then by his own power and will, as himself pleases, but as those keys
do help him to open and shut, to bind and loose; by and with the authority of
these keys must he proceed, and not otherwise.

Now let us see, what these keys be, by which he opens and shuts,
byndeth and loses, forgiueth and retains sins. These Keys are these two,
Christ's Word and Christ's Spirit, Mat 18. 18. Ioh. 20. 23.
which I thus prove:

1. For that in this Text is a promise of giving the keys, I will give the
keys, etc. Now, seeing that here they are not given, but promised, let us see,
what Christ gave to Peter, and other the Apostles, and we shall find, that he
gave them two things; his Word, which he calls the words of his Father, and
the Word of reconciliation which he put in them, and they received, Ioh. 17. 8.
2. Cor. 5. 19. and his Spirit, Ioh. 20. 22. which they also received, when he
said, Receive ye the holy Ghost, breathing on them. These are the two things
which we find that he gave them: therefore they are either the keys, or
inseparable companions of the keys.

2. Christ, in Ioh. 20. 21. says, As my Father has sent me, so I also send
you; so in Chap. 17. 18. But with these two did his Father send him; with his
Word, Ioh. 7. 16. and 8. 26, 28, 38. and with his Spirit, Luke 4. 18. Mat. 3.
16. Esaias 11. 2. and 42. 1. and 61. 1, 2. Therefore these two are the keys.

Keys are by Bellarmines interpretation, here taken for great authority and
power, as in Esaias, 22. 22. in Eliakim, shadowing the great power and authority
in Christ, Revel. 3. 7. exercised in his Church. But what greater power and
authority then his Word and Spirit, can there be in Christ his Church?
whatsoever it be, it is comprehended in these two. Therefore these be the keys.

4. He speaks of keys, as of more then one linked together; so that they are
given as inseparable: and so these two be: For the Spirit teaches the Word of
Christ, Ioh. 16. 13. and 14. 26. and the Word is with the Spirit, Esaias 59. 21.
these two keys are tied together and given by Christ.

5. The keys promised here, are the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: In this
spiritual Kingdom, by these to bear rule, by these to bind and loose in
earth; is so verily and as surely done in heaven. For what in this Kingdom
here can bear Rule, but his Word, and his Spirit? What truly can bind and
loose in heaven, but these? We may be assured, that what the Word and Spirit of
God binds, they are bound indeed, and what these loose, remit, and forgive,
they are loosed, remitted, and forgiven of God in heaven: of no other keys can
we be so assured hereof. These then are the keys here promised to Peter, and
were given to all the Apostles, and to the true Church of God.

This place therefore helps nothing our Adversaries, who boast of an unerring
spirit, leading the Pope and his Prelates, into all truth: if they brag of
this key, let them show us the other, the Word of God, and the same written now
in the Scriptures; or else their boasting is in vain, and their binding and
loosing of no force.

Deuteronomy. 17. 8. If there arise a matter, etc.

Answ. This place is for us, and against them: for here judgment must be
given, not as men think, out of their own brain, but, says the text
(according to their own translation) Thou See also Ezec. 44. 24.
shall do whatsoever they that are Presidents of the place, which our Lord
shall choose, shall say and teach thee according to his Law: now that Law was
written, 2. Chro. 17. 9.

This is it then we desire, that the truth of judgment may be from the written
Word of God, which this place approves: yet though they produce it and urge it
so often, nevertheless it speaks not of the necessary points of faith, but of
controversies in matters of another nature, as the eighth verse plainly
shows.

Hag. 2. 12. Thus says the Lord of hosts, Ask the Priests the Law.

Answ. This place is also for us, and against themselves: for what were the
Priests to be asked? what, their own opinion and judgment? No, but they were
to be asked the Law, that is, the Law written, and according to which they did
answer, in verse. 13. 4. We teach, that Pastors are to be heard speaking to
us, out of the Word written, and accordingly as it teaches them to speak, we
must obey with all reverence.

2. Chro. 19. 8, 18. Moreover in Jerusalem did Iehosaphat set of the Levites,
etc.

Answ. It is one with that in Deuteronomy. 17. 8. and here, contrary to the Popish
practice, the Priests and Levites were subject to Iehosaphat the King, who had
an inspection over them, and gave them a charge: so 2. Chron. 17. 7, 8.

2. These. 2 15. Stand fast, and hold the tradition, etc.

This place is answered fully and at large before, in handling the former
question.

Mal. 2. 7. For the lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and the Law shall
they require of his mouth.

Answ. 1. This place proves not that the Priests lips ever did keep
knowledge, (though it be thus read in a Commandment) but teaches what his
duty was to do: For the next verse following tells us, what the priests then
were; But you have departed out of the way, and have scandalized many in the
Law, Verse. 8. Therefore he made them contemptible, and base, verse. 9.

2. This text makes for every Priest without exception: but will they have
every Priest in his teaching to be without error, and his word the rule of
faith?

3. This tells us what the people are to seek for, to wit, the Law, but this
as before is proved, was written.

X. Proposition. That the Church is no where in Scriptures taken for the
invisible Church:
Confuted by their own Bible.
Heb. 12. 23. ANd the Church of the first borne which are written in Heaven:
which in the former verse. 22. he calls Mount Sion, and the city of the living
God, heavenly Jerusalem, and the assembly of many thousand angels. Is this the
visible, or invisible church? does man's eye look upon this heavenly company?
Reu. 14. 1, 3. There is the Lamb with his company redeemed from the earth upon
Mount Sion, having his Fathers Name written in their foreheads, Mat. 16. 18.
Romans 8. 29. Ephesians. 1 22. and 5. 23, 32. Col. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Revel 21. 10 In
which places is to be understood the invisible Church, and wheresoever it is
understood of the mystical body of Christ, it is there the invisible Church.

Contraried by Antiquity.
The Ancient Fathers found in Scripture an invisible Church.

Saint Augustine, in Psalm. 92. concion. 2. part. 2. of the same Psalm, makes
only the elect from Abel to the worlds end, to be the Church, this Church is
invisible to man.

Saint Cyprian says, in Epist. 55. That those are the Church, which abide in
the house of God. But can man see, who will abide therein.

Origin, in Math. 16. 18. understands the Church, of such as fall not away,
but do overcome, and are not overcome of those gates of hell: but such are
known only to God, and not discerneable by men, nor seen with bodily eyes.

Saint Gregory, in Hom. 19. in Euang. calls the Catholic Church the Lords
Vineyard, from just Abel, to the last of the elect in the end of the world.
Does Gregory understand this of the visible Church? What mortal eye can see
this Church of the Elect? On Job, cap. 9. in l. moral. 35. He writes, that
Christ and the Church, the Head and the Body are one person. But who ever saw
this with his eyes? Gregory therefore found in the Scripture an invisible
Vineyard and Church of Christ.

Gainesaid by their own men.
Caietan takes that of Mat. 16. 18. for the congregation of the faithful.

Ferus expounds it of the Elect: now the Elect are visible to the eye.

Our Adversaries allege many places to prove the Church most properly to be
called visible, as Number. 20. 4. 1. King. 8. 14. Act. 20. 28. and 15. 3, 4. and
18. 22. and many other Scriptures.

Answ. 1. All these are of particular visible Churches, and not understood of
the Catholic: the former we affirm to be visible; but not this.

1. The places contradict not this which we hold, that the Church, somewhere in
holy Scriptures, is taken for the invisible Church, which they by bringing
places to prove a visible Church, do not gainesay.

XI. Proposition. That the Church is ever gloriously conspicuous to the world.
What we mean, when we say, that the Church is sometime hidden.

WHen we speak of an invisible Church, we mean the Church Catholic in our
Creed, which we do believe, and do not see, nor can see: for faith is the
ground and evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. also faith and sight are
opposed, 2. Cor. 5. 7. but we only believe the Catholic Church, as in our
Creed we confess, and therefore is it inuisisible, partly in heaven
triumphing, partly here on earth militant, known only to God, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
and not discerned of men, because they be only the Elect of God. This is the
Church spoken of, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. Romans 2. 28, 29. Mat. 16. 18. Ephesians. 1. 22.
and 5. 23. Col. 1. 18. and the hidden ones, Psalm. 83. 3.

Besides this Catholic, we hold also a particular Church visible. For
beginning in Paradise, we may find such a visible Church till the flood; from
thence to Moses: from him (under whom it mightily increased into thousands of
families) till the same was planted in Canaan, where it became a National
Church, and never wanted some degree of visibility in more or fewer of the
members thereof, unto the coming of Christ, who taught the people, and
gathered Disciples, which professed him, and after his Ascension, were the
first of those, which after were called Christians; all being then together in
Jerusalem for a time, and the only visible Church of Christ upon earth, which
visible Church through persecution, began to be scattered abroad, and the
Apostles and Teachers being also dispersed, this one Apostolical Church spread
far and wide into the world, never being any more entire at once in one
place, as before it had been in Jerusalem, but from that time to this day,
has been, and is in several Congregations, which are called Churches, every
one bearing the denomination of the whole, because all of them do make but one
Church, as also for that every one of them should lively represent that first
Church in Jerusalem, (from whence these other came into the world) in doctrine
of the Apostles fellowship, Sacraments, and prayer with one accord, Act. 2. 42,
46.

This Church taken in a general notion, for all those that profess Christ any
where, in any sort, has ever been visible in the world, and also to the
world, to Jews, Turks and Pagans.

But thus taken in so superficial, bare, and naked apprehension, it
comprehends all sorts of Assemblies professing Christ, whether purely or
impurely, Orthodoxally, or Heretically, uniformly, or Schismatically, and so
has several names; Sometimes taken from the City where such Assemblies be, as
the Church of Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, Ephesus, Philippi, Thessalonica, and
Colosse; Sometime according to the Countries, as the Churches of Galatia. So we
say now, The Church of France, of England, Scotland; Sometime from the
Sect-Masters names, as Arians, Macedonians, Eutychians, Nestorians, Donatists,
as now, Brownists, Separatists, etc. Sometime from the People, according to
their Country where they were borne, though dwelling elsewhere, as we have
here in London, and some other coasts of England, the Dutch, the French, and
Italian Churches; Sometime from the Coasts, as the East and West Church;
Sometime from the Language used in the public worship, as the Greek Church,
and the Latin Church; Sometimes from the opinions held, as Anabaptists,
Vbiquitaries, and Familists. And thus come we and our Adversaries to be
diversely named: though we be all in general called Christians, yet we call
them that are yoaked under the B. of Rome, Papists, for their Pope and
Romanists from their City; but they themselves usurped the name of Catholics.
They call us Lutherans, and Caluinists; but we make none save only Christ the
author of our faith: commonly we are called Protestants, because we continue our
protestation against the enemies and abominations of the Romish Church.

Such a Church thus taken in this general manner, professing Christ under one
name or other, has ever been visible, even to the world. Thus we teach that
the Church is ever visible one where or other, and never wholly hidden at any
time.

But here in the question, the name Church we take more strictly, for a
company wheresoever assembled in public, together worshipping the true God
in Jesus Christ, as God himself only has prescribed by his Word, whereto
outwardly they profess conformity, both for doctrine, and conversation also
in good measure.

This true Church of God, we say, is visible; First, in respect that it
consists of men, making open profession. Secondly, in respect of the place
being public, where such obtain liberty to meet together. Thirdly, in
respect of the external actions in and about the worship of God; Thus this
Church is visible, but not alike gloriously co^spicuous at al times, in every
place where God planteth it; This Church we affirm not to be at any time
invisible: but we only say, it is sometime hidden; neither yet do we mean
hereby, that it is so hidden, as not to be found any where, of the^ that seek
after it by due means, as if it were utterly extinguished: nor so hidden, as
not to be seen of any, in any place: for such a hiding we never dream of, as
our Adversaries interpret falsely against us: but when we say it is hidden, we
mean, that it is not acknowledged, but contemned by the evil ones, which love
not the truth, by reason of the fewnes of the followers Mat. 10. 23. and 23 34.
Heb. 11. 38. Act. 1. 13. and 12. 12 and 20. 7, 8.
thereof, and their secret meetings in time of persecution, and their decay of
outward government, and public exercises in open places. For these reasons,
she is said to be hidden; and this hidden estate of the Church comes to pass,

1. For that she consists of a mixed company, the worser sort sometime, and
for a long time coming to be the greater and a prevailing faction.

2. As they prevail, so they diminish the number, weaken the credit of those
professing the truth, and do bring cunningly their own will, their own
inventions and ways, into estimation with the worldly minded.

3. This prevailing faction and greater number increasing, engrosse and
arrogate to themselves the name of the Church, and so encroach upon credit to
their own devices, as vaunting to be the only true Church, and their
profession and practice, the only true and sound Religion.

4. Hereupon they condemn the other as Schismatiques, and Heretics, and their
way as heresy, and so raise up against them persecution, inhibiting their
meetings in public, scattering their Assemblies, punishing their Teachers,
and making them to be generally evil spoken of, and putting by-names upon them
full of reproach, to cause the^ to be the more detested of the worst, and
distasted of indifferent minds, by forging many lies and falsities upon them,
both in life and doctrine.

5. By this it comes to pass, that now they are glad to fly away, to hide
themselves, to meet in secret places, where they may with any safety come
together, till God raise such as be in authority to afford them public
meetings again.

In the mean space they are as it were hidden: and this is all we mean, when
we speak of the hidden Church; which is not so hidden, but that the members of
her are seen one to another, See D Whites te and cable ob^eruati^ns of the
Church, i^ (...) Reply to Fisher, page 51.
and do often meet together: yea, some of them are espied by this prevailing
faction sometime, whom they cruelly persecute, and put to death, if they do not
recant, and turn to them.

Their assertion, that the Church has been ever to the world gloriously
visible, is most false:
Confuted by their own Bible.
1. By Prophetical speeches, foretelling that the Church shall lose her
glorious conspicuousnesse to the world, 1. Chr. 15. 3. And many days shall
pass in Israel without the true God, and without Priest and Teachers, and
without the Law, Osea. 3. 4. Many days shall the children of Israel sit,
without King, without Priest, without Sacrifice, without Altar, and without
Ephod, and Teraphim. See also Mich. 3. 6, 7. and in Mat. 24. 24. Christ
foretells that false Christ's, and false prophets shall arise, and so far
seduce, as to deceive the very elect, if it were possible; which could not be,
if ye true Church should be ever gloriously conspicuous. S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
3, 4. tells us of such a revolt, as Antichrist shall be exalted and sit in
the Temple of God. And S. John in the Revelation, Chap. 9. 2. tells of such a
darkness, that should obscure the Sun and Air, of such an oppression of the
Church, as she should be trodden under foot, Chap. 11. 2. of such a
persecution, as she should be glad to fly into the wilderness, Chap. 12. 6.
and lastly, of such a prevailing of the Beast that enemy, as the whole earth
should adore, and follow after him, Chap. 13. 7, 8. Which Word of God must
needs be true. And therefore the Church is not ever gloriously conspicuous to
the world, as an earthly Monarchy or estate.

2. By Historical narration, 2. Chron. 15. 3. Heb. 11. 37, 38. Judge. 6. 2. in
the kingdom of Judah, in Ahaz his days, in the days of Manasses his revolt
from God; for then was there no glorious conspicuitie of the Church any where.
What a low ebb was Gods Church come to in Israel in Eliah his days? About the
time of Christ's suffering, what glorious face of the true Church we^ there
then? Christ was condemned: the Apostles were sted (...) scattered: Peter
forswore Christ. Was here a glorious true Church in the eye of the world? We
see then, the Church has not ever been in a pompous visibilitie.

Contraried by Antiquity.
S. Augustine, Epist. 80. ad Hesych. toward the end, and Epist. 48. ad
Vincent. says, When the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give
her light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven, (as is prophesied, Revel. 6.
and 9. 1.) then the Church shall not appear, for that then the ungodly
persecutors See more of this his opinion in Enarrat. in Psalm. 10. de bapt. also
contra Donat. lib. 6. cap. 4.
shall rage out of measure.

S. Chrysostom on Mat. Hom. 49. says, that since the time that Heresies
invaded the Church, it can no ways be known which is the true Church of
Christ, but by the Scriptures only: in this confusion it can no otherways
else be known. This shows then that the true Church of God is not ever
visibly glorious. And this is manifest, if we consider the estate thereof in
the time of the Arian Emperors; the world almost being turned Arian, as S.
Hierome complains.

Gainesaid by some of themselves.
Alex. Hales part. 3. q. vlt. number. 5. Art. 2. says, that about the time of
Christ's passion, the true faith remained in none, but in the Virgin Marie.

So Durand. Rat. lib. 6. cap. 72. number. 25.

So Panormit de elect. and elect. potest. cap. sanctificasti.

So Turrecramat. de Consecrat. d. 2. semel Christus, Number. 4.

It was a poor visibilitie then, far from glorious conspicuousnesse.

Many Papists write of a miserable estate of the Church in the time of
Antichrist: that the Mass shall be celebrated in few places, and very
privately in caves and secret places, yea, perhaps the Pope shall then profess
his faith in secret. See for these things, Pererius on Daniel, page 714.
Ouandus in Breuiloqu. in 4 sent. D. 18. prop. 3. page 602. Suarez. lib. 5.
Contr. sect. Angli. cap. 21. Acosta de Temp. nouis. lib. 2. cap. 15. Rhem. on 2 Thessalonians 2. 3. All these speak of the Churches almost utter ex^^pation. See more
testimonies, of Occam, Caietan, Maluenda, Barradius, and others in D. Whites
Reply to Fisher, page 77.

This they do mean of their Romish Church-Seruice, Mass, and Religion; which
I pray God to hasten, and make them true Prognosticators of their own
downfall and ruin, Amen, Amen.

But that Romish Antichrist has played his part against the true Church
already, as is foretold in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Reu. 9. and 11. and 12. and 13. which
these men cannot, or will not see, being made drunk with that whores cup of
her fornication,

The Scriptures objected answered.
Mat. 5. 14. Yet are the Light of the World, a City set on a hill cannot be
hidden: Neither do men light a Candle, and put it under a Bushel, but on a
candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in the house.

Answ. This place does not prove the Church visible or vnhidden at all times,
and to all; the successiue perpetual Church is not expressed nor intended: for
Christ spoke this to, and of his Disciples then. So Chrysostom takes it: and
yet even they In Psalm. 38.
(when they fled from Christ) were hidden for a time. But here is a threefold
similitude, by which our Adversaries go about to prove the euer-glorious
visibilitie of the Church.

1. From the word light; ye are the light of the World. What light is there in
nature, which is always seen? The very Suns light is not so in the same
place: for it goes down at night, and in the daytime it is often beclouded,
and at some times eclipsed, neither do all see it, though it shine forth; for
the blind man cannot; he that is a sleep, or winketh, does not; and they that
are out of the Horizon cannot. So then, let the Church be the Suns light; yet
she therefore cannot be proved to be ever gloriously visible to all, every
where: when the estate of the Church shall be, as is said in Revel. 6. 12. the
Sun being black as Sackcloth: and in Chap. 9. 2. the Sun and Air darkened
with the smoke coming out of the bottomless pit, Epist. 80. ad H^sych and 48.
ad Vincent.
then (says Saint Augustine) the Church shall not appear.

2. From a City set upon an Hill, which cannot be hid: true, totally, and
finally to all and every one at all times; for so we say, the Church cannot be
hid: but such as truly seek^ unto her, and in sincerity desire to see her,
shall come to the sight of her. But yet a City set on an hill, is ever hidden
to those that want sight, to such as be far off from it, to such as be near
to it, is it sometime hidden, when foggie mists arise and hinder the sight.
This simily therefore proves not a perpetual visibilitie of the Church.

3. From the Candle on a candlestick; but the candle often burns dimly, and
needs snuffers to snuff it. Again, it lightneth only those that have eyes
to see; and have their eyes open to see, else it does not give them light.
Thirdly, it gives light only to them that are in the house, to wit, in the
same room, but not to other, in another room, in the same house, if a wall
be between them. We see then, that these similies do not expressly prove
a continual clear visibilitie of the Church.

Mat. 18. 17. Tell the Church: if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be to
thee as a Heathen.

Answ. This place the Gagger alleges before for to prove, that the Church
could not err, and now that she is ever gloriously visible, yet here are no
express words, nor direct intent of her visibility or hiding.

1. Christ here did speak of the Jewish Church then, which was not the
Catholic, but a particular Church visible.

2. If applied to us, it cannot be meant of the Catholic Church, for that
cannot be seen with our eyes, but believed; neither if it could be seen, can
she be gathered into one place, to hear private causes, as is here meant.

3. This therefore being understood of a particular Church, as it needs must,
and that also of the only Ecclesiastical Gouerners therein; what is this to
prove the visibility of the whole Church?

4. This telling of the Church, may be done by such as be of her, when she is
in the wilderness, seen to her own, and not to the world, even where only
two or three be gathered together in Christ's Name, to hear such complaints,
Verse. 19, 20.

2. Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.

Answ. Here is no word of the Church; but the wise Gagger takes the Gospel
and the Church for one and the same. If so, then the place is flat against
himself: for he says, that the Church cannot be hid; but Saint Paul says,
the Gospel may, to them that are lost, blinded by Satan, and do not believe:
and therefore the Church may be hid, if it and the Gospel be one.

Esaias 2. 2. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of
the Lords House shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be
exalted above all the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it.

Answ. They expound this, and that of Mich. 4. 7. Dan. 7. 14. of Christ's
Kingdom; which they will have to be sensibly and corporally visible, when it
is altogether spiritual. This spiritual Kingdom is not a visible Mountain,
which the Nations with their bodily eyes flow unto; but with the eyes of their
mind. But they object and say, that a Prophecy must be of things which may
be seen and perceived by our senses But who ever saw with his corporal sense
any such thing as is here foretold? Who ever saw men beat their swords into
plowshares, their spears into pruning-hookes? Verse. 4. Whose sense ever saw
the Wolf lodging with the Lamb, the Leopard with the Kid, the Calfe with the
young Lion, the Cow with the Bear, and the Lion eating straw like an Ox? etc.
and yet these be Prophecies, Esaias 11. 6, 7 see chap. 60. 20, 21. and many other
places speaking of Christ's Kingdom, and spiritual comforts thereof.

Esaias 61. 9. And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, etc.

Answ. Here is spoken of the Churches seed to be seen among the Gentiles;
but whether openly or secretly is not mentioned: but the very text says, All
that see them, shall acknowledge them. Mark, all that see them. So first, here
is no speech of the whole Church, but of her seed. Secondly, that they are to
be known and seen: but this may be as well in secret as openly. And thirdly,
of all that see them. To some then they are not seen. We confess, that all
that by faith see the Church, to them is she spiritually visible. And this is
all that this text affords.

XII. Proposition. That the Church cannot err?
THe Church here taken for the visible Church, consisting of a mixed company,
we say, may err. This their opinion taught and believed of the people, is the
mother and nurse of all the mischiefs in that Romish Synagogue, which
arrogateth the name and privilege of Gods Church, and that Church only is
intended by this perverse Teacher. For this is the Mystery of iniquity, and
secret Cabala of the Roman Rabbis: when they give the glorious title of
inerrabilitie to the Catholic or general Church, they all the while mean
none other then their Mistress, the Lady of the seven hilled city, and other
Churches, as subiugated to her, and made her hand-maides, or rather slaves. But
we will follow this question in the general style and appellation of the
Church, as it is here propounded in terms.

Confuted by their own Bible.
First, we find in it the Churches defection foretold by Moses, Deuteronomy. 31. 16.
This people (meaning Israel the Church of God then) will fornicate after
strange gods, forsake me, etc. Foretold by the Prophet Azariah, 2. Chron. 15.
2. Many days shall pass in Israel without the true God, without Priest, a
Teacher, and without the Law. Foretold by Saint Paul, 2. These. 2. 2, 12. where
he speaks of a revolt, and such a revolt, as thereby the Man of sin gets up
to seat himself in the Temple of God, drawing to him such as have not a love
of the truth. Foretold by Saint Peter, 2. Pet. 2. 1. In you, lying Masters,
which shall bring in sects of perdition. By Saint John in his Revelation, where
the Church is foreshewed to prove a bloody Whore, Chap. 17. Now what is
foretold, certainly does, or shall come to pass. Therefore the Church may
err.

Secondly, we find in their own Bible, that the Prophets in old time found
the Church guilty, not only of moral crimes, but also of errors in doctrine,
Esaias 48. 4, 5, 8. and in Ezech. 16. 15, 35. where she is set out as a lewd
Strumpet. And in Chap. 20. 8. raxed for idolatry aforetime. The Prophecy of
Jeremy condemns the Church in his time for many abominations committed in
Jerusalem, and in Egypt. Our Savior found the Church at his coming corrupted
with false doctrine, the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees; warning his
Disciples to take heed thereof, Mat. 16. 6, 12. How the Churches of Galatia did
err, and were bewitched, Saint Paul tells us, Gal. 1. and 3. and 4. And the
Churches in Asia, as Pergamus, and Thyatira are taxed, and found fault with,
Revel. 2.

Thirdly, we find in their Bible by the history thereof, that the Church has
erred even from the very beginning.

I. In Paradise our first Parents, the first Church that ever God had, and the
most perfect for knowledge, holiness and righteousness; yet this Church
erred, and fell fearfully; in adding to Gods Word, in taking from it, and in
believing the devil before God. What Church is it then, which may not err?

II. After their casting out of Paradise, till the Flood, the Church, that is,
the sons of God, went unto the daughters of men, by which mixture the whole
earth became corrupted, Genesis 6. which error in fact came out of a dogmaticall
error in judgment.

III. From the Flood to Abraham; in which space we read of open rebellion
against God, Genesis 11. and that there was idolatry committed in the Church by
Their and Nachor in Mesopotamia, from amongst whom Abraham was called out,
Josh. 24. 2, 14.

IV. From Abraham's coming into Canaan, till Isreal's coming out of Egypt. In
this space idolatry was crept into the Church; into Jacobs Family, Genesis 35. 2.
And Israel is taxed for committing idolatry in Egypt, Josh. 24. 14. and for
being obstinate therein, Ezech. 20. 8. and 16. 15, 35. and 23. 8.

V. In Isreal's going into Canaan, during their aboade in the Wilderness; they
erred in heart always, they knew not the Lords ways, but mightily provoked
him, Psalm. 94. 9, 10, 11. and they committed horrible idolatry, both Aaron the
chief Priest, the Heads of the people, besides the rest, Exodus 32. 4, 5, 8,
31. They were a perverse generation, of which read Psalm. 77. 8. 10, 16, 17,
18, 19, 36, 40, 41, 56, 57. the whole Psalm shows, that they greatly erred.

VI. In Canaan in the days of the Judges, how often fell they into horrible
idolatry, serving other gods, and doing what liked themselves, Judge. 2. 10, 11,
12, 13. and 5. 8. and 6. 25, 26. and 8. 33. and 9. 4. 27. and 10. 6. and 21.
25. In Ely his time was a miserable state of the Church and Religion, 1. Sam.
2. In Saul's time men did not seek to the Ark of God, 1. Chron. 13. 3.

VII. From Salomons reign, to the captivity, were great abominations. Solomon
set up, or favored in others the setting up of idolatry, the remainders
whereof continued unto Josiah his days. The ten Tribes fell to idolatry, and
never returned. Judah often committed great wickedness, as in the days of
Rehoboam, Iehoram, Amaziah, Ioas, Ahaz, Manasses, Amon, and other Kings, which
succeeded godly Josias; and the people are often complained of to have done
corruptly, and to have sinned against God, even in good Kings days, 2. Chron.
17. 2. and 33. 17. and 36. 14. for which God heavily plagued them, 2. Chr. 28.
6. For more evidence of the evils in this space, read the Prophets, Esaias 48.
45. and 56. 10, 11. Ier. 2. 27, 28. and 3. 1, 2. and 5. 31. and 6. 14. Ezech.
69, 11, 12, 15. Hosea 2. 2.

VIII. From thence to Christ: The Priests, as Malachi witnesses, had departed
out of the way, and made void the Covenant, Mal. 2. 8. had despised and
polluted his name, Mal. 1. 6, 12. they did not lay to heart his commandments,
Mal. 2. 2. Judah is accused to have transgressed, and that abominations were
done in Israel, and in Jerusalem, that they had contaminated the sanctification
of the Lord, and had the daughter of a strange god, Mal. 2. 11. In the second
of Machabees we may read of horrible corruptions in the high Priests. Jason
got the office by money brought his Countrymen to the Heathen rites; the
Priests were not occupied about the offices of the Altar, but the Temple and
Sacrifices were neglected, 2. Machab. 4. 7, 11, 14. And when our Savior was
come, he found many sects, false Teachers corrupting the truth, Matthew. 6. and
16. 6, 12. and 23. 16, 22. and was by the outward pretending domineering Church
then in Council condemned, and put to death. To conclude of the chief Rulers
in this Church, the saying of Steven, that they were stiff-necked, and
uncircumcised in heart and ears, always resisting the holy Ghost, Act. 7. Who
can read these things, and think yet, that the Church cannot err; if withal
they would consider, how this Church of Israel had the most excellent means
for direction and confirmation?

I. They had the written Word, and ordinary Teachers, the Priests and Levites
daily instructing them, Deuteronomy. 33. 10. Acts 15. 21.

II. They had extraordinary teaching; 1. By God himself from Heaven, Exodus 20.
By Vrim and Thummim, by Vision and Dreams. 2. By Prophets, Moses, Samuel,
Eliah, Elisha, and very many more. 3. By Kings endued with a Prophetical
Spirit, as David and Solomon. 4. At length, by Jesus Christ himself
personally. 5. By the twelve Apostles, Mat. 10. 6. By the 70. disciples, Luke
10. 1. Never such, nor so many in any Church, since God had a Church.

III. They had Miracles and wonders in bringing them out of Egypt, in the
fearful giving of the Law, in carrying them through the Woldernesse, in
planting them in Canaan, and in strange Miracles wrought in Eliah and Elisha's
time, and in some of the Kings of Judah. Christ confirmed his doctrine, and so
did the Apostles and Disciples their teaching by Miracles, Luke 10. 17. No
Church under the Heaven had ever the like.

IV. They had great mercies and unheard of deliverances from their Enemies:
from Pharaoh and his Host drowned in the Red Sea: from the Amalekites,
discomfited by Moses prayer: from the innumerable multitude of Enemies, the
Kings of Canaan, of Midian, Philistims, Syrians, Assyrians: from the Host of
Sennacherib nine score thousand slain by an Angel in one night, Kings thirty
two, besides Benhadad, with an infinite Host defeated, by only 7000. and
odd: Jonathan and his Armor-bearer did terrify an whole Camp: Gideon and
three hundred men made an innumerable multitude to she away, and with a few
other of Ephraim, did slay of them in one day one hundred and twenty thousand:
Asa vanquished the Army of the Ethiopians, ten hundred thousand, besides three
hundred Charets. Iehosaphat gathered the spoil of his enemies, three Kings
coming with their Hosts against him, whom God set one against another, to
destroy utterly one another for his safety and enriching. What shall I speak
of Hosts flying for fear without any pursuing of them? For other blessings
and mercies they are not to be numbered.

V. They had strange and most terrible punishments upon them, to keep them in
the fear of God, to make them to know him, and to walk in his ways: fire
from Heaven devouring up some, the earth swallowing up quick other-some, the
giving of them often into the hands of Heathen Kings to oppress them, that
they might turn from Idolatry; yea, at length sent them all into captivity
for 70. years.

Thus we see, for Teachers, for Wonders and Miracles, for Mercies and
Judgments, none ever to be compared to them. Papists may fame Legends to
parallel these; but these are truths, having witness from Gods Word it self.
And yet this Church erred, and as Esaias says, chap. 48 4, 8. was stubborn, had
a neck as an Iron sinew, and her forehead as brass, and was a transgressour
from the womb.

If the Papists make little account of these reasons, as nothing to keep a
Church from erring; yet is it much more then their Romish Church can say for
her self. Let them say what they can for the Churches not erring, and we will
see whether this Church of Israel cannot say the same also.

Will they plead: 1. A Covenant? Israel had so, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 15. 2 Or, a
Covenant written in the heart? So was it then, Ier. 31. 33. Esaias 5. 7. 3. Or, a
Covenant with their Priests? So had the Priests then, Ier. 33. 20. 4. Or, that
the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and the people learn of them, and
they teach the people? So the very same might Israel allege, Mal. 2 7. Deuteronomy.
33. 10. Neh. 8. 7, 8, 9. Leui. 10. 11. Ezech. 44 23. yea, and did boast of,
Ier. 18. 18. 5. Or, succession of persons from time to time, in the same
Chair, or Seat? This could she plead to the full, from Aaron the first
appointed immediately by God himself with his office, place, service,
ornaments, and maintenance, his next successor to be also named by God
himself, Number. 20. 28. 6. Or, the Continuance of this Covenant to uphold
succession? This had it in plain words; and therefore was for ever the
Priesthood appointed to him and his seed, Number. 25. 12, 13. 7. Or, the presence
of God with them? So could and did Israel, Much, 3. 11. 8. Or, the name of the
Church? So they, Ier. 7. 4. 9. Or, that it is called holy, the Ground and
Pillar of truth? So was Jerusalem the holy City, Esaias 48. 2. the City of
truth, the sanctified Mount, Zach. 8. 3. 10. Or, that the Word did go out from
them to convert other Nations? So could they, as they were taught by Esaias,
Chap. 2. 3. and of making Proselytes could the Pharisees boast, Mat. 23. 11. Or,
the Spirit to be in them to keep their Teachers from erring? Who could thus
speak, as Israel might? Nehe. 9. 20. Esaias, 6. 3, 11. Zach. 7. 12. as Peter
witnesses, 2. Pet. 1. 21. 12. Or, that they are called the Church, and are
come from the Apostles, and Church at Jerusalem? So they by Stephen, Act 7. 38.
also says Isaiah, Esaias 48. 1. Hear ye, o House of Jacob, which art called by
the name of Israel, and are come out of the waters of Judah. So could the
Scribes and Pharisees boast of their Original, Ioh. 8. 33. 13. Or, that they
are Catholics, and the world spread over with them? And could not the Jewish
Church say so? Of their Religion were some of every Nation under heaven, Act.
2. 5, 9, 10, 11. they were dispersed in all the Persian Monarchy, Este^ 3. 8.
Chap. 1. there were many Proselytes made: such was the Eunuch of Ethiopia; and
to make them, they travailed Sea and Land, Mat. 23. 14. Or, that they have ever
had the holy Scriptures in their custody? So to the Jews were committed the
Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. 15. Or, y^ the Church now has many excellent
promises? What? more then Israel had? to be their God, they to him a peculiar
treasure above all people, a kingdom of Priests, an holy Nation, Exodus 19. 5,
6. to come to them and bless them, Chap. 20. 24. to be high above all Nations
to praise, name, and honor; to be a holy people, Deuteronomy. 26. 19. to circumcise
their heart, and the heart of their seed; to love him with all their heart and
soul, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. to be with them, not to leave them, nor forsake them, Deuteronomy.
31. 8. yea, he promised, that no new god should be among Psalm. 81. 9.
them, nor they to adore a strange god, Psalm. 80. 10. Mount Sion was not to be
removed, but to abide for ever; and peace to be on Israel, Psalm. 105. 1. whom
he would redeem from all Psalm 1^^. 1. Psalm. 13^. 8. Psalm. 132. 13, 14
iniquities, Psalm. 129. 8. He chose Sion, and that to be his rest for (...),
Psalm. 13^. 13, 14. their way was to be the way of Holiness, and so direct that
fools should not err by it, Esaias 35. 8. and such as erred in the Spirit,
should know understanding, and the mutterer should learn the Law, Esa. 29* 24.
and they should have Pastors according to the Lords own heart, which should
feed them with knowledge and doctrine, Ier. 3. 15. To conclude, Israel had a
promise to be saved with eternal salvation, they should not be confounded and
ashamed for ever and ever, Esaias 45. 17. yea, that we may know, that the
promises were not to the people then living only, the Lord says, I will power
out my Spirit upon their seed, and my blessing upon thy stock, Esaias 44. 3.
and touching the Temple, thus says God to Solomon, I have sanctified this
House, to put my Name there for ever, and mine eyes, and my heart shall be
there 1. King. 9. 3.
always, 3. Kin. 9. 3.

Yet for all these so gracious promises, she erred, she has fallen away, and
remains in her sins.

We have heard out of their own Bible; First, how the Churches defection has
been foretold.

Secondly, how she also has been found guilty.

Thirdly, the same proved by History of the Bible, from the beginning in Adam
and Eve, till Christ, though the Church of Israel had admirable means to
uphold it: to which I do add this last.

From Christ's coming, till John's being in Pathmos. In this space we may find
errors in the Church. The Apostles themselves before Christ's Ascension, were
in an error touching Christ his Kingdom, dreaming of a temporal kingdom,
Act. 1. 6. Luke 24. 21. of restoring the kingdom to Israel, and redeeming
them: so as they did strive among themselves, which of them should be greatest,
Luk 22. 24. and hereupon it was, that the mother of Zebedees children desired
of him for her sons, that one might sit in his Kingdom, on the right hand,
and the other on the left, Mat. 20. 20, 21. Their knowledge was very imperfect;
for it is said often, that they understood not many things, Mat 15. 16. Luke 9.
45. and 10. 34. Ioh. 12. 16. and 29. yea, so slow of heart, and dull of hearing
they were, that Christ tells them, that he had many things to say to them,
but that then they were not able to bear the^, Ioh. 16. 12. their faith was
very weak, as appears by his calling of them, Ye of little faith, Mat. 8.
26 and 16. 8. Slow of heart to believe what the Prophets had spoken, Luke 24.
25. Also by their forsaking him, and flying from him when he was taken, Mat. 26
56.

After Christ's Ascension, and the coming down of the holy Ghost, they were
ignorant for a time in this, that they did not think it was lawful to go to
the Gentiles; as we may see in Peter, Act. 10 15. 20. and the other Jews,
verse. 45. compared with Cap. 11. 2, 3, 18, 19. The Churches of Galatia erred
so, as S. Paul said, that he feared lest he had labored in vain, Gal. 4. 11.
I need not here speak of errors, and Heresies creeping in, troubling the
Church, and deceiving many, as in Act. 15. 2. 1. Tim 1. 3 6, 7, 19. 20. 2. Tim
2. 18, 19. 1. Cor. 15. 12. Ephesus fell from her first love, Reu. 2. 4 Pergamus
had in her such as vpheld the doctrine of Balaam, and of the Nicolaitans, Reu.
2 14. Thyatira tolerated Iezabel to reach and seduce Christ's servants, Reu. 2.
20. Sardis was an hypocritical Church, and in a dying condition, and Laodicea
lukewarm, rich in conceit, but miserable; naked, blind, and poor in
condition, Reu. 3. 2, 16 17. S. Paul tells Timothy, that all that were in
Asia were departed from him, 2. Tim. 1. 15. Thus was the Churches state even in
the Apostles days. By which we may see the Church subject to err: and to hold
the contrary, that she cannot err, Antiquity is against.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Origin, Hom. 6. in Ezekiel. The City of God, as long as she erreth not, or does
not sin, has God to her Father: but when she begins to err, her father
is an Amorite, and her mother an Hittite: he then thought she might err.

Jerome complains in Dialog. aduers. Lucifer. That the whole world groaned
and wondered to see it self Arian. Did not he think then that the Church
might err?

Aug. lib. 2. cap 18. Retract. speaking of the Church on earth, says, that by
reason of ignorance and infirmities of her members, the whole Church has cause
to say every day, Forgive us our trespasses. Basil, epist. 70. tells us, that
Satan had in his time begun to sow the seeds of Apostasy in those places,
where the Gospel of the Kingdom first arose up, striving to spread it into
the whole World. He speaks of Apostasy, which is more then erring.

What meant Hilarie, cont. Auxentium, when he said, The Church is lost, and we
are fallen into the time of Antichrist, whose ministers do transform
themselves into Angels of light, without all feeling, or conscience of Christ?

Vincent. Lvren, aduers. profan. Nou. ca. 4. has said, that not only some
portion of the Church, but the whole Church it self is blotted with some new
contagion.

Gainesaid by some of their own.
Pope Innocent says in the Canon Law; The Churches Judgment Decret. Greg. li.
3. de sent. excom. ca. 28. A nobis est saepe. Super 5. de sent. excom. Anobis 2.
oftentimes follows opinion, which many times falls out both to deceive us,
and to be deceived it self.

Panormitan thus writes: A general Council representing the whole Church,
may err in excommunicating him, that should not be excommunicate. If in a
matter of this nature, where proofs may be brought before sentence
pronounced, how much more in points of a higher nature, without the Scripture
for the guide? A general Council is called the whole Church representadue. If
therefore this err, the^ may the Church err; for how can the Churches voice
else be heard, except in Can. 6.
the Scriptures? But by their own confession, general Councels have erred;
for the first Council at Nice of 318. Bishops, made the Bishop of Romes
government no more, then that of Alexandria. That at Ephesus of 200. Bishops,
with the Council at Chalcedon of 630. Bishops, gave to the Sea of
Constantinople equal privilege with Rome. But in these things, say the
Papists, the Councels erred; therefore in some things general Councels may
err, even in that point which to the Papists is most fundamental, being the
very soul and essence of Popery in that part which consists in usurpation,
and tyrannous dominion over all other Churches.

The Scriptures objected, answered.
Esaias 59. 21. This is my Covenant with them: My Spirit that is upon thee, and
my words, which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed,
says the Lord, from henceforth, and for ever.

Answ. 1. I answer, that the Prophet speaks here of Gods Covenant with them,
that is, with those that turn from transgression in Jacob, and so of the
faithful and elect, and not of the Church visible, of which we speak.

II. Here is no promise, that the Church shall not err; but that he will
bestow on them, which exercise the Ministry, his Spirit, and his Word
continually for the Churches good.

III. If he will needs hence conclude, that the Church cannot err: 1. He must
prove, that the Teachers do ever teach the truth by Gods Spirit, and by Gods
Word, which are to go together, Ioh. 14. 26. and 16. 13. Mat. 18. 19, 20. 2.
That the hearers, the members of the Church, do ever receive, believe and
follow their Teachers thus teaching by the Word and holy Spirit, which two
things rest for him to make good ad Graecas Calendas.

IV. This promise made, must needs be understood conditionally of the visible
Church, and of an ordinary Ministry: for Esaias tells us afterwords, how they
vexed Gods Spirit, chap. 63. 10. We see how the Church of the Israelites, and
that at Jerusalem has been cast off of God, and has now neither Word nor
Spirit of God to direct it. Christ found her Teachers in his time full of
errors, as they grievously erred before, 2. King. 16. 11. 2. Chron. 36. 14, 16.
Esaias 56. 10. Ier. 5. 1. Mal. 2. 8. And we know by experience in our times, and
by faithful relation aforetimes, that Teachers have erred; and people have not
ever embraced the truth, when sound Teachers have delivered it; let Christ's
hearers be instance for all, and those in Jury which heard the Apostles.

V. If this were a good argument, where Gods Spirit and his Word is, there can
be no error; then would it follow, that no ordinary member of Christ should
ever err; for such a one has Gods Spirit, 1. Ioh. 2. 20, 27. Romans 8. 9. 2.
Cor. 1. 21. and his Word, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. by which they become believers, Ioh. 17.
20. But this, I hope, a Papist will not grant, and yet the argument is the same.

Ioh. 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth.

Answ. 1. This place is primarily to be understood of the Apostles, to whom the
promise of guiding into all truth, was a special privilege, Mat. 10. 20. Ioh.
14. 26. and 16. 13.

2. Of the succeeding Teachers, but with no such special privilege: for
first, there are no such promises made to them. Secondly, experience teaches,
that they have wanted this privilege. Thirdly, the hearers have liberty to
search and try that which is delivered, if they doubt, 1. These. 5. 21. 1. Ioh.
4. 1. Ioh. 5. 39. Act. 17. 11. Waldensis, one of their own side, says Li. 2.
ca. 19. de Doct. sid.
of particular Pastors and Bishops, We know that these have often erred.

3. Neither the abiding of the Spirit for ever where it is, nor the title of
Spirit of truth will enforce ever an infallibility in teaching; for it is
called the Spirit of sanctification or holiness, Romans 1. 4. for that he
works in us holiness, and is ever abiding in the godly, who are the Temple
of the holy Ghost; and yet are they not so sanctified, but they often offend in
life. So is it the Spirit of truth, because it enlightneth the minds of men
with only that which is truth, and guides them in the truth, if they follow
their guide: but if they do not, they may, yea, and do err from the truth.

Mat. 18. 17. If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee as an
Heathen, and a Publican.

Answ. 1. This is meant of an evident case proved by witnesses before the
Church in matters of offense, between one private man and another; wherein the
Church may give right sentence, if she will; yet we see, such as meddle in the
Churches censures, do not ever proceed aright. This place therefore is not to
the matter of doctrine and determination of faith, the point in question;
neither does it prove, that in her censure the Church cannot err: for says
their own Panormitan, as before is cited, A general Council representing the
whole Church, may err, in excommunicating him that should not be
excommunicate. These words speak not of the Churches either not erring or
erring, but of other hearing the Church, and how they should carry themselves
toward such, as will not in so clear a case hear the Churches admonition.

3. Its not here commanded, that he should be held as a Heathen and Publican,
that would not hear the Church in whatsoever she says: for Christ here
speaks of the Jewish Church then, as appears by the name Heathen and
Publican, which were abhorred of the Jewish Church. Now, that Church (we
read) did excommunicate a blind man (which received sight) for his professing
of Christ, Ioh. 9. 34. and had agreed to put any man out of the Synagogue,
which should confess Jesus to be Christ, v 22. and did also forbid to teach
in his name, Act. 4. 18.

4. This place is spoken of some Ecclesiastical Governors, (if it be extended
to us) having the power of censures in a particular Church; which the Learned
in their Church do confess, may err; and therefore this helps not to prove,
that the Church cannot err.

Esaias 35. 8. And a high way shall be there, and away, and it shall be called.
The way of holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for
those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.

Answ. I. This verse is wholly allegorical, and therefore cannot so well be
enforced for dogmaticall proof, without a full explanation of the words; which
the Gagger should have done.

II. It is altogether against himself in the exposition, if he either durst,
or had been able to have set it down: for by highway may be understood the
common profession or points of Religion, for good and bad, as the highway is
for all; then the way of holiness is taken for a more strict profession, or
more straight Rules of Religion. If so, then consider the persons who they be,
that shall not err in this way: he does not say, The Church, or the learned
Church men, or men in holy Orders; for are these fools? but wayfaring men,
though fools, shall not err. Here is a promise, that the simple Laytie shall
not mistake their way; which Popish Teachers cannot abide to hear of. Neither
shall any unclean pass over this way: but they teach, that their Church
Catholic consists of elect and reprobate, both good and bad, clean and
unclean. Therefore in a spiritual sense the words are to be understood of the
only sanctified by Gods Spirit, here traveling in this World as wayfaring
men; and though esteemed as fools, yet are so guided in their holy profession,
as they shall not be suffered to wander out of the way of life, neither
totally nor finally. But he will say, If these shall not err, then much less
shall the Church. True, who denies it? we do not say, that all the whole
Church, and all the holy that ever have been, such as this place speaks of,
have all erred this thousand years, as the Gagger bears his Reader in hand,
making him believe, that we so teach. Here the Prophet speaks of the Lords
redeemed separated from the unclean, in a spiritual estate, in and by Christ;
but in our dispute we speak of the visible Church of clean and unclean, good
and bad, and of a mixed company.

III. This verse, and the whole chapter, speaks in the first place, of the
return from Captivity, which the Prophet does express in figurative
speeches, to set out the comfort thereof most lively: and so it is nothing to
the purpose, for which the Gagger brings it. In a high sense it sets out the
spiritual happiness of the redeemed by Christ, partly here begun, and fully
to be perfected in the day of the Churches perfect redemption.

IV. It speaks not here of the Churches teaching, but rather of the Saints
travailing toward Heaven: But the word, not err, made the Gagger think, he
had obtained his purpose, and an express text for not erring in Doctrine, when
the words speak of a way, a highway, of travailing men, and others not
passing over it, and of the redeemeds walking, verse. 9. Then being understood
of not erring in life, it cannot be taken absolutely: for error of life is in
the best, but they err not to final destruction.

Ephesians. 5. 27. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish.

Answ. 1. Our dispute is of the visible Church, and mixed company; this is to be
understood only of the body, whereof Christ in the most proper sense, is the
Head and Savior, verse. 9. which he nourishes and cherishes, verse. 29.
between whom and Christ thereis such an union, as it is called a great
Mystery, verse. 32. which cannot properly be meant of visible Churches,
consisting not only of Elect, but also of Reprobates, who are not cleansed, nor
nourished, or cherished, as members of his body, nor made ever glorious.

II. The Apostle speaks here of the Church either as triumphant, or, if as
militant, then as it is in preparing, and as it shall be hereafter in Heaven:
for in this life, it is not altogether spotless, without wrinkle or blemish,
Cant. 1. 5, 6.

III. This place does serve rather to prove her purity in life, then
infallibility of judgment in teaching: this latter is hence far fetched;
the former may seem more apparent. But will any believe, that Gods Church for
life and conversation, is in this life without spot, wrinkle or blemish?

1. Tim. 3. 15. The Church of the living God, the ground and pillar of truth.

Because this place is much urged by others, and the last of this Gaggers, I
will more fully make answer unto it. Hence he would conclude, that the Church
cannot err; he means the Church of Rome, the Pope, at least, the virtuall
Church; for they defend not now any Church from error, but their own. But
this they can never prove out of the place.

I. Saint Paul wrote to Timothy, how he should behave himself in the Church,
1. Tim. 3. 14. So his Epistle, that is, the Apostolical written Word, was made
to be Timothies rule, to guide him from erring, and not the Churches
determination. S. Paul, for all this his praise of the Church, sent him not to
Her, but prescribed him a written Word, to direct him in governing of her,
which he would not have done, if by calling the Church, the pillar and ground
of truth, he had meant she could not have erred.

II. Saint Paul speaks thus of the then present Church of Ephesus, where
Timothy was, chap. 1. 3. built upon the foundation, Ephesians. 2. 20. and yet she
soon left her first Love, Revel. 2. 4. and after fell away.

III. The word Church comprehends all the faithful together at Ephesus: so
the Church of Ephesus is taken, Revel. 2. 1. But our Adversaries will not have
the people (as the Apostles allowed, Act. 15. 22.) with their Bishops and
Pastors, to be the Church, and with them to approve of matters of Faith: For
the Romish Clergy think of the people, as did the hypocritical Pharisees,
that they know not the Law, and are cursed, Ioh. 7. 49. Except they allow the
people also with the Teachers, to be the pillar and ground of truth, this place
does not serve their turn.

IV. If the word Church be taken for any other particular Church, to which
Timothy, as an Evangelist, might go, after the Apostles planting of them,
then from hence the Papists cannot conclude that which they would: for first,
they acknowledge, that particular Churches may err. Secondly, its evident by
Scripture, in the Churches of Galatia, Gal. 1. and 3. 1. and 4. 10, 11. by
history, and by experience. Now, the Church of Rome was never other then a
particular Church, in the best spiritual estate thereof. Saint Paul writes to
it no otherwise, then to a particular Church.

V. If it be taken for the Universal Church; this helps not them. For first,
theirs is not the universal, but a particular Church, as is proved after in
the sixteenth question.

Secondly, it is absurd to reason from that which is not questioned, nor can
ever assemble together to come to the trial, if it were questionable.

VI. The intituling of the Church, to be the pillar and ground of truth, will
not afford the conclusion of not erring, and that for these Reasons. First,
because the words are metaphorical, and a similitude must be extended no
farther then is in ended. Now, the Church is called the pillar and ground, not
because she cannot err: but first, for that she has the Apostles writings
committed to her, as were the Oracles of God to the Jews, Rom 3. 2. which
Apostles writings are (says Irenous) the pillars and supporters of our faith;
the proofs, foundations, Li. 3. ca. 1.
and the grounds of our cause, as Saint De unit. Eccl. ca. 16. On this 1. Tim.
3.
Augustine speaks. Secondly, as Lyra thinks, it is so called, for that the
Church does maintain the truth of the Gospel, even in the greatest
persecutions: and, as other judge, for that it vpholdeth the truth, that it may
not fall to the ground, though it be afflicted; and because by words and
examples it confirms our Faith. Thirdly, the Apostle speaks according to the
use of pillars in old time among the Gentiles, on which their Laws, written in
Tables, were hanged up for people to read: yea, some wrote the Laws upon
pillars themselves. So as the Church here is resembled to those pillars, which
has the Books of holy Laws, to show them, and to uphold them, and to
exhibit them out unto all to be seen and read.

Secondly, because Saint Peter was counted a Pillar, Gal. 2 9. and yet he
erred, even in not walking according to the truth of the Gospel, verse. 14.

Thirdly, because Saint Paul calls so the Church at Ephesus then, as she was,
and so long to be so esteemed as she should continue. Thus Saint Paul to the
Hebrews tells them, that they with himself and others, are the House of
Christ, if (says he) we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the
hope firm unto the end: implying, that if they did not, they should not be so.
Can any well conclude from that, which one is at the present, that he shall
ever be the same? Then had not our first Parents fallen; nor Solomon been an
Idolater; nor the Israelites now, none of Gods people; nor Rome, (as she is)
spiritual Babylon.

Fourthly, because not the name and title of the House of God it self (by which
name the Church is called here, in 1. Tim. 3. 15. as also believers are called
by the name of the household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19.) will afford this their
conclusion. For the Church of Ephesus, so called, did err. Now, may it not be
inferred from hence, that she is called the House, and believers the Household?
and may it be inferred, because she is called a pillar only, or stay, to uphold
the house? Will not the whole house, nor the household yield it? And will a
pillar, or prop, make it good? Very unlikely.

Fifthly, it is only upon the praise given to the Church, that this conclusion
is made. Is this then good arguing; Whatsoever praises the Church has, that
for which, or wherein she is praised, she has it in perfection? Here she is
called the pillar and ground of truth: Ergo, (say they) she cannot err. See
the like reasoning; She is the household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. Ergo, she never
has any doubting. Yet this they deny, and hold here to have no certain
assurance.

Lastly, consider the truth, of which she is the pillar and ground. On this
place, Ioh. 5. 23
Oecumenius understands it in opposition to the shadows in the Temple under
the Law; there the type, here the truth; there the shadow, here the substance.
But the Temple was only the pillar and ground, that is, the appointed place
where the knowledge and use of the Ceremonial Law was had and vpheld: so only
is now the Church, the place where the divine truth is to be found, and is in
practice, and no where else. Truth in Scripture is taken for the Word of God,
Ioh. 17. 17. and 8. 31, 32. the Gospel, the Word of truth, Col. 1. 5. Gal. 5.
7. even the Mystery of godliness, as Saint Paul in this place of the 1. Tim.
3. 16. enterpreteth the Word, Truth.

So then, the Church of God is the pillar and ground or stay of Gods Word and
his Gospel, even the mystery of godliness. This she receives, keeps,
bears up, publishes to the world, and is the ground whereon it does rest,
and no where else in the world. What then? Is she, or it the Rule? Is her
authority above it, or it above her? The King commits to some the public
Records, to keep and to publish to other. Is their authority greater then
these? Are their words of force, without the warrant of those Records? Or is it
not possible for these keepers of them, to err in their proceedings? We know
the contrary. The Jews had the Oracles of God committed to them, Romans 3. 2.
but have not they erred? The Church of Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, Philippi,
Colosse, Thessalonica, Hebrews, and other Churches in the East, had the new
Testament committed to them; yet have they, we see, erred. So has the Church
of Rome very shamefully, as the Epistle written to them does testify, if her
now new doctrine be examined by it. The Church therefore, the visible mixed
company, of whom all our dispute is, may err.

XIII. Proposition. That the Church of Rome cannot err:
Confuted by their own Bible.
I. IN it we read, that she is in particular forewarned to take heed of
falling, Romans 11. 20. which admonition proves her possibility of erring.

II. It foretells of her Apostasy. Yea, this Church, which See his Majesty's
broke, and Bishop Downham de Antichristo and Respons eius ad ^essiam de Antic^r.
they say cannot err, and whereof the Pope is Head, is called the great Whore,
named Babylon, drunken with the Saints blood, sitting upon the Beast with seven
heads, having ten horns, expounded by their own Bible to be Rome, Revel. 17.
1. 5, 6. the great City, situate upon seven Hills, and which in John's days
reigned over the Kings of the earth, verse. 9, 18.

III. Their Bible tells us, that there were begun in her uncharitable
disputations about eating, and not eating of some things; about observation of
days, Romans 14. men, for these things condemning and despising one another.
There were such then, as were authors of divisions and scandals, contrary to
the doctrine which the Saints then had learned, Romans 16. 17. so that a
defection was then breeding, and a beginning to err from the Apostles doctrine
in his days.

IV. The Epistle of Saint Paul written unto them, shows, that she has erred:
for his and her doctrine are at odds in many things; as for example in these
for instance.

The Romish Church. Saint Paul. She calls not her self, A Church, but, The
Church, and is ever boasting of that name. He never calls them at Rome then,
The Church, as in other Epistles he uses to call others; the Corinthians,
Galatians, Ephesians, Revel. 2. 1. etc. a point for Papists to note and to
observe, why this title is not given her. She says, that God may be
represented like an old man. He teaches it to be a Heathenish practice, for
which God plagued them, Romans 1. 23. She teaches, that all sins deserve not
death, but in themselves many are venial. He names 23. sins, Romans 1. 29,
30, 31. worthy of death; not for the Act, but for the consent of heart, verse.
32. and Romans 6. 23. He says, that the stipend of sin is death; he excepteth
none. She teaches, that the Virgin Marie was without sin. He teaches
otherwise; All to be under sin, Romans 3. 9. All to have sinned, ver. 33. and
he exempteth none, of either Jews or Greeks; neither there, or any where
else, save Jesus Christ only, Heb. 4. 15. She teaches, that they are just
fied by works, and that before God. He contrarily, Romans 3. 24. We are
justified gratis by grace: for we account a man to be justified by faith,
without the works of the Law, verse 28. For if Abraham were justified by works,
he has to glory; but not with God, Romans 4. 2. She teaches, that concupiscence
in the regenerate is not sin. He contrary calls it sin, Romans 7. 7. She
teaches, that a man may perfectly fulfill the Law, and do works of
supererogation. He teaches the contrary, and that out of himself, To. 7, 15,
16, 18, 25. agreeing with our Saviors teaching, Luke 17. 10. She teaches,
that the sufferings of the Saints here, are worthy of eternal glory. He
teaches, that the passions of this time are not condign of glory to come,
Romans 8. 18. 2. Cor. 4. 17. She teaches, that the Church cannot err. S. Paul
shows the contrary in Romans 11. 19, 20, 21. by example of the Israelites, and
does forewarne the Romans to take heed that God do not cast them off. She
teaches, that the Pope and his Clergy is not subject to Civil Authority. He
teaches the contrary, not exempting any, Romans 13. 1, 3, 4, 6. with Tit. 3. 1.
She teaches, that holiness is to be put in the observation of days, and
difference of meats. He makes this as a thing indifferent, and teaches that
none are to contend about such things, and that the kingdom of God stands not
herein, Romans 14. 1, 2, 5, 17. She teaches, that it is not profitable for all
to read the Scriptures. He teaches, that it was written for the use and
comfort of all, Romans 4. 23. and 15. 4. She teaches, to pray to Saints, Angels,
and to the Virgin Marie, and to give them praises for many things. He teaches
to pray to God, Romans 15. 30. and so prays he, Romans 15. 5, 13, 33. and 16. 27.
to none other prays he, nor gives praises, but to God for his mercies.

Thus we see them to be at odds with the Apostle, by the witness of their own
Bible, laid to their doctrines. The like might be showed out of the Epistles of
Saint Peter, whom the Popes claim for their Rock, and therefore their Church
not only may, and does err.

And to make yet this more clear, we will view them first in their virtuall
Church, and then in their Church representative.

The cream or quintessence of their Church (as it is reduced to an Elixir by
the Refiners and Alchymists the Jesuits) is squeczed into a little room, and
comprised in the Pope, whom they call the Virtuall Church. Of his Holyhood they
avouch,

XIV. Proposition. That the Bishop of Rome cannot err:
Confuted by their own Bible.
IT gives us to know, that Peter (whom forsooth they do make the first Pope
of Rome) did err; first, in mistaking Christ's Kingdom, as terrene and
earthly, Act. 1. 6. Secondly, concerning the person of Eliah, that he should
come before the Messiah, misunderstanding Malachi. Mat. 17. 10. Thirdly,
touching the resurrection of Christ, Luke 18. 34. John 20. 9. Fourthly, in
having conscience of the difference of meats, after Christ's Ascension, Acts
10. 14. Fifthly, in not understanding his full Commission to go to the
Gentiles, Act. 10. 20. Sixthly, in not walking rightly to the verity of the
Gospel, Gal. 2. 14. If then this first Pope (as they make him) did so err,
then the after-Popes may, except they can show some privilege before him.

Contraried by Antiquity.
For it is manifest by History, that the Popes judgment was not held to be
infallible but that he might err.

1. For we may find such to have been made Popes, as may easily persuade any
wise man that they might err. Some have Alphonsus de Castro, haeres. li. 4.
ca. 4. Platina in Iul. 1. * See Master Alex. Cook his book of this, which no
Papist has undertaken to answer. See such Authors as have set out the Popes
lives. Platina and other.
bin unlettered Idiots, no Grammarians, that could hardly write their names in
Latin; some, Laymen, as Constantius the second, and Bennet the eighth; and
once a woman, Pope * Ioane: and very boys for age; Bennet the ninth, a child
of ten years old; John the twelfth, a bastard, a mad Lad, about eighteen
years old. Could not these yonkerrene, think you?

2. Some have been most abominable persons, Atheists, blasphemers, poysoners,
sorcerers, and such like. Is it like that Gods holy Spirit would reside in such
filthy monsters to keep them, forsooth, from erring?

3. Some of them fell fearfully. Marcellinus worshipped Heathen Idols:
Zepherinus was a Montanist: Liberius and Felix, Arians; Anastasius the second,
an Acatian; Vigilius, an Eutychian; and Honorius, a Monothelite. And cannot yet
Popes err?

4. Some Popes have abrogated the Decrees one of another: Benno. Platina.
Supplementum Chronic.
Gregory the first abolished the Decrees of Pelagius: so Sabinian and Innocent
those of Gregory: Steven abolished those of Formosus: so Romanus those of
Steven, and so forth. And cannot yet Popes err?

5. Some have decreed flat against Scripture. Celestine ordained Alphons. li.
1. ca. 4. de haeres. Trent. Conc. sect. 8. can. 3. sub Pio 4.
Marriage to be void, when either party fell into heresy. Pius Quartus
decreed, that it should be lawful for him to allow degrees of Marriage
forbidden in Leuiticus, and to forbid what God allowed. And cannot Popes err?

6. Eastern Bishops and ancient Fathers have very sharply Eusebius. li. 5. c. 26.
reproved the Bishop of Rome; as namely, Polycrates the Bishop of Ephesus; and
as Ireneus the Bish. of Lions did Victor, for his rash proceeding against the
Eastern Church. And yet do not Popes err?

7. Ancient Councels have withstood him; as that of Chalcedon, Acts 16.
wherein were 630. Bishops, withstanding Leo in the question of supremacy. The
sixth Council of Carthage, of 217. Can. 105.
Bishops, resisted three Popes one after another, in that they would do
contrary to the Council of Nice. These judged that Popes might err, else
would they have yielded to the Popes.

Gainesaid by Papists themselves.
1. Pope Andrian the sixth, de sacr. confir. ar. 3. ad. 2. page 55. says, It
is certain that the Pope may err. So judged Innocentius Arbor. Theosoph. li.
4. ca. 32. De potestat. Ecclesiae consid. 10. 11. De signis Ecclesiae li. 18.
ca. 6.
the fourth. So also have learned men formerly held; as Gerson (of which
opinion are the Sorbonists,) who hold, that the Pope might err.

Bosius dares to write, that the Pope may be an heretic, writing, teaching,
and preaching heresies.

Stapleton confesses it to be no matter of Faith, but of opinion Controuers.
3. qu. 4.
only, because so many famous and renowned Divines have ever held the
contrary; as Gerson, Almaine, Occam, almost all the Parisians, Durandus;
whereto may be added Waldensis, Turrecremata, and Erasmus; yea, Alphonsus de
Castro holds De haeres. li. 1. cap. 4. De certitud. Grae. assert. 13.
them impudent flatterers, which say otherwise. And Catharinus gives this
reason, because the holy Ghost does not always, and in every work assist him.

They which flatter the Pope, hold, that he may err; First, as a man.
Secondly, as a private Doctor; so Gregory de Valentia; Analys. li. 8. on Gal.
2. ca. 7. diuis. 5. pa. 355.
and this, says Salmeron, is a common opinion. Thirdly, as a Bishop; so Heart
yields it in his conference with Doctor Raynolds. Fourthly, as Pope in a matter
of fact, so acknowledges Bellarmine. Li. 4. de P. Romans cap. 12.
Fifthly, as Pope, in discoursing about matters of Faith, his reasons may not
be apt nor necessary, and it is not worth the labor to rippe them up to the
quick, or to rest in them. Thus writes Canus and Stapleton, In arguing he may
be deceived Loc. Theol. l. 6. cap. 8. princ. doct. l. 8. ca. 14. and 15.
and err. Only they hold, that he cannot err in the conclusion. How likely
is this? What wise man will believe it?

2. Martin the fifth consented with the Council of Basil and Constance, that
the Pope might err. But Eugenius the fourth, with the Council of Ferrara and
Florence, held the contrary. The one side must needs err.

3. The Papists do not rest, in showing full obedience to the Popes decrees,
which argues, that they believe not all things to be infallible truths which
they decree. As for example.

The Pope, in the Council of Trent, decreed the Apocrypha books to be
canonical: and yet since then, Driedo, Sigonius De Script. and Dogm. Eccle.
li. 1 (...). lt Comment in Seu(...) Bibl(...) 4. 44. De a (...) li. ^. ca. 7.
Loc li. 11. ca. 5. page 3^1. Digres 26. sect. 7. pa. 169.
and Sixtus Senensis have questioned and re^ected them. He also there decreed,
that the Latin vulgar translation should be authentical, and in all public
readings, disputations, preachings and expositions so used, and none under what
pretense soever, to reject it. Yet Galatinus and Canus are bold to tax it of
corruption.

If any desire more particulars of the Popes decrees in Councels, and yet how
Papists do vary from the same, read Doctor Whites Way.

By this their dealing, it is very clear, that they hold no such infallibility
in Popes, no, not decreeing things in general Councels.

4. Councels of the Popish Church, have condemned and deposed some: As Ioh. 22.
who made a mock at the Gospel, and at the immortality of the soul, and was
condemned by the Council of Constance, which calls him an incarnate devil.

So Eugenius the fourth, condemned by the Council of Basil, as an heretic, an
infidel, a limb of the devil, and as a capital enemy to the truth.

The Council of Pisa, consisting of 1000. Divines and Lawyers, deposed two
Popes, Gregory the twelfth, and Bennet the Theod. Niem. de schis. li. 3. ca.
44. pa. 91.
thirteenth, for schismatickes and heretics.

Lastly, the complaints uttered by Papists, do show how Popes may err.

Francis. Victoria speaking of immoderate dispensations, says, De potestat.
pap. and Council.
that a Council should do well to bridle him.

Saint Briget speaks thus of the Popes, They are tormentors In her Revel.
of souls, and do tear in pieces the flock of Christ, etc.

The Council at Rhemes, under Hugh Capet, having complained of the times and
Popes differing from their predecessors, says thus, And must so many servants
of God throughout the World be subject unto him? So wicked they were, as
Platina, after a long deploring of the Tyranny, impiety and hypocrisy, which
then reigned in Popes, brake out into these speeches, There can hardly be mercy
enough in God for the Popes. and Petrach durst to say, that the greatest harm
that one can wish to a man, is, to be Pope. All these things considered, we may
believe without doubting, that the Pope may err.

So then, the Papists virtuall Church may err.

The Scriptures objected answered.
Ioh. 11. 49, 51. Caiphas spoke this not of himself, but being high Priest
that year, he prophesied, that Jesus should die for the Nation.

Answ. Caiaphas was a wicked man many ways, and in part an usurper, as the
Rhemists confess: a very fit pattern and Patron for the Pope. But to answer
to the place objected, for the Popes not erring: First, this was but once by
special direction, and therefore cannot hence be concluded any perpetual
assurance of direction. Its clear by that which followed: for this man in
another Council, Mat. 26. 57, 59. heard and accepted of false witnesses,
condemned Christ for a blasphemer, verse. 60. 62, 65. and in another Assembly
took counsel to put him to death, Mat. 27. 1. Secondly, this speaks of
prophecy, an extraordinary gift to this man then. Thirdly, though the man
here was a lewd wicked usurper; yet was his office of Gods own appointment.
What is this to the Popes Antichristian supremacy, an office of the devil,
and not of Gods ordinance? Fourthly, If this place afford assurance of an
unerring spirit to the Pope, it must be either in respect of the man's person,
or office, or chair he sat in. But none of these. First, not of his person,
who was a wicked usurper, and Christ's enemy. And will the Pope plead his
person? Secondly, not of his office, for that is changed, as the Apostle in
Hebrews does witness. Thirdly, not of the chair; for the seat had no such
virtue in it to keep him safe from error, as before is noted in Mat 26. 57,
59, 61, 62, 65. and 27. 1. for the chair either had then lost his virtue, and
then can it not keep from error: or it was not the chaires virtue which made
Caiaphas to prophecy; and then is it idle to boast of the chair: or else
paraduenture the virtue was in it, but not always operative; and then is it
uncertain, when it will work, to keep the man from error which sits therein,
so as he may some time or other err, or be left in doubt whether he does err
or no. This being the state of that chair, how can the Pope claim an unerring
spirit from this? Fourthly, though the Evangelist John, guided by Gods Spirit,
did expound the meaning of the words otherwise then Caiphas ever meant them;
yet those in Council with him, understood them not spiritually, but took them
as vttred in State policy, for outward peace and safety of the Nation; as is
clear in Ioh. 11. 48, 53. So as he erred in his own scope, and they in
apprehending the words in another drift and sense, then God did intend by them.
Therefore as Caiphas and his company herein erred, so may the Pope and conclaue
of Cardinals, for any help to the contrary that they can get from this place.

Luke 22. 31. I have prayed that thy faith fail not.

Answ. 1. This is spoken of Peter, and not of the Pope. 2. This was in respect
of a future lapse in Peter, which Christ foresaw, more then in any of the
Apostles, as the event declared. 3. This is meant of Peter's own particular
inward grace of faith, which was terribly shaken, when he denied and forswore
his Master, and not of his teaching in the execution of his ministry. For why
should Christ pray more for Peter's teaching, then for the rest, whom Christ
sent out as well as him, to teach all Nations?

Mat. 16. 18. This text is spoken unto Peter, of the Churches preservation
against the gates of hell: but speaks nothing of Peter's not erring, much
less of the Popes; of whom Christ in this place never dreamed. And its clear
by Scripture, that the gates of hell prevailed against Peter, after Christ had
uttered these words unto him, though not totally and finally to destruction,
yet in a great measure to transgression, and fearful falling.

Mat. 23. 2. This is very largely answered before; and there is it fully
proved, that these Scribes and Pharisees erred grossly in many things.

Ioh. 21. 15, 16, 17. This text speaks of Peter's duty, that as he loved
Christ, he should feed his lambs; but speaks not a word of his not erring,
who after this was found ignorant in some things of the nature of Christ's
Kingdom, Act. 1. 6. of going to the Gentiles, and eating things forbidden by
the Law, abrogated by Christ, Act. 10. 12, 14. and he also erred at Antioch,
Gal. 2. But if this did clear Peter, what makes it for the Pope, who shows
no love to Christ in feeding his lambs? If he never teach, then he may be sure
never to err in that kind.

Exodus 28. 30. First, what this Vrim and Thummim was, can no man tell.
Secondly, though Aaron had it, yet he foully erred in the golden Calfe, in
making it, in building an Altar before it, and proclaiming a feast thereupon to
the Lord, Exodus 32. 4, 5 And did not Vrijah err in the days of wicked Ahaz,
2. King. 16. 11, 16? So the high Priest in Christ's time? Therefore this place
alleged to prove that the high Priest could not err, is much abused. Thirdly,
what is this to the Pope, who is neither Gods high Priest (for such is there
now none, but Jesus Christ only;) neither has this Vrim and Thummim, which
Aaron had?

XV. Proposition. That Councels may not err, being confirmed by the Pope:
Confuted by their own Bible.
The Council at Jerusalem, gathered under the high Priest, against Christ,
Mat. 26. against the Apostles, Act. 4. 5, 6. against Steven, Act. 6. 12. and 7.
1. against Paul, Act. 22. 30. erred. The Assembly gathered under Aaron, who
consented to them, and made the golden Calfe, erred, Exodus 32. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
The great congregation, gathered under David, and the high Priest then, erred,
in not seeking the Lord after a right manner, 1. Chro. 13. in putting the Arc
in a new Cart, verse. 7. and Chap. 15. 13, 14, 15. The Assembly of the Priests,
Prophets, and people gathered against Jeremy, erred, Ier. 26. 8, 9, 11. And
yet this Church had large promises, as before is declared, and the high Priests
better assurances then the Pope: For the high Priest was first nominated by God
himself, after confirmed by a miracle, Number. 17. 8. he had upon his breast the
Vrim and Thummim, and warrant in express terms to hold him for the Lords
high Priest. No such assurances has the Pope. And therefore if the Councels
thus erred under the high Priests, so may they under the Pope.

Contraried by Antiquity.
1. Its clear that general Councels have erred, as that of Arimine of 600.
Bishops in defense of Arius; yea, Bellarmine Lib. 1. de Council. cap. 6. 7.
names general Councels rejected, as the general Council at Antioch, Anno
345. the general Council at Millaine of above 300. Bishops, Anno 354. the
second Ephesine, Anno, 449. and many other.

2. Councels have contradicted one another; the first Nicene condemned
worshipping of Images; and the second Nicene allowed it: Chalcedon condemned
Eutyches; the Ephesin confirmed his heresy. In contradictions must needs be
error.

3. S. Augustine, lib. 2. de bapt. Contra Donat. cap. 3. says, that former
general Councels may be corrected by the later, when that is known, which
before was hid. He therefore believed that Councels might err.

4. Even Councels confirmed by the Pope, may err, and have erred. The Council
of Neocaesaria confirmed by Pope Leo 4. condemned second marriage, contrary to
1. Cor. 7. The second Nicene approves worshipping of Images, contrary to Exodus
10. If any desire more instances, let them read our learned Whitacres de
Concilijs.

5. Councels approved by Popes, have contradicted one another. The Councels of
Constance and Basil determined that the Council was above the Pope, and that
the Pope might err. Pope Martin the first, chosen by the Council of
Constance, was of the same judgment: but the Councels of Ferraria and Florence
determined the contrary, that the Pope was above the Council; and Eugenius the
4. which gathered the Councels, was of the same judgment with them. And
therefore the one side must needs err; and so Councels approved by Popes may
err. And what doubt can be made of this, when this their virtual Church is
proved before, not only to be subject to error, but also to have erred? And
can his approving of Councels preserve them from error, who cannot preserve
himself from it?

Gainesaid by some of themselves.
The Council of Florence and Ferraria held that a Council might err; and so
thought Pope Eugenius the fourth.

Their learned men have held that Councels may err. General Councels may
err, says Waldensis! Cusanus also Concord. In doctrina sid. lib. 2. cap. 19.
Loc. Theol. lib. 5. cap. 5. Dialog. part. 1. lib. 6. cap. 25. 26.
Catho. lib. 2. cap. 3. yea, (says Canus) and prescribe some laws to the
whole Church, that are not right, profitable, and just. Occham holds that
they may err, though the Pope confirm them. For as is before proved, the Pope
and Councels have erred. Pighius says of the Council of Constance, that it
decreed In Hierarch.
against the order of nature, against manifest Scripture, against the
Authority of all Antiquity, and against the Catholic faith of their Church.

Bellarmine says, that the great Council of Chalcedon erred in In Praef. de P.
Romans
equalizing the Bishop of Constantinople to the Bishop of Rome.

Our Adversaries take liberty to themselves to allow, or disallow Councels, in
what, or as far as they please; as Councels make any way for them, so far
they approve them; as they make in any thing against them, so far they reject
them: For this read Bishop Morton his Catho. Apology, par. 2. lib. 4. ca. 3.
p. 334, 335. also D. White his last Book page 153.

Scriptures objected answered.
Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I
in the midst of them.

Answ. I. Here is not meant either a National, or Provincial, or Diocesan
Synod; much less a general Council: but Church Officers, or Governors in a
particular Congregation, to judge of private offenses, as is clear from the
text verses 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

II. Will they say, that the number of two or three assembled, is of an
unerring spirit? Is this such a Council, as on which men may rest assured that
the judgment thereof is infallible? Never any yet durst affirm so much. And
yet this text speaks but of two or three gathered together.

III. Here is not a word of not erring, nor of infallibility in doctrine, but
of Christ his presence with them. But from this it follows not, that they
cannot err. For the Apostle says, We 1. Cor. 13. 9, 10.
know in part. But with those which the Apostle comprehends under the word,
We, was Christ present. And if they knew but in part (perfection of knowledge
not being to be attained unto here) as the Apostle there teaches; seeing
imperfect knowledge may err, it is evident that they might err, though Christ
be present with them: for he is with his Saints, but he does not perfectly
sanctify them; his Spouse has imperfections in this life, neither does he
perfectly illuminate them, but they have their mistakes. Christ was with his
before his death, yet had they errors: and before his Ascension; yet he found
them ignorant of his spiritual Kingdom, Luke 24. Act. 1. And after his
Ascension, and coming of the holy Ghost, even Peter was mistaken, Act. 10. and
other of the Church, Act. 11. as before is proved.

IV. What is this text to prove Popish Councels not to err? For this Scripture
speaks of such as are gathered in Christ's name, whereas those Councels are
gathered in the Popes name. Christ promises to be with those that are
gathered in his name: but will it necessarily follow, that he will therefore
be with those that are gathered in the Popes name? This stands in need of
proof, especially seeing the Pope is proved to be Antichrist, with whom, we
may be sure, Christ will keep no company.

Ioh. 6. 13. The Spirit of truth will guide you into all truth.

Answ. I. This is a promise unto the Apostles, whose prerogative in their
Ministry was not to err, because they were the chief builders and planters
of Christian Religion. All other Ministers are but watere^.

II. It is one thing for a Guide to lead aright, and another for those that
should follow, to follow aright. It therefore will not be necessarily
concluded, that because a perfect Guide leads the way, such as come after,
cannot, or do not go out of the way. For they may not strictly follow the
Guide, but now and then may slip out of the way, through want of eie-sight, or
dimnesse of sight, or through carelessness, looking some other way, not minding
the Guide.

3. How can our Adversaries prove, that this promise is made to their Popish
Councels, which are ruled and See the History of the Council of Trent: and
Brocard on Revel 17. who was at that Council.
guided by their Popes, and not by Gods Spirit?

Acts 15, 25 28. This Council erred not.

Ans. 1. This was a Council gathered of all the 12. Apostles, of the Elders at
Jerusalem, and of the whole Church. 2. This had the guiding of the holy Ghost,
as the text witnesses. 3. This laid the Scriptures for their ground, verse. 15.
and the manifest evidence of the work of the holy Ghost, verse. 8 which they
took for direction in their decrees. 4. Here was free liberty of disputation,
without interruption, one attentively hearing another, without by-respect, that
the truth might take place. What is this to Popish Councels? Are there any
Apostles? Admit they freely the whole Church? Are they guided by the holy
Ghost, and by the verity of holy Scriptures? Is liberty there granted to every
one to speak freely? If they cannot prove these, this text serves not their
turn.

Other Scriptures are objected, as Mat. 16. 18. Luke 10. 16. 1. Tim. 3. 15. All
which are fully answered before. As for the place in Heb. 13. 17. it is to be
understood not simply, but that Teachers are to be obeyed, as farre-forth as
they do teach the truth, and command what God prescribes.

XVI. Proposition. Whether the Church of Rome be the Catholic Church:
Confuted by their own Bible.
I. IT is so far from making it the Catholic Church, as it no where does
give it the name of a Church, as it does Corinth, chap. 1. Gal. chap. 1.
Ephesus, Reu. 2. 1. Acts 20. 28. 1. Tim. 3. 15. and so other Churches. But no
where is this title given to Rome. Note it well.

II. It tells us, that the Faith of Saints at Rome was renowned in the whole
World, Romans 1. 8. but not that their Church was spread into all the World.
Neither says it, that the Faith so commended, came out from thence into the
World; or that it was any other, then that which was then in all the World. For
Rom 1. 5 12,
their Bible tells us, that not from Rome, but from Jerusalem, it came both
to Rome, and into other places of the World. Jerusalem was the Mother and Head
Church, and not Rome. And of those in Rome it says, Among whom ye are called,
Romans 1. 6. so were they not the Universal Church, but one particular among the
rest, which together made up the whole Church.

III. Their Bible tells us, that the Church at Jerusalem was planted by
Christ, and by his twelve Apostles, with whom were the 70. Disciples: such
Teachers as no other Church ever had at once. The Church of Antioch, Corinth,
Ephesus, and other more, were planted by the Apostles, as we learn from their
own Bible. But who first taught at Rome, it shows us not, not Peter, I am
sure.

IIII. Their Bible does at least equal other Churches with it, if not prefer
them before it: 1. In giving the name of Church to other, and not to it: for
there is mention of Saints at Rome, but not of the Church at Rome: The title
they had not given to them.

2. It plainly tells us, that other Churches were first planted by the
Apostles, but mentions not the planting of it by any of them.

3. In highly praising of other Churches, as the Corinthians, for being
enriched with all utterance, and all knowledge, for coming behind in no gift,
1. Cor. 1. 5, 7. and for being partakers of the sufferings of Christ, 2. Cor.
1. 7. So the Ephesians, which Church he calls the Church of the living God,
the Pillar and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15. and the believers there to be
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Cornerstone, in whom they were builded together for an habitation of God
through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 22. If our Romanists had any such
testimony, how would they boast? Great commendations are given to the Church at
Colosse, Col. 1. 4, 6. for their steadfast faith, love, and fruit of the
Gospel, and for their order which the Apostle ioyed to behold, cha. 2. 5. What
shall I speak of the praises of the 1. These. 1. 3, 6. and 2. 13, 14. and 3. 6.
and. 4. 10. 2. These. 1. 3, 4. and 2. 13.
Thessalonians for their work of Faith growing exceedingly, their labor of
love, their patience of hope, their abounding in charity, being followers of
the Apostles, and the Churches of God in Jury, receiving the Word of God, as
the Word of God, in much tribulation, with joy of the holy Ghost? To which
praises the believers at Rome did not then attain, though they had their
praises, and those great too, Romans 15. 14. but not comparable with those
Churches.

Lastly, in showing how the Apostles honored some other Churches by their
writings. As Corinth, by two Epistles: so Ephesus, by one from Saint Paul, by
another from Saint John, Revel. 2. 1. who wrote to that Church, in the first
place, the heavenly book of the Revelation: in like sort were two written to
the Thessalonians, and but one to Rome.

5. It is clear by their own Bible, that Peter (who^ they claim falsely for
their first Pope) wrote two Epistles, which are called Catholic: but neither
of them was written to Rome, as the Catholic Church, neither makes he any
mention of it. And S. Paul writes to the Saints at Rome, as to a particular
company, and not as any Head-Church, before, and above other. The Thessalonians
are commended for being followers of the Churches of God in Judea, but not for
following those at Rome; to whom, when Saint Paul wrote, he says, Romans 1. 6.
that they were called among others that in other Nations were called; but it is
not said, above other Nations.

6. Their Bible tells us, that S. Paul wrote his Epistle to them that were in
Rome called Saints, and beloved of God, so that they were within that City, or
there-about: but the Catholic Church was then dispersed; for the Gospel at
that time had gone into all the World, and was preached to every creature under
Heaven, Col. 1. 6, 23. In their Bible is mention Acts 2.
made of thirty Kingdoms and Countries, ten Islands, and almost three score
famous Cities out of Jury, in and amongst the Gentiles, where the Gospel had
been preached, among whom Rome was but one, and had obtained at the most,
praises common with other Churches. Their titles were Saints, Romans 1. 7.
beloved of God, also brethren, Romans 10. 1. and 12. 1. and 15. 14, 30. Their
faith, the same that was among all Nations, Romans 1. 5. called the common Faith,
verse. 12. and therefore spoken of throughout the whole World, verse. 8. Their
obedience was published to every place, Romans 16. 19. Not for that their Faith
and obedience did surpass others: for the words are delivered barely, your
faith, your obedience: not with praises, as the Faith and obedience of the
Colossians, and Thessalonians, accompanied with love and abundant charity,
with patience, and joy of the holy Ghost, in great afflictions, and so forth:
but for that Rome was the sease of the Empire, and the publishing of their
faith and obedience, might be a means to draw on others which dwelt in other
places.

Contraried by Antiquity.
We may read, that the chief of the Church of Rome, was but at first a
Bishop, and his Church but a Drocesan Church. Then he became an Archbishop,
and so his Church but a Provincial Church. After he got to be a Patriarch, and
so his Church but Patriarchall, as some other were, then equal with him; as
that of Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Constantinople. All this time he
was no Universal Bishop (till bloody Phocas gave him that title:) and so his
Church not Universal, till she also became the great whore, and so might well
be common; the kings of the earth committing fornication with her, as was
foretold, Revel. 17.

It is said that Athanasius, as Liberius confesses, was separated Epist. ad
Vrsac, and Valent. in Baron. Annal. to 3. Ann. 357. n^. 44.
from the communion of the Church of Rome. But may we judge so holy a man, and
so valiant a Champion for the truth, to be therefore separated from the
Catholic Church? Polycrates, and the Eastern Churches, did not condescend to
the Church of Rome in the keeping of Easter; did they therefore dissent from
the Catholic Church? who was he in those days, that had so much as a dream
thereof?

S. Jerome in Catal. Fortunat. reproves the custom of the Church of Rome, and
Epist. ad Euagr. he prefers the custom of the Catholic Church: he held
not Rome then the Catholic Church, but distinguishes them asunder, one from
another. The title of Catholic was long before it came to be added to the
Church; and when it was used, many Churches were so called. The Roman Church
then was not the Catholic Church.

Gainesayd by some of their own.
Aeneas Syluius, who was Pope, writes; That before the Epist. 30, 1.
Council of Nice, small respect was had to the Church of Rome. Now, it cannot
be imagined, that all the time before, the learned Fathers, and holy Martyrs
should be said to have had small respect to the Catholic Church, the mother
of every particular Church, because they had small respect to the Church of
Rome. If Aeneas Syluius says true, then was not Rome held the Catholic
Church, of those, who so smally respected her.

Pighius, lib. 6. ca. 3. de Eccl. Hierarch. says, Who did ever yet by the
Church of Rome understand the Universal Church? He then at that time had not
learned this point, to hold the Church of Rome for the Catholic Church.

Francisc. Picus, Theorem. 13. says, The Church of Rome is a particular Church.

The objected Scriptures answered.
Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, etc.

Luke 1 33 He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his
kingdom there shall be no end.

Answ. Who is read in Scripture, but knows these to be spoken of Christ's
Kingdom, and not of the Popes jurisdiction? Where is here Pope, or Rome
expressed? But the Gagger proves hereby the Church of Christ Catholic: which
we acknowledge. But says he, None of these promises have been so much
verified, as they have been in the Church of Rome: and therefore is she only
the Catholic Church. In that he says, Not so much verified, as of Rome; he
grants it to have been verified of other Churches, though not so much: he
cannot therefore from a higher degree conclude, that she is only the Church,
whereof the promises are made. The words are spoken of Christ's Kingdom in plain
terms expressed. And is his Kingdom now become the Romish Jurisdiction only?
His Kingdom, after he assumed our nature, began before the Church of Rome had
a being. And can any think that David in the Psalm, or the Angel speaking
the words to his Mother, in Luke, did dream of a Pope-holy Father, and his
Churches jurisdiction? Christ's Kingdom was not, nor is not of this world, Ioh.
18. 36. but the Popes is: therefore he undertakes to be chief Judge, to divide
inheritances, and to dispose of kingdoms, which Christ refused to intermeddle
in, Luke 12. 14. Moreover his Kingdom should extend to the uttermost parts of
the earth; but so did never Romes Jurisdiction. Many Christian Churches never
subjected themselves to her: many far remote, know her not, nor her Pope;
whether a man, or a woman, Pope Ioane.

Lastly, The Romish Church cannot be Christ's Kingdom, for that the Pope is
Antichrist, whose character set forth in the Scripture, he seems so lively to
express, that his best abetters cannot free him of that title. For my part I
have laid the dog so near his door, that I hope he and his Parasites See
also the Answer of B. Downame, unto Leon. Lessius de Antichristo.
cannot beat him away. See more in my poor labors upon the Revelation.

Coloss. 1. 5, 6. Ye heard before in the word of the truth of the Gospel,
which is come unto you, as it is in all the world, and brings forth fruit,
etc.

But says the Gagger, No faith or Gospel has, or is so dilated in all the
world, nor has fructified, as the faith of the Roman Church has done.

Answ. 1. Where is in the Text, Rome, or the Romish Church?

Secondly, by saying, no faith or Gospel, has or is so dilated, speaking in
the time past, and present; he plays the deceitful Merchant, by making two
different things one. 1. For by the time past and most ancient, must be meant
the faith and Gospel in the Church, planted in other places as well as at Rome
in the Apostles days, of which this place of the Colossians speaks: and by
the time present, is understood the faith and profession of the now Romish
Church, greatly differing from that which the Apostle commended then, as before
is manifested out of the Epistle to the Romans.

Thirdly, in that he says, no faith (meaning this present faith, for which he
only strives) has not been, nor is so dilated in all the world, fructified
and grown, is not true. For first, the true faith, beginning at Jerusalem,
went farther being preached to every creature under Heaven, Col. 1. 6, 23.
Secondly, this our present faith (the very same with that Ancient faith, as I
See my Book, Look beyond Luther.
have proved) is dilated, fructified, and grown more then theirs. It is in
both the East and West Indies; it is in more Kingdoms in Europe, then the Pope
has full jurisdiction in, as in England, Scotland, with all the adjacent
Islands belonging to both Kingdoms, which be many, in Ireland, in Denmark,
Norway, Sweden, Poland, Lapland, and in other Countries under those Kings; in
Pomeraine, in the Low. Countries, in Dukedomes, Princedomes, and in other
places in Germany. Besides that, it is in France, and some other places of the
Popes Jurisdiction. So that for spaciousness, we be little behind Rome.
Hereto are to be added the Russian, Greek, and Abyssine Churches, as large as
the European. In those the Papacy is either utterly unknown, or abhorred as
vehemently as by us. Thirdly, the faith and unbelief of the Mahumetane
Religion, is beyond the Romish present faith. Therefore as the Text helps him
not, so his boasting is vain, and false.

Romans 1. 8. I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith
is spoken of throughout the whole world.

The Gagger having cited this place, says, that Saint Paul in express terms,
calls the faith of the whole world, or Catholic faith, The faith of the
Romans, that is to say, of the Roman Church. Therefore it is only the
Catholic Church.

Answ. 1. Note here, that he concludes the Catholikenesse, from the faith of
the Church: where therefore that is, which then was commended, must needs be
the Catholic Church, holding the Catholic faith as we do.

Secondly, but what is this to the Romish Church now? For their present faith
is not that which Paul commended then. This should they prove. Is this good
reasoning; Such a man's word was of singular credit formerly, with every man,
Ergo, it is so still when he is grown Bankerupt? Jerusalem was the joy of the
whole earth, ergo it is so still? Let this Gagger prove their faith now the
same with that then, else this place will do them no good, but rather
vpbraideth their Apostasy.

3. In this application of the words, he erreth grossly, or rather, if it be
not his error through ignorance, then it is wicked deceit, and so worse, in
calling it the faith of the Church of Rome, as if originally it had flowed from
thence, and gone out thence into the world; when Saint Paul mentions not any
going forth of this Faith from thence, but that it was spoken of: which is to
be understood of their receiving of it, as it was received of other Nations, as
is evident in Romans 1. 5, 6. where Paul speaks of the Faith among all nations,
among whom, says he, they were called. So as those at Rome were partakers with
others of the common faith preached in the world; and not otherwise beholden to
Rome for their faith, as this Gagger would insinuate to his credulous Scholars.

This text therefore makes Rome no more the Catholic Church, then Corinth,
Philippi, Tessalonica, etc. which had received the same faith, though their
receiving of it was not perhaps so much spoken of, for the reasons before
alleged.

XVII. Proposition. That the Church of Rome has ever been in perfect unity
within it self:
Confuted by their own Bible.
FOr even in the Apostles days, when Saint Paul wrote his Epistles, there were
in the Roman Church some, which then made dissentions and scandals, contrary
to the doctrine which they had learned, which served not Christ our Lord, but
their own bellies, Romans 16, 17, 18. as yet they now do at Rome. There were
uncharitable contentions and judging of one another about things in themselves
indifferent, about eating, and not eating, as also about superstitious
observing of days, Romans 14. in and about which two things, a great deal of
their Religion consists to this day. And if she has been in such unity
always within her self, how is it happened, that she is become the great
Whore, Reu. 17. and that her Head the Pope, is become that Man of Sin, 2.
These. 2. and that Antichrist, the beast like a Lamb, which speaks as the
Dragon, Reu. 13?

Contraried by Antiquity.
I. There is no unity between the Popes and Peter, whom they make their
Predecessor. See for this, Catal. Test. verit. pa. 27. 62, etc. Saint Peter's
life and the Popes compared; Saint Peter's Doctrine in his Epistles, and the
Popes Decrees together.

II. Not between Pope and Pope. Not in judgment: for Martin the fifth held
with the Council of Constance, and Eugenius the fourth with Ferrara and
Florence, against the other, concerning the Popes not erring, and his Authority
over Councels. Not in authorizing the Latin Translation: For Pope Sixtus 5.
set out his Edition with his fullest power, as not to be amended; yet comes
Clement 8. with his corrected Edition in many hundred places afterward. Not in
Decrees: for Formosus his Decrees were disannulled by Stephanus, and this Popes
by another. Not in affection, as is evident by the so many and so long
continued Schisms. Onuphrius reckons up above thirty notorious schisms. Not
in life: for though bad enough all of them, after they became Popes, especially
from the time of Boniface, yet some were Necromancers, some Mortherers, some
Atheistical contempers of the Gospel, some bloody Warriers; how many of them
filthy Fornicators, and Adulterers, it is not to be told.

III. Not between Pope and Councels: for these have deposed Popes. As the
Council of Constance did John the 22; that of Basil, Eugenius the 4. that of
Pisa, Gregory 12, and Bennet the 13.

IV. Not between Pope and his Cardinals. For of them he has put out the eyes
of some, and caused other to be thrattled: and some of them have opposed him in
their Writings.

V. Not between the Pope, and the learned in that Church: such were beside
many others, Marsilius of Padua, Dantes Aleigerius, Occham, the Doctors of
Paris: the state and Divines of Venice, of late days, in an opposition, did
not regard the Popes judgment.

VI. Not between the parts of the Popes Laws; for the Sea Rainolds against
Heart. page ^ 33.
Decrees and Decretals are often at odds.

VII. Not between Council and Council: for Constance and Basil, were against
Ferrara and Florence.

VIII. Not between the Canonists and Glossaries: for they jar, and are at
difference one with another.

IX. Not between the Schoolmen: for among them are particular Sect-Masters,
whose Scholars are called after their names, Thomists, Scotists, Albertists,
Occhamists, opposing one another.

X. Not between the Friars; for the Dominicans and Franciscans spent whole
ages in Controversies, one holding one thing, and another another opinion,
about the Conception of the Virgin Mary, which bred other differences also.

XI. Not between the Priests and the Jesuits: let herein bear witness, The
Jesuits Catechism, The sparing Discourse, and other books, with all
virulencie written one against another, in the English tongue.

XII. Not between the Learned, of what sort soever: for in their writings they
cross one another, in many points of their Religion; and namely, in all those
which maintain the truth with us, against others of that Romish Faction, as in
many particulars is already before, and afterward shall be further showed. And
farther for this, let the Reader read Pappus, concerning the discord among
Papists, Doctor Hall, Deane of Worcester his Book, called the Peace of Rome;
and Doctor White his Way, pa. 154. 155. to 161.

XIII. Not between the Inquisitors: for they differ in their judgment about
the purging of Books; some allowing for orthodoxe, that which other will not
let pass for sound: as may be seen in the Indices expurgatorij of Spain,
Antwerpe, and Rome, varying one from another. See for this, Doctor James his
Mystery of the Indices expurgatorij, page 15.

XIV. Not between the People: for even among them be differing opinions. As
Master Moulin in his Buckler of Faith, shows from his own experience, page
279. and as we may find among Papists with us, when they are conferred
withal apart one from another.

Gainsaid by their own men.
From the Papists themselves may the discord of the Romish Church be noted:
from their own Historians, from such as have written the Popes lives, and from
such as in their writings do acknowledge the differences among them, as
Bellarmine himself does confess very many, and so Navarre. For which read
Doctor Hals forenamed book, entitled, The Peace of Rome, in hundreds of
differences.

Many Scriptures are alleged to prove, that unity ought to be in the Church;
which we acknowledge, and pray for. But yet they prove not their Churches
unity.

XVIII. Proposition. That Saint Peter was Prince of the Apostles, and had a
primacie of Power and Authority above all the other Apostles:
Confuted by their own Bible.
1. IT tells us, how Jesus Christ reproved the contention, which arose about
their vain conceit of Superiority one above another. This he plainly
condemned, and as plainly told them, that there should be no such
Superiority among them, as they did dream of: and therefore he exhorted them
to humility; yea, in such a sort, as that he keeps him down as the
inferior Minister, and Servant of the rest, that would be greatest among them,
Mat. 20. 24, 25, 26, 27. Mar. 10. 42, 43, 44. Luke 22. 24, 25, 26.

2. By their Bible we are given to understand, that all the Apostles are every
way made equal: in the like choosing and manner of calling, Math. 4. 18. 21. In
the like Commission given to all at once, Mat. 28. 19, 20. and 10. 5. Mar. 16.
the like power, Mat. 10. 1. the same authority, Ioh. 20. 21, 23. the same
benediction, Luke 24. 50, 51. In breathing on them with one and the same
breath, his holy Spirit, Ioh. 20. 22. In making them all Apostles, in office
the same, and in title, Luke 6. 13. For the Apostles were the chiefest of all
appointed in the Church, Ephesians. 4. 11. 1. Cor. 12. 28. All therefore being
Apostles, they were equal; for a higher dignity amongst them there was not.
They were all called foundations, Revel. 21. 14. They were all installed into
their Apostleship by one and the same means, Act. 2 1, 2, 3, 4. They were all
ordained to one and the same end; to be with him, to go and preach, Mar. 3.
14, 15. and 16. 15. to be witnesses of him to the utmost parts of the Earth,
Act. 1. 8. and all of them at the length to sit and judge the twelve Tribes of
Israel, Mat. 19. 28. The Lord made no difference among them. If any had been,
it may seem to have been in John. 1. For he, with his brother, was Christ's
nearest kinsman. 2. He was called the Disciple whom Christ loved. 3. He and
his Brother were called Boanerges, Mar. 3. 17. sons of thunder. 4. He was
ever one with Christ: as in his transfiguration, Math. 17. 1. and in other
places, Mat. 26. 37. Mar. 5. 37. 5. He was the only Disciple, after whom
Peter made inquiry, what he should do, and of whom a saying went abroad, that
he should not dye. 6. He was the only Disciple, that went boldly in with
Christ, and when he was in the High Priests house, he brought in Peter. 7. He
was the only Disciple that stood by Christ when he was upon the Cross. 8. He
was the only Apostle to whom Christ committed his Mother, to take care of her.
9. He was the only Apostle, which Christ would have to call his Mother,
Mother, and she to hold him as her son. 10. He, with Matthew was the only
Apostle that did write a Gospel, adding thereto three Epistles. 11. He was the
only Apostle that was rapt in Spirit on the Lords day, to receive the
Revelation of Jesus Christ by an Angel, foretelling the Churches estate to the
worlds end. 12. Lastly, he was of all the rest that lived, the longest, and
alone after them all. In these was he far beyond Peter. He never denied his
Master, as Peter did. He was never called Satan, as Peter was. Yet for all
these excellencies in John, the Papists will not have any Chiefty in him. And
surely, if these eminencies will not afford him the Headship among them; it
cannot be found in Peter, who attained not to such excellencies.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Cyprian. de vnitat. Eccles. Verily the rest of the Apostles were the same that
Peter was, endued with equal fellowship, both of honor and authority.

Jerome aduers. Iouin. lib. 1. All the Apostles received the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; and the strength of the Church was established equally upon
them all.

Origin on Math. 16. tract. 1. says of the Keys, that they were not given to
Peter alone, but to all alike, and that which Christ said, was spoken in common
to them all.

Ambrose de incarnat. cap. 4. says, that Peter received the Primacie of
confession, not of honor; the primacie of Faith, not of Degree.

Rabanus Maurus de institut. Clericorum, lib. 1. cap. 4. says, That the rest
of the Apostles were fellowlike with Peter, in Honor and Authority:

Gainesaid by some of their own side.
Aquinas. id opuse. 20. calls all the Apostles the Vicars of Christ.

Cusanus lib. 1. de concord. Cathol. cap. 13. We know that S. Peter has not
received more authority of Christ, then the rest of the Apostles. In the Mass
they singing to Christ, pray that he would keep his flock by the holy
Apostles, who are there called Vicars of his work.

Gratian, did. 21. in Nouo. 24. 4. c. loquitur. Nothing was said to Peter,
that was not said to the rest of the other Apostles, who according to S.
Jerome, are all the Fundamental stones of the Church, Revel. 21.

Leo first Bishop of Rome, in Aniuers. die assump. suae ad Pontificatum. Ser.
3. says, I give thee the Keys, was a power transferred to all the Apostles.

Scriptures objected, answered.
Mat. 10. 20. Now the names of the twelve Apostles are these; the first Simon,
who is called Peter, etc. Because he is first named, therefore they will
conclude a Headship over the rest.

Answ. Here is no express word of Headship, but in numbering the Twelve, the
first begins with Peter. So he is only first here in reckoning, in order of
numbering, but not of commanding superiority. Saint Mark chap. 3. 16. and Luke
6. 14. leave out the word first, in naming of the Apostles. And Saint Paul in
naming the Apostles with Peter, gives him not the first place, Gal. 2. 9. He
is first reckoned, for that he was first called by Christ, Mat. 4. 18. Andrew
knew Christ before him, and Ioh. 1. 41, 42.
brought him to Christ: but when Christ called them to follow him, and to be
his Disciples, Peter is first in that place of Matthew. For when Andrew brought
him to Christ, neither of them were as yet called by him to follow him, for
that was not till John the Baptist was imprisoned. Andrew was John's Disciple,
and his knowing of Christ was this, by John's teaching, Ioh. 1. 35, 36, 40. and
he brought Peter to Christ, verse. 41, 42. but Andrew abode with Christ but that
day, verse 39. neither did he as yet leave his Master John: but when John was
imprisoned, both Andrew and Peter returned to their calling, Mar. 1. 14, 16. In
which vocation Christ found them, and then called them, and the first of them
was Simon; Math. 4. 18. And hereupon being first named when he was called, and
the first called of all the Cyprian. Ep 71. ad Quint. Greg. in Ezech. hom. 18.
are of this judgment, that Peter was first called.
Apostles by Mathews relation, chap. 4. he is in the reckoning of the 12. first
named by him, in chap. 10. 21. and so by the other Evangelists. For it is the
Rhemists error, to say that Andrew was first called; and a common mistake to
yield them so much: whereby they seem to take more hold from this place, and
from the rest where Peter is first named, then there is just cause, although
the argument is of it self very weak, as by the former Reasons is evident,
and as before has been proved. For Reuben was first in the numbering, but
Judah for all that was chief in government.

Math. 16. 19. I will give unto thee the Keys, etc.

The Gagger will have Peter chief, for that he supposes the Keys were given
to him only.

Answ. 1. The question which Christ propounded, was to all the Apostles, verse
13. 15. though Peter readiest ever to speak, made the answer; yet not only
for himself, but for all the rest, as appears in verse 20, where our Savior
commands them all, not Peter alone, not to tell that he was Christ which
shows that they all knowing it, would have professed as much, if Peter had
not prevented them. Therefore his answer being for all, Christ's power given
thereupon was general to all.

Secondly, the Keys given, are no such things as belong only to Peter; but
are common to all. See before, an answer to this place.

Thirdly, the words following in this Text, Whatsoever thou shall bind upon
earth, etc. containing the action, or office of the Keys, belong to all, Math.
18. 18. which power here was given not only to Peter, but also to the other
Apostles, by the Rhemists own confession.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ, when he breathed on them the Holy Ghost, Ioh. 21. 22,
23. (which with one breadth he gave to all, saying, As my Father sent me, so I
send you) and gave them all power of forgiving, and retaining of sins, which
is the power of the Keys here spoken of, Christ sent all his Apostles, as his
Father sent him: Therefore Peter cannot have more authority then the rest,
unless they can prove that Peter was sent by Christ, otherwise then Christ
himself was sent by his Father.

Fifthly, the words are a promise of giving the Keys, and power to bind and
loose, to remit and retain sins, afterward, and not the giving of them now:
but this promise, we see, was not performed to Peter alone, but to all the
Apostles, Ioh. 20. 23. not then naming Peter; and therefore this promise was
made unto all; and so intended to be performed, as the fulfilling shows.

Lastly, the Fathers are of the same opinion with us, touching the meaning of
this Text: See before Origin, Ambrose, and the same on Psalm. 39. Austin in
Johan. tract. 118. Theophylact on Matthew 16. Beda on this Text.

1. Cor. 3. 4, 22. One says, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas, I
of Christ.

The Gagger here from the order would prove Peter chief next Christ. Lo, says
he, how from those, which he would have esteemed the lesser, he ascends to
those whom he would have esteemed the greater.

Answ 1. The man's wit went a grazing, when he wrote this. For if he so conclude
from the order, then Paul must be inferior to Apollos, when Paul was an
Apostle and a Planter: but Apollos no Apostle, and only a waterer, 1. Cor. 3.
6.

2. In Mat. 10. 2. he would have Peter the chief, because he was named first:
now here the chief, because he is named in a third place. Saint Paul, Gal. 2.
9. puts him in the second place between two: and will not they hold him the
chief for this too? Does not virtue consist in the midst? for put him in the
first place, as in Mat. 10. in the third place, as in 1. Cor. 3. 4, 22. or in
the second, as in Gal. 2. 9. its with them a profound Reason, to make him
always the chief; for he may take what place he lists. Deep Divinity, and
an invincible Reason! Though Saint Paul in Gal. 2. takes himself to be nothing
inferior to him, or to other which seemed to be Pillars; and was inferior to
none of the great Apostles, 1. Cor. 11. 5. and 12. 11. upon this Text,
Chrysostom shows, that S. Paul compared himself with the Apostles, even with
Peter and the rest.

Luke 22. 31. And the Lord said, Simon, etc. When thou art converted,
strengthen thy Brethren.

Answ. This place proves not any Headship over the Apostles.

First, he is called Simon, by his common name, and not Peter, which our
Adversaries stand upon, and make their chief argument.

Secondly, this place is to forewarne him of his fearful temptation, and so of
his fall thereby, the utter peril whereof he should escape, not by himself, or
his own power and grace, but by Christ's mediation. What, is this to have a
Headship?

Thirdly, it teaches him a duty, when he should be converted, and be
recovered from under the fall, that he should confirm others. If by
confirming, the Gagger will hence conclude the practice and exercise of
greatness over the Apostles; then Saint Paul and Barnabas had this greatness
too. For they did confirm others, Act. 14. 21. and Paul and Silas, Act. 15.
41. 1. These. 3. 2. yea it is a common Duty of every Pastor. Is every one that
confirms, made thereby a Superior in Rule, and Government? Then a Priest
confirming his Sovereign, is his Superior. And by this, Saint Paul was Peter's
Superior: for he brought Peter back from his by-path, both by reproof, and
public teaching of the truth, and so confirmed him, who for fear did before
go astray, Gal. 2. 11, 17.

Fourthly, the Lord Jesus (if they will here understand the Apostles) calls
them Simons Brethren, and so gives them equality.

Lastly, where are the Gaggers express words for Peter's Headship, out of this
place? Is it in strengthening? A poor strength to support such a Babylonish
Tower.

Luke 22. 26. He that is greatest among you, let him be younger, and he that is
Chief, as he that does serve.

Answ. 1. The words in the beginning of this verse are against Chiefety; for it
is said, It shall not be so with you: when they were at strife for Superiority.

Secondly, the meaning of the Greatest, and Chief, on which the Gagger does
fasten his teeth, does not imply as he pretends, any Chiefety among them:
but Christ speaks according to their aspiring minds; not of them, as any of
them were, but as some of them desired to be, as is clear by the speech and
Petition of the Mother of Zebedees children, Mat. 20. 20, 27.

Thirdly, the occasion and the very scope of the place, is against all
Superiority in the Apostles.

Fourthly, it cannot be showed, that any of them all did either claim, or
practice any superiority; or taught in their writings any such thing.

Fifthly, they did strive verse 24. for superiority, which of them should seem
the greater. As yet therefore there was no such greatness settled among them.

6. If any such thing had been, or had been intended by Christ to be
conferred upon Peter, he had, upon this, just occasion to have decided the
Controversy: as surely he would have done in Peter's behalf, in a matter of so
great consequence, as our Adversaries make it, as he did in the behalf of
Moses and Aaron, to appease the contention against them, Number. 16. and 17. 10.
But Christ tells them all, that no such thing should be among them, in this
text, and gives the rest authority to pull down the spirit of him that would
seek to be Chief, to make him as a Servant; as is evident in the words of the
text. Therefore here is nothing for any authority in Peter: Nor indeed in any
other Scripture.

XIX. Proposition. That S. Peter was Head of the Church.
THough the former Position overthrown sufficiently confuteth this; for if
Peter be not Superior over the Apostles, who were the principal members of
the Church, he cannot be the Head of the Church: yet seeing this Headship over
the Church is so stiffely stood in; I thought good to handle it also distinctly
from the rest, for more evidence of the truth to common Christians.

Confuted by their own Bible.
I. By appropriation, it gives the title of Head of the Church only to
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 22. and 4. 15. and 5. 23. Col. 1. 18. And no where does it
make a man the Head of the Church, neither Peter, nor any other; either
expressly, or by any necessary consequent,

II. It calls the Church the body of Christ, 1. Cor. 12. 27. Ephesians. 4. 12.
and 6. 23. No where is it called the body of S. Peter.

III. It tells us, that Saint Peter himself gives to Christ Headship,
Principality and Chieftie, and to none other: for he calls him the Prince of
Pastors, 1. Pet. 5. 4. the Pastor and Bishop of our souls, 1. Pet. 2. 25. as
he is also called the high Priest of our confession, Heb. 3. 1.

IV. The Apostles did not know, or acknowledge any such Primacy or Headship in
Peter: For first, they sent Peter and John to Samaria, Act. 8. 14. which they
neither would, nor could have done, had he been their Governor and Head
indeed. Secondly, James, in the Council at Jerusalem, took no notice of
Peter's supremacy: for James did then call him Simon (his name, before he was an
Apostle) without any title of preeminencie, Acts 15. 14. He also said, I
judge, (which word Peter there used not,) verse. 19. to whose sentence and
judgment, Peter and all the Apostles and Ancients did subscribe, verse. 22.
Thirdly, none of the other Apostles then, did acknowledge any Headship in
Peter: for the Decree of the Council went out under the conioynt authority of
all, without special mentioning of Peter, Act. 15. 23. and 16. 4. Fourthly,
Saint Paul knew of no such Chieftie in Peter: for first, when he does mention
any word tending to set out any greatness in the Apostles, he applies it not
singularly, as to one, but plurally as to more. Thus, 2. Cor. 11. 5. he speaks
of great Apostles; 2. Cor. 12. 11. of such as were above measure Apostles (so
Rhemists do translate, but (...).
we, the chief Apostles;) and Gal. 2. 9. of such as seemed to be Pillars, and
namely, them. Again, these Apostles so great, the Chief, the Pillars, among
whom was Peter, he does equal himself, saying, that he was nothing less,
nor had done nothing less then they, 2. Cor. 12. 11. and 11. 5. neither added
they any thing to him, Gal. 2. 6. As touching Peter more particularly, Saint
Paul resisted him in his face, before all, Gal. 2. 11, 14. did share with him
fully in Commission: for as Peter was the Apostle of the Circumcision, so was
Paul of the prep^ce, or Uncircumcision, verse 7. and did compare with him in the
effectual work of the Ministry, verse. 8. All which he would not have done,
had Peter been the Head of the Church; for it had been arrogance in him.
Moreover, when he named some of the Apostles as Pillars, he mentions James,
and gives him the first place before Peter; belike forgetting Peter's Headship.
Lastly, when Saint Paul had fit occasion offered to speak, if ever, of Saint
Peter's Headship, 1. Cor. 1. 12. when some held of Paul himself, some of
Apollor, some of Cephas, he speaks not one word thereof, as not knowing, nor
acknowledging any such primacy in Peter: for had he known it at all, much more
to have been such an essential point of Religion, as Papists make it, he would
undoubtedly have taught it. But neither he, not any other Apostle* love go of
any such high point, as the Papists since have forged, to gull the World
withal.

V. None of the four Evangelists, nor Saint Luke, when he wrote the Acts knew
of any such dignity: for they never write of him as the Head of the Church.
They name him but as they do the rest, calling him Simon, or Simon Beter,
without any title of eminency above other.

VI. The Church in the Apostles days, know not of any such honor to belong
unto him: for some did call him: to an account of his doings, Act. 11. 2, 3.
neither did they yield him any such principality. The Corinthians, of whom
some equalled Paul, and others, Apoll^s with him, had not yet learned this note
above Ela.

VII. And lastly, it is also clear by their own Bible, that Peter himself
knew of to Much supreme authority, for first, he went at the other Apostles
sending of him, Act. 8. 14. Secondly, he gave to the Church an account of his
proceeding, when they found fault with him; Act. 11. 2, 3. Thirdly, he gave to
Saint Paul the right hand of sooretie or fellowship, Gal. 2. 9. Fourthly, being
openly rebuked, he submitted thereto, verse. 11. Fifthly, he was not so much as
President of the Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15. Sixthly, he never undertook
matters of the Church of his own head, or by his sole authority. In teaching
the necessity of electing another Apostle, not he, but they, to wit, the men
then assembled, appointed two, upon whom the lots were to be cast, Act. 1. 23.
In ordaining Deacons, the twelve Apostles gave their advice together, and
imposed their hands upon them, Act. 6. 2, 6. No special mention of Peter
above, before, or alone from the rest. Seventhly, he in his Epistles, styles
himself by the title of an Apostle, 1. Pet. 1. 1. and no higher. Neither does
he in either of his Epistles, express any sign or token of any other
authority, but rather the clean contrary first, by equalling himself to
others his inferiors, calling himself a fellow-Elder, (...).
1. Pet. 5. 1. yet never the Servant of Servants, the style of cursed Cham, fit
for the Pope. By forbidding others to Lord it over Gods heritage, 1. Pet. 5. 3.
By appropriating to Christ the title of Prince of Pastors, verse. 4. which now
they that pretend to be Saint Peter's heytes, shame not to arrogate to
themselves. So far is he from dreaming of an universal Headship. And lastly,
we find not that he ever used this authority of Headship: which if it had
been laid upon him by Christ, he ought to have done, yea, and he would have
exercised it. For what Christ imposed upon him, he performed: As to preach the
Gospel, Mark. 16. 16. to do the office of an Apostle, Luke 6. 13. to work
Miracles, Matthew. 10. to be a witness of Christ, Act. 1. 8. These and other
such offices he performed, and the other he would have done, had any such
dignity been bestowed upon him.

Contraried by Antiquity.
For, as before is showed, Cyprian, Jerome, Origin, Ambrose, Augustine, and
also Chrysostom, in Matthew. and in Gal. 2. make On Mat. 16. tract. 1.
all the Apostles like equal with Peter.

Austin: de verbis Dom. ser. 13. makes Christ the Rock, and not Peter, but
Peter to be established upon the Rock, in Concion. ad Catechum. ca. 12. in his
retractions, li. 1. ca. 21. Hilary de Trinit. l. 2. makes Christ the Rock,
confessed by Peter* Jerome in Lucam. ca. 16. tells us, that the Rock was
Christ. The Fathers judgment, concerning the Keys, given to all the Apostles,
is set down before. Sea more, Austin. de doct. li. 1. ca. 18. Firmilian,
epist. 75. inter. epist. Cyprian. Chrysostom. in Act. ca. 1. and in Galat. ca 1.
And touching the exhortation of Christ to Peter, to feed his Lambs. Cyprian.
de vnitate Ecclesiae, says, The Flock of Christ was but one, which all the
Apostles fed with one consent. August. de pastoribus; They were many Apostles,
and yet it is said to one, Feed my Lambs; because all good Pastors are one,
and in one, they feed, and Christ feeds. Also de agone Christiano, ca. 30.
When Christ says to Peter, Love thou me? Feed my sheep; he says the same
to all.

Cyril speaking of the place in John, Chap. 21. 17. tells us, that Christ's
thrice asking, Love thou me? was to draw so many answers from him, according
to his thrice denying of him: and the charge to feed his Lambs, was the
renewing unto him the dignity of Apostleship: (he says not, Headship;) for
that by his denial it might have been thought, he had weakened it. As for the
name of Head of the Church, which of the Fathers gives it to Peter? A title
too high for man, which is proper only to Jesus Christ.

Gainesaid by Popes, and others their own men.
Eutychianus, Bishop of Rome, in Epist. There is but one immovable Foundation,
one happy Rock of Faith, confirmed by Peter's mouth; Thou art Christ, the Son
of the living God. The Interlineall Gloss; upon the Rock, that is to say,
upon Christ, in whom Peter believes. The Common Gloss; Thou art Peter, but
thou art so of me, who am the Rock.

Lyra, Haymo, Hugo Cardinalis, Cardinal. de Aliaco, and Ferus on this place of
Matthew, say, that Christ is the Rock.

Concerning the Keys, Anselmus on Matthew. 16. says; This power was not given
alone to Peter: but as Peter answered one for all; so in Peter he gave his
power to all.

Pope Leo 1. ser. 3. in Aniuers. die assump. suae ad pontificatum, This power
of the Keys passed over to all the Apostles.

Gratian Decrees, D. 21. in nouo and 24. q. 2. loquitur. Saint Peter received
no more power then the rest of the Apostles.

Gerson de potest. Ecclesiae consid. 11. The Keys were not given to one, but
to unity.

Council of Basil: The Keys were given to the Church, and not to Peter.

Hincmar, Archbishop of Rhemes, wrote a Book hereof under Charles, against
another Hincmar, Episcopum Laudunensem: yea Canonists, and those of the
chiefest, in cap. 1. de renunciat. lib. 6. say, that the power of binding and
loosing, in which is found all jurisdiction of the Church, proceeds
immediately from Christ, and not mediately from Saint Peter. Touching Peter's
Office of feeding, Cusanus Concord, lib. 2. c. 13. upon the place of John 21.
15, 16, 17. as also of Christ's charge to go into all the world and preach,
says, There is found nothing said to Peter, that imports any power.

Marsilius Defens. Pacis part. 2. cap. 28. says, That Christ spoke to all the
Apostles in Peter's person, which manner of speaking, Christ testifies himself
to have used, in that he says, What I say to one, I say to all.

Gregory lib. 4. Epist. 32. denies Peter to be called universal Bishop. And
it is well known how he opposed that title, as very Antichristian, lib. 4.
Epist. 34. But if he had known, that to Peter the whole Church had been
principally committed, that he had been the Prince of the Apostles, and
Pastor of Pastors, he would have allowed of that title, as just and lawful,
and not have condemned it as Antichristian.

Scriptures objected answered.
Mat. 16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and
the gates of Hell, etc.

Answ. Here is no express word of Headship; neither does this Text by
consequence prove it. For although Christ speaks to Peter, yet he speaks not
of Peter's person.

I. The words are a promise touching the Churches safety, and nothing of Peter's
Supremacy.

II. It speaks of a Rock, on which the Church is builded. Now the words are a
Metaphor, as Bellarmine grants. But a Lib. 1. de. PP. Romans cap. 11.
Metaphor is to be interpreted, according to the nature of the thing, of which
it is spoken: as here, of a Rock, as of a foundation, which is to uphold that
which is built upon it, and not to rule over that which is builded thereupon.
So that from the name of Rock, cannot be concluded Headship and Rule, for it
is not proper to a foundation, in that respect, to rule; but to support and
bear up.

III. If Christ here, either gave, or promised to give to Peter the Headship,
and that before all the rest of his Disciples, Why did then afterward James and
John, Mar. 10. 35. and their Mother, Math. 20. 2. seek for the chiefest places
above the rest? Yea, and why did the Apostles afterward strive which of them
should be the greatest, Luke 22. 24? And why had not Christ plainly decided
this for Peter then, and told them of this his speech and meaning in this place
toward Peter? If Christ had here intended it, surely, there he had not
forbidden Sovereignty; but upon so sit occasion offered, had stablished
Headship upon Peter. It is clear therefore, that Christ here meant no such
thing.

IV. If by Rock be concluded Headship (not to urge the Metaphor against it,)
yet Peter is never the nearer his Headship, for he is not the Rock.

1. The name, Peter, gives it him not. For first, there Christ names him for
more vehement affirming of that, which he The like speech, Genesis 41. 44.
would utter for the Churches comfort. As if he had said, As verily as thou art
Peter, and so to be called, Ioh. 1. 42. Mar. 3. 16. so certainly will I build
my Church firmly upon the Rock, which thou have made confession of, that Hell
gates shall not prevail against it. So that Christ calls him not Peter, because
he should be the Rock; but that upon the remembrance of his name, he might
think upon the Churches safe stabilitie (as upon a Rock,) against all the
powers of darkness.

2. Petros is the interpretation of Cephas, Ioh. 1. 42. and therefore he being
by Christ, (who spoke Syriak) called Cephas, as he is sometime so named by S.
Paul, 1. Cor. 1. 15.) most commonly he was called Peter, not alluding to Peter
in this place of Matthew; but for that Cephas was Syriak, and Petros Greek,
and so was he named Peter, because of the generality of the Greek tongue,
rather then Cephas.

3. Petros signifies in Greek generally, a stone, and not a Rock of
foundation. And therefore though he be called Peter, yet is he not therefore
the Rock, but a Stone in the Lords building, a precious stone. For the twelve
Apostles are twelve foundations, Reu. 21. 14. and every foundation is a
precious stone, verse 19. 20. And if Peter be reckoned the first in order, he
is there a lasper. A stone he is, and so are all the other Apostles
fundamental stones, and likewise are the elect stones too, 1. Pet. 2. 5.
though not such stones. But the chief corner stone is Christ, 1. Pet. 2. 6.
and here in Matthew is he the Rock, and not Peter; Petros is a stone. Now the
Church is here built on a Rock, not on a stone, except on the Corner-stoue,
and on the twelve precious Stones, but not on one stone, but upon one Rock.

4. If Christ, by calling him Petros, had meant him to be Petra: then had
Petros bin an appellatiue, the same with Rock, and not a proper name, as here
it is used. For no Demonstratiue goes before it. But if Christ had said, Thou
art that Petros, and upon that Rock will I build my Church, and so made the
word appellatiue, this Text had been somewhat to the purpose: but here is no
such Demonstratiue, Petros being a proper name.

5. He cannot be the Rock, because that Christ calls him Peter: for he was
Peter before, Mar. 3. 16. and is now Peter, when Christ called him so; for he
says, Thou art Peter. He was not now at this time the Rock, as Bellarmine
does confess. Lib. 1. cap. 10. (...). Romans PP.
Therefore it is not his name that makes him the Rock, because here he is
Peter, but yet not the Rock, by Bellarmines grant.

II. These words, upon this Rock, will not make Peter the Rock. 1. The
Scripture no where makes man the Rock of Gods Church. David called God his
Rock, 2. Sam. 22. 2, 32. Psalm. 18. 2. Saint Paul says, Christ is the Rock,
1. Cor. 10. 4. 2. The word Peter and Rock, in the Original, yea, and in their
Translation, are distinguished in gender and termination, yea, and in
signification, as before is noted, and the one a Noune appellatiue, and the
other a proper name. 3. The present alteration of the speech from Peter's
person, to some other thing, will not admit him to be the Rock. For it is not
said (as it in plainness of speech should be, if indeed the Rock had been
Peter,) Thou art Peter, and upon thee will I build my Church: but, Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock, etc. Where the Pronoune this, has Relation to some
other thing then to Peter, even to his confession, that Jesus was Christ the
Son of the living God, upon which Rock Christ would build his Church. For no
where the Scriptures thus vary in a Relative, if the intendment of the speech
be to one and the same person: neither do any thus use to speak, nor may we
think that Jesus Christ would have thus doubtfully spoken, if he had purposed
to have had Peter held to be the Rock.

III. The words following, I will build my Church, remoueth Peter from being
the Rock.

First, Church here is to be understood the whole Church militant and
Triumphant. How can Peter be the Rock on which it is built? Could he be the
Rock of the Church Triumphant, when he was here militant? Or can he be the
Rock now of the Militant, and he a Saint in Heaven Triumphant? Or how the
Rock of both, then and now, as he that is the Rock must be? For on the Rock
is the Church built, not a part of it, but the whole, and not for a time, but
even for ever. For will all, or any part of the Church once built upon the
Rock, be removed off from the Rock? Or will the Rock cease to be the
bearer up of the Church? Then either is Peter now, the Rock, or he never was
the Rock at all. But how can he now be, whose body is turned to dust? Can his
Soul be the Rock? As for a Rock by succession, it is but a fantasy. Christ
speaks of an everlasting sustaining Rock, and but of one Rock, and not of
one Rock after another, dying and decaying.

Secondly, the Church and this Rock are two things: for Christ says he will
build his Church upon this Rock. Now Peter was one, in, and of the Church:
here, a principal member militant; and now, a Saint triumphant. He must
therefore be one, built with the Church, upon the Rock: he cannot therefore
himself be the Rock; for so himself should be built upon himself.

Thirdly, Christ speaks of his Church, and says, my Church. Had he no Church,
but that which was built upon Peter? Had not he at this very time, when he
spoke these words, a Church? Was Zachary and Elizabeth, John Baptist, Joseph
and Mary, Simeon and Annah, the other Apostles, the 70. Disciples, and many
others following him, not of his Church? If they were, were they built on
Peter? Did they know Peter to be the Rock? Or were they of the Church, and not
built as yet upon the Rock? For as yet Peter was not the Rock, by Bellarmines
confession.

Fourthly, Christ here made himself a Builder; I will build (says he) my
Church. He built while he did live, by his Word and Spirit. But did his Word
and Spirit gather any to Peter? Did his Word and Spirit build his followers
upon Peter? Christ built his Church by his Apostles: for they are said to
build: and Paul speaks of himself, as of a wise Master Builder, 1. Cor. 3.
10. But upon what did they build? Even upon Christ alone, 1. Cor. 3. 11. Ephesians.
2. 20. in whom all the building is knit together, verse 21. They built not upon
Peter; nor he on himself, but upon Christ, 1. Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6. Did any of the
Apostles preach Peter? Paul says, he preached not men, but God, Gal. 1. 10. Or
did Peter preach himself to be the Rock? If he was the Rock, why did they
not preach him? If they did not, who can believe it?

Fifthly, if Peter now was made the Rock, and Head, as Aquinas, Turrecremata,
and many other Papists auerre, though Bellarmine says it was but here
promised; how came this Rock, by and by after in Matthew, to be called Satan,
Mat. 16. 23? Is it like that Christ would call the Rock, on which he will so
firmly build his Church, Satan? Lastly, if it were granted, that Christ built
his Church on Peter; yet is it not spoken exclusiuely, as on him alone,
secluding the rest of the Apostles; for elsewhere he conioynes them with him,
Ioh. 23. 23. Ephesians. 20. 20. Reu. 21. 14. Mat. 28. 19.

IV. These words, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, will
overthrow Peter's being the Rock. For this Rock bears up so powerfully the
Church, that Hell gates shall not prevail against it. Whence follows, that
this Rock must needs be stronger then Satan's power and policies. But what
power can that be, but the power of Christ, and of God? For who but God can
resist Hell gates? Therefore from all the words of this Text it is clear, that
Peter cannot by it be the Head of the Church, nor the Rock on which it is
built: and yet this place is one of the chiefest for his Headship.

The words in the next verse 19. I will give thee the Keys, are answered
before.

Ioh. 21. 15, 17. Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, love thou
me more then these? Feed my Lambs.

Answ. 1. Here are no express words of Headship, neither can any such thing be
concluded out of this place, by any well framed argument: and yet this is the
very principal place which they allege to uphold it.

Secondly, Christ here calls him not Peter, (for that name is uttered by the
Evangelist,) but only Simon the son of Jonas, as thereby preventing the
conceit of Headship, which our Adversaries dream of from the name of Peter.
Which our Savior here mentions not, nor the name Cephas, because of his
fearful denial of him so lately, as now therefore unworthy of that name.

Thirdly, he is here questioned concerning his love, which he so much boasted
of before Christ's taking, and soon after seemed to have lost, by forswearing
Christ. And three times he is asked, to remember him of his three times
denial of Christ, it being now also the third time of Christ's appearing to
them, verse 14. Also the question is with a comparison, Love thou me more
then these? What if he meant it of the 153. great Fishes, with the Ship, Nets,
and other things therein? for he leaped into the Sea, hearing of Christ, and
cast off all respect to the ship and Fishes, verse 7. till Christ willed them
to bring of the fishes, ver. 10. 11. And therefore might Christ demand
thereupon this question: neither is any thing in the Text against this. For
Christ was by the fishes, and the question was after dinner. But conceive it of
the rest of the Apostles, as it is commonly understood; for Peter had preferred
his own love before all of them before, Mat. 26. 33. Luke 22. 23. Which here
Christ, by thus propounding the question, remembers him of, as a check to his
former conceitednesse, seeing his love appeared less then theirs. Christ here
questions Peter's love, he here in a sort checks his former boasting. What of
all this? Ergo, he is the Head of the Church, and Prince of Pastors. Logically
concluded!

Fourthly, Peter's answer was now affirmative, concerning his love simply. He
durst not boast now comparatively, as before. Neither did he answer to the
comparison, but appealed to Christ's knowledge of his love toward him. And
therefore at the other two times, Christ leaves out the comparison. Which
shows that Peter knew his former folly, and now discerned no superiority of
love in himself above the rest; neither that Christ purposed to commend it
above the love of the other, and so to preferie him above them, but to make
Peter more humble, and better to know himself, as the whole carriage of the
business shows.

Fifthly, the words, Feed my Lambs, will not afford Peter any Headship.

I. In general, this charge was as to re-install him again into his
Apostleship, that it might not be doubted of, and that by a threefold command.
First, because of a threefold denial of Christ, by which he had deserved to
lose his Apostleship. And secondly, for that Christ would have him very
diligently careful in performing the charge of feeding: being thus mercifully
admitted into the grace of the Apostleship again, but not advanced into any
higher dignity and command over other Apostles.

Again, this charge follows not as a reward of his love, which had formerly
so failed: but as a true declaration of his love now again professed toward
Christ. For what great expression of love had it been to Christ, for Peter to
have accepted of a Supremacy above all the rest, which before they had
foolishly contended for? Luke 22. 24.

II. The word feed makes not here for any Headship.

For first, it was a duty of his Office already received, for an Apostle to
feed, and not an imposing of a new Dignity.

Secondly, it is a common charge to all the Apostles, Mat. 28. 19. Mar. 16. 15.
Yea, to other Bishops and Elders, Act. 20. 28. 1. Pet. 5. 2.

Thirdly, the words in the Greek, which Christ uses here, (...).
are used to express such feeding, as is required of ordinary Teachers, as
the former quoted places show; and do not here imply any supreme Authority,
or extraordinary kind of feeding from other of the Apostles.

Fourthly, the word in our English to feed, and the Greek (...).
words, are taken from such as feed beasts of the earth. The one is used for
such as keep Swine. Mat. 8. 34. Mar. 5. 14. but this (...).
our Adversaries make no use of, to pearke up Peter's regencie. And yet Christ
in the Evangelists language uses this word twice, in the first question, and
in the last verses 15. 17. and the (...)
other word but once; perhaps because of such as are fed, that is, outwardly
called, there will be two Swine or Goats, for one true Sheep. This last word
is taken from Shepherds, feeding their flocks; as the word here applied to
Lambs does show. So in 1. Cor. 9. 7. 1. Pet. 5. 2. This they take great hold
on, to help forward their conceit. Because this word is applied not only to
Teachers, as in this place, and in Act. 20. 28. 1. Pet. 5. 2. and the word
Pastor also, taken from Shepherds, applied to Teachers, Mat. 9. 36. and 26.
31. but the same is spoken also of Kings, Math. 2. 6. Revel. 19. 15. So it is
to teach, and to bear rule over others. Therefore they will hence conclude,
that Peter had here a Princely Supremacy bestowed upon him.

But first the word which is used twice, both before and after, (...)
does limit the signification of this, which is but once used.

Secondly, a word of double signification is to be understood according to the
subject matter spoken of: and that signification taken, which is fittest to the
thing in hand.

As this word, here translated feed, spoken of a King, is to (...)
govern and rule, as a King, and not to teach as a Pastor. But being spoken of
a spiritual Pastor, as here it is, it cannot be so meant of ruling as a King:
but is to be understood of feeding, as a spiritual Pastor, by Doctrine and
life, and not of ruling. Or if of ruling too, yet it is but of such a rule as
befitteth a Pastor, and not of the Rule which is in a King. For our Adversaries
can no more conclude from the double signification of the word, that Peter is
to teach, as an Apostle and Bishop, and to rula also as a King, the Church:
then it may be concluded of a King, that he is not only to rule as a King,
but also to teach the Church as a Bishop. This they will not allow to Kings,
whom they hold Laymen: and yet the Argument from the double signification, is
as good for the one, as for the other.

Thirdly, our Savior Christ took on himself no such Rule, as they would give
unto Peter, to lay it upon their proud Pope. Though the name of Governor be
given to Christ, as of rule and power also, Mat. 2. 6. and 28. 18. yet he would
not be made a King, Ioh. 6. 15. though he was a King, Ioh. 1. 49. nor would
meddle in dividing the inheritance, Luke 12. nor allow Sovereignty in his
Disciples, Luke 22. 24, 25, 26. Must here then a word of double signification
be written aduantageously to lift up Peter to a new Dignity, which Christ
never allowed of in them, nor ever took upon himself, as the Pope does? As
his Father sent him, John 20. so sent he not Peter only, but them, that is,
all the rest of the Apostles. But that was not to bear rule over Nations in
outward State, as the Pope does, as much as he can: but to teach and preach to
all the world: this did Christ. And his servants may not think to be above
their Master, or to be sent from him, otherwise then his Father sent him.

Fourthly, Saint Peter, who exhorts the Elders to feed, uses the same word,
in 1. Pet. 5. 2. that is here in this Text; and yet by and by forbids them to
be Lords over Gods Heritage. If this word had noted any such sovereignty, he
would not have given it to Inferiors; nor have immediately forbidden Dominion
thereupon, if there had been any such Rule included: for that had been to
give, and by and by to take away again.

Fifthly, the word and Title of Pastor, whence the other word (...).
to feed comes, is the fourth degree under an Apostle: for Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists are before Pastors. Now, a Pastor, or Bishop, or
Elder, is to feed, Acts 20. 28. 1. Pet. 5. 2. Therefore here is not imposed a
Superiority upon Peter, but a Duty common to other of inferior rank. This
word feed therefore will help them nothing for the Supremacy.

The word my, pulls down Peter from Sovereignty. For first, Peter's charge is
to seed, not his own, but Christ's sheep. So then, Peter is not a Lord, but a
Seruant-Shepheard, to feed the chief Shepherds flock, as Peter himself
calls Christ, who knew no other chief Shepheardship, either in himself, or
in any other, but in Christ, 1. Pet. 5. 3. And we read how the flock is
called Gods, Act. 20. 28. 1. Pet. 5. 2. but no where Peter's. As also by Christ
himself we are taught, that there is but one fold, and one Shepherd of that
fold, to wit, but one general Shepherd, and that is he himself, Ioh. 10. 11,
14, 16. and not Peter, and that by Peter's own acknowledgement in the
forequoted place, 1. Pet. 5. 3.

The word Lambs, or Sheep considered with the rest of the words, and as it is
commonly taken, wipes away Peter's Supremacy.

For first, the words are not spoken universally, Feed all my Lambs, as if
he had been charged with all of them. For this had been a charge: First,
which he could never have performed, secondly, which he never did attempt to
perform. Now, God never imposed any impossible charge upon him; and Peter
would not have been found faithless. But it is spoken indefinitely, to feed
here, and there, whom he could, and where he could, at any time. Therefore he
is not here the universal Bishop.

Secondly, Lambs or Sheep are not Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and
Pastors. These are never so called, but in relation to Jesus Christ only, Mat.
26. 31. and never in reference to any man. But if under these Lambs and Sheep
be comprehended all, and every one of the Church and flock of Christ, then by
their account, all the Apostles, and the rest, must be sheep, and Peter their
Shepherd, and so a Shepherd over shepherds. Which vain conceit, without
proof, who can give credit unto? And yet Bellarmine makes a difference
between Lambs and Sheep. The Lambs forsooth, must be the Laity; and the
Sheep, the Apostles: when as the words are used indifferently, Math. 10. 16.
Luke 10. 3. Act. 8. 32. And (...)
Christ, though he use two words, yet does not make any such difference. For
the two words to feed, are applied also indifferently to either of them. So
that taking sheep for the Apostles, Peter must not only rule as they would
have it, but also teach the Apostles: when Apostles are all immediately from
Christ, and taught of Christ, and by his holy Spirit, Galat. 1. 1, 12. and
needed no instruction from man in the work of the Ministry, Math. 10. 20.
Ioh. 14. 26. and 16. 13. Thus we see, there is not the least footing in any
word of this Text, for Peter's Supremacy above all other, on which yet they
settle it. But if here Peter's Supremacy could be proved, yet what is this to
the Pope? He feeds not by preaching Christ's Lambs: but rules, or rather
rauages like a roaring Lion, over Christ's Sheep: he is like a Lamb, but
speaks like the Dragon, Revel. 13.

Lastly, that here is no Headship given to Peter, it appears in verse 17.
where it is said, that, upon Christ's third time questioning him, he was
grieved. Now, may we reasonably suppose, if Peter had conceived of Christ's
words, as Popes do, that a Supremacy was therein bestowed upon him, that he
would have been grieved? Do men grieve at high preferments offered,
especially having contended for the same, as the Apostles had done? Who sees
not therefore, that Peter perceived no such glorious preferment, nor high
Dignity, out of any thing that Christ here spoke, as our Adversaries do? From
all this it is clear, that Peter from hence has no Headship above others.

XX. Proposition. That Peter was the only Vicar of Christ here on Earth:
Confuted by their own Bible.
FOr Vicaradge unto Christ properly so taken, it teaches us, That Jesus
Christ, going out of the world, promised to substitute in his room, not any
Peter, nor any man, but such a one as could be every where with his Church, in
his bodily absence, which was his holy Spirit, Ioh. 15. 26. and 16. 7. And by
this would he be ever with them, Math. 28. 19, 20. and 18. 20. to remember
them of all things, Ioh. 14. 26. to guide them, Ioh. 16. 13. and to dwell with
them, Ioh. 14 17. Romans 8. 9. which a Peter could not do.

Secondly, it tells us, that according to this promise, when Christ ascended,
he sent down his Spirit, Act. 2. by which Gods people are still guided and
taught, Romans 8. 1, 5, 9. 11, 14, 26. 1. Cor. 2. 10, 12. 1. Ioh. 2. 20, 27.
which bears witness to our spirits, that we are Gods children, Romans 8. 16.
Gal. 4. 6. by which we are sealed to eternal life, 2. Cor. 1. 12. Ephesians. 1.
13.

Thirdly, it declares unto us, that when Christ ascended, he was mindful of
his Church, and gave gifts unto men: Some, to Ephesians. 4. 12.
be Apostles; some, Prophets; some, Evangelists; some, Pastors, and Teachers:
but among these, no one general Vicar, or Head over all. If there had been
such a one, Paul had as good reason to have mentioned him, as the rest. But his
Vicar general was Gods Spirit, and no man. And note, that the Apostle shows a
threefold use of these aforementioned. 1. For that they were the consummation of
the Saints. 2. For the work of the Ministry. 3. For the edifying of the body
of Christ.

Now, if a general visible Vicar on earth had served for any of these
purposes, he had been given of Christ: but he needed not, and therefore this
needless gift was not given to any.

As for a supply of Instructers, Guides, and Lights in the Church Militant, we
deny not, but Christ has left many Vicars, and does still send daily
Ambassadors to his Church, to reconcile us to God. And so our Bishops, and
other Ministers of the Church, by the Keys of power and knowledge, open the
way of Heaven to Christian people, which they do in Christ's stead, and therein
are his Vicars, or Deputies, lawfully called. But this Vicaradge is too small a
portion for Sir Pope.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Tertul. de violand. Virgin. The Lord sent the Holy Ghost, that man's
mediocritie, not being capable of all things at one time, might by little and
little be directed, orderly disposed, and brought to perfection, by that Vicar
his holy Spirit. Also in his Book, de praescript. he says, that Christ taken
up into heaven, sent the power of his holy Spirit, as his Vicar, to conduct the
faithful. We see in these days, who was held the Vicar of Christ.

Gainesaid by their own men.
Aquinas in Opusc. 20. calls all the Apostles the Vicars of Christ.

Tolet. in Ioh. 20. 21. says, that Christ instituted his Apostles, his Vicars.
How then was Peter his Vicar? for their cannot be a Vicars Vicar. If Peter was
then the Vicar of Christ, they could not be Vicars too; and, by these men's
testimony, they being Vicars, he was not Christ's only Vicar.

Now then I conclude, that if Peter was not the Prince of the Apostles, nor the
Head of the Church, nor Christ's only general Vicar here on earth, then the
Pope cannot possibly be any of these. For he claims all from Peter, as being
his only successor. Therefore Peter never having these from Christ, as is
fully proved, the Pope cannot have them. But if it could be proved, that Peter
had all these (which yet is most false:) what were that to the Pope: by what
right could he claim them? when all the Papists in the world are not able, by
undeniable arguments, to prove; 1. That Peter was ever (after he was Christ's
See my Book: The fabulous foundation of the Popedom
Disciple) personally at Rome. 2. That albeit he had been at Rome, therefore
(already being an Apostle) he was the Bishop of Rome, an inferior Dignity.
3. That whatsoever was given to Peter, the same was also given to the Pope,
successively to the worlds end. 4. That the Pope is truly Peter's successor,
both in Doctrine, and life. 5. That these last Popes, for many hundred years,
are one and the same with the Bishops of Rome in the first three hundred of
years, for Doctrine and conversation, following Peter therein. Till these be
proved soundly, though Peter had been, that which they strive to make him: yet
is the Pope never the better; but a proud and an arrogant usurper of Titles and
Authority not due to him.

XXI. Proposition. That the Public service of the Church ought not to be in a
vulgar and known Tongue:
Confuted by their own Bible.
1. Cor. 14. 9. So thou also by a tongue, unless thou utter a manifest Speech,
how shall that be known which is said, for thou shall but speak in the Air?
This is a plain condemning of speaking in a tongue not manifest, not
understood of the Hearers.

2. Cor. 1. 13. We write no other things to you, then that you have read, and
know. They then knew what they read, whether private, or public, Ephesians. 3. 4.
According as thou reading, may understand. Reading the Scriptures is a part
of the public Liturgy or service.


1. These. 5. 27. I adjure you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read to all
the holy Brethren. If it had been in an unknown Tongue, it had been in vain
to have been read unto all the brethren; and it had been to no purpose thus to
adjure them.

Act. 1. 14. All these were perseuering in one mind, in Prayer, and with one
accord, Act. 4. 24. This was Public Prayer. But if they understood not what
was prayed: how could they be of one mind and accord?

S. Paul wills us to pray and sing with understanding, 1. Cor. 14. 15. and
says plainly, that if men bless, that is, pray in an unknown tongue, the
vulgar cannot say, Amen. And he gives this Reason, because he knows not
what thou say, neither is edified, verse 16, 17.

In their Bible, mention is made: First, of Prayer in the Congregation, Act.
12. 12. and 4. 24. and 13. 3. and 16. 13, 16. and 20. 36. and 21. 5. Secondly,
of reading the Scriptures, Coloss. 4. 16. The parts of the public Service of
the Church in the Apostles days.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 27. Thirdly, of preaching, Act. 9. 20. and 20. 7. Fourthly, of
singing, Math. 26. 30. 1. Cor. 14. Fifthly, of administering the holy Sacraments;
of Baptism, Act. 10. and of the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 10. and 11. Let our
Adversaries show, if they be able, that these parts of the public service were
done in an unknown tongue.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Origin. cont. Cells. l. 8. Let every man make his prayer to God in his native
Mother tongue.

Austin. Tract in Johan. 21. Why are these things spoken in the Sea more in l.
4. ^. 10. de doct. Christ and lib. ^4. c. 16. de Trunt (...) 18. ^ 4^.
Church, but to be known? Why are they pronounced, but to be heard? And why
are they heard, but to be understood? And on Genesis l. 12. cap. 8. Noman (says
he) is edified by hearing that which he understands not.

Ambr. in cap. 14. 1. Epist. ad Cor. If we come together (says he) to edify
the Church, those things ought to be spoken, which the hearers understand.

Chrysostom. hom. 35. in 1. Cor. He that speaks in an unknown tongue, is not
only unprofitable, and a Barbarian to others, but even to himself, if he
understand not.

In Hom. 18. on 2. Cor. He tells us, that the Priests and the people say the
same common prayers, and all do say one thing.

S. Basil. Epist. 63. tells, how, that in his time, when they met together,
they used a known language.

In the purest Churches, for the space of eight hundred years, Divine Service
was never performed in an unknown tongue. And if it were at any time, in a
tongue not the Mother tongue, yet was not that tongue a strange language, but
such as the hearers understood. See for this point Master Perkins Problem.

If any desire any more of this, let him read Doctor Fulk on Rhem. Testament,
1. Cor. 14. Doctor White his last Book of this point, page 369. who eiteth
Origin, Justin Martyr, Tertul. Clemens Alexand. Cyprian, Basil, Chrysostom,
Ambrose, and Augustine; with their own words against this absurd practice of
Papists. See also, page 375. in the Margin: and 380.

Gainesaid by themselves.
Aeneas Syluius, who after was Pope, in hist Bohem. cap. 13. faith, that when
suit was made, that the Slauonians newly converted to the faith, might have
their Church-seruice in their Mother Tongue, and there being some stay about it
at Rome, a voice was heard from Heaven, saying, That every spirit should praise
the Lord, and every tongue should confess unto him: So the controversy is
determined by an immediate voice from heaven.

The Lateran Council, under Innocent the third, chap. 9. decreed, by reason of
mingled Nations of diverse tongues, in one City, that meet men should be
provided to celebrate Divine service, and to administer the Sacraments,
according to the diversity of their Rites, and languages.

Lyra, on 1. Cor. 14. says, that if the people understood the prayers of the
Priest, they were better brought unto God, and so answer Amen more devoutly.

And Caietan on the same, says, it were better for the Churches edification,
that prayers should be said in the Mother tongue.

Many learned Papists, as Lyra, Thomas Aquinas, this Caietan on this 1. Cor.
14. and Erasmus in Declarat, ad Cens. page 153. confess, that in the Primitive
Church, and long after, the Prayers and Service were done in the Mother Tongue.
See D. Whites last book, page 356. mentioning Armenians, Abissines, Indians,
Russians, Egyptians, proved by Papists themselves.


And Cassander, Liturg. cap. 28. shows, that diverse Nations, to this day,
retain the ancient custom still. Thus we see their own Bible, the ancient
Fathers, their own Councels and learned men, are against this absurd, and
unreasonable custom, of having Service in an unknown tongue. God gave
diversity of tongues to his Apostles, and they spoke in them all, Act. 2. and
the hearers heard them speak to them therein. What lets, but that in
praying, reading singing, and administering of the Sacraments, we should use
every tongue, according to every Nation; seeing every Language was given by the
Holy Ghost, to publish the Gospel therein?

Scriptures objected, answered.
Luke 1. 8. Zachary burnt incense within, and the whole multitude was praying
without, at the time of the incense.

Answ. 1. Here is not a word of the Priests speaking in any language at all, to
the People: neither was he here, to say any service, but to burn incense.

Secondly, if he had said Service, the People could not hear him: For he was
in the Temple, they a great way off, in the out-Court. Leu. 16. 17.
What is this to Latin Service? Or saying it in any language? except they
hence will conclude, that because the Priest said nothing, and the People could
not hear him; that now the Priest may speak in what language either he will,
or can speak, when none is near him, but all far enough from hearing what
he says. And then who shall help the poor man to say his Mass? Is this
their authority for their Latin Service? Shame light on such, as so abuse
Scripture, to keep poor people in ignorance.

Nehem. 8. 8. Here would they prove that the Scriptures were read in an
unknown Tongue to the People, that is, in the Hebrew Tongue, which the People
now, after seventy years captivity, understood not.

Answ. 1. It is untrue, that the people assembled, were ignorant of the Hebrew
tongue. For most of the Congregation were such as were before carried captive,
and were now returned from thence, Esd. 2. 1, 42, 65. and 3. 12. who had not
lost their language, Nehem. 13. 24. As for that, where it is said, they made
the People understand the reading, it is not meant of the language and words,
but of the sense and meaning thereof.

Secondly, grant that now they had forgotten the language, and had now the
Scriptures in no other tongue: will it follow, that what they had of
necessity, the Church now needs must be enforced to, when there is no cause?

Thirdly, this Language was the holy Tongue, in which the Scriptures were
written, and once their own Mother tongue: must therefore a strange tongue,
and wherein the Penmen of Scripture never wrote, be thrust upon all Nations,
as the only tongue to say Service in?

Fourthly, as yet the Holy Ghost had not sanctified all languages, as he did
in coming down upon the Apostles, after Christ's Ascension, Act. 2. but now
he has. And therefore in every tongue, he is to be preached, prayed unto,
and praifed. See before, how to answer this place, in the end of the fifth
Proposition.

XXII. Proposition. That Images are to be in Churches, and that not only for
instruction, but also to be adored:
Confuted by their own Bible.
1. IT does forbid them, Deuteronomy. 4. 23. where is forbidden the making of a graven
similitude: which Moses says is a forgetting of the Covenant. And in verse 15.
he says, You saw no similitude in that day. And a reason is given, Lest
perhaps deceived, you might make you a graven similitude, or Image. Here the
drawing of any similitude of God is utterly condemned. So in Romans 1. 23.

Exodus 20. 4. Thou shall not make to thee a graven thing, nor any similitude,
etc. thou shall not adore them, nor serve them.

Here is not only a graven thing, but any similitude forbidden, without any
restriction, or exception at all, and also the adoration of them. And a reason
is in Esaias 42. 8. I will not give my glory to another, nor my praise to graven
things: neither can God be likened to any thing, or an Image be made of him,
Esaias 14. 18. and 46. 5. Act. 17. 29. Wisd. 14. 17. This commandment condemns
in matter of Religion, the making of our own heads a graven thing, and any
likeness, not only of things which be not (which they say are Idols,
representations of things which are not, false Similitudes,) but a graven
thing, and similitude of any thing which is in heaven, which is in earth, and
of things which are in the waters, to adore and serve them, Leu. 26. 1.

Secondly, their Bible lays folly to their charge, and affirms that such
are vain in their cogitations, and their fablish heart darkened, who make God
in similitude of a man, Romans 1. 21, 22, 23. This has God fearfully punished,
and that with a spiritual plague, Romans 1. 26. He is pronounced accursed, that
makes a graven and molten thing, an abomination to our Lord, the work of the
hands of Artificers, and puts it in secret (how much more openly?) to worship
it; and all the people are to say, Amen. Let them be confounded, (says the
Psalmist) that adore sculptils, Psalm. 96. 7. The Jews to this day, hate
Images: which shows, that they were taught by the Law to hate them.

Thirdly, by their Bible we learn, that this was an Heathenish practice. The
Heathen invented this making of Images of the dead, Wisd. 14. 15. They decked
them, lighted Candles before them, offered to them, Baruch 6. and worshipped
them, Wisd. 14. 17, 18. and their Priests were shaven, and beguiled the people
Baruch 6. as the shaven Priests of Rome do.

Fourthly, their own Bible tells, that no good comes thereof, but evil,
Hab. 2. 18, 19. What profits the thing engraven, that the forger thereof has
graven it a molten and a false Image? What canit teach? He tells us, that an
Image cannot teach. The Doctrine of their vanity is wood, says Jeremy, chap.
10. 8. and every Craftsman confounded in his sculptill, because it is false,
which he has melted, and there is no spirit in them. They are vain things,
and a work worthy to be laughed at, verse 14. 15. It is changing the verity of
God, into lying, Romans 1. 25. For the shadow of a Picture, is a labor without
fruit, the lovers of evil, are worthy to have their hopes in such things: both
they that make them, and that love, and that worship them, says the Author of
the Book of Wisdom, ca. 15. 4, 6.

Fifthly, by their Bible we learn, that men worshipping the work of their
own hands, they do worship idols, Devils. 1. Therein we find Heathen idols,
Devils, 1. Cor. 10. 20. representations of false gods. 2. We find the
Israelites worshipping the work of their own hands, the golden Calves, falsely
representing the True God, and these calves were idols, Act. 7. 41. and devils,
2. Chro. 11. 15. Whereby we see the representing of the True God falsely, is a
devilish idol, as well as the representing of a false god. 3. We find idols,
and so the worship of Devils among the Papists, Reu. 9. 20, 21. where the
works of men's hands, of gold, silver, brass, stone, and wood, are called
idols, and devils. But they worship the works of their hands, made of such
things; and therefore worship idols and devils. Thus God condemns Imagerie
for idols and devils. And this very place may fitly be understood of Papists.
For first these idolaters, here spoken of, are such as fall out to be under
the sixth trumpet, long after the destruction of the Heathen idolaters. 2. They
are such as be after the Star is fallen, chap. 9. 1. and become a King of the
Locusts. But what Clergy man since Christ, ever wore a Crown, but the Pope?
3. They are such, as those great Armies, verse 16. were raised up to plague,
for their idolatry. But what can these be, but Turks, the scourge of Popish
idolaters, and idolatrous Christians? 4. They are such as ouer-ranne the true
Religion, so as Christ sends out his Word to recover his from under this
idolatry, and from among them, chap. 10. 11. But who have spread their idols
over the Church? Not Jews, nor Turks, but Papists. And has not Christ sent
out his Word to regaine his from among them? 5. And lastly, the words, chap. 9.
20, 21. do set out Papists. 1. They repented not of the works of their hands,
when they saw the Easteme Churches overthrown by the Turks for their
idolatry, after the second Nicene Council there establishing it. 2. These
committed Murders, Sorceries, Fornication, and Thefts. And do not all know
how these reign among Papists? For murders, their massacres of Christians, and
unheard of cruelties upon poor Indians, many millions witness them. For
Sorceries, is not spiritual Babylon, that is, Rome, full thereof, chap. 18.
23? Rome now is that Whore, drunk with blood, chap. 17. which deceived the
Nations by her Sorceries, chap. 18. 23. For her Fornication, she is called the
Mother of whoredoms, chap. 17. And do not her Stews witness it? What shall
I speak, how under color of vowed poverty, by Dispensations, Pardons,
Indulgences, she robbed every Kingdom? Therefore these are Papists,
worshipping idols, and devils, and cannot so well be applied to any other
under heaven, all the former circumstances seriously and thoroughly weighed. See
B. Carleton his Book of Thanksgiving, how he presses this text upon Papists.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Tertul. de idolat. God has forbidden both the making, and worshipping of an
Idol. Now, by Idol, he means every form or representation, as himself there
says, and that the consecration of Images is Idolatry.

Epiphanius. The superstition of Images is unfit for the Church of Christ. He,
seeing an Image in a Church, tare it in sunder; he also exhotred to bring no
Images into the Churches, as an horrible wickedness: yea, though it were the
Picture of Christ himself.

Lactantius says, Out of doubt there is no Religion, where there is an Image.

Gregory, the Bishop of Neocaesaria, says, Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 6. that
Heathenisme was the first deviser and head of Images.

Enseb. l. 7. c. 17. calls it an heathenish custom.

Origin against Celsus. Common sense does will men to think, that God is not
delighted with honor of Images made by men. And of his own time he says
thus, We worship no Images.

In Saint Austins time, it is clear by that which he writes, on Psalm. 113.
that there were no Images in Churches.

The Council at Eliberis or Granada in Spain decreed, that nothing which is
honored of the people, should be painted in the Churches.

The first and sixth Constantinopolitan Council held against Images, that it
was not lawful, either to have the Images of Saints, or to worship them: And
if any from that time, durst make, or adore them, in the Church or at home, if
of the Clergy, he was to be deposed; if of the Laity, accursed.

The general Council, by the Commandment of the Apostolic See at
Franckford, under Charles the great, where the Popes Legates were, condemned
the worship of Images. Abb. Vsperg. Anno 793. Rhegino. Anno 794. Opus illustr.
Caroli. Mag. contra Synod. p. 486. l. 4. c. 2. See Alan. Cope dial. 4. cap. 18.

The Ancient Christians of the Primitive Church had none.

Clem. Alexand. hort. ad Gent. page 14.

Minutius Foelix Octau. Atheuag. Legate.

Athanasius against the Gentiles says, If a living man cannot teach thee to
know God, how can a carved stock and a stone do it, that is dead?

Gregory, Bishop of Rome, lib 7. Epist. 109. commends the zeal of Serenus a
Bishop in France, who would have nothing made with hands, worshipped; and
therefore brake the Images: which act though Gregory commended not, yet he
would have him keep the people from the worship of them. The Bishop of
Orleance ( Jonas lib. 1. de cultis Imag.) professed his detestation against the
worship of Images, and held the doers worthy to be cursed.

Bishop Durandin Rational. lib. 1. cap. 3. and Catharin. tract. de cult. Imag.
think their use to be dangerous.

Gainesaid by themselves.
Polydor. Virgil. lib. 6. cap. 13. de invent. rerum, writes, that by the
testimony of Jerome it appears, how in a manner all the ancient holy Fathers
condemned the worship of Images, for fear of idolatry.

Erasmus in Catechis. says, that by the testimony of sound and approved
Stories it is clear, that till Ieromes time, such as were of sound Religion,
would endure no image, either painted, or graven, to be set up in the Churches,
no not the image of Christ himself.

Holcot. in lib. Sap. lect. 7. says, that no adoration is due to any Image,
and that it is not lawful to adore any Image.

Agobardus B. of Lions, who lived in Anno 815. says, ( in Bibl. Paetrum)
Whosoever worshippeth a Picture, molten or graven Statue, worships an Idol, not
God, nor Saint, nor Angel. See Roger Houeden, part. 1. Annal. fol. 272. where
he shows how the Church of God detested the Decree of the 2. Nicene about
worship of Images.

Aquinas, Hales, Albertus, Bonauenture, Marsilius, and nine more, cited by D.
White, in his last Book, page 209. do hold, that Adoration of Images was
prohibited the Jews. Then such places as be alleged for Images in the Old
Testament by our modern Papists, are but abused.

Bannes in Tho. 229. par. 10. page 170. says, that the worship of the Images
of Saints, is neither expressly, nor vnfoldedly taught in holy Scriptures. All
Scriptures therefore alleged, are but abusiuely alleged to beguile the simple.

Scriptures objected answered.
1. For making Images to be worshipped.

Exo. 25. 18. And thou shall make two Cherubims, etc.

Ans. This is no warrant now for us. For we have a perpetual law forbidding
the making of Images and likenesses, Exodus 20. to worship them, Leu. 26. 1.
This binds us for ever. But God is not bound: he makes a Law for us, not to
himself. And this commandment which he gave, was extraordinary, for a time,
and therefore not imitable of us, no more then his command to Abraham to kill
his son; or to Israel, to rob the Egyptians, are to be warrants for us, to
kill, or rob any.

2. This was not done before they had received this commandment. When we have
such a command, then have we authority so to do. But till then, we must
make no Images to worship them.

3. This is of making Cherubims: and is no warrant for picturing men and women,
or the holy Trinity.

4. After what fashion they were made, is not showed. For the conceit, that
they were made with faces of beautiful young men, is uncertain, seeing they
appeared in vision otherwise, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 2.
Ezekiel. 1. and 10.

5. These were in the Sanctum Sanctorum, into which only the High Priest came,
and that but once a year; the people saw none of these, nor were they to be
worshipped by any. What is this then for making Images openly for the people in
Churches, to be adored by the people?

1. King. 6. 35. And he carved thereon Cherubims, etc.

Answ. 1. Solomon did herein nothing of his own head, but had a pattern to
follow in every thing, 1. Chro. 28. 11, 12, 19. 2. Chron. 3. 3. Let them show
such a warrant from Christ.

2. These were not seen to the people, being in the inner Court, 1. King. 6.
27. into which only the Priests came.

3. This was a special commandment, only for the use of the Temple, which
being temporary, for the time of the Ceremonial Law, what warrant is this to
us?

4. We must remember the Moral Law, Thou shall not make, etc. This ever binds
us; we may not take upon us of our own Authority to make Images.

Heb. 9. 1, 5. The first covenant had ordinances of divine service, and a
worldly Sanctuary, and over it the Cherubims of glory, shadowing the
Mercy-Seat.

Answ. The Author of the Gag would hence prove the Cherubims to be an ordinance
of divine service, and allowed for us to follow. But he was grazing in so
thinking. For all the building was called a secular Sanctuary: but we are a
spiritual building, 1. Pet. 25. We therefore are to take heed of such Jewish
ordinances, and rudiments of the world, Col. 2. weak and poor elements, as
the Apostle is bold to call them, Gal. 4. 9.

Numb. 21. 8. Make a brazen Serpent, and set it for a sign.

Answ. 1. This had a special warrant for the making. Neither Moses nor Aaron
durst invent it of themselves. This being a special and extraordinary
commandment, is not of us to be imitated, against a perpetual precept, Exodus
20.

Secondly, this was made, not to be worshipped, but to be a typical and
operative sign, as the event teaches.

Thirdly, this had a miraculous effect by Gods divine power; a promise annexed
to it of life, to every one bitten, that looked upon it, Numb. 21. 9. being a
lively type of Christ, Ioh. 3. 14.

Fourthly, this was abroad in the Camp; set on a pole, not in the Tabernacle.
What is this to Images in the Churches?

Fifthly, this was an Images of a Serpent. Is it fit to set up such in Churches
to adore them?

Sixthly, Hezekiah, 2. King. 18. 4. did, among other defacings of Idolatries,
break in pieces this Brazen Serpent: for that the people burnt incense to it.
And the use being past, and a foul abuse crept in, in contempt he called it
Nehushtan, a piece of brass.

Math. 22. 20. This place speaks of an Image upon a piece of coin. What Is
this to Images set up in Churches? We do not deny but such Images for civil
use may be made. And I think that Image-mongers love well these stamped
Images, and get many of them by their graven Images.

Exodus 31. 2. and 35. 30. God bestowedon Bezaleel and his fellow, wisdom,
understanding, and knowledge, to carue, grave, and paint.

Answ. We approve of the Art, and the use thereof to the right end, as of God:
and that to make such Images as God commanded them, to be in the Tabernacle.
But Gods furnishing them for his special service then, is no warrant for any
man now, to abuse his skill, now to make Imagery in Churches, contrary to Gods
moral precept, Exodus 20.

Genesis 28. 13. Exo. 33. Esa. 6. Amos 9. Dan. 7. All these places show how God
appeared: and there is ascribed to him eyes, hands, and face; and therefore may
God be pictured.

Answ. 1. Howsoever it pleased God to appear, and set out himself to us; yet
he has plainly forbidden us to set out any similitude of him, Deuteronomy. 4. 15,
23.

Secondly, the ancient Prophets, and people of God never made any such use
hereof.

Agrippa told Caligula, that the Temple never admitted any Image made with
hands, and said farther, Our forefathers have holden it a thing unlawful, to
paint or carue him that is invisible. Philo. Iud. de Legate. ad Caium. But if
they had learned this Popish Divinity, as lawful from such apparitions, and
from such ascribing of parts of man's body to him, they would have done it.

Thirdly, Saint Austin de fide and Symbolo. cap. 7. says, To form an Image of
God, is abominable.

In Gregory the seconds time, Anno 726. in an Epistle to Leo Isauricus, it is
said, they used not to paint, or represent God the Father.

The sixth general Council holden, Anno 687. Can. 28. forbids Caranz. ibid.
the making of the holy Ghost in the form of a Dove: yet he so appeared. Those
Fathers had not yet learned this Popish Doctrine.

Durand calls it a foolery (he might better have said, an horrible
impiety,) to make or adore an Image of the Trinity, in 3. did. 9. q. 2. Many
Papists hold it unlawful to paint the holy Trinity.

Caietan, Catharinus, Diegus, Abulensis, Peresius, and others.

Fourthly, if God may be so pictured, as he by apparitions or words sets
himself forth; we should have represented to our senses, a very abominable
Idol, in such variety of parts and fashions, as it should be a very Idolatrous
Monster; a picture of that which is not, which they themselves say is an Idol,
and so forbidden.

Fifthly, howsoever God did appear: yet was he never seen, Ioh. 1. 18. 1. Tim.
6. 16. Moses could not see his face, and live, Exodus 33. 20. For Gods speaking
to him face to face, is expounded of a familiar manner, as a man speaks to
his friend, as is there in the Text. How can he be truly pictured that never
was seen, nor can be seen?

Sixthly, though he might be pictured as he appeared: yet the popish picture is
an abominable idol: for no where ever appeared he like an old side-bearded man,
with three crowns, yea, and sometime with three faces, sitting on a fear, with
his Son before him, and a Dove over his head. This childish baby, or rather
Idol, is their own invention.

For the worship of Images.
Exodus 3. 5. Put off thy Shoes, etc.

Answ. 1. Here is no Image.

2. The ground was holy in respect of Gods presence: yet did not Moses fall
down to adore the ground, but stood up. But Papists will have men to fall
down before Images.

Thirdly, Moses was here forewarned of Gods presence, and holiness of the
ground. Let them prove to us by Gods own voice, as here, that their Images are
holy, and that Gods presence is in them. And yet for all that, will not this
procure adoration to them, no more then Moses adored the earth.

Fourthly, this place, if Images were holy, should rather keep us from them,
then make us come to them. For it is said, Approach not, or come not hither;
loose off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand, is
holy ground. Its therefore rather against going to Images, then to go to
worship them.

Ador^ ^^e the footstool of his feet. Understood (say they) of the Arc, 1.
Chron. 28. 2. Which was worshipped of the Jews, in regard of the Images set
upon it.

Answ. Understanding this footstool of the Arc, as they say; it will help
nothing their worship of Images.

For first, the Arc was of Gods own appointment to be made for manner, matter,
and end, Exodus 25. 9. but so be not their Images.

Secondly, the Arc is called his footstool. But Images are not so called:
neither claims he them for his.

Thirdly, God promised his presence with the Arc, Exodus 25. 22. But where is
his promise to be with their Images?

Fourthly, the Arc was not an Image. What is this then to an Image?

Fifthly, the Arc was in the most holy place, into which none could enter but
the High Priests. Therefore the people could not adore it, but a far off, as
being in the out-Court, without any sight thereof. Now, their Images are near,
and in the peoples view; and not only where the High Priest of Rome comes. If
they will have Images, as the Arc, then let his High Priestship keep them in
his most holy Chapel for himself, and let them be for him only, as the most
Holy was for the high Priest.

Sixthly, by the Arkes being in so remote a place, its clear, that the words
must be translated, Adore ye toward his footstoele, as in 1. King. 8. 44.
Pray toward the holy City, and the house which he had chosen. And then the
Arc was not adored, but God, it being the sign of Gods presence, before which
they worshipped, 1. Sam. 1. 19.

Seventhly, if it was worshipped because of the Images upon it, then was it
only worshipped in the Sanctum Sanctorum. For there the Cherubims were spread
over it, and not elsewhere; and then only the High Priest adored it: for he
only saw the Images over it. And then this Text seems to speak, not to all,
but to him. What is this to the peoples worshipping of Images?

Eighthly, and lastly, it is untrue, to say the Jews worshipped it, because of
the Images on it. For first, they neither did, nor could ever see any Image
upon it. Secondly, we read of the Arc, brought forth; in their iourneyings
in the wilderness; so in going over Jordan; also into the Camp of Israel, 1.
Sam. 4. 5. and at other times: but we never read of any that did worship it.
But if this had been a commandment here, surely there would have been some
example of adoring it. Thirdly, they were commanded to worship God, Deuteronomy. 6.
13. and 10. 20. but no where to worship any other thing. Fourthly, how could it
be, that they worshipped the Arc, because of the Images upon it; when the
angels, which by the Images were represented, were not adored of them? Would
they worship the Image, and not the things themselves? For as Origin says, No
Contr. Cells. lib. 5.
man adored the heavenly Angels, which did submit himself to the Law of Moses.

Phil. 2. 10. At the name of Jesus, etc.

Answ. 1. Here is no Image mentioned. What is this to Saints worship, and their
Images? For this Text speaks of Jesus, our Lord and Savior Christ, because we
must bow down to him the Son of God, one person God and Man, when we do
make mention of his name: Will it follow therefore, that we should do so to
dead Images.

XXIII. Proposition. That the Lords Supper is to be administered to the people
in one kind only:
Confuted by their own Bible.
1. IT teaches us, that Christ, instituting this his last Supper, administered
it in both kinds: giving a commandment to take and eat, and also to drink,
Mat. 26. 26, 27. Luke 20. 20.

Secondly, the Apostle Saint Paul, repeating the institution, mentions both
the Bread, and the Chalice, 1. Cor. 11. 24, 25. And first he tells them, that
this he received of the Lord. Secondly, that he delivered the same unto them,
verse 23. Thirdly, he, in verse 28. plainly prescribes the eating of the
Bread, and drinking of the Chalice; and that to every one that comes
prepared, and proves himself, saying, Let him eat of that bread, and drink
of that Chalice. Out of which place it is evident, that the drinking of the
Chalice is of equal extent with the duty of proving our selves, before we
come unto this Sacrament. But the duty is general and belongs unto all
indifferently. The drinking of the Chalice therefore may not be denied unto any.

Thirdly, the Church then in his days did receive it in both kinds, 1. Cor.
11. 26. For it is said there, So often as you shall eat this bread, and drink
this Chalice, you shall show the death of our Lord until he come. By both
they show his death. And this place shows clearly that so often as they
received, they did eat the Bread, and drink the Chalice.

Fourthly, the Apostles and Ministers of Christ did administer in both. For the
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10. 16. The Chalice of benediction, which we do bless,
is it not the communication of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we
break, is it not the participation of the body of the Lord? Here the Apostle
first mentions both the Chalice and Bread. Secondly, by the word we, he
understands himself and other, which did bless the Chalice, and break the
Bread. Thirdly, he says, that by the Chalice we communicate of Christ's blood;
and by the bread, we participate of his body: and not by one of them, of them
both. Saint Paul would have Christ's blood out of his body in the Against
concomitancy. See D. White his last book, page 460, 466.
Chalice represented, and not by the bread only both his body and blood.
Fourthly, Christ is perfect food: we must therefore eat him, and drink him.
Drink alone preserues not life, nor only to eat; but both to eat and
drink; therefore Christ instituted both to be received. If the Adversaries say
that this receiving was of the Apostles, and as they by consequent would See an
answer to this there also. page 488, 489, 492.
infer of Priests only, which may receive in both kinds, but not the Laity:

I answer, first that the Apostles, receiving the Sacrament from Christ, were
then and there for the whole Church. They received alone, because they were
Christ's family, to receive together the Passover.

Secondly, the Apostles were not as yet fully ordained, till Christ breathed on
them after his Resurrection, Ioh. 20. 21. as some even of Papists affirm.

Thirdly, if, because they only were present at the institution, they
therefore should only receive in both kinds: then what warrant have they to
admit any, but Priests, to the Lords Supper? What warrant to admit women to it,
so much as to receive the bread? Yea, why are any Laymen admitted to the
bread, or to the Sacrament at all? for no Lay persons did receive with the
Apostles, no not Christ's Mother.

Fourthly, touching the 1. Cor. 10. 16. there is (under the word we) meant the
Apostles, and other Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, that they blessed and
brake, that is, consecrated and administered the Lords Supper unto other, to
wit, the Laity. For in verse 21. he plainly shows how the Corinthians did
drink of the Chalice, and did partake of the Table of the Lord, though they
could not receive worthily so doing, if they went unto the Idol Temples. Thus
are they confuted by their own Bible.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Ignatius in Epist. 6. ad Philadelp. gives us to understand, that in his time,
the Cup was divided to the whole Church.

Justin. Martyr, Apol. 2. tells us, that it was the manner of the whole
Congregation, to receive both the Bread and Wine.

The first Council of Nice, speaking of the holy Table, mentions both the
Bread and Cup.

Theophyl. on 1. Cor. 11. says, that the Cup was in like manner delivered unto
all. See more for this, Athanasius 2. Apolog. Chrysostom Hom. 27. in 1. Cor.
and Ambrose in 1. Cor. 11. Cyprian in 2. Epist. ad Cornelium, in Epist. 63. and
54. Cyril Catech. mystag. 5. Augustine in Ioh. tract. 27. Tertul. deresurrect.
Clem. Alexand. 2. pedagog. cap. 2. See Doctor White his last Book, page 482.
citing Just. Martyr, Chrysostom. Haymo. Answ. to Fisher


Gainesaid by themselves.
Gelasius the Pope, decret. part. 3. did. 2. ca. comperimus, calls it a fond
superstition to abstain from the Cup: and satih, that such a division cannot
be done without great sacrilege.

Alex. Hales, 4. q. Art. 2. says, that whole Christ is not contained under
each kind, by way of Sacrament, but only his flesh under form of Bread, and
his blood under the form of Wine: and that there is more power of grace in
Communion in both kinds, then in one, q. 11. in 2. Art. 4, 5, 3.

Lorichius lib. 5. Hospinian. calls them false Catholics, which hinder
reformation of this point.

The Church of Rome for above a thousand years after Christ, used both the
kinds in administering this Sacrament. See this at large proved by Master
Perkins, in his demonstratiue of the Problem out of Papists themselves.

To which add the opinion in this point of receiving in both kinds, Lyra in 1.
Cor. 11. Durand. in national. lib. 4. also Greg. de Valentia de legit. vsu
Enchar. cap. 10. who confesses, that the custom began, not much before the
Council of Constance. Caietan. 3. part. Thom. q. 80. Art. 12. q. 3. Ouand. 4.
p. 221. See Doctor White, page 497.
Fisher the Jesuit acknowledges the Lay people in the Primitive Church, to
have frequently received in both kinds.

Scriptures objected, answered.
Ioh. 6. 51. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, and the
bread which I will give him, is my flesh.

Answ. 1. This is not spoken of the Sacrament. For first, Christ So hold many
Papists, Doctor White, page 495
had not as yet instituted it. Secondly, he speaks of spiritual bread, then
present, I am the living Bread, in the former part of the verse: to which the
relation is in these words here, This bread, to wit, himself, the living
Bread; I am the bread of life, says he, verse 48. The Sacramental bread was
not as yet, when thus he spoke. Thirdly, the bread here was that, which (when
he spoke) came down from heaven, verse 50. 58. But the bread which Christ
administered at his last Supper, never came from heaven. Fourthly, this bread
whosoever eats, makes him that eats it, to live for ever: but so does not the
Sacramental bread which may be eaten by the wicked. Fifthly, he himself
expounds what he means by this Bread, even his own flesh, which he gives
for the life of the world, and which he did give upon the Cross. But the
Sacramental bread is not his own flesh. As for that error of
transubstantiation, the vanity of it shall be confuted in the next question.
Sixthly, if this be spoken of the Sacrament, then all that receive it not, have
no life in them, verse 53. as Infants, and other, before they come to ripe age:
which they will not affirm. And yet will it undeniably follow, if this be
properly meant of the Sacrament.

II. If it were granted, that Christ spoke here of the Sacrament, which he
would institute: yet this place helps not our Adversaries, but rather makes
hue and cry after their the every, for presuming to rob the people of the Cup.
For first, in verse. 53. Christ plainly says, Unless ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. And in
verse 54. he says, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has
everlasting life. So he binds life to both, and secludeth life from such as
receive not both. Secondly, therefore both being so necessary, it follows,
that when he only mentions the eating of bread, there is a figure, one part
for both. Else should the divine Oracles of our Savior thwart one the other,
in pressing both eating and drinking, affirmatively, to the obtaining of life,
in receiving both; and negatiuely, to loss of life, in not receiving both.
Thirdly, Christ goes about to declare himself to be sufficient food for the
life of his, which believe in him. Now, a man cannot live by only eating, nor
only drinking, but by both. Therefore, says he, My flesh is meat indeed, and
my blood is drink indeed, verse 55. He says not, that his flesh is both meat
and drink. He knew that his body had flesh and blood: yet he wills to eat,
and drink. Now, the flesh is to be eaten, and the blood to be drunk. In
eating his flesh, we cannot be said to drink his blood. For that which is to
be eaten, cannot be said to be drunken too; these being two distinct and
differing actions, for two things. If one would have served, the urging of two
had been needless. Fourthly and lastly, he mentions Bread, not to exclude
Wine; and eating, not to exclude drinking: but because he had spoken of Manna,
the Israelites bread in the Wilderness, and so called himself Bread, keeping
the subject and occasion of which he had begun to speak. So in Ioh. 4.
speaking with the Woman of Samaria, occasioned by the drawing of water out of
the Well, he promises to give her water to drink. Would any therefore hence
conclude, that only water were sufficient, and no need of eating bread? As we
cannot conclude so, from the one, no more can we from the other.

Luke 24. 30, 35. He took bread, blessed, and brake, and did reach to them.

Answ. 1. This is not meant of administration of the Sacrament. Christ once did
institute and administer it, but no more for ought we find. For note here:
first, that the two Disciples went into a common Inn, to take their ordinary
food, at night, where they meant to have lodged; they met not together for the
Sacrament.

Secondly, it was in the night time, no necessity urging for the Sacrament.
The Passover was already past, which was indeed received in the Evening.

Thirdly, he sat down at a common table with them, verse 30. If this were the
Sacrament: then why speak our Adversaries of an holy Altar, and a holy place?
For here, the place was an Inn; the Table, a common board, for ordinary
repast.

Fourthly, they came not prepared to the Sacrament; they sat down after a
common manner, to eat common meat.

Fifthly, he had not revealed himself unto them, neither knew they what he was.
Is it likely, that he would so suddenly deliver the Sacrament? or they be so
careless of right receiving Gods holy Sacrament, that they would, without
knowledge of him, what he was, and what he went about, admit him to administer
the Sacrament to them? For they knew him not, but in breaking the bread; in the
time of that Act, and not before. As if Christ would steal upon them with the
holy Sacrament, and make them know him in the administration, and not before?
Is this likely?

Sixthly, here is no mention of the word of Institution, This is my body: which
being left out, makes the breaking of the bread to be no Sacrament.

Seventhly, here is neither holy prayers before, nor after, nor any other holy
duty mentioned, fit to be performed at so holy an action.

Eighthly, these knew him only by breaking of bread, verse 35. but this must
be understood of his ordinary breaking of bread, blessing, and distributing,
as he did in Math. 14. 19. which these Disciples saw. But for his blessing of
the Sacrament, and breaking of the bread, these two men had not as yet seen.
For only the twelve Apostles were there then, and not any of the seventy
Disciples, of which were these two. How then could they know him by such an Act
as they never saw him do?

Ninthly, the Rhemists dare not affirm it, indeed to be the Sacrament, but
with an if it be the Sacrament, and as it is most probable; When the Reasons
before show, that it is altogether improbable.

Tenthly, there be of themselves which take this place for ordinary D. White,
page 507.
repast. Enthymius, Dionys. Carthus. Greg. hom. 23. in Euang. Lyra, Caietan,
Gagueus, Iansen, Barradius, and other more.

Eleuenthly, If it was the Sacrament, then Christ being the Priest, he used
only the bread, he consecrated only bread, he administered only bread, which
was contrary to his first institution, and contrary to the Popish Priests
practice, who consecrate both, and receive both. But is it probable that Christ
would cross his former administration? for Wine he drunk no more, Luke 22.
18. Math. 26. 29.

Twelfthly, if it were granted to be the Sacrament, yet hence would it not
follow that the Sacrament should be administered in one kind, because Bread is
only mentioned. First, because the^ Christ should administer contrary to his
own institution, but few nights before: when he administered in both kinds, and
had commanded, both to take, and eat the Bread, and all to drink of the Cup.
Secondly, breaking bread, and to eat bread, is an usual Hebrew phrase, for to
express whatsoever is set before men, to eat or drink, Luke 14. 1. Lam. 4. 4.
Esa. 58. 7. Here bread then is both for Bread and Wine. Thirdly, These two
Disciples were of the seventy, and so in Orders. Are these then to receive in
one kind, as the Layicks? Fourthly, if to administer in one kind be
sufficient, why not to consecrate in one kind too? If by their own judgment,
it be unlawful to consecrate in one kind, but in both; why not also to
administer in both? Fifthly, the Apostle tells us, that the Chalice of
Benediction is the communication of the blood of Christ, 1. Cor. 10. 16. By the
Cup then we partake of Christ's blood. Let this be diligently considered of.
Sixthly, the Rhemists on Ioh. 6. 98. sect. 11. say, that the Priests should
always receive both kinds. Mark the reasons: First, to express lively the
Passion of Christ, and the separation of the blood from his body, in the same.
Secondly, to imitate the whole action and institution. And must not Christ's
Passion be lively expressed to the people? Must the Priest imitate the whole
action and institution, and not the people? Has the Priest more right in
Christ's death, the^ the people? Seventhly, the constant practice of the
Catholic Church from Christ's time, from above a thousand years till now of
latter times, tells us, that the places speaking of the bread, as Act. 2. 42.
and 20. 7. are to be taken for the Sacrament administered in both kinds. For
the constant practice shows, that the Church, all that space, took it to be
so. Eighthly, and lastly, it was the practice of those Heretics, the
Manichees, to receive under one kind, of whom the Papists are followers; as
they be in many other things, of other Heretics.

XXIIII. Proposition. That these words, This is my body, are to be taken
literally, Touching this Controversy, read D. White his last Book, Ans. to
Fisher page 395. 413. and 419.
without any Figure, the Bread being transubstantiate, and Christ there
corporally, the substance of bread being taken away, and Christ's true body in
the room thereof, though the accidents of Bread remain.
Confuted by their own Bible.
1. IN their Bible it is called a commemoration of Christ, 1. Cor. 11. 24. Luke
22. 19. Now, a remembrance is of that which is absent, and not of a thing
present.

Secondly, their Bible teaches us, that it is usual in Scripture, speaking of
a Sacrament, and of signs representing, to give to the signs the very names
of the things signified thereby. As Genesis 17. 10. Circumcision is called the
Covenant, being only the sign thereof. So the killing and eating of the
Lamb, as God appointed, is called, the Phase, or passage, or Pasche, is they
translate it; or Passover, as we translate, Exodus 12. 11, 27. Luke 22. 15. as
the festival day was so called also, John 6. 4. 1. Cor. 10. 4. The Rock is
said to be Christ; which was but a type of him, Tit. 3. 5. Baptism is called
the Lauer of Regeneration, Reu. 1. 20. the 7. Candlesticks, are the seven
Churches, which did represent the Churches: and the mystery hereof they call
there, in their translation, a Sacrament. So the seven ears of Corn, are
seven years, Genesis 40. 27. It is usual to speak in a Sacrament, figuratively,
and not properly. All which places show the meaning of this sacramental
speech, This is my body; that is, the sign of it: the sign being called by
the thing signified, as we see in other Sacraments, which must teach us to
expound this: as also the rest of the words; this Chalice is the new Testament,
1. Cor. 11. 25. this is my blood of the New Testament, Math. 26. 28. this is
the Chalice the New Testament, Luke 22. 20. and, Drink the Chalice (says S.
Paul) which they yield to be figuratively spoken; and therefore so must the
other.

Thirdly, the name of bread, both before the mentioning of the words of
Consecration by Saint Paul, in 1. Cor. 11. 23. and after, is still kept, verse
26, 27, 28. 1. Cor. 10. 16, 17. not because only show of Bread was so to the
eye, but for that it remained bread indeed, and is yet so to feeling and taste,
as well as to sight.

Fourthly, their Bible tells us, that heaven truly has received Christ,
until the times of the restitution of all things, Acts 3. 21. Till then, he
comes not bodily out of heaven: except the bread be heaven it self, into
which at his Ascension he was received.

Fifthly, their Bible tells us, that when Christ comes, he shall come from
heaven visibly; so come again, as the Apostles saw him go up, Act. 1. 11. But
they saw him in his body visibly ascend; so shall he in body come again, and
not in a conceited inuisibilitie into the Sacrament bodily.

Sixthly, their own Bible teaches, that a body cannot be in two places at one
instant of time, Mat. 28. 26. He is not here, said the Angel: and gives the
reason, For he is risen. Because he was in another place being risen and gone
out of the Sepulcher, See Augustine in Ioh. tract. 31. showing that Christ is
not in two places at one time.
the Angel plainly and truly denied him therefore to be there. Now, we
believe him to be ever bodily in heaven. Therefore by an heavenly Angels
reason we may truly say, that bodily he is not here in the Sacrament, no more
then he was in the Sepulcher, because he was risen.

Seventhly, their Bible teaches, that wheresoever Christ's body was at any
time, he was discernable by sense, and therefore he wills his Disciples to
use their sense to discern him, Luke 24. 39. So did Thomas, Ioh. 20. 28. But
in the Sacrament, is no sensiblenesse at all of his bodily presence.

Eighthly, their Bible does teach, that whenever God turned one substance
into another, or took one away, and put another in stead thereof, that the
same was discernable by sense. Moses Staff was visibly a Serpent; Dust in
Egypt, was Lice seen and felt; and so the Water was Blood sensibly, and the
Water good Wine (in Ioh. 2. 9. 10.) to the taste. But in this change at the
Sacrament is no such sensible perception, and therefore is there no such thing;
for God in his miracles deludeth no man's sense.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Tertul. aduers. Marcionem. This is my body, that is, This is a figure of my
body.

Ambros. desacra. lib. 4. says, that it is a figure of the body and blood of
Christ. And speaking of the signs, he says, that they remain the same that
they were.

August. in Psalm. 3. says, that in this Feast the Lord commanded and delivered
the figure of his body and blood to his Disciples. And the same Father, contra
Adamantium, cap. 12. says, that when the Lord said, This is my body, he gave
the sign of his body. See more in his Book de Doct. Chri. lib. 3. cap. 16.
calling it a figure, and contr. Maximinum, lib. 3. cap. 22. he calls the
things visible, Signs.

Chrysostom. ad Caesarium Monachum, says, that though the bread has the name of
the Lords body, yet the nature of bread remains still.

Theodoret. in Dialo. immuta. He changed the names, and gave his body that
name which belonged to the sign; and to the sign, that name which belonged to
his body: not by changing their nature, but by adding grace to nature. And in
Dial, inconfusus, he says, that the mystical signs after consecration, do
not depart from their nature, but they abide still in their former substance,
figure, and form, and may be seen and touched as before.

Cyril. in Ios. lib. 4. cap. 14. says, that Christ gave to his faithful
Disciples pieces of bread. See farther in Bishop Usher his last Book, of the
controuerse of the Real presence, citing Iustine Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian,
Origin, Cyprian, Theophilus of Antioch, the Author of the harmony of the
Gospels, Eusebius, Acacius, Macarius, Austin, Chrysostom, Theodores,
Ephraemius, the Council of Constantinople, Bishops of France, in a Synod at
Carisiacum, Rabanus: Also D. White his last Book, page 401. citing many, and
page 435. answering the Adversaries places out of the Fathers.

Gainsaid by themselves.
Golasins a Pope, de duabus not. Chri. says, that the nature of the Bread and
Wine cease not; but remain still in the property of their nature: and contra
Eutycheten. The elements are the image and similitude of the body and blood of
Christ.

Their Gloss de cons. Did. 2. The heavenly Sacrament is called the body of
Christ, but improperly. It is impossible that the bread should be the body of
Christ.

Pet. Lombard sent. 4. did. 11. si autem, etc. says, that some judged, and
some wrote, that the very substance of bread and Wine remained still: and of
the manner of conversion (he says) he is not able to define.

Petrus de Aliaco the Cardinal, 4. q. 6. Art. 2. says, that the opinion which
holds the substance of bread not to remain, does not evidently follow of the
Scriptures, nor, in his seeming, of the Churches determination.

Caietan 3. par. q. 75. Art. 1. page 153. says, that in the Gospel there is
nothing that compels us to understand them properly. See more in Bishop
Usher his last book of this point. Ratrannus, Scotus, Alfrick. Abbot of
Malmesbury.

The Scriptures objected answered.
Luke 22. 15. With desire I have desired to eat the Passover with you, before
I suffer.

Answ. 1. This Text is understood of the Jewish Passover, and not of the Lords
Supper; for the Supper was not called the Pasche or Passover. Also the whole
Text shows it to be ^^, verse 7, 8, 11, 13, 15.

Secondly, even in this Text is a Sacramental phrase; for here the eating of
the Lamb is called the Passover, which was an act done long before, of which
this Feast was only a remembrance, and not the thing it self.

Thirdly, this Passover did Christ certainly eat of with his Disciples: but
the Bread and Wine in the Supper which he instituted for this new sacrament of
the new Testament, the Apostles ate and drank of, but not a word of Christ's
eating thereof, but only of the other Jewish Sacrament, of which in the Verses
next following he also speaks, saying that he would no more drink of the
Vine, verse 18. as before he said that he would not eat of the Passover,
verse 16.

Ioh. 6. 51. I am the living Bread, etc.

Answ. This speaks not of the Sacrament, as before is proved in the former
question.

Mat. 26. 26. Take, eat, this is my body, Luke 22. 19. This is my body which
is given for you.

Answ. 1. I have before proved, that these words are spoken in an usual
Sacramental phrase; figuratively, and not properly.

Secondly, they cannot be spoken but figuratively, because Christ himself
spoke these words. He willed them not to eat his natural body, which body was
visible before them. Had he his own body in his hand, and every one of his
Twelve Apostles the same in their mouths? then were there thirteen bodies of
Christ at one time, at the table: twelve in their hands and mouths; and one,
sitting apparently before their eyes. One body cannot be in so many places at
once, as before I have proved. And what a little body must this be which Christ
held in his own hand, which he did break, and which every of the Apostles did
put in their mouths?

Thirdly, The words must needs be figuratively understood now, if we consider
the time when Christ spoke them, to wit, before his Passion, when as yet his
body was not given, nor his blood shed.

Fourthly, Christ spoke figuratively when he delivered the shop, Mat. 26. 28.
Then why more properly in the one, then in the other?

Fifthly, The end of Christ's instituting this Sacrament, shows it to be
figuratively spoken. For it was for a remembrance of him, Luke 22. 19. But if
this (upon the words of consecration) had been his very own body, it could
not be called properly a remembrance of him: for we remember by signs things
absent, and not things themselves present; for so the signs were needless.

1. Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion
of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ?

1. Cor. 11. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
judgment to himself, not discerning the Lords body.

Answ. 1. Here is no proof for transubstantiation: but that the Bread is
Christ's body, and the Wine his blood, by the receiving whereof we receive
Christ's very body and blood. But how? Sacramentally, spiritually, by faith: and
such as come not prepared to this holy Sacrament, as they ought, eat and
drink unworthily, not making a difference of this bread and wine, representing
Christ, from common bread and wine, or a common banquet, which is a grievous
sin. All this we do acknowledge, neither do we deny the bread to be the
body of Christ, or the wine his blood; but yet ever in a Sacramental speech,
figuratively, and not properly. For if the sign be the very thing signified
indeed: then were there no Sacrament: for it is an outward sign of an
invisible grace.

Now there being (as is proved) no transubstantiation, then it follows, that
there is no adoration of the Sacrament in that respect; nor therein offered any
unbloody sacrifice for the quick and the dead.

XXV. Proposition. That prayers are to be made unto Angels and Saints departed:
Confuted by their own Bible.
1. FOr Angels, their own Bible tells us, that the Angels themselves forbid
worship to be done to them, Reu. 19. 10. and 22. 9. And so Saint Paul taught
that they should not be worshipped, Col. 2. 18. Now, prayer to them, is
worshipping of them, and that in a great degree.

Secondly, for Saints departed, the Virgin Mary, or any other, they are not to
be prayed unto: for they know not our particular estates here. Abraham has
not known us, and Israel has been ignorant of us, Esa. 63. 16. The dead know
nothing more, Eccles. 9. 5. Job. cap. 14. 21. speaking of the dead, says,
Whether his children shall be noble or unnoble, he shall not understand. How
vain is it then to pray to them?

Touching either Angels, or Saints, their Bible allows us not to pray unto
them.

I. It teaches every where, wheresoever there is either a commandment to
pray, or an example of any holy man of God praying, that the same is made unto
God. For commandment, Psalm. 49. 15. Invoke me in the day of trouble, who is
very ready to hear, Esaias 64. 24. Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me, says Christ, and
promises them that come unto him, that he will not cost forth, Job. 6. 37.
James says, Ask of God, chap. 1. 5. There is no commandment to pray to any
other in all the Scripture. For examples, Abraham called upon the Name of the
Lord; so Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, and all the rest. No
instance can be given to the contrary, in either precept, or example.

II. The Apostles desired to be taught to pray, Luke 11. Now, Christ in his
perfect form of Prayer taught them, and in them, all us, to pray aright. And
it is against praying to Saints and Angels, in the Preface, Our Father, which
art in Heaven. First, this is against all She Saints: for we cannot call the
Virgin Marie, nor any woman-Saint, Father. Secondly, this is against all
Angels: for they be not our Fathers, but Fellow-seruants, as they confess,
Revel. 19. 10. Thirdly, this is against all Hee-Saints departed: for they be
our Brethren; and in Heaven but one Father, Matthew. 23. 8, 9.

In the Petitions which Christ wills us to pray for; they cannot be made to
any of them. We cannot say to them, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come,
Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Can we say to them, Give us this
day our daily bread, Forgive us this day our trespasses, Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil?

In the conclusion: for may we ascribe to them, and say, Thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory for over, Amen?

Now, if we cannot ask of them these things, nor ascribe to them kingdom,
power and glory, without horrible idolatry and sacrilege; then either Christ
taught not sufficiently in this Prayer, to whom and what to pray for; or else
if he did, then no Saints or Angels are to be prayed unto.

III. Their Bible makes only Christ the means between God and us: For
first, it tells us but of one Mediator, One God, and also one Mediator of
God and men, 1. Timoth. 2. 5. Who this one is, it also tells us, even the
Man, Christ Jesus, 1. Timoth. 2. 5. And further teaches, that he is our
Mediator both of redemption, Heb. 9. 12. and of intercession, Romans 8. 34. Heb.
7. 25. neither does their Bible make any other Mediator in either of these
respects unto God for us, save Jesus Christ alone. Secondly, their Bible
tells, that no man comes to the Father but by Christ, Ioh. 14. 6. Thirdly,
that we have a promise to be heard, if we ask the Father in his Name, Ioh.
16. 23. Fourthly, that Christ foreshewed, that his Disciples should ask and
pray his Father in his Name, Ioh. 16. 26. Fifthly, their Bible exhorts us
therefore to go to him, Heb. 13. 13. to offer up our praises (and so our
prayers) by him, Heb. 13. 15. for that he is able to save us for ever, Heb. 7.
25. and therefore to go with confidence to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. 16.
for in him we have affiance and access in confidence by the faith of him,
Ephesians. 3. 12. whom the Father ever hears, Ioh. 11. 42.

IV. Their Bible teaches us, that albeit we need, and have also a Mediator
between God and us; yet it is needless to make any Intercessour to Christ:
for he is one that has compassion of our infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. he commands
us to come to him, Mat. 11. 28. and is always living to make intercession for
us, Heb. 7. 25. Seeing then he only is for us to God, and that we need none
between him and us, not any Intercessour to an Intercessour; the praying to
Saints or Angels is a vain show of wisdom in superstition, and humility in a
will worship, which the Apostle condemns, Col. 2. 23. Lastly, it is so far
from humility, not to do what God wills us to do, though it may seem
otherwise to our selves, that it is to God grievous, Esaias 7. 11, 12, 13. Ahaz
was willed to ask a sign; he refused, holding it to be a tempting of God:
but the Prophet reproves him for it. We are commanded to come to Christ. In
our conceits this is presumption; but having a warrant so to do, we sin as
Ahaz did, and grieve the Lord, in being ruled by our own wisdom, and not by
Gods Word.

V. Their Bible teaches, that prayer can be made to none, but to them in whom
we must believe, To. 10. 14. How shall they invoke, in whom they have not
believed? Therefore except we believe in them, we cannot pray unto them. But
to believe in any creature, the same Bible forbids, and pronounces them
accursed which so do, Ier. 17. 5. And in our Creed we are taught to believe
in God, and not in any creature, as the Romane-Trent Catechism teaches, in
the Article of the Catholic Church.

VI. Their Bible teaches, that not only the members of Gods Church prayed
only to God, but also that the very Heathen themselves never prayed to any
thing, but what they held to be God, Ion. 1. 5, 6. The men cried to their god,
verse. 5. and the governor said to Jonah, Invoke thy God. v. 6. Now, Papists
pray to them which they hold not to be gods, and therefore herein, by the
witness of their own Bible, are more absurd then the Heathen. And yet many of
the common people are more dangerously stupid on the other side. For they
worship them for so many gods, and put no difference between them and Christ.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Epiphanius in page 447. Greek: The body of Mary was holy, but it was not God:
and she was a glorious Virgin, but not given us to worship.

Ignatius in Epist. ad Philad. O ye Virgins, have before your eyes enlightened
by the Spirit, only Jesus Christ and his Father, in your prayers.

Origin cont. Cells. lib. 8. In one place he says, Only by the guide of Christ
we are brought to the Father. And in another, Christians make their prayers
only to God by Jesus Christ.

S. Austin, confess. lib. 10. cap. 43. speaking of Christ, says unto God, The
true Mediator whom thy secret mercy has made known to the humble, is Jesus
Christ, the Mediator of God and men. And on Psalm. 69. If we should worship
the Angels, says he, we should learn of themselves not to worship them.

The interlineall gloss on Esa. 63. says, that Austin was of opinion, that
the Saints departed, know not what the living do here in this world.

Ambrose D. obitu Theodos. Thou, Lord, only art to be inuocated.

Jerome ad Heliodor. Epist. 3. cap. 1. We ought to invoke by prayer, to call
unto us none but God.

Nicephorus hist. lib. 15. cap. 18 tells us, that one Peter Fuller (...).
five hundred years after Christ, Bishop of Antioch, a Schismatike, invented
the Invocation of our Lady, that she should be named in all prayers. If
praying to her was so late; what may be thought of praying to Saints?

See Chrysostom. hom. 7. on Col. 2. Ambrose, in Romans 1. 5. page 177. The Greek
Scholiast. page 697. Theodoret, on Col. 2. page 776.

Gainesaid by themselves.
Eckius Enchirid. cap. 15. confesses, that there is nothing expressly to be
found in the Scriptures, that Saints must be inuocated.

Bellarmine confesses, that the Saints in the time of the old Testament, were
not inuocated. De Sanct. beatit. cap. 19.

And Salmeron says, that touching this matter, there is nothing to be found in
any of the Epistles, 1. Tim. 2. Disp. 2. Art. 7. s. prim.

This Suarez also acknowledges, that before Christ not any man directly prayed
to the Saints departed, that they would help them, or pray for them, Tom. 2.
in Tho. Disp. 42. Sect. 1. page 434.

Dom. Bannes 22. q. Art. 10. pa. 170. says, that invocation of Saints is
neither expressly, nor vnfoldedly taught in the holy Scriptures.

Tho. Aquinas in Reu. 8. verse 3. page 226. Christ, says he, not by another,
but by his own self offers the prayers of the just to his Father; and then
adds this reason; For there is no other Mediator. He speaks here of Christ
the Mediator of Intercession, that there is no other. Here had he forgotten
their distinction, that the Saints are Mediators of intercession.

Scriptures objected, answered.
For praying to Angels.
Genesis 48. 16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the Lads.

Answ. 1. Jacob begins his Prayer to God, verse 15. and adds this Angel
as equal with God: for he says, God that feeds, The Angel that delivers,
bless these children. Where there is a continual joint act of both, as both
being but one indeed. For God, as Esaias says, will give his glory to none other.
And David ascribes redeeming to the Lord, Psalm. 31. 5.

II. It is clear, that the Angel, which delivered Jacob, was God, Genesis 31.
11. where the Angel says, that he is the God of Bethel, verse 13. This is
the Angel whom he there prayed unto to be delivered, chap. 32. 11. and here
acknowledges to have redeemed him.

III. Jacob prays that this Angel would bless the children. Now God only
gives blessings, Iam. 1. 17. Ioh. 3. 27. Psalm. 84. 11. and 121. 1, 2. and of
God, Jacob desired to be blessed, Genesis 32. 26. This Angel therefore was God,
and not a created Angel.

IV. If they will have it a created Angel, it may then be thus expounded: The
God that feeds me, and the same God which by his Angel, as his instrument,
delivers or redeemeth me, etc. So as his invocation is still to God, though
he mentions the instrument, by which God used to deliver him. For he
speaks here of redemption from evils, and not of that which was wrought by
Christ in the flesh, except so far forth, as temporal deliverances were
types of this spiritual.

Tobie 5. 16. God which dwells in Heaven prosper your journey, and the Angel
of God keep you company.

Answ. 1. This Book is Apocryphal, and therefore is not of force to confirm
a Doctrine of faith.

Secondly, this power of Tobie is made to God, and not directed to the Angel.
He prays God to prosper his journey: and for this end, he desires that Gods
Angel might be sent with them to keep them company, which we also may and
do pray for in such a case. For the Angels have charge over us, to keep and
defend us in our ways and godly courses.

Osea 12. 4. He had power over the Angel, etc. He made supplication to him.

Answ. 1. This Angel was the Lord; for it is said, he found him in Bethel.
Now that Angel was God, Genesis 31. 11, 13. and 28. 13. and 35. 9, 10. and even
in Hosea 12. verse 5. he, the same, is said plainly to be The Lord God of
Hosts.

Song of the three Children, verse 36. O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the
Lord, etc.

Answ. 1. This is Apocrypha. Here is no praying to Angels: for as they speak
to Angels: so in like manner they say, O ye Sun and Moon, O ye Stars and
light. And so, O ye winds, fire, and heat, Winter, and Summer, etc. And
therefore by the like reason all these are to be prayed unto: and so should
we be worse then Heathen Idolaters.

II. The words express a duty of their blessing and praising of God; which
they are to perform to God: and not a word of any thing, that they are
requested to do for us.

Numb. 22. 34. Balaam said to the Angel, I have sinned, etc.

Answ. I. This Balaam was a Witch. Is this a good instance? Fit enough for a
Romish Balaamite.

II. Here is no Prayer made, but a confession of sin.

III. This Angel, Balaam said, was the Lord. Compare verse 35. with verse 38.
And when the Angel, verse 35. said to Balaam, only the word that I shall
speak unto thee, that shall thou speak: the Text in chap. 23. 4, 5. says,
that God met him, and the Lord put a word into his mouth: so verse 16.

Genesis 19. 18, 19, 20. Oh, not so my Lord.

Answ. Lot here prayed not to a created Angel, it is clear. For first, the
Angel which spoke to Lot thus, I have accepted of thee, I will not destroy
this City, speaks as having authority in himself. Secondly, he is called
the Lord, verse 24. The Lord rained from the Lord.

For praying to Saints.
Luke 16. 24. Father Abraham, have mercy on me, etc.

Answ. I. This is a Parable, and the letter is not to be urged beyond the
scope of the Parable, which is not to teach us to pray to Saints.

II. Their own men say, that under the Law, as is before showed, there was no
praying to Saints. And Bellarmine gives the reason (according to his own
faith) because they were not as yet in heaven.

III. This is an example of a damned man, who flies with horror from the
presence of God; who calls not upon God. Can this be a pattern for Gods Church
to follow?

IV. This Parable speaks of Dives and Abraham, as within eyesight and hearing
one of another, though divided by a gulf of separation. What is this the^ to
us on earth, to petition Saints in heaven, whom we see not, nor cannot
certainly tell that they do hear us, to give answer again, as Abraham does
here to Dives?

V. The example is not of one here on earth praying to one in Heaven, as the
proof ought to be; but of one soul to another, both departed this life.

Job 5. 1. Call now if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the
Saints will thou turn?

Answ. I. Eliphas exhorts not Job to pray unto any Saint, but reproues Jobs not
well-demeaning himself toward God in his afflictions, by so justifying
himself, as if there were no just cause with God thus to deal with him. And
to let him fee how herein he did amiss, he wills him to consider the
examples of the Saints in affliction, whether they did so behave themselves:
and he implies that none did so, nor carried themselves as he did.

II. Their expounding it of praying to Saints, has no ground hence. For first,
the interrogation implies a negation, that none of the Saints would answer,
neither would Job turn to any of them, to have answer from them. Secondly,
here is no example of invocation. And if Eliphaz words be urged as a precept;
what warrant had he to impose it on Job? or we, so to receive it from him? For
he was no Prophet, sent of God to teach Job. And the text tells us, that Gods
wrath was kindled against him, for that he spoke not of God the thing which was
right, as Job did, Job 42. 7. Thirdly, if the words of Eliphaz be urged, not as
a new precept, but as an exhortation to that which was then in practice; why
does Bellarmine and other say, that before Christ no prayers were made to
Saints departed? and why do they allege places out of the Old Testament,
herein fighting against themselves?

Genesis 48. 16. Let my name be named on them.

Answ. Jacob here wills not to be prayed unto after death; for none of his
posterity ever so did: but he adopteth Joseph's children, as his own, and so
to be called: that is, that Ephraim and Manasses should be called the sons of
Jacob, or children of Israel. The like phrase is so to be taken, Esa. 4. 1.
Romans 15. 30. Heb. 13. 18, 19. Job 42. 8. Genesis 20. and other places, where one
is to pray for another.

Answ. I. These places are spoken of one praying for another in this life, and
not of any praying to Saints departed. From the living to the dead, it
follows not. For men living do acquaint one another with their estates, and
so they have certain knowledge thereof: but it is not so between the living
and the dead. It is very uncertain, whether these hear and know what is asked
of them.

II. There are for this duty, pregnant precepts, and lively examples every
where in Scripture, but none such for the other.

III. The Scripture does witness the fruitful effect of prayers made here, one
for another. As Moses his prayers for the Israelites at the Red Sea, in
fighting against Amalek, and at other times: So Isaiah his prayer, for
Jerusalem, for overthrow of Sennacheribs Host; and so of many others. But the
Scripture no where witnesses any effect at all, of the prayers of the dead,
for any thing here on earth.

IV. This praying is mutual one for another; as we pray others to pray for us,
so others desire our prayers for them. But the departed desire not ours for
them, neither need they our prayers.

They allege other Scriptures to prove, First, that Angels pray for us.
Secondly, that Saints departed know what passes on the earth. Thirdly, that
they do pray particularly for us. Fourthly, that we may beseech God to grant
our Petitions in favor and merit of the Saints.

If all this were true and evidently clear out of Scripture; yet will it not
follow, that we therefore may pray to them. For prayer is a part of Gods
worship, to be made only to God: as precepts dobindlys, the pattern of all
true and right praying directs, and holy men's examples do teach us: So this
answer might suffice. Yet, that their proofs from Scripture may not deceive
the inconsiderate; I will produce the places for all four, and make answer
thereunto.

I. Scriptures objected, That Angels pray in particular for us, answered.
Zach. 1. 12. And the Angel of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of Hosts,
how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah,
etc?

Answ. 1. This was a vision in the night to the Prophet, verse 8. and chap. 4.
1. and so an extraordinary thing; and being so, and also but a representation
for the present to instruct the Prophet, a real and ordinary act cannot be
concluded from thence.

Secondly, these words are not a Prayer, but a kind of inquiry, after the
Lords purpose, touching the future estate of the Church, that he might inform
the Prophet thereof, as by the present ensuing answer may appear, in verse 13.
and the charge given to make the same known to the Church, verse 14, 15. for
her comfort, in restoring her to glory and peace, verse 16, 17.

Thirdly, grant it a Prayer: it will not prove that Angels pray for us; because
this Angel is not a created Angel, but Jesus Christ, who is often called in
the Old Testament, an Angel, as before is showed. And that this Angel is so
to be taken, is evident: For first, the Prophet calls this Angel, his Lord,
verse. 9. chap. 4. 4, 5. Secondly, the Text calls him, the Lord, and makes
this Angel and the Lord, all one, verse 19, 20, 21. Thirdly, to this Angel
the other gave an account, verse 11. Fourthly, before this Angel stood Joshua
the High Priest, chap. 3. 1, 3. and he is called the Lord, verse 2. The Lord
said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, Satan.

Tobie 12. 12. I did bring the remembrance of your prayers before the holy One.

Answ. 1. He that is here brought in for an Angel of God, in chap. 5. 12. told
no better then a lie: for he said he was Azarias the son of Ananias, a
mortal man's son: He could not then be an Angel; or if an Angel, a lying
one. And as he made a lie therein, so might he do in this, chap. 12. 12, 15.

Secondly, this place does not prove that Angels pray for us. For he says not,
that he prayed for them; but if the liar may be believed, he brought their
prayers unto Gods remembrance, and presented them, verse. 15. as one taking a
Petition of another man to present it to a King; he is the presenter of it, but
not the Petitioner.

Thirdly, this Book is Apocrypha, and suspected of idle fables, such as
learned Papists do meanly esteem of.

Reu. 8. 4. And the smoke of the Incense, which came with the prayers of the
Saints, ascended from the hand of the Angel before God.

Answ. 1. Here is no created Angel, but Jesus Christ; which is clear by these
reasons.

First, from the allusion to the Priests office serving at the Altar; who was a
type, not of a created Angel, but of Christ, Heb. 9. 11. Then, from the place,
where this Angel stands; which was at the Altar, to offer upon the golden
Altar, which was before the Throne: but the Angels are in the out circuit of
the Church, chap. 5. 11. as her guard to keep her, Psalm. 34. 7.

Secondly, it is not said that he offered up the Saints prayers, but he
offered up Incense with their prayers. It accompanied the Saints prayers, verse
4. and the smoke of the Incense ascended up with the prayers of the Saints.
Christ's Spirit goes with the prayers of the Saints, like Incense, and the
vehemency thereof (teaching us to pray with groans that cannot be expressed,
Romans 8.) is like smoke ascending up before God; or the Incense is Christ's own
intercession, and the smoke the efficacy thereof accompanying the Saints
prayers unto God: for when we pray, he then prays for us.

Thirdly, most of the Papists which do write upon this Text, do hold this
Angel to be Christ. Peter Bullenger, Thom. Aquin. Rich. de Sancto victore,
Haymo, Dion. Carthus. Viegas, and many other. This is nothing then for Angels
praying for us.

Dan. 8. 15. When I Daniel had seen the vision, etc. and chap. 9. 20, 21.
while I was speaking in Prayer, etc.

Answ. 1. The former Text speaks nothing at all, of any Angels praying: but of
the Angels instructing Daniel at Gods commandment, chap. 8. 16, 17. This was
also a vision in a deep sleep, verse 18. From whence Doctrines of Faith are
not to be concluded, but soundly to be taught from the literal sense of other
holy Scriptures.

II. The latter Text shows, that Daniel praying to God, chap. 9. 20. the
Angel of the Lord was sent to him, verse 21. but no mention of any prayer made
by the Angel for him.

Whether Angels pray for us, the Scripture teaches not. If we yield that they
do, it follows not that we should pray to See D. White his last book, in
answer to Luke 15. 10. page 315, 316. to 1. Cor. 4. 9. page 317.
them. The Angels are sent out by God for us, they are often with us, they are
helpers, and by coming and going at Gods bidding, they do know our affairs
here. But should we therefore pray to them? it is a part of Gods worship: and
Angels themselves, as before is proved, forbid to be worshipped.

II. Scriptures objected to prove that Saints departed know, what is here done
on earth, answered.
Luke 16. 29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

Answ. 1. It is a Parable, and a thing supposed only, not a literal History.
For after the very letter, some things in this Parable cannot be true; and
therefore they cannot hence conclude a Doctrine, as out of a History. If this
place will serve for Saints knowledge, from Abraham; how can the Papists look
on this Text, hindering the people from the Scripture? When first Abraham
exhorts to the hearing of Moses and the Prophets. Secondly, denies the sending
of the dead to instruct, as Papists have been instructed for their feigned
Purgatory. Thirdly, he affirms that they which will not hear the Scriptures
written by Moses and the Prophets, will not believe such as rise from the dead.
Thus he confirms the authority of the Scriptures, against wandering visions
and apparitions.

Secondly, the Papists say, that before Christ's Ascension, Abraham and the rest
of the Patriarks were in the place called Limbus patrum. How could Abraham know
what was done in Earth, when he was in the prison? Perhaps by inquiry made of
other Souls, which came thither, how the Church did, and what other means of
instruction she had, then when he lived on the earth?

Thirdly, if but so: what is this to prove that Saints then, and so now, do
know every man's estate particularly, and what passes here upon earth?

Ioh. 5. 45. There is one that accuses you, even Moses.

Answ. 1. By Moses is not meant his person, but his writings among them, as the
verses 46. and 47. do declare.

Secondly, it is absurd to make the Saints in Heaven accusers. Papists will
have them Intercessors, whose property is not to accuse in any sort, but to
pray for them, which pray to them.

Thirdly, Christ says, they trust in Moses. Will a Saint in heaven be so
displeased with them, and so fail them that trust in him, that he will go
and accuse them unto God? Such then become miserable Patrons. Does their Legend
afford any such examples?

Fourthly, Christ's saying that they trusted in Moses, must not be understood of
his person: but of his writings. For the Jews did not believe in man. A curse,
as is before delivered, they knew to be pronounced against them, which trusted
in man.

Reu. 12. 10. The accuser of the brethren is cast down, which accused them
before God day and night.

Answ. In the former, they make Moses an accuser of some; and so in that
respect, a companion with the devil here. Is not this a wise Gagger? But how
can they prove hence, that Saints in Heaven know what is done here? Because the
devil knows what evils are here done. A goodly reason. But do not we know,
that the Devil is here on earth; that he compasses the earth to and fro? He
stirs up David to number the people; he is author of much mischief: he
must then know many things. And will it hence follow therefore, that souls
which remain continually in heaven, must know what is here done in earth?

2. King. 6. 12. Elisha tells, what words the King of Syria spoke, being
far from him. So 2. King. 5. 26. Elisha saw what passed between Naaman and
Gehezi, 1. Cor. 12. Saint Paul was rapt up into the third Heaven, Act. 7.
Steven in earth, saw Christ in heaven.

Answ. 1. These places tell us, that these things were so. Let them bring us
Scriptures which will affirm as much of the souls in heaven, here seeing
things in earth, and we will believe. But this these places prove not.

Secondly, these were extraordinary revelations, and give no warrant of
ordinary knowledge. In such things, from extraordinary acts to ordinary, is
no sound arguing. For the Prophets did not know all things. Elisha knew not the
cause of the Shunamites coming, 2. King. 4. 27. nor Samuel, when he went to
less his house, whom God would choose, 1. Sam. 16. 6.

Thirdly, all these are instances of knowledge, in men on earth, of things done
on earth; or of things which being on earth, they saw in heaven: but not a
word, what those in heaven saw here upon earth; which is the only point in
question.

The Gagger quoteth more places, As Mat. 19. 28. But this is nothing to purpose.
And the place is meant of all, appearing before Christ, at the last day, whom
the Apostles shall then see.

Reu. 2. 26. 1. Here is a promise, accomplished in Christ, See D. White his
last book, p 309. 310, 311, 312. in answer to this; as also to Reu. 3. 12. 1.
Cor. 13. 9. and 5. 10. not cited by the Gagger.
Psalm. 2. in whom the Saints have this power. See Augustine, Beda, and many
other, cited by Fulke on this place, for this sense.

Secondly, this is to be understood of the Saints power over those out of the
Church. For here they are to be ruled with a rod of iron, and to be broken
in pieces. But the Saints departed Papists make Protectors of others, and not
breakers of them to shiuers.

Act. 5. 3. This was an extraordinary manifestation of Ananias his hypocrisy
to Peter. If they can prove, that God does reveal men's actions here, to Saints
in Heaven, we yield.

1. Sam. 28. 14. Here is the Devil appearing in Samuelt likeness: what hence
this Gagger will gather for Saints knowledge in heaven, I know not.

III. Scriptures objected, that Saints departed do pray for us particularly,
answered.
Reu. 5. 8. The 24. Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of
them Harps, and golden Vials, full of odours, which are the prayers of the
Saints.

Answ. 1. This was in a vision and trance, and the words allegorical, and
therefore cannot be the ground of Doctrine of faith.

Secondly, here is not meant the Saints departed; but these four and twenty
are the type of the whole Church here on earth, verse 10.

Thirdly, these prayers of the Saints (which Saints are on earth, chap. 8. 3.)
may be the prayers of the four and twenty Elders themselves: yet called the
prayers of the Saints, as if they were the prayers of others.

First, for that these represent the whole Church, verse 9. which consists of
Saints.

Secondly, because a Church or Congregation of people gathered together, pray
not only for themselves, but for all the Saints of God; and so their hearts
here being as Vials, full of the grace of Prayer, as it were odours, are
esteemed the prayers of all Saints.

Fourthly, Tho. Aquinas, Rich. de Sco. Victore, Haymo, Beda, and other, do
expound this place of the Church militant.

2. Match. 15. 14. Then Onias answered, etc. Where he tells how Jeremy prayed
for the people.

Answ. 1. This is an Apocryphal Book.

Secondly, this speech of Onias touching Ieremies praying, was but Judas his
dream. For it is said in verse 11. that he told the soldiers all this, as his
dream, to encourage them to fight. It is weak architecture to build upon a
dream, doctrines of faith.

Thirdly, neither did Judas much regard the help of Ieremies prayer. For in
the same Chapter, he himself did pray, verse 21, 22, 23. but entreated not
Jeremy to pray for him, but made his suite only to God.

Ier. 15. 1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, etc.

Answ. 1. These words are spoken only by way of supposition, as if God had
said, If Moses and Samuel were now before me, as they were, when they lived on
earth, praying for these people, I should not regard them. Is it good reasoning
from a suppositiue speech, to a real act indeed?

Secondly, they themselves say, that all the Fathers that were before Christ,
were in Limbus Patrum, and so could not know our affairs in particular to pray
for us.

Baruch 3. 4. Hear now the prayers of the dead Israelites.

Answ. 1. This book is Apocryphal.

Secondly, were not these in the place, called Limbus Patrum? How could they
then see all things in the face of God, from whose presence they were kept?

Thirdly, here is mention of the prayers of dead Israelites: but not for whom
they prayed. It is not said, they prayed for others on earth. They might pray
for themselves in Limbo.

Fourthly, by dead Israelites, are not here to be understood such as were
departed this life, but such as were accounted as dead, as going down to the
grave; for so Baruch speaks to Israel, verse 9, 11. And he speaks of such
dead Israelites and their children, which had sinned before God, and had not
hearkened to him, verse 4. expressing their deserts worthy death. Do men
alive, requesting God to hear for them the prayers of the dead, use to move
God with telling of the Saints sins, and their rebellion against him? Is this
a Romish prayer, Hear, Lord, the prayers of the dead for me, for they have
sinned against thee? Will any be so mad, to allege such a reason? Therefore
Baruch makes confession of the living Israelites, being then through distress
as dead men; and beggeth pardon for them, as follows in verse 5.

Fifthly, their Doway Annotation on this place is this; Men in sins and
miseries are as if they were dead, verse 11. yet by Gods mercy may receive new
grace of spiritual life. They then take these for men alive, and not dead, as
this foolish Gagger does.

Reu. 2. 26, 27. This is answered before, and nothing concerns the prayers of
the Saints departed.

Luk 16. Dives in hell prayed for his brethren on earth: much more then will
the Saints in heaven.

Answ. 1. This is but a supposed speech, a parable, and therefore nothing
thence to be gathered, but as is intended in the scope of the Parable.

Secondly, if there be such all-knowing vision, and allhelping charity in
Heaven, it is marvel that in all the Scripture, it should no where as clearly
be mentioned, as this charity of one damned in hell.

Revel. 6. 9, 10. And I saw under the Altar the souls, etc. and they cried
with a loud voice, How long, Lord, holy, and true! do thou not judge and
avenge our blood, on them that dwell on the earth?

Answ. 1. This was seen by John in a vision; and is not to be interpreted
according to the Letter, to establish a doctrine of faith.

Secondly, though it be taken after the letter; yet here is no proof that
Saints pray for any in particular, but for the Church militant in general.

Thirdly, their Prayer is not for other in the Church; they intercede not for
other, but the request they make, concerns themselves.

Fourthly, their cry is literally for justice and revenge upon their enemies,
persecutors, and sheaders of their blood. Does mindfulnesse of injuries remain
in Saints departed? They then are less charitable then Saints on earth. Steven
at his death prayed for his enemies. This place proves not, that Saints
departed pray particularly here for us on earth; but rather they pray against
the enemies of the Church.

2. Pet. 1. 15. I will endeavor after my decease to have remembrance of these
things.

Answ. This is not meant by his intercession to God after death, but of his
then present and diligent writing to them while he was alive, whereby they
might be made to remember after his decease, what he had taught them by word
of mouth or writing, while he lived.

1. King. 2. 13, 19. Adoniah had a suite to Solomon, and used the help of
Bathsheba to him; Absalom used Ioabs intercession, for him to David, 2. Sam.
14. So should we go unto God by Saints, intercessors for us.

Answ. 1. Similitudes are for illustration, but do not prove any thing,
especially thus detorted absurdly.

Secondly, the case is not alike, as between man and man, so between God and
us, in this case. He is God, and so every where, and not as man, circumscribed
in a place. To man we cannot speak when and where we would: but to God we
may, whose eyes and thoughts are not like to man's, Esai. 55. Man, through
pride, will not; or through carelessness, regards not; or through ignorance,
knows not; or through business, is hindered, so as he cannot help such as
come for help: or his attendants about him, may keep Petitioners from him, so
as they cannot speak to him. But there are no such lets in God. The Simile
therefore is not fit.

Thirdly, this is voluntary humility, which caused the worship of Angels by
certain Heretics, which the Apostle condemns, Col. 2. 18.

Fourthly, we need no Saints to go to God for us: for we have appointed by
God himself, a Mediator of intercession between God and us, his Son Jesus
Christ, by whom boldly with confidence, we may go to God, Ephesians. 3. 12. Heb.
4. 16. and 10. 22. and 7. 25.

Fifthly, as for any to go between Christ and us, we need it not: For he is
the Head, and all we the members of his body, as well those in earth, as
those in heaven; we here on earth, being as dear to him, as those in heaven.
He sits in heaven to request for us, and is a most merciful High Priest,
touched with our infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. Therefore he took our nature upon
him, Heb. 2. 16. to be a faithful and merciful High Priest, verse 17. Steven
made no means to him, but prayed immediately to him, Act. 7. 59, 60. and so
did John, Revelation 22. 20, 21. Christ wills us himself to come unto him,
Math. 11. 28. And we read not that any of the Apostles, or holy men, praying,
mentioned in Scripture, did ever go to Saint or Angel to make request for
them. Also, to answer the Simile: Is there any of us, having a great man's
Command, in all our needs to come to himself, giving his faithful word and
promise to hear our suites and requests very readily at any time, and none
appointed by him to hear suitors, when they come, but only himself,
attending mercifully in his own person for us, in open place without let of
any, that would go first to any of his servants, and not forthwith rather to
himself with all gladness? I appeal to men's own hearts in this.

Lastly, this putting of Saints between Christ and us, is to make an
Intercessor, and to hold Saints departed (if we were sure they could hear us,
which yet is very uncertain) to be more loving, more tenderly affected toward
us, then Jesus Christ himself, who has with his own blood bought both them
and us.

Scriptures objected, that we may pray to God, to have our Petitions granted
in favor and merit of Saints departed.
Exodus 32. 13. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servants, to whom thou
swarest, etc.

Answ. 1. Here is no merit of Saints urged.

Secondly, their persons are mentioned by Moses, not for their own
worthiness, but for the Covenant which by oath God confirmed to them; which
Covenant Moses urges, and not their deserts. For Moses speaks of Gods act to
them, but not a syllable of any thing, that they either did, or spoke; note it
well.

2. Chron. 6. 16. Keep with thy servant David my Father, that which thou have
promised.

Answ. 1. Here is no word, no work of David remembered, and therefore no merit
of his urged.

Secondly, that which Solomon alleges in his prayer, it Gods promise made
unto David. So in 2. Chro. 1. 9. in 1. Chro. 29. 18. David prays to God in
that title which he would be named by, and by which he named himself, Exo. 3.
6. So it is a calling upon God by his name, and not praying to him through the
merits of Saints departed.

Exodus 20. 5. And showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep
my commandment.

Answ. This is no whit for Saints prayer, but altogether against merit. For the
Text says, that to those which love him and keep his commandments, God will
show mercy. If they did merit, what need they or mercy? The Gagger says, that
God will here reward the merits of good men; when he only says he will show
mercy, and mentions no merit.

Psalm. 132. 1. Lord, remember David, etc.

Answ. 1. This Psalm penned by David, is a Prayer made by himself for
himself, and so nothing to the point of controversy. Secondly, if penned by
some other, after David's time; here, by David, is meant Gods promise made unto
David, of which the Psalmist makes mention in verse 11, 12, 17, 18.

Esai. 63. 17. Return for: thy servants sake.

Answ. That is, for thy Covenants sake, made unto thy servants. So Psalm. 32.
10. For thy servant David's sake: that is, for the Covenant and promise sake,
made unto David, as the Verses 11, 12. following, show; and not for the merit
and intercession of David. Also David is here named, because he was an
excellent type of Christ, who therefore is called by the Name of David, Ier.
23. 5. and 30. 9. Ezech. 37. 24. Osea 3. 4. So that if the words be taken for
David; then there is understood Gods promises, the person put for the Covenant
made to him: but taken for him that David typed out; then is it for Christ his
sake, conceived in the name David. And so the Text proves not prayer made to
God, to be granted for the merits of Saints.

XXVI. Proposition. That Confession, commonly called Auricular, or
Sacramental, is of necessity.
THey mean hereby, a secret confession only to the Priest alone, of all, at
least mortal sins, particularly reciting them, with all circumstances
thereof, as they committed them in thought, word and deed: and that without
this, there is no remission of sin.

This we deny to be of necessity. But they affirm it to be such an
ordinance of Christ, as not only he which does condemn and contemn it; but
whosoever does neglect or omit the same when he may have it, cannot be saved.

Confuted by their own Bible.
I. It affords no commandment, or any example hereof, either in the Old
Testament, or in the New, that any should go to a Priest secretly, and make
confession after this manner to him. Therefore this is no divine ordinance
necessary to Salvation.

II. Promises of mercy and forgiveness are made to the confession of sins,
not mentioning the particular enumeration of them to a Priest, 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
Prou. 28. 13. Therefore there is pardon without this burdensome ordinance,
which is maintained so strictly among the Romanists, that thereby the Priests
may tyrannize over the consciences of the poor Lay-Catholiques, and further
serve their own turns for politic ends.

III. There are examples of such as obtained pardon. First, by confession only
to God, as David himself withesseth in Psalm. 32. 5, 6. Secondly, by making
only a general confession, Psalm. 32. 5, 6.
as David did, 2. Sam. 12. 13. This we see also to be so in the Publicanes
confession, Luke 18. 13, 14. in Zacheus confession, Luke 19. 8, 9. in the
Prodigal sons confession, Luke 15. 21. and thirdly, by only hearty
contrition, without any vocal confession at all, as in the example of that
Woman, which with tears washed Christ's feet, Luke 7. 38.

Therefore this coming to a Priest, and numbering up sins in particular, is
not absolutely necessary to obtain pardon of them.

Contraried by Antiquity.
August. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 3. What have I to do with men, that they
should hear my confessions, as though they were able to heal all my sores?

Nectarius the Bishop of Constantinople put it down, and Locrat. lib. 5. ca.
19. Zozom. ^. 7. c. 16. Tripart. hist. l. 9. c. 35. Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 28.
all the Bishops in the East, and their Churches: which they never would have
done, had it been the ordinance of God, and necessary for all times and
people.

Chrysostom, hom. 2. in Psalm. 50. who was after Nectarius, says, I will thee
not to confess thy sins to thy fellow-seruant (meaning the Priest:) confess
them unto God that may heal them.

And in Hom. 22. ad popul. Antiochen. says further, This is wonderful in God,
that he not only forgiueth us our sins: but neither does disclose them, nor
make them known, neither does he enforce us to come forth and tell them: he
requires no more, but that we speak to him alone, and to him alone confess
our faults. This Father held it then, not of necessity to go to a Priest.

For more testimonies, see the late and learned book of Bishop Usher, upon
this point; he cites Chrysostom. Austin, the Egyptian Abbot, Basil, Ambrose,
Maximns; Taurinensis, Greg. Nyssen, Origin, Nectarius, Clem, Alexandrinus,
Laurence, Bishop of Nouaria. Theodore an Archbishop of Canterbury.

Gainsaid by themselves.
The Canon Law says, de poen. D. 5. in poenit. Glossa. It was taken up, only
by a certain tradition of the Church, and not by any authority of either the
Old, or New Nestament.

Panormitan. super 5. de poen. and remiss. ca. omnes vtriusque says, that he
finds no manifest authority, that ever God or Christ commanded us to
confess our sins to a Priest.

Petrus Oxoniensis the Divinity Reader at Salamanca, taught publicly, that it
had a beginning from a positive law of the Church, and not from the Law of God.

Beatus Rhenanus in the Argument of Tertul. de poenit. that Caranza in Sixto 4
Ouand. 4. d. 16. Pro. 2.
this privy kind of Confession was ever commanded by God, says he, we read
not.

Erasmus in annot. ad Epist. Hieronymi ad Oceanum de obitu Fabiolae, tells
us, that in Saint Ieromes time, (four hundred years after Christ) secret
confession of sins was not ordained.

Bellar. lib. 3. de poenit. cap. 1. acknowledges, that Rhenanus and Erasmus
believed that this secret confession was not instituted, nor commanded by God,
nor in use in the Ancient Church. And these were as two learned Papists, as
ever were. And therefore their testimony is of no small credit herein: Yea,
Erasmus there tells us, that the Writings of the Fathers are abused, to
maintain this private and secret confession.

Caietan in 3. Tho. q 8. art. 4. holds, that a man by contrition, without
confession, is made clean, and a formal member of the Church: Yea, he says,
that he which is contrite for his sin, and receives the communion without
Shrift, sins not mortally, though he have a Confessor at hand.

Cornelius Agrippa. de vanit. cap. 64. I could, says he, by many examples
fresh in memory, show how fit this Shrift is for bawdry.

If any desire more, read Bishop Vshers last book, wherein is cited Gratian,
Johannes Semeca, Michael of Bononia, Johannes de Selua.

Also let him look into Doctor Whites way of the true Church, of the Papists
differing opinions about this, page 440. 441. in quarto, digress. 55. Number. 8.
and D. Whites last book, p. 190, 191. Ans. to Fisher
192. citing John Medina, Gratian, and Caietan, Iansenius, Vasques, Mich.
Palacius, Gloss. on Gratian, Gerson, Panormitan. Maldonat, and others.

Scriptures objected answered.
Math. 18. 18. Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, etc.

Answ. 1. Here is not a word of confession in this place of Scripture, but
rather of accusation by another. For in the words foregoing, the notice given
to the Church, is from the party not offending, but offended. If thy brother
trespass against thee, etc. tell it to the Church. But all Auricular
confession is supposed voluntary, whereby a man accuses himself, and in
private, not public, as here.

Ioh. 20. 23. Whose sins ye remit, etc.

Answ. 1. Here is no mention of confession of sins to them. Secondly, the
authority given here to the Apostles, was exercised in the public Ministry,
and preaching of the Word, though they heard no private confession, as the
Papists dream of. Therefore the Apostle Saint Paul calls the preaching of
the Word, the ministry of Reconciliation, 2. Cor. 5. 18. Thirdly, Christ
says there, As my Father sent me, so I send you. Now he was not sent to hear
private confessions, and thereupon to give them absolutions: but by preaching,
to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the
opening of the prison to them that are bound, Esai. 61. 1. Luke 4. 18. Neither
did he bind any to private confession, nor sat to hear the same. Therefore
such as he sends, are not tied to do otherwise; neither has here Popish
shrift any ground. Fourthly, Caietan on this place, says, that the Sacrament
of penance has here no commandment.

Act. 19. 18. And many that believed, came and confessed, etc.

Answ. Here is mention indeed of confession, but this proves not imposed
private confession, secretly in the Priests ear. For first, this is of a
confession voluntary, not enforced. Secondly, of many that did it: but not of
all. Thirdly, public, and not in S. Paul's ear. For as they showed their
works, and brought their books, and burnt them before all men, verse 19; So
was this confession open: for the Text makes no difference of these actions.
Fourthly, Here it is said, they confessed: but no particular enumeration of
sins with circumstances. Fifthly, Caietan a Cardinal, in his Commentary
hereof, holds, that this place is not meant of Auricular confession.

Iam. 5. 16. Confess your faults one to another.

Answ. This is nothing for the Popish confession. For first, it is as general
as prayer one for another. But Prayer is a duty common to all. Secondly, he
says not, the prayer of the Priest, but of a righteous man. And I hope that
others beside Priests are righteous men. Thirdly, here is not a word of
absolution: but a promise to the prayer of faith, not to the Priests words, to
save the sick, and to have his sins pardoned, verse 15. Fourthly, confession
commanded here, is not confined to a Priest, but may extend to any other.

This Saint James speaks to all, to whom he wrote his Epistle. And this place
is to be understood one of these three ways. First, either of Priests and
people: and then are the Priests bound to confess, as well to the people, as
the people to them. For its said, Confess one to another, that is, mutually,
or reciprocally. Secondly, or here is understood only of Priests among
themselves, and then is there nothing to the people. Thirdly, or only of the
people among themselves, and then is this nothing to the Priest, to take
authority hence, to bind the people to confess to him. Fourthly, confession
here is not of secret sins in heart against God, or sins hidden from men,
but of trespasses or offenses one against another, as the word in the Original
shows, and is so taken in Mark 11. 25, 26. Upon which grieuances, mutual
confession or acknowledgement of wrongs is here enjoined as a fit means of
brotherly reconciliation, and preservation of peace among themselves. To which
they must add prayer, one for another, that their mutual confession
reciprocally, for reconciliation, may be blessed unto them. Of which practice,
happy are they which make conscience: and blessed should we be, if to this
every man would submit himself. A harder task, then to whisper his sins in
a Priests ear secretly.

Lastly, the Rhemists say upon this text, that it is not certain that S. James
speaks here of Sacramental confession. Whereupon others, in alleging
Scriptures for Auricular confession, leave out this place, as not to the
purpose.

Mat. 3. 5, 6. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the
Region round about Iordane, and were baptized in Iordane, confessing their
sins.

Answ. This sorteth not with Popish Auricular Confession, and that for these
three reasons.

First, this was public, not in a corner of the Temple, or of a Synagogue, but
in the place where he baptized them in Jordan, before all the people.

Secondly, this was at their first conversion receiving Baptism, and not
yearly at set times.

Thirdly, its not certain, what sins, or how many, whether in general, or
particular, they confessed.

Fourthly, it was impossible for John to hear every man's private confession,
with enumeration of circumstances, seeing all Judea, and all the Region about
Iordane, and Jerusalem, went out to him; meaning very many, and multitudes of
people.

Leuit. 13. 2. and 14. 2. The Leper shall be brought unto the Priest, etc.

Answ. 1. Here is no mention of confession of sins: but of one brought to the
Priest, to take a view of the Plague of Leprosy upon the body, verse 9, 10.
All the argument therefore that can hence be drawn, is only typical, not
conuicting.

Secondly, the party was not to come and confess himself a Leper to the
Priest: but the Priest was to judge him so, and to pronounce him a Leper, chap.
13. 3, 11, 44. Then should the Leper cry and confess, not to the Priest, but
to the people, that he was unclean, verse 45.

Thirdly, this judgment of the Leprosy, by a plain Law, here belonged to the
Priest. But where can they show a Law only for their Priests to hear private
confession after their Popish manner?

Fourthly, the Priest looking upon the party, was not in private, between
them two; but before other: for he was brought unto the Priest by others to
be viewed.

Fifthly, the Priest did not always profess the party clean, upon showing
his malady, as the Popish Priest does ever the Confitent, upon showing his sins
by confession: but the Leuiticall Priest put the party apart from all others a
time for a trial Leuit. 13. 4, 5. and after trial, pronounced the party
unclean, and shut him out of the assembly of the people, verse 46. Numb. 5. 2.
Which the popish Priest never does: who upon confession runs to remitting and
loosing, but not at all to retaining and binding: and yet he that may do the
one, may and ought to do the other.

Numb. 5. 7. Then shall they confess their sin, which they have done.

Answ. I. This sin is not every evil in thought, word, and deed, or a
numbering up of all sins, that may be remembered, as Papists require: but only
of some trespasses between man and man; as when one coozeneth another, or
violently has wronged another in such things wherein restitution may and ought
to be made, as is clear in this text, speaking of recompensing the trespass,
as also in Leuit. 6. 2, 3, 4, 5. speaking of the same with this text, and
expressing the particulars. In this case of restoring and recompensing, reason
requires an acknowledgement of particulars, to show why, and for what,
restitution is made.

II. The text speaks of confession, but does not express to whom, whether to
God, or to his neighbor, or to the Priest.

First, it may be meant to God, when the offendour sees his sin, and
humbles himself before God, confessing and craving pardon: for to such God
promises mercy, Prou. 28. 13. So David confessed, Psalm. 51. 4. and obtained
pardon, Psalm. 32. 5.

Secondly, it may be understood of confession to man, to the party wronged, as
Joshua exhorted Achan to do to him before the people, Josh. 7. 19. Of this
speaks our Savior in Luke 17. 4. Mat. 5. 23. 24. And this text in Numbers,
does lead to this. For here is immediately joined recompense of the trespass
to confession. This latter duty is performed to the party offended, as the
text shows in Leu. 6. 5. and what hinders that the former should not be so
too, seeing the text speaks after confession, so much of restitution to the
party offended, or to his kinsman in the first place, before any mention made
of the Priest? Of whom when Moses speaks, he mentions no private confession
to him, not a word of the Priest hearing of confession, but of the man bringing
his trespasse-offering, and of the Priest making atonement thereby, Leu. 6. 6,
7.

Thirdly, if this confession be made to the Priest, it helps nothing for Popish
privy confession. For the Priest did not sit in a corner to hear confession
within the Tabernacle, for within came none of the people, but only in the out
Court, and thither came the man with his offerings to the Priest in the view
and hearing of the Priests and people, for one man and one Priest was not alone
in the out-Court, as it is in Popish Shrift.

To conclude the answer to this; The Papists own Lyranus, who had been
sometimes a Jew, says on Leu. 16. 21. that the Priest did not hear the
particular confessions of the people, for that had been impossible, but only
in general.

Ioh. 11. 14. Jesus says unto them, Loose him, and let him go.

Answ. 1. Here is no mention of confession.

Secondly, if this loosing noted the Priests absolution, then the Priest must
absolve publicly, and also without confession, and after men to risen from the
dead, as well as before.

Thirdly, it cannot be proved that the commandment given to loose him, was
spoken to Christ's Disciples. It is likely Martha and Mary, Lazarus his loving
Sisters, would be most ready to do this, before all other, and the Jews
which came to them to comfort them, verse 31. who, as it is most probable, are
they, to whom Christ spoke to take away the stone, verse 39. For when Christ
speaks to his Disciples, its usual in the Evangelist to express the same,
and to mention the deeds and sayings of the Disciples which are here omitted.
Also the Relative them in this 44. verse, must bereferred to the persons
beforenamed, in verse 36. 39. which were Jews, when no mention was made of his
Disciples, from verse 16. Is it like that the Relative in verse 44. should have
relation to verse 16. when there is seven and twenty verses between? Now if
Christ speak to the Jews, and they loosed him, and not the Disciples, then
this place is vainly alleged.

Lastly, this is but an allegorizing upon a text; and an allegorical
interpretation not intended in the text, is a weak, yea, an idle proof, in a
controuerted point of Doctrine.

But in conclusion, I would have these Gaggers know and acknowledge, that our
Church does not banish Confession made to the Minister, and even privately,
when men find their consciences burdened, and distressed, that they may
receive instruction, comfort and absolution, sealed unto their souls, by the
execution, and applying of the power of the Keys, whereof our Church of
England is as truly and rightfully possessed, as any Church in the world. But
our Church has duly rejected the corruptions of confession, which stand in
the heavy yoke of absolute necessity of such confessing and particular
circumstantiall enumeration of sins, which has no warrant by the Word of
God, nor example of practice in the ancient Church.

XXVI. Proposition. That there is a place, commonly called Purgatory, into
which, souls after dissolution from the body, do go, wherein, as in a
prison, such as here have not satisfied by temporal pain due for sins, do
make satisfaction in suffering hellish torment, it is uncertain how long.
WE deny that there is any such place, and hold that this is a very fiction for
gain to the Pope-god of the Romish Church. But they affirm the contrary, and
teach that there is such a place near unto hell, and that the torments thereof
are insufferable as these of hell, but only that in hell there is no
redemption, whereas from this, there is, say they.

This Purgatory pick-purse is confuted by their own Bible.
First, in their Bible we may find all the places which ever God made,
Heaven, Earth, Sea, and Hell; but it no where names any place called
Purgatory. Therefore there is no such place of Gods making.

Secondly, in their Bible we may find only two sorts of persons, Elect and
Reprobate, Sheep and Goats, blessed and cursed, Math. 25. 34, 41. Not a mean
between both. Two gates and ways, the strait and narrow, the broad and wide,
one on the right hand, and another on the left. Two kinds of works, good and
evil, 2. Cor. 5. 10. A twofold reward, punishment everlasting, and life
everlasting, Mat. 25. 46. Two places to receive the reward in; the kingdom
prepared for the elect from the beginning of the world, Math. 25. 34. and fire
everlasting, prepared for the Devil and his angels, verse 41.

Thirdly, it affords us many texts against it.

John 5. 24. The hearer and believer in Christ has everlasting life, and he
comes not into judgment, but shall pass from death, into life. If he come
not into judgment, he cannot be cast into a place of punishment. To such as
be in Christ, there is no condemnation, says Paul, Romans 8. 1. For by Gods
grace are we justified gratis by redemption that is in Christ, Romans 3. 24. and
he has set us free, Ioh. 8. 36. free from sin, both in respect of the
guilt, as also of punishment. Else how are we free? Are Gods works imperfect?

2. Cor. 5. 1. We know that if our earthly house of this habitation be
dissolved, that we have a building of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in heaven. Saint Paul speaks of himself, and of all true Christians,
in this word we: of whom he says, that after death, they have their house for
ever in heaven; he puts no lodging or Inn of Purgatory between. And in the
tenth verse of the same Chapter he says, that at the last Day every one is to
receive as he has done in this body. So whilst man lives here in body,
and not as he suffers in soul in Purgatory, is he considered.

Heb. 10. 14. By one oblation has he consummated for ever those that are
sanctified. Note here 1. That Christ has made an oblation for his. 2. That
this is but one. 3. That this one Col 2. 13, 4. 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
has consummate and made his perfect. 4. And that for ever. So as in verse 17.
its said, that their sins and iniquities I will now remember no more. And
will he yet punish them in Purgatory? Will he cleanse them from all sin,
pardon all offenses, not imputing sin, Romans 4. 8. and yet will he exact a
satisfaction? Its unreasonable to think it.

1. These. 4. 17. Where the Apostle speaks of those alive at the last Day, to
be only changed, and so taken up to Christ. All the elect at that time shall
escape Purgatory; or it may be, it will then be blown out, or it and hell
turned into one.

Ephesians. 1. 10. Here the Apostle speaks of perfecting all in Christ, in heaven
and in earth. Note how he here only mentions two places, in which those be,
who have benefit by Christ: those in Heaven, and in Earth. The Apostle forgot
them which were frying in Purgatory. If Saint Paul had believed such a place,
where hope of Salvation had been, would he have left those souls comfortless?

Reu. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, for they rest from
their labors. Where rest is, there is no torment. It were small comfort to
think this to be spoken of the body, for so beasts and beastly men rest. Also
to understand it of the soul, that it rests from the feeling of temptations to
sin, and from fear of damnation, and yet to be in hellish torments for
sin, they not knowing how long. What a rest may this be called? Let them show
where the word rest is ascribed to any, and that they are blessed and do rest,
while they be in flaming torments? Thus the word (...) henceforth points at
the present transition to blessedness.

Math. 16. 19. and 18. 18. Here is mention of the Churches power to loose on
earth; but not in Purgatory, except Purgatory be on earth. Not Peter, nor the
Pope has any power allowed by Christ from these Scriptures, to meddle with any
binding or loosing of any after death, but only in this life. Note this, you
Papists, which rest so much on the Popes power, and help of friends after
death.

Luke 23. 43. The good thief went forthwith into Paradise, which is heaven, 2.
Cor. 18. 2, 4. So Lazarus into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. Both escaped
Purgatory: the one, under the Law; and the other, under the Gospel.

In all the old Testament there was no sacrifice ordained for souls of the
departed. When Aaron offered incense, it was only for the living, to pacify
Gods displeasure toward them: but not for the dead, Numb. 16. 48.

Wisd. 3. 1. The souls of the just are in the hand of God; and torment shall
not touch them. So does Montanus translate truly, according to the Greek
text. But in Purgatory is torment, and therefore just men's souls are not in
Purgatory: for they are in peace, ver. 4. What can be more direct against
their Purgatory?

He that desires more Scriptures according to our translation, let him read a
book entitled Ignisfatuus, where are alleged out of the Old Testament,
Ezech. 18. 22. Esai. 57. 1. Eccles. 12. 7. Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Psalm. 51. 7. Esai.
53. 4. Leu. 1. 3, 6. Out of the New Testament, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. Heb. 1. 3. 1. Tim.
2. 6. Heb. 10. 14. Romans 6. 23. and 8. 33. and 5. 1. Reu. 14. 13. 2. Cor. 5. 1.
Col. 1. 20. Gal. 6. 8. Ioh. 9. 4. 2. Cor. 4. 17, 18. Mar. 11. 25. Col. 2. 13.
Mat. 6. 12. Ioh. 10. 18. Gal. 5. 22. All which places are urged in form of
reasoning.

Contraried by Antiquity.
The book of questions and answers at the end of Iustine Martyrs works,
says in quest. 75. thus: After the souls are departed out of the body, the
souls of the good are carried into Paradise; the souls of the wicked into
hell. And in quest. 60. it is said, that men, after the departure of the soul
out of the body, cannot by any provision, care, or study, get help or succor.

Cyprian against Demetrian says, This life being ended, we are divided into
the everlasting lodgings of death, or immortality.

Jerome on Amos 9. The soul loosed from the bands of the body, shall be
carried to hell, or be lifted into the heavenly habitation.

Greg. Nazianzen in Epitaph. Caesar. fratris, says, that every good soul,
fearing God, freed from the body, presently enjoys admirable pleasure.

Austin de vanit. Tom. 9. c. 1. When the soul parts from the body, she is
instantly placed in Paradise, or headlongly cast into hell: and in lib. 5. of
his Hypognost. he says, A third place we know none, neither do we find any
such place throughout the holy Scriptures.

Ambros. cap. 2. of his book of the profit of death, says, When the day
comes, we go assuredly to our Father Abraham, etc. and although our works
fail us, (mark this) yet our faith may secure us.

The Greek Churches to this day, believe no Purgatory. See Master Moulin his
Buckler of Faith, page 214. 219. citing Chrysostom, Lactant. Hilarie,
Victorinus, Austin, Ambrose, Origin, Greg. Nazianz. and Basile, touching souls
departed.

Gainesaid by their own men.
Espencaeus in 2. Tim. page 144. says, Every soul, after the dissolution of
the body, does enter into an unchangeable estate.

Leo Decr. part. 2. Consecr. 33. did. 1. cap. 49. says, That which a man in
his body receives not, being unclothed of his flesh, he cannot obtain.

Lombard. 3. D. 19. says of such as are in Christ, that they are so delivered,
that after this life there is not any thing to be found to be punished.

Bishop Fisher, called Roffensis, against Luther, Art. 18. confesses, that in
the ancient Fathers there is either none at all, or very rare mention of
Purgatory.

Greg. on Job, lib. 13. cap. 20. Because, says he, we are redeemed by the
grace of the Creator, we have this heavenly gift bestowed upon us, that when
we leave our fleshly habitation, incontinently we are carried to our heavenly
rewards. Can any thing be spoken more clearly against going into Purgatory?

See Bishop Usher his last Book, in the controversy touching Purgatory: and
also D. White his last book, page 567. citing many Papists touching the
inualiditie of the Popes power over souls in Purgatory.

Scriptures objected, answered.
1. Cor. 3. 15. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss: but
himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.

Answ. 1. Albeit the foolish Gagger does say that this is an express Scripture
to prove Purgatory: yet Bellarmine says, Lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 5.
that this is one of the most difficult places of the whole Scripture.
Therefore it will not easily satisfy a doubtful mind in this controuerted
point.

Secondly, this place is interpreted in the several words very See Morneus on
the Mass: all their opinions cited, Lib. 3. cap. 6. p. 257, 261.
diversely by the Ancients, and so variously, as Bellarmine is forced by reason
of the incongruities thereof, to leave and forsake them all, and to run his
own course, as wide as any of the rest, and differing from his fellows,
Thomas, Alcuinus, Hugo Cardinalis, and other.

Thirdly, Erasmus in his Commentary says, that this place affords not any
thing for Purgatory, or venial sins. This his opinion is not suffered to
see light, but is blotted out. See Index Expurgatorius, which is made the true
Purgatory for Erasmus, and others that dare to doubt of the false Purgatory.

Fourthly, the words are all Allegorical. Now Symbolicall places prove not
Articles of Faith. And therein it is absurd to take any of the words properly
in continued metaphors, and wholly Allegorical.

Fifthly, this text speaks of burning of a man's work; but not of burning a
soul. But in Purgatory, they say, the soul is burning, and not his work;
works go not into Purgatory: but here works both good and bad are tried by
this fire.

Sixthly, this speaks of the work of Teachers, building upon the foundation
either Gold, Silver, or precious Stones, or Wood, Hay, and Stubble. By the
former must be understood either sound Doctrine, or sound-hearted Believers
won to Christ by their teaching: and then by the latter must be meant
errors, and unsound Doctrine; or hollow-hearted Christians, which in time of
fiery trial fall away. Take then either way, this is nothing for venial
sins, or bringing souls to a purgation. Accordingly in the thirteenth verse,
the fire is a revealing and trying fire, to manifest the difference of men's
works in the execution of their Ministry. What is this to the purging and
tormenting fire as a satisfactorie punishment for sin? Purgatory fire is a
material fire, say they; but a material fire cannot try Doctrines, truth from
falsehood, sound from unwholesome teaching.

Seventhly, the word fire in verse 15. cannot be taken for material fire, or
Purgatory fire.

First, because the continued metaphors in the whole context admits not of such
a proper and literal interpretation.

Secondly, the word of similitude is against it. For it is not said, by fire,
but as by fire; so it is not meant fire properly, but by some likeness; a
metaphorical fire, not a material fire.

Thirdly, Estius one of their own learned men, says, That the word fire three
times mentioned in verse 13, and 15, is the same in every place, and calls
the interpretation absurd, which puts a difference in them. Which being true,
the former fire in verse 13. not being meant of Purgatory, by Bellarmines
grant, this latter cannot but absurdly be so interpreted. And so in conclusion,
no Purgatory fire at all.

This fire is spiritual, such a fire as can try Doctrines, and can reveal
them, and can save the builder, though it consume his work, which fire is Gods
Word, Ier. 23. 29. and 20. 9. and Gods holy Spirit, Mar. 9. 49. Mat. 3. 11.
This word, by the operation of this Spirit upon the conscience of an erroneous
builder, when by the light of truth he sees his work vain and naught,
works as fire in him to make him confess his error, and to labor to teach
the truth, and thus is he saved, as by fire, the word being in him as fire, as
it was in Jeremy, especially in time of trouble, and day of trial for his
Doctrine.

Ioh. 11. 22. But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou will ask of God, God
will give it thee.

Cardinal Allen, says the Gagger, has hence learnedly concluded, that Martha
had been taught and believed, that the dead might be helped by the piety of
the living.

Answ. 1. How learnedly the Cardinal could conclude hence Purgatory, or the
Gagger to help him, I leave to learned men to judge, and withal, whether they
have not exposed themselves to folly, who hence would collect such a thing.

Secondly, touching the Jewish Church and her Doctrine, how Purgatory was
unknown to her and the Church of Israel under the Law, let the Reader peruse
Mornay of the Mass, his third book, and sixth Chapter.

Thirdly, the speech is to Christ, and of her full assurance of the efficacy
of his prayer unto God, even to raise up Lazarus from the dead, as appears by
the scope of her speech. What is this to help souls in Purgatory?

Act. 2. 24. Whom God has raised up, loosing the sorrows of Hell. This
clearly makes for Purgatory, says the wise Gagger; for here he and the
Rhemists will have Christ loose others from their pains.

Answ. 1. This speaks of Christ's rising from the dead by the power of God.

Secondly, of Gods raising him up, and loosing him from the sorrows of Hell,
and not of Christ's freeing others from torment.

Thirdly, here is no mention of Purgatory, but of Hell; And is Hell and
Purgatory now one place? I fear me they will find it so, that he which
goes to Purgatory, goes to Hell.

Fourthly, the word Hell is here taken properly, or figuratively. If properly
for hell it self, the place of the damned, then it is nothing for their
Purgatory: for from hell is no redemption, Luke 16. 26. If figuratively, then
it speaks not of any real Purgatory place: and so neither way serves their
turn.

Fifthly, if they will have the place to be for Purgatory, then is there no
cause now to fear it: for therein is now no more pains. For it is not said,
that he loosed the souls out of it, but the sorrows thereof, and took them
away. What makes this for Purgatory?

Sixthly, the word in the most current originals is (...), (though the old
vulgar read (...)) and the first signifies not Hell, but Death, so it is thus
to be read: loosing the sorrows of death, as we truly translate.

1. Cor. 15. 29. Otherwise what shall they do, that are baptized for the dead?
An evident proof says the Gagger.

Answ. 1. Howsoever the profound wisdom of the Gagger makes this evident, yet
Bellarmine graunts it to be a dark Scripture; and there, indeed, is not a
more obscure text, wherein most Expositors are to seek, and hardly can find
to give themselves satisfaction herein: And therefore being in sense dark and
doubtful, is not a sufficient proof in a Controversy.

Secondly, this so evident a place with the Gagger for Purgatory, the Rhemists
could not see to note it, nor Lyra, nor Thomas, nor Hugo de Sancto Charo a
Cardinal, nor their Gloss, nor Caietan, much less Saint Chrysostom, nor
Ambrose, nor Haymo, nor other more, some expounding it one way, some another,
but not of Purgatory, nor of any such thing as may justly infer Purgatory.

Thirdly, the scope of the place is to prove the Resurrection of the dead, and
not Purgatory; for it is said, If the dead rise not at all, why are they
baptized for the dead? Now, for them to expound baptized, afflicted; and
afflicted, to signify fasting and praying for the dead, and that for those in
Purgatory, it is far from proving the Apostles scope, and the Resurrection
from the dead.

Fourthly, whatsoever the sense of baptized for the dead may be; First, it is
clear, that here by dead is understood the dead in grave, whose bodies were to
rise again, and not of souls in Purgatory. Secondly, if baptism here should
be afflicting, yet to be baptized for the dead, is to be taken not actiuely
for such as baptize, that is, as our Adversaries here expound, do afflict
themselves, but passiuely for such to be afflicted by other. Thirdly, this
reason, which the Apostle uses, seems to be such a thing as was well known,
and so forcible to persuade to believe the Resurrection, as the same words are
in this one verse twice mentioned. But how can our Adversaries prove that men,
to afflict themselves by fasting, and prayer for the dead, was so well known
and practiced then in the Church? And yet if so, how proves it the Apostles
Doctrine, touching the Resurrection of the dead, and the bodies of men to rise
out of the grave? or that therefore there is a Purgatory? For the Believers
mourned for Steven, and made great lamentation over him, Act. 8. 2. yet proves
it not a Purgatory, nor that Steven was in it, being a Martyr, and the first
of all other. These three things let the Gagger prove, before he build his
paper Purgatory on this Text. Fifthly, the words for the dead may be expounded
for the hope of the Resurrection of the dead, and the word baptized, for
afflicted; and so the words may be thus read; Else what shall they do which
suffer and endure troubles in hope of the Resurrection of the dead, if so be
the dead do not rise at all? why are they then afflicted for this hope of the
dead to rise again? Thus interpreted it is current enough, and agreeable to
the scope, and the next verses 30, 31, 32. seem to me to confirm this
exposition. For the Apostle having said, Why are they baptized? forth with he
says, Why stand we in ieopardie every hour? then he tells of his dying
daily, and of his fighting with beasts at Ephesus, and all upon the hope of the
Resurrection, professing all to be in vain, and no advantage to him, if the
dead rise not at all. So as here the Apostle expounds the word baptized, to
be all one with, to stand in ieopardie, to dye daily, and to fight with beasts,
and the words for the dead, his certain hope of their rising again, which
aduantageth him in enduring such troubles and afflictions; else it were no
matter to live like Epicures, and then say, Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye. Thus this place understood remoueth obscurity, agrees
with the scope, has warrant from the style of the Apostle, is a strong reason
to persuade, that the dead shall rise again, and may satisfy the mind of him
that seeks resolution in so manifold varieties of expositions, as have been
hitherto made upon this place.

Luke 16. 9. Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when you
shallneed, they may receive you into the everlasting habitations.

Answ. 1. The Rhemists looking on this place, found no Purgatory, but that
Saints departed do pray for us. Which what is it to Purgatory?

Secondly, by they is to he understood the Angels: by the everlasting
habitations meant Heaven. How the Gagger could pick out Purgatory hence, I
see not. Surely he had a great blazing Torch, bigger then all Purgatory fire;
else could he not have seen Purgatory through this dark creuise.

Luke 23. 42. Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Hence,
says he, the good thief presupposed, that souls might be helped after death.

Answ. 1. What then? Ergo, a Purgatory? Prove this. For souls are helped
after death, when by the holy Angels they are carried into Abraham's bosom,
Luke 16. 22.

Secondly, the good Thief prays here to Christ for salvation by him, as now
he was in the world, and ready to die, and not through fear of Purgatory to
be delivered out of it. The Gagger must prove that he believed a Purgatory.

Thirdly, Christ's answer cleereth this, for he said, This day shall thou be
with me in Paradise. Christ understood him to pray to go to heaven, and not
to be helped in Purgatory, and therefore promises him Heaven that day,
whither he himself went.

2. Machab. 12. 46. It is therefore an holy and healthful cogitation This is
as it is in their Bible.
to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed from sins.

Answ. 1. This book is Apocryphal, and so of no force to persuade in a doubted
point of faith.

Secondly, here is no word of Purgatory, though we should admit of the place.

Thirdly, in this Verse (see Montanus his Bible) there is in the original, no
mention of praying for the dead, but of making reconciliation.

Fourthly, but to yield the translation: What then? Praying for the dead
proves not Purgatory. For the Greeks pray for the dead, and yet believe no
Purgatory.

Fifthly, they prayed here for the pardon of sins, and not for freedom out of
Purgatory.

Sixthly, the parties here prayed for, dyed in mortal sin, and were guilty of
horrible idolatry forbidden by the Law, ver. 40. but such as so dye, go not to
Purgatory, it is a place for venial, and not for mortal sinners, as they
teach.

Seventhly, the moving cause of their praying, and making an offering to send
to Jerusalem for a sinne-offering, was, for that they were mindful of the
Resurrection, verse 44. and not that they thought these men to be in
Purgatory. This rests to be proved.

Eighthly, and lastly, it is clear, that the Author of this book did not
dream of any Purgatory: For he makes the ground of praying for the dead,
only the hope of the Resurrection, affirming the act otherwise to be
superfluous and vain, verse 44.

Tobie 4. 18. Set thy bread and thy wine upon the burial of In ours, Chap. 4.
17.
the just man: but do not eat and drink thereof with sinners.

Answ. 1. This book is Apocryphal; and therefore of no such credit as to end a
Controversy.

Secondly, here is not one word of Purgatory.

Thirdly, nor any mention of prayers for the dead, by which they infer,
though unsoundly, Purgatory.

Fourthly, this Feast was for the comfort of the living sorrowing for the dead,
as is clear out of Ier. 16. 7. and not for any thing touching the souls
departed.

Fifthly, the name of Just man is against the conceit of being in Purgatory;
for the just shall go into life everlasting, Mat. 25. 46. The souls of the
just are in the hand of God, and torment shall not touch them, says the book
of Wisdom, chap. 3. 1.

Esai. 4. 4. The Lord shall cleanse the filth of the Daughters of Sion, and
shall wash the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof, in the spirit of
judgment, and spirit of heat.

First, these words are wholly Metaphorical, and not properly spoken, to be
taken after the letter.

Secondly, he speaks here not of venial sins, liable to Purgatory, but of
mortal sins set out under filth, and blood.

Thirdly, this cleansing was to be in the midst of Jerusalem; was Purgatory in
it?

Esai. 9. 18. For impietieis kindled as a fire, it shall devour Bryer and
Thorn.

Answ. 1. This speaks not of Purgatory, but of impiety, and the nature,
thereof. But the Gagger did well to take impiety, for Purgatory; for it is an
impious conceit: and Purgatory can as truly purge sin, as impiety it
self, and both alike.

Secondly, here is not a speaking of fire, but only by way of similitude,
kindled as a fire; and not properly meant of any material fire.

Thirdly, they say, Purgatory fire is but a purging, and not a devouring fire;
but here the Prophet speaks of devouring.

Fourthly, Purgatory fire deuoures not Briars and Thorns: and if they expound
these of sins, then are they not venial, for briars and thorns are the
curse on the earth: and therefore if they set out sins, they must note out
cursed sins.

Fifthly, the Prophet speaks of Gods wrath, which he would power out against
the people then alive in those days for their wickedness, as the words
before, from verse 13. and after this text, verse 19. do evidently show. Thus
Jerome, Haymo, and other take to be the meaning.

Math. 3. 11. He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire.

Answ. A man would judge the Gagger a very Goose, in citing this for
Purgatory: but that Bellarmine produced it before him.

I answer: First, if fire be here Purgatory, then Christ baptized with the holy
Ghost, and with Purgatory. Did he so?

Secondly, let them allegorize how they will, the absurdities arising are so
great, as no reasonable judgment will rest thereupon. For almost every thing
in the text overthrows this feigned Purgatory prison.

I. Agree. This being done, preuents going to this prison of Purgatory. For he
is cast in for not agreeing. But all the godly (who only are subject to go
into Purgatory, and not the wicked) have made their agreement with God, by
Christ, who has satisfied for them, procured for them remission of sins, and
made an atonement to God for them, Romans 5. 10, 11. Therefore by this text, none
that are in Christ, go into this prison: and so none at all: for the Reprobate
go to Hell. This Purgatory prison is therefore a babish Bugbeare: a place for
no body.

II. With thine Adversary. This is diversely expounded: but take it which way
they will, it serves not for Purgatory.

First, some make him the Devil: But with this Adversary we may not agree, but
must ever, etc. Iam. 4. 7. And what has the Devil to do with Purgatory?

Secondly, some say he is God. If so, First, he is agreed with, as before is
showed, so as by him we cannot be cast into Purgatory justly. Secondly, who
is the Magistrate to whom God leads us, Luke 12. 58? Is any above God, that
he needs to seek justice at the hands of another? Cannot he right himself?
Thirdly, but where read we, that God is called an Adversary to his children?
We read the Devil to be our Adversary, 1. Pet. 5. and the man of sin, the
Romish Antichrist, 2. These. 2. 4. but where is God so called? Fourthly, if he
be, in casting of his into Purgatory for their venial sins; then are
venial sins injurious to God: which they deny; but if they were not, God
would be their Adversary for such sins, not being reconciled, till they had
made him satisfaction.

Thirdly, some make this Adversary the Law: but if the law be he, then venial
sins are the breach of the law, and so become mortal. For the law curses
every one that obeys not all things therein, Deuteronomy. 27. Neither does the law
send them to Purgatory, but as accursed to Hell. Yet can it not thus do with
such as be in Christ; for he was made under the Law, to redeem us from the
curse thereof, Gal. 4. 3, 4.

III. Quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him. The way here is either
good or bad. Not bad: for how can God (whom Bellarmine makes this Adversary)
walk with him, that he is an Adversary to, in an ill way? If a good way, how
is it that he and the offending party should continue at odds, and he be his
Adversary in a good way?

IV. Lest at any time (to wit, in this life, being in the way) the Adversary
deliver thee to the Judge. Who may this Judge be? Between God and us there is
no Vmpire or Dayes-man, Job 9. 33. Christ indeed is Judge; but first he sits
not yet to judge, but at the last Day; as yet he sits to make intercession for
his people to God, to reconcile God to them. Secondly, when Christ is Judge, he
shall reward all the godly, he delivers them not to the Jailer, as the Judge
here does. And thirdly, this Adversary delivers the offender to this Judge to
be punished: but God the Father draws such as he will save, to Christ: Christ
therefore is not this Judge. And who he may be else, let the Gagger tell us:
for other Judge of men before God there is none, after this life.

V. And the Judge deliver thee to the Jailer or Officer. In this Allegory, the
Judge is last; except they will say it is conscience. But will God deliver his
servants over to the worm of conscience at their death? This were to send
them, not to Purgatory, but to Hell, where this worm dies not. And if the
Judge be Conscience, I pray them tell us, who then is the Officer subject to
Conscience? If they say, The Officer is the Devil, or some one of his wicked
angels: who can believe it? For will either God, or Christ permit Devils to
carry souls to Purgatory? Or is it some good Angel? Good Angels carry
souls into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. and not into Purgatory. And they are
ministering spirits for the good of those that be heirs of salvation, Heb. 2.
14. and not Gaolers to cast the godly into fiery torments. As the Judge is
lost in this Allegory; so the Officer or Jailer for this Purgatory prison
cannot be found.

VI. And thou be cast into prison. Here is the punishment for non-agreement.
This prison, say they, is Purgatory: but that cannot be.

First, because in the whole New Testament, it is taken either properly for a
place for Malefactors here, Act. 12. or else for hell, 1. Pet. 3. 10. Reu. 20.
7. No where for Purgatory.

Secondly, they that go to Purgatory, are the Penitent, say they, but the
offending party cast into this prison, is one that will not agree with his
Adversary, but forces him to show extremity, and so is he obstinate.

Thirdly, this party is injurious to God, in making him an Adversary, in
obstinate persisting, and he is much offended, in that he causes him to be
cast into prison: an act expressing anger, Math. 25. 30. Now, say they,
obstinate offenders sin not venially, neither is venial sin injurious to
God, as they say. Therefore this prison cannot be Purgatory, into which such
an offender is cast.

VII. Thou shall not come out thence, till thou have paid the utmost farthing.
These words show that this prison cannot be Purgatory. For till here is
never, as in other Scriptures, Math. 1. 25. Numb. 20. 17. Psalm. 110. 1. Luke
22. 16, 18. 1. Sam. 15. 35. Till thou have paid, imply not that the man can
pay, or that lying in prison, he does pay, as our Adversaries dream. For going
into prison, argues inabilitie to pay, Mat. 18. and lying in prison is no
payment, but rather a punishment for not paying. As for these words, the utmost
farthing, argue not, as foolishly our Adversaries do imagine, that the party
lies here only for farthings, to which they compare venial sins, as if he
had made payment of greater sums, but had not satisfied for farthings, when
here is no mention of paying any part of the debt, greater or lesser, and the
utmost farthing is named, not to imply payment of any part, or to make a
difference of lesser moneys from greater sums, or as they speak of venial
sins from mortal, but to show the extremity whereto the debtor shall be
brought, before he be freed from prison. Here is nothing then for venial
sinues, more then to imagine that this debtor ought a sum of money all of
farthings only, or that he had agreed with his Adversary for pounds,
shillings, and pence: but now would be so froward as to stand out for
farthings, and for these to be cast into prison, of which to any reasonable man
there is no likelihood. Thus we see how in all the words, the Allegory, to
prove their Purgatory, is wholly overthrown: so as this place must needs be
taken properly, and nothing at all serves for their purpose.

2. Tim. 1. 18. The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in
that Day.

Answ. The Gagger cites this for Purgatory; but how he can hence prove it, I
see not. In that Day, is the last Day. And must an Onesiphorus, a man of such
rare mercies, go to Purgatory?

1. Ioh. 5. 16. If any man see his brother sin a sin not unto death, he
shall ask, etc.

Answ. Here is no word of Purgatory, but mention of some sin to death, and
other some not to death, as are the sins of infirmity, committed by Gods
Elect. What is this to prove a Purgatory? Thus much for the objected
Scriptures in defense of their ignis fatuus, as one well calls it.

XXVIII. Proposition. That good works do merit, and are the cause of our
salvation:
Confuted by their own Bible.
I. IT concludes all, even the best that ever were, under sin, 1. Ioh. 1. 8,
10. If we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves. John includes
himself. Romans 3. 23. All have sinned, Esai. 53. 6. All we like sheep have
gone astray: on him is the iniquity of us all. 1. King. 8. 46. There is no man
that sins not. Iam. 3. 2. In many things we offend all. James includes
himself, and all to whom he wrote this general Epistle. Pro. 20. 9. Who can
say, My heart is clean, I am pure from sin? None but Jesus Christ only, and
he alone, Hebr. 4. 15. 1. Ioh. 3. 5. 1. Pet. 2. 22. 2. Cor. 5. 21. Therefore
where sin is, there is a stain of all our actions; and so cannot be
meritorious, or cause of salvation.

Secondly, it teaches us, that we are like a dead man in sins, Ephesians. 2. 1,
5. Col. 2. 13. so as our wills are not to do good, till God make us willing, as
in the next Proposition, I shall fully show. Now where man's own will is
wanting, till by another it be made willing, his works cannot merit. For a
meritorious work must come of man's free will.

Thirdly, it teaches that all our goodness without us and within us, is of
Gods grace; By the grace of God, I am that I am, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.
10. It is of his goodness, Romans 11. 22. of his benignity and kindness, Tit.
3. 4. and of his good will, Phil. 2. 13. 2. Tim. 1. 12. that we are converted.
Now, if all that which we do, either doing good works, or suffering for his
name, 1. Chron. 29. 12, 14, 16. Phil. 2. 29. be of God, and that of his mere
grace, mercy, benignity, and good will; how can man do a good work to merit
at Gods hands? For a work that merits, must be our own; but what have we that
we have not received, 1. Cor. 4. 7? Who has first given to him, then
retribution shall be made of him, Romans 11. 35? In the mean space we do give
to God only of his own, 1. Cor. 29. 12, 14, 16. Deuteronomy. 8. 18. And profit we
him any thing thereby? He is not the better by us, Psalm. 16. 2. What he
wills us to do, is not for his good, but for our own, that he in mercy
might do us good, Deuteronomy. 5. 29.

Fourthly, it teaches us, that though we in state of grace, be thus furnished
of God, and hereby made willing and able to do that which is good and
well-pleasing, through Christ, in his sight: yet are we not in this life able
perfectly to fulfill the Law of God: Adam once could; in heaven hereafter we
may, but here it is not possible. For in Eccl. 7. 21. it is said, There is no
just man in the earth that does good, and sins not. All the examples of the
godly witness the truth hereof, and every man's own experience, and every man's
own conscience, if it be not dead, or seared. For the obedience required, is
not only external, but spiritual and internal also, and this absolutely in
all perfection to be performed, to all the commandments generally, to every
commandment particularly, and to every branch of every of them, at all times,
without the least omission. But this obedience is impossible to be performed of
any in this life; for that there is both flesh and Spirit in every man, which
two are such adversaries one to another, so as the best men cannot do the
things which they would, Galat. 5. 17. This inability, through this corruption,
Saint Paul found and confessed to be even in himself, Romans 7. 15, 19.
Therefore all our obedience being imperfect, our works cannot be meritorious,
and cause of salvation. Merit requires perfection, and admits not
imperfection; for cursed is every one that keeps not the words of the Law,
and fulfilleth them not in works, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. So far is man from meriting,
as a malediction is due, if he do not obey the commandments, Deuteronomy. 11. 28.

V. It teaches us, that therefore through this our defect, good works are
secluded from being the meritorious cause of our salvation, 2. Tim. 1. 9.
Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. By grace you are saved through faith; not of works, that no
man glory, Romans 4. 2. If Abraham was justified by works, he had to glory, but
not with God. None are clean before him, Job 25. 4, 5, 6. and 9. 2, 3. Romans 3.
28. and 9. 16. We account a man to be justified by faith, without the works
of the Law. It is not of the willer, nor of the runner, but of God that shows
mercy. Psalm. 48. 8, 9. He shall not In ours, Psalm. 49. 8, 9.
give unto God his reconciliation, and the price of the Redemption of his own
soul. Therefore good works, though they ever accompany those that are saved,
and justified in Christ, as fruits of a lively faith, yet are not the cause of
salvation, nor do justify us before God.

VI. It teaches, that God therefore, to make us accepted, gave us his Son to
become all in all for us.

First, he was made under the Law, to redeem us from under it, Gal. 4. 4, 5.
Secondly, he was made a curse for us, to redeem us from the curse, Gal. 3.
43. Thirdly, he was wounded for our iniquities, and broken for our sins,
Esai. 53. 5. by whose stripes we are healed, 2. Pet. 2. 24. Fourthly, he
himself bare our sins in his body upon the tree, 1. Pet. 2. 24. making
Purgatory for sins, Heb. 1. 3. and so for us was made sin, that we might
be made the justice of God in him, 2. Cor. 5. 21. and so live to justice, 1.
Pet. 2. 24. Fifthly, hereby he is become our Wisdom, Justice, Sanctification
and Redemption, 1. Cor. 1. 30. that we may glory in him, verse 31. for in him
the righteousness of God through faith is ours, Romans 10. 3. and 3. 22. and so
there can be to us no condemnation being in Christ. Therefore he is our merit
and cause of salvation, and not our own works.

VII. It teaches, that the Apostle hereupon makes man's blessedness to
consist, not in his own merits and works, but in reputing justice without
works, and in forgiving, and not imputing sin, Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. which
forgiving is our keeping of the Law. For as Saint Austin in retract. lib. 1.
cap. 19. says, All the commandments are holden to be kept, when that which is
not kept is forgiven. And again, All our righteousness (says he) stands
rather in the remission of our sins, then in any perfection of justice, De
ciu. Dei, lib. 19. cap. 27. Therefore if man's obedience and keeping be in
forgiveness, and his blessedness stand therein without works, how is it
possible to imagine, works to be the meritorious cause of our salvation?

VIII. It teaches that, for all the graces in us, and for all our obedience to
him, God only promises to be merciful, as in Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Thou shall know
that the Lord thy God, he is a strong and a faithful God, keeping his
Covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his precepts.
So in Exo. 20. 6. Doing mercy to them that love him and keep his precepts.
Here both for the inward love of God, and outward obedience, is only promised
mercy. Now where mercy needs, there can be no merit, Romans 11. 6.

IX. It teaches, that the godly 1. acknowledge in all humility their sins,
Psalm. 51. 3, 4. Esdr. 9. 6. Dan. 9. 1. Secondly, they vilify themselves, Job
9. 2, 3, 30, 31. and 42. 6. 1. Cor. 4. 4. and also those things which seem to
be of worth in them. We, says the Prophet, are become as one unclean, and all
our justices as the cloth of a menstruous woman, Esa. 64. 6. Thirdly, they
confess, that if God be strict in justice, none can be able In ours, Psalm.
130. 3.
to endure, Psalm. 129. 3. If thou shall observe iniquities, O Lord, Lord, who
shall sustain it? Fourthly, hereupon they crave that God would not enter into
judgment with them, for that so no flesh should be justified in his sight,
Psalm. 142. 2. Fifthly, they In ours, Psalm. 143. 2.
therefore appeal from his justice, to his mercy, calling and crying for it,
as in Psalm. 129. 3. With thee there is propitiation: and Psalm. 130. 3. Psalm.
51. 1.
saying also in Psalm. 50. 1. Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy great
mercy, giving a reason, Dan. 9. 18. For not in our iustifications do we
prostrate prayers before thy face, but in thy many commiserations. And
therefore says David, Psalm. Psalm. 119.
118. 76. Let thy mercy be done to comfort me. He seeks comfort in mercy,
and not in merit. Did these holy people of God dream of merit, and of the
worth of their works, as the proud condemned Pharise did, Luke 18? or rather
did they not as the poor Publican did, who cried, Lord, have mercy on me a
sinner? and therefore went away more justified then the other? The godly know,
if that they should justify themselves, their own mouths would condemn
them, Job 9. 20. And all are by Christ, Matthew. 6. taught in Prayer, to fly to
God for mercy, and to beg forgiveness, and not to plead merit.

X. It teaches, that all whatsoever God did to Israel his people, all was of
his mercy, Psalm. 135. The possession of the Psalm 136.
Land of Canaan was not merited by Gods people, Deuteronomy. 9. 5. For, says God, Not
because of thy justices, and equity of thy heart do thou enter in to
possess thy lands: I do it not for your sake, be it known unto you, says
the Lord, but for my holy name. So in Ezech. 36. 22, 32. Now, if the type of
heaven could not be merited by either inward grace, or outward works, may we
think that heaven may be merited, when Saint Paul tells us, that it is the gift
of God, Romans 6. 23? Gift is free, and not purchased.

XI. It teaches, that the passions of this time are not condign to the glory
to come, Romans 8. 18. If persecution and suffering Martyrdom cannot merit
condignely the glory in heaven: What may we think of other works whatsoever?
For neither our goods, nor goodnesses, is any thing unto God, Psalm. 16. 2.

XII. It teaches, that no man can merit of God, by doing that which he ought
to do; but rather, when we have done all things that are commanded, to judge
our selves unprofitable servants, Luke 17. 10. But whatsoever we do in
obedience to God, the same we ought to do, and that with all our mind, heart,
soul, and strength, Matthew. 22. and therefore cannot merit by duty, no more
then a man can merit by paying his debts. This it is, which made Saint Paul to
say that he had nothing to glory of, when he did but his duty, 1. Cor. 9. 16.

Lastly, it is altogether needless to conceit of merit. For what would we
merit? Is it pardon of sin? or favor of God? or life everlasting, life and
heaven it self? Then these need not be merited.

For first, Christ has by his blood cleansed us of all our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.
7. God through him has pardoned all offenses, Col. 2. 13. Ephesians. 1. 7. Act.
13. 38. and so are we healed, 1. Pet. 2. 24.

Secondly, Christ has reconciled us to God, Romans 5. 10, 11. and so have we
peace with him through Christ, Romans 5. 1.

Thirdly, Christ has gotten us full assurance of Heaven, by the surest way
that may be: for it is ours both by purchase, Heb. 9. 12. by donation, Ioh. 10.
28. and also by inheritance, Romans 8. 17. Gal. 4. 7. and 3. 29. So as our
obedience, and service, and works are done, not to merit eternal life, but
rather to express our thankfulness for those things which he has done for
us.

It is with us, as with a man once very rich and wealthy under Simile.
a great Landlord, whose Tenant 1. has run himself out of all, and turned
Bankerupt: 2. is become infinitely in debt, and not able to pay: 3. is at last
cast into prison, there to lie and dye for any means possible, either by
himself, or any of his friends to set him free. Now, the son of this his
great Landlord is so exceeding full of compassion and love, that of mere
pity, without any suite or desert of the party imprisoned: First, goes and
pays all the debt to the utmost farthing, satisfying all to the full, and so
freeth him of his imprisonment. Secondly, then he purchases again his Lands,
and redeemeth them for the poor Tenants use and benefit, as before, and makes
them sure to him again by word and writing, sealed and delivered before
witnesses. Thirdly, he furnishes him with moneys to set him on work, and to
manage this his estate as long as he lives: So as he becomes hereby rich.
Now, what is this man to do with these his moneys, and with honest increase
thereof? Is he to pay his debts therewith? They be paid already. Is he to
purchase his Lands again, and to redeem them therewith? They are purchased to
his hand. What is he then to do? By the Law of gratitude, he is only to
express his thankfulness, by showing himself obliged to him in all
serviceable duties for ever, to love him unfeignedly, fear to offend him at any
time, and to be ever ready at his command; and not, like a proud arrogant
dotard, to endeavor with this his friends moneys to make needless payments,
and purchases, as if he scorned to be beholding to such a friend, as had done
already all these things for him. This tenant is Adam and his posterity,
Application.
who lost Paradise, and all his right of heaven and earth, and by his sins to
God became infinitely indebted, and so is cast into the kingdom of darkness
unrecoverably, in respect of any power of any natural man to redeem him. But
Christ Jesus he comes, by his death pays his debts, and by his obedience
purchases him the right of heaven and earth again. This he assures him of by
his word, writing the covenant in his heart: then gives he him his Spirit, the
seal of that inheritance, and so thereupon the comfort of conscience to be
witness thereto. Then does he bestow upon him manifold gifts and graces to
adorn his profession, to glorify Christ, and to allure other to his service,
to stop the mouths of wicked blasphemers, to enable him the better to do
Christ's service, and to show himself thankful, and not to strive
vaine-gloriously to make himself copurchaser with Christ, and that not with
any thing of his own, but with Christ's own gifts and graces. These former
ends we Protestants only aim at, and do rest with our Lord and Saviors
purchase most thankefully. This latter the proud Pharisaicall Papists strive
unto, as if Christ's payment and purchase were insufficient without their help,
and yet without Christ's bounty, are beggarly wretches. This their pride,
ingratitude, and derogation from Christ's goodness toward them, do deserve
damnation.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Austin lib. de gra. and lib. arbit. cap. 9. God brings us to eternal life,
not for our merits, but for his own mercy.

Origin. ad Romans lib. 4. cap. 4. I hardly believe, that there is any work,
that may require the reward of debt. Because this is lately handled out of the
Fathers, he that desires any more, let him read Bishop Vshers last book,
touching merits, who cites Saint Austin, Ambrose, Origin, Hillary, Basil,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Cyril of Alexandria, Prosper, Ennodius, Fulgentius,
Eusebius, Emissen, Agapetus, Bernard, and diverse others more. Read also Doctor
White his last Book against Fisher, of this Controversy, page 510.

Gainsaid by themselves.
In the Canon of the Mass, the Priest makes his prayer thus: Receive us into
the fellowship of thy Saints, not weighing our merits, but granting us pardon
by Jesus Christ our Lord. Here is renouncing merit, and appealing to mercy
through Christ.

Saint Gregory on Psalm. 7. poenit. It is one thing for God to reward men
according to their works, and another for the works themselves: and he
alleges the Apostles saying, The suffering of this life is not worthy of the
glory of the life to come.

Our Adversaries grant, that the children which go to heaven, go thither
without merit, by the virtue of the free Adoption by Jesus Christ. Now, the
means of salvation in Christ is one, and not diverse, in respect of the persons
saved, for one sort to be saved without, and another by merits: as if Christ
were not alike sufficient for both; or that there were any other ground of
salvation, then the free election of grace, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. Romans 11. 5, 6. Act.
13. 48.

See the forenamed D. White against the merit of condignitie, citing Gregory
Arimine, Durand, Marsilius, Waldensis, Burgensis, Digres. 3 5. Sec. 15.
Eckius, with others. Also his Brother D. Whites way of the true Church,
producing some of these, and withal, citing Ferus, Bellarmine, Stella his
prayer on Luke, chap. 7. and Anselmes prayer taught the people; renouncing and
plainly denying their own merits, and resting on Christ's merits, and his
blessed death and Passion only.

Scriptures objected answered.
Matthew. 16. 27. He shall reward every man according to his works. Matthew. 5.
12. Great is your reward in Heaven. So Matthew. 10. 42. Romans 2. 6. 1. Cor. 3. 8.
Revel. 22. 12. Ierem. 31. 16.

Answ. 1. There is, Romans 4. 4. a reward of mercy and grace, which we
acknowledge, and not of desert and merit: for a reward may be of bounty above
any due to the party, but so cannot merit. Ambrose Epist. lib. 1. There is one
kind of reward of liberality and grace; and another the wages of virtues and
recompense of labors.

Secondly, the reward here being understood of eternal life, must needs be of
mercy; for eternal life, says the Apostle, is the gift of God, Romans 6. 23.
and not man's purchase. A gift is free, and cannot be merited by works: for to
him that works, the reward is reckoned not of grace, but of debt, Romans 4. 4.
Heaven then being Gods gift, cannot be due for works, to make God become
indebted to man.

Thirdly, the Rewarder here is God. Now, he rewards two ways, either in mere
justice, or in justice and mercy both. In mere justice so rewards he the
wicked, justly deserving damnation. In justice and mercy both: so believers in
Christ. In justice first, in respect of Christ's meriting reward for his:
secondly, for that God is just in his promise, and having promised a reward in
his justice, he will perform it. In mercy yet this is to us: first, in respect
of our selves, deserving no such reward: then, in respect of the moving cause,
which is his own good pleasure, to make such a promise, and to accept us in
Christ, and so to reward us.

Fourthly, the reward here is promised to the persons, He will reward every
man, and not the work: for the person makes the work accepted, as Abel did
his offering, and not the work the Genesis 4. Heb. 11.
person with God.

Fifthly, it is not here said, for his works, as noting any cause of man's
reward, but according to his works, showing the quality of the works, as they
may excel one another, and how our works should be the measure, according to
which God would mete and proportion out the heavenly rewards. For as men here
excel in virtues, so shall they in glory; and therefore of such as suffer for
Christ, he says, Great is your reward, Matthew. 5.

Sixthly, if works were rewarded, yet is it in mercy, and not for the merit of
them: for are they not imperfect, as before is proved? Again, are they not his
own, fruits of his own Spirit? and can we merit to give to God his own?
Moreover, what equality is there between heaven, the reward, and the work
wrought? None at all. And therefore the reward is in mercy, and not in merit.

2. Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad.

Answ. 1. Here is intended only, that in general there shall be a retribution
of reward and punishment. And therefore the diverse mean of procuring both
these is not specified: but a phrase used, which may extend to both, according
to that he has done, in either kind. Otherwise for the one, namely, for doing
badly, might truly, and properly have bin said, For the merit, or demerit of
evil works, punishment is due. But because it could not be said so of the
other, therefore the word according is used. And so the scope of the place
reaches only to show, that there shall be a manifestation of our works, and
retribution for them. But if we will needs particularize here of the manner of
rewarding good works, then we say, that the Judge here, Jesus Christ, comes
not to reward his, according to their merit, with heaven: for it is said, that
he gives to them eternal life, Ioh. 10. 28. By his blood himself obtained
it for them, Heb. 9. 12. They do not then merit that which is gift: and
therefore he proceeds not here according to any merit in them.

1. Cor. 4. 5. Then shall every man have praise of God.

Answ. 1. Here is no merit spoken of.

Secondly, the person is praised, and not his works: and this God does of his
goodness, for our faithfulness, Matthew. 25. 21, 23. but not for the
worthiness of the work done.

Thirdly, Saint Paul, verse 4. the very next verse before says, Though I know
nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. He conceited therefore no
merit.

Fourthly, the praise here intended specially, is in regard of sincerity of
teaching, whereby Saint Paul implies, that other false and proud teachers were
not so praiseworthy, as some of the Corinthians thought, being seduced by them.

1. Cor. 9. 17, 18. I have a reward, verse 25.

They strive to obtain an incorruptible Crown.

Answ. 1. This reward is of mercy, and not of merit: for the incorruptible
Crown, that is, Heaven, is obtained by Christ, and is his gift to us:
therefore not obtained by merit.

Secondly, our obtaining by striving, is the obtaining of the assurance of the
Crown in our selves, and not the obtaining of the Crown it self through the
worthiness of the striving: seeing we are commanded to strive, Luke 13. 24.
Now, that which is done of duty, cannot merit.

Thirdly, the Apostle first, in verse 16. tells us, that in doing his duty,
he has nothing to glory of: Then in verse 17. he applies the reward, not to
the work wrought, but to his willingness in working: yet he implies, that
there may be an unwillingness: and does he not acknowledge, Romans 7. 18. that
where a will is, yet there may want ability to perform?

Lastly, in verse 18. he plainly expresses what he means there by reward;
not heaven, but in preaching, to make the Gospel of Christ without charge.

Hebr. 11. 26. He had respect to the recompense of reward.

Answ. 1. The blundering Friars, wheresoever they find in Scripture, reward,
presently cry out that they have found merit. How often have we told the^ out of
the ancient Fathers, nay, out of civil experience, that reward and merit be not
always Relatiues? that there is a reward of grace as well as of due debt, Romans
4. 4?

Secondly, who knows not, but that even here men requite labors without
desert?

Thirdly, Moses had respect to the recompense upon Gods promise made, and not
upon the merit of his own doing: for he makes not his own act, the procurer
of the recompense, but the certainty of the recompense, the setter of him
forward to the work.

Psalm. 18. 20. The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness, etc.

Answ. 1. David speaks in his life time of that which God had done for him in
delivering him from Saul, and from his enemies, which dealt most unjustly with
him: here therefore first David's righteousness is his righteousness toward
men, which God mercifully looked upon, and not any righteousness of his before
God: for this David disclaimed, Psalm. 130. 3. and 143. 2. Secondly, the reward
here is not heaven, but David's deliverance, and Gods favorable protection of
him in his troubles.

Revel. 3. 4. For they are worthy.

Answ. 1. This is spoken of the persons, and not of their works.

Secondly, the word worthy, is here indeterminately set down, and does not
show how they are worthy. Therefore before it be determined, it must be
proved by other Scriptures, how they became worthy: else merit cannot hence be
concluded.

Thirdly, men by the Gospel are worthy, not of themselves, but through Christ,
who is their righteousness before God, 1. Cor. 1. 30. Worthy they were,
because Christ was pleased to count them worthy, as 2. These. 1. 5.

Fourthly, this may be understood comparatively, in respect of others in
Sardis, who had defiled themselves, etc. Digni, non ex dignitate, sed
dignatione.


Col. 2. 24. Knowing that ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance; for
ye serve the Lord Christ.

Answ. 1. Here the Apostle speaks of servants, how in doing faithfully their
service to men, they serve Christ himself. Now, for servants to serve their
Master faithfully, is a duty commanded by God, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6. But imposed
duties done, cannot merit, Luke 17. 10. 1. Cor. 9. 16.

Secondly, the word for expresses not the cause of the reward: but the sign
and true token to our selves of obtaining it. It notes the quality and
condition of such as may look for eternal life; as also the way and order,
which they that come thereto, do observe here in this life, and not the cause
thereof.

Genesis 15. I am thy great reward.

This is spoken of God himself. Can he himself be merited of us? Can man by
any work bring God himself to be the very due debt? I tremble to think so.
Let any Pharise thus challenge God: I dare not.

1. Tim. 4. 8. Godliness has promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come.

Answ. 1. That which is of promise, comes freely, and is not merited. God
promised Christ. Did we merit him? Christ promised his holy Spirit. Was it
merited?

Secondly, all promises of God made to his people, are made in Christ. In him
all the promises of God are yea, and Amen; they have their ground and
performance in him, and for his sake, to us. This very word cutteth the sinews
of Merit, and shows that we claim of God fidelity in performing his
promise, but not the payment of a deserved debt.

2. Tim. 4. 8. The Crown of righteousness, which the Lord that righteous
Judge shall give me at that day.

Answ. 1. Before is showed how eternal life, which is this Crown of
righteousness, is given us freely by Christ.

Secondly, it is called the Crown of righteousness, because he glorifieth
thus those whom he justifies, Romans 8. 30.

Thirdly, Saint Paul disclaimed justification by his own righteousness, 1.
Cor. 4. 4. and 9. 16. and taught salvation to be by grace, and not by works,
Ephesians. 2. Here therefore he speaks not of merit: for so should he be
contrary to himself.

Fourthly, Saint Paul speaks in verse 7. of nothing done by him, but that
which by duty he was bound to do. Was he not bound to fight a good fight,
to finish his course, and to keep the faith? Then could he not merit by his
duty, as before is proved.

Fifthly, the Lord is said to be righteous in rewarding, not in respect either
of us, or of our work, but in respect of his promise to reward, which he is
just to perform: for by our works we make him not debtor; but he makes
himself so of his mere goodness by promising, for he is not unjust to
forget our works, Heb. 6. 10. for his own promise sake: for he is just in his
sayings, Romans 3. 4. Where note also, that the truth of God, verse 7. is called
the righteousness of God, verse 5. and he is said to be just, as well in
forgiving, 1. Ioh. 1. 9. as in punishing: and a merciful righteousness there
is in God, even his faithfulness toward his people, in performance of his
Word, which is opposed to the justice of God, by which he rewards men
according to their deserts, Psalm. 143. 1, 21. Consider this well, and thou
shall never swell with merit.

2. These. 1. 5. That ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for
which resuffer.

Answ. 1. Touching the word worthy: see before the answer to Reu. 3. 4.

Secondly, here it is not said, that they are worthy, or might be worthy, but,
that they may be counted worthy. Now, to be so, and to be counted so, do much
differ. For they be counted so, that in themselves are not so, but in another,
as we all be through Christ. So Saint Paul prays to God for this, as a
mercy from him, toward them, that he would count them worthy. Now, God does
count none worthy but in Christ, in whom only he is pleased, Matthew. 3. 17.
Therefore the Thessalonians were not worthy by any thing in themselves.
Thirdly, their sufferings made them not worthy of eternal life: for the
Apostle had taught the contrary, Romans 8. 18.

XXIX. Proposition. Of Free Will, and the strength thereof.
BEfore I come to propound the question, that it may be truly understood,
somethings are to be premised.

First, that there is the faculty called the will in every reasonable soul.

Secondly, that this will is a free and active will, in it self, and to
anything it wills, without enforcement.

Thirdly, that this will has the understanding, the other faculty of the
soul, ever going before it, to be the informer thereof.

Fourthly, that this will has power to choose, or refuse the thing objected,
and laid before it, or to pause and rest it self between both.

Fifthly, that the use of this free will was, to compass all those ends for
which man was made, (which were as manifold as man's composition, who is
microcosmus) and to do such things as should tend to his own good, and Gods
glory: but by sinning, man has left off this free will, till it be repaired by
grace: yet not wholly, but that in diverse things some power remains;

First, in all natural actions, as to eat, sleep, walk, sit, stand, and to
use all other bodily actions, and use of the senses, for preservation of life,
and for avoiding things hurtful; the general gift in nature, common to all
unreasonable creatures. Only whereas these move to their end, yet are they not
privy (for want of reason) to discern what they do: but man, as Lord of his
own actions, does what he does, out of his own choice, by knowledge, and
deliberation before hand.

Secondly, in humane actions; as to speak, discourse, learn and teach Arts
and Sciences, and all such things as be common to all of mankind, that they
may live in the world, as men, among men, in civil societies profitably.

Thirdly, in Moral actions; as to do justice, to live temperately, chastely,
to do good to others, to relieve, help and defend them, and to do actions of
common honesty, and such things as be praiseworthy, and common among
ciuill-minded men, which know how to govern themselves after a commendable
fashion in well-ordered societies: but yet all these with great weakness, and
maimedly.

Fourthly, in sinful actions, even to the full, and that with greediness,
Ephesians. 4. 19. as to blaspheme, despise Religion, persecuting the truth, and to
do all manner of evil, drawing iniquity in cords of vanity, and sin, as
the link of a Waine, Esa. 5. 18. as far as God will permit.

Fifthly, in outward means tending to spiritual ends: by Gods appointment, as
to come to the Church, to say prayers, to read and preach the Word, to hear
it read and preached, to receive the Sacraments, to confer and reason of
points of Religion, to profess it openly, to submit, and outwardly to conform
to the orders of the Church; and to observe such things therein, as be common
to the outward profession of Christianity. But herein the power of the will is
wondrous weak and defective, as is clear by too lamentable experience, and
in the judgment of every man's conscience. Thus far man has free will before
regeneration, but the power thereof in these forenamed means, is not without
the common help of Gods Spirit: for a man cannot say, that Jesus is the
Christ, but by the holy Ghost; and this will of man is also under Gods will, as
all these places show, Ier. 10. 23. Pro. 16. 1, 9. and 19. 21. and 20. 24. Iam.
4. 15. Psalm. 21. 11. Heb. 6. 3. Act. 18. 21. 1. Cor. 4. 9. For God in his
wisdom determines all things, by his power subdueth all things, and by his
providence disposes and guides all things, Psalm. 135. 6. Ephesians. 1. 11.

Sixthly, when God by his grace repaireth the loss of free will in spiritual
things, and gives a man a will to repent, believe, love, and obey God; then in
these spiritual things has his will a power to believe, repent, and so forth,
willing his own eternal comfort with God, and true fellowship with those that
truly love God, but not before GOD work this will in him; which will is yet
but partly to good; for that it is partly to evil, being here sanctified but
in part, as appears by the infirmities, and falls of the godly; yea and this
will wrought, needs continual assistance of divine grace, that the same may
will unto the end. These things premised, will help to answer the objected
Scriptures by the Adversary, and to make evident the point in Controversy,
and the question between us and them.

The state of their Tenet: That man's will has a natural power in it self,
coworking with Gods grace, in the very first instant act of a sinners
conversion, to which actiuitie of the will, such conversion is in part to be
attributed:

Confuted by their own Bible.
BY their own Bible a man is wholly dis-inabled of his own natural will,
though never so well morally qualified, truly to will spiritual good things
for his own eternal salvation, and peace with God.

First, it shows him to be conceived in iniquities and sins, Psalm. 50. 7.
and to be a transgressor from the womb, Esa. 48. 8. Psalm. 51. 7.
and to be a servant to sin, Romans 6. 20. and so it strips nature, making a
man naked of all spiritual good, as of ability to perceive and know the
things that are of the Spirit, 1. Cor. 2. 14. to see the Kingdom of God, Ioh.
3. 3. to think any thing of himself, as of himself, 2. Cor. 3. 5. For no
good dwells in him, Romans 7. 17. How then can we will that which we cannot
perceive, nor know, nor see, nor so much as once think of, being indeed
alienated from the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18? Without Christ able to do
nothing, Ioh. 15. 5. but are become altogether unprofitable, not one of us
doing good, no, not so much as one, Romans 3. 12.

Secondly, it takes him (having thus found him naked, and without the life of
God) and lays him dead in the grave of sin, being dead in sins and
offenses, Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. Col. 2. 13. Now what power of will is there in a dead
man?

Thirdly, having thus put him dead into the grave of sin, it covers him
over with corruptions: His understanding is obscured with darkness, Ephesians. 4.
18. his wisdom is an enemy to God, Romans 8. 7. an enemy in sense, Col. 1.
21. blindness is over his heart, Ephesians. 4. 18. yea, all the cogitations of his
heart are bent to evil at all times, Genesis 6. 6. perverse it is, and
unsearchable, Ier. 27. 9. and, as Montanus translateth, deceitful above all;
so as it is not, neither can be subject to the Law of God, Romans 8. 7. whereby
he is wholly given over; yea, and gives himself to the operation of all
uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. being unwise, incredulous, erring,
serving diverse desires, and voluptuousnesses, living in malice and envy,
hateful, and hating one another, Tit. 3. 3. walking according to the course of
the world, and according to the prince and spirit of Darkness, doing the will of
the flesh and of the thoughts, and so by nature the child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.
2, 3. If it be thus with man by nature, where is the power of his free will?
specially if we consider him to be in the devils snare, and held captive at his
will, 2. Tim. 2. 26?

Fourthly, thus having covered him over with his foul corruptions, their Bible
makes him in the very first instant act of his conversion, merely passive;
And this it does:

First, by removing the cause of our new birth from our selves; we are not
borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, Ioh. 1.
13.

Secondly, by denying man to have any thing to give unto God first: We have not
first given unto him, Romans 11. 35. We have nothing that we have not received,
neither have we whereof to glory, as not received, 1. Cor. 4. 7. by denying
him to be able to do any thing, Ioh. 15. 5. as to have power to hear Christ's
Word, Ioh. 8. 43. to believe, to receive the Spirit of truth, Ioh. 14. 17. to
know God, Matthew. 11. 27. to choose Christ, Ioh. 15. 16. to come to Christ, Ioh.
6. 44. to enter into the Kingdom of God, Ioh. 3. 5. to come whither he is
gone, Ioh. 8. 21. And the reason is given, because they are not of God, Ioh. 8.
47. because it is not given them of God, Luke 8. 10. because they are not his
sheep, Ioh. 10. 46. because their eyes are blinded, and their hearts indurate,
Ioh. 12. 40. and they have not eyes to see, nor ears to hear, Romans 11. 8. nor
hearts to conceive, 2. Cor. 2. 9, 10.

Thirdly, by affirming that very powerful means: yea, though men be wise and
prudent, yet are not available, where God gives not heart to understand, eyes
to see, and ears to hear, Deuteronomy. 29. 3, 4. Luke 19. 42. Matthew. 11. 25, 27.

Fourthly, by ascribing to God all that we are, all that we have, all that we
do, and all that we can do; both for the beginning, for the increase, and for
the continuance. By which we may see, how that it is Gods preventing grace,
that brings us to him, and his grace also that confirms, increases, and
preserves us unto the end.

This also their Bible teaches, and shows how mercifully God preuenteth us
in all things, that no man might glory in himself, but he that glories,
should glory in the Lord, Ier. 9. 23, 24.

First, God, before such men have any being, as have free will in spiritual
things, chooses and predestinates them in Christ to be holy and blameless,
Ephesians. 1. 4. and preordinates them to believe, and to have eternal life, Act.
13. 48. So as the ground of their salvation, is far before their will.

Secondly, having thus chosen them, he finds them, when they neither seek,
nor ask after him, Romans 10. 20. they are his work, Ephesians. 2. 10. made anew:
they have a new birth; Iam. 1. 18. being borne of God, Ioh. 1. 13. and of the
Spirit, Ioh. 3. 5, 8. by the immortal seed of the Word, 1. Pet. 1. 23. He
takes away unwillingness, and the stony heart, and gives them a will, Phil. 2.
23. even a heart of flesh to do his will, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. and puts also into
them a new heart, and a new Spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 26. so is the new man created in
justice, and in the holiness of the truth, Ephesians. 4. 24. Thus God in mercy
preuents man's will.

Thirdly, Man being thus begotten, thus borne and made anew, the Lord quickneth
him, Romans 8. 11. Ephesians. 2. 5. and gives him spiritual life, Ioh. 5. 21. 1.
Cor. 15. 45. For now he lives, yet not he, but Christ lives in him, as the
Apostle speaks, Gal. 2. 20. still preventing man's will.

Fourthly, when God, of a dead man has made him alive, and raised him up
again, Col. 2. 12. then he opens his understanding to understand the
Scriptures, Luke 24. 45. opens his eyes, Psalm. 118. 18. Esai. 35. 5. and 42.
7. his ears, Esa. 50. 5. Job Psalm. 119. 18. Psalm. 51. 17.
33. 16. his lips, Psalm. 50. 17. his heart to attend to the Word, Act. 16. 14.
In whose heart God now so shines, as when he commanded light to shine out of
darkness, 2. Cor. 4. 6. and sets them free, Ioh. 3. 37. still in mercy
preventing man's will.

Fifthly, thus God makes way for himself, opening man's understanding, eyes,
ears, lips, and heart: he draws us unto him, Ioh. 6. 44. and gives his
laws into our hearts, and subscribeth them in our minds, Heb. 10. 16. He
gives us divine graces, spiritual wisdom, Ephesians. 1. 17. the knowledge of
the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 13. 11. Faith, Ephesians. 2. 8.
Phil. 1. 29. Love, 1. Ioh. 4. 20. Fear, Ier. 32. 40. Repentance, 2. Tim. 2.
25. Act. 5. 31. and 11. 18. and the Spirit to know the things that are given us
of God, revealing unto us that which no eye can see, no ear can hear, no
heart conceive of, 1. Cor. 2. 9, 10, 12. Does not God then by his grace prevent
our will?

Sixthly, after his thus furnishing us with heavenly indowments, Ezekiel. 16. 9,
13. having wrought in us the will, that we may be employed in his service, he
works also in us the deed, Phil. 2. 13. he teaches us to pray, Romans 8. 26.
pouring out the Spirit of grace and prayer, Zach. 12. 10. He makes us to
walk in his precepts, and to keep his judgments, Ezekiel. Deuteronomy. 8. 18. 2. Cor.
9. 9, 11.
11. 20. and it is of him that men have great substance, a Chron. 32. 29. 1.
Chro. 29. 16. and of him it is, that they bestow of it liberally, verse 14.
yea, if any do suffer for his name, this is also the gift of God, Phil. 2. 29.

Seventhly, that all our sufficiency may be known to be of God, their Bible
tells us in general, that of him are all things, Romans 11. 36. that every best
gift, and every perfect gift is from above, Iam. 1. 17. that he begins the
work, Phil. 1. 6. that it is he also that increases, 1. Cor. 3. 7. Ephesians. 2.
21. Col. 2. 19. perfecteth, Phil. 1. 6. Psalm. 138. 8. strengthens and
confirms, Romans 16. 25. 1. Cor. 1. 8. and keeps us, 1. Pet. 1. 5. so that
none shall pluck us out of his hand, Ioh. 10. 28. and puts his fear into
our hearts, that we shall not depart from him, Ier. 32. 40. concluding, that
all our sufficiency is of God, 2. Cor. 3. 5. and that it is he that has
wrought all our works in us, Esai. 26. 12.

Lastly, to all these reasons, I may add these five following.

First, Gods promising of his heavenly gifts and graces, as showing men to be
without them, till they receive them from him: such are those in Ezekiel. 11. 19.
Ier. 32. 39, 40. and 31. 33, 34. and 24. 7.

Secondly, the prayers made unto God to convert men, Ier. Psalm. 119. 36.
31. 18. to fit them in all goodness to do his will, Heb. 13. 21. to
sanctify and preserve them without blame, 1. These. 5. 23. do show that the
power is from God, and not in man.

Thirdly, the godly acknowledging their preservation from falling, to be of
God, Psalm. 115. 8. and 36. 24. and that it is he Psalm. 116. 8. Psalm. 37. 24.
Psalm. 145. 14.
that lifts them up being fallen, Psalm. 144. 14. they attribute nothing to
their own power.

Fourthly, the Apostles giving God thanks for men's obedience, Romans 6. 17. for
their faith, hope, love, Col. 1. 3, 4, 5. for their deliuerence from the power
of darkness, for translating them into the kingdom of his Son, Col. 1. 13.
for the increase of faith and charity, 1. These. 1. 3. for blessing them with
spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3. By all which God is made the Author and
Giver, and we only the Receivers thereof, when he has made us willing
thereto. For a man can receive nothing, unless it be given him from heaven,
Ioh. 3. 27.

The last is, that the Scripture tells us how the Lord preuenteth the pride
of man's heart, that he might not ascribe power to himself, Deuteronomy. 8. 7. He
had mercy on thee, lest thou should say in thy heart, Mine own force, and
the strength of mine own hand, has achieved all these things for me. Ephesians.
2. 8, 9. We are saved by grace, not of works, lest any man should boast
himself. We are not (we see) to boast of our own strength, nor to ascribe
any thing to our selves, but remember Gods mercy, that he which does glory,
may glory in the Lord, 1. Cor. 1. 31. 2. Cor. 10. 17. For of him, and by him,
and in him are all things: to him be therefore glory for ever, Amen, Romans 11.
36.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Austin. in Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 30. No man can believe, hope and love,
unless he will: but even the selfsame will to believe, hope, and love,
comes not, but from God.

De gra. cont. Pelag. cap. 25. God does not only help us to be able to work,
but works in us to will and to work: and in cap. 17. he says, that God
without us does work in us to will: and in Epist. 107. It is God, who by his
secret calling works the mind of man to give consent.

Prosper. de vocat. Gent. cap. 6. The turning of the heart unto God, is of God:
alleging the place of Jeremy 24. 7.

Fulgent. ad Monimum, lib. 1. Both our good will, and also our good works are
of God. And again, this Father says, We in no wise suffer, nay, according to
wholesome Doctrine we forbid, whether in our faith, or in our works, to
challenge to our selves any thing as our own.

S. Bernard de gra. and lib. arb. The creating of us to freedom of will, is
wrought without us.

The Arausicane Council. 2. cap. 4. determines, that if any do maintain,
that God expects our will, that we may be purged from sin, and does not
confess, that by the infusion and operation of the holy Ghost, it is also
wrought in us to be willing to be purged, he resists the Apostles Doctrine,
who says, that it is of God that works in us both the will and the deed.

Bishop Usher lately handling this point, cites Austin, and Fulgentius,
Prosper, Jerome, and others: to whose learned Tract, I refer the Reader.

Gainesaid by their own men.
Bayus de vit. imp. cap. 8. Free Will, without Gods help, is of power to do
nothing but sin.

The Master of the Sentences, lib. 2. D. 25. says, that Free Will, before
Grace repair it, is pressed and overcome with concupiscence, and has
weakness in evil, but no grace in good; and therefore may sin, and cannot
but sin, even damnably.

Cornelius Mus Concion. tom 1. page 252. Our strength is not sufficient to
bring us back from death: we cannot be converted and saved by our own power.
The exciting grace, which disposes thee to thy conversion, God works in thee,
without thee: God so weth it in us, without us.

Alphonsus aduers. haeres. lib. 7. verbo gratia. Our will, when by Gods help
it has begun to do any good, it cannot, without the same special help,
prosecute the good begun, nor persevere in it.

Greg. Ariminensis 2. D. 26. page 95. without this special aid it can do
nothing.

Sec Bishop Usher in his last book, citing Gelasius, with a Synod of 70.
Bishops at Rome; the French Bishops in the second Council at Orange;
Bradwardin, the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Scriptures objected answered.
1. Cor. 7. 37. Has power over his own will, etc.

Answ. 1. This is nothing to the question in hand, which is of free will and
power thereof, in the first act of a sinners conversion. Secondly, we grant
that in such a case as this, to wit, to marry his Virgin, or not to marry her,
man has free will, that is, power and right.

Ioh. 1. 11, 12. He came in to his own, but his own received him not, but as
many as received him, etc.

Answ. 1. In the former part is man's inabilitie to entertain Christ: they
received him not, they would not. We grant man's free will to evil, till God
change it. Secondly, in the latter part it is said, Many received him. But it
is not said, By the power of their own will. We acknowledge that by Gods
preventing grace, men may receive Christ: which here is to be understood: for
they that received him, did it by faith, and are said to believe in him: but
the Apostle says, Faith is the gift of God; Ephesians. 2. 8. and not in man's
power. Thirdly, the very next verse following in this Chapter, verse 13. cuts
the nerves of the power of free will in our new birth. For says the text, We
are borne of God, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man.

Deuteronomy. 30. 19. I have set before thee life and death, blessing and cursing:
therefore choose life.

Answ. This and all other exhortations and commandments, as Ios. 24. 14, 15.
Deuteronomy. 10. 12. and 11. 16, 18. Ephesians. 4. 22. Phil. 2. 12. and in many other
places in Moses, Psalms, Prophets, and in the New Testament, do not conclude
in man any natural power of his own will, to choose or refuse; to obey, or not
to obey, of his own free will, as our Adversaries do imagine; no more then
they can conclude, the lame man in Act. 2. 2. so borne, to be able to rise and
walk, because Peter said to him, Rise up and walk, verse 6.

First, because in none of the exhortations, dehortations, and commandments,
there is any mention of the power by which man comes to be able to perform
that which he is exhorted unto. Therefore the power is to be gathered out of
other Scriptures, which is the power of Gods grace, and not the power of man's
freewill; as all the Scriptures before alleged do fully prove.

Secondly, for that all those places do no more but show what duties man owes
to God, but not what he can do of himself. A Creditor demanding payment of
his Debtor, and exhorting him to pay, does not therefore imply necessarily,
that he is able to pay; for he may (perhaps) for all that, be altogether unable
to pay, as we may read, Matthew. 18. 25. So these places show what we owe, and
what God requires, but not that therefore we are able to pay what he
commands; for all the Scriptures before alleged deny it.

Thirdly, all these commandments, and exhortations, are spoken to those in the
Church, which consists of a mixed company, both of unregenerate, which are
either abiects, or elect of God, till they be called, as also of regenerate
persons. Now, to the first sort, God thus speaks, showing them what they could
have done (for God commands nothing that has been, is, and shall be ever
impossible to man) and what yet they ought to do upon peril of damnation; but
not what either they now can do, or shall hereafter be ever able to do of
themselves, being dead in sin, and void of grace, and God not bound to give
it them. To the second sort, the elect, not yet borne a new by the Spirit, God
thus speaks, to show not only what they could have done once, what now they
ought to do, but also what by Gods preventing grace they may be able, and
shall do. For God uses such means to convert them unto him, at that time
(the day of their visitation being come) inwardly by his Spirit, and works
their will to that which he outwardly by word commands, and exhorts unto,
Act. 2. 38, 41. As Peter's exhortation to the lame man, by which God conueighed
strength and power into the man, to make him able to walk, Act. 3. 6, 7. This
appears lively in Ezekiel. 37. 7, 10. To the third sort, the already Regenerate,
who have, by Gods preventing grace, free will, God thus speaks, as to them
that can do what he commands, and exhorts unto. He uses threats, to keep
them in awe: dehortations, to keep them from sin: admonitions, to make them
take heed: exhortations, to set them forward: promises, to encourage them, that
so, by his euer-assisting grace accompanying them, they may be raised, when
they are fallen; be increased, that they decay not; and kept on in continuance
to the end, that they never fall away. Thus may we see, that these
commandments, dehortations, and exhortations are not in vain, though man's own
will be not lifted up thereby, as Papists dream.

Fourthly and lastly, Moses and the Prophets under the Law speak legally to
men, so as if they never had fallen, but had kept their perfection, not
regarding their now inabilitie after the fall: and therefore from such legal
charges and commands, we cannot conclude man's power to perform. As for
Evangelical commandments, they are assisted by Gods Spirit, to work in the
elect grace of obedience in Christ, in and through whom they are made able to
do all things, as the Apostle speaks. What then are these commandments to
prove the power of man's free will? Even nothing at all, whether they be taken
legally, or Euangelically.

Luke 13. 34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. how often would I have gathered thy
children, etc. and ye would not!

Ans. This place speaks of free will unto evil, to wit, the wills refusing of
the means of Salvation, in killing the Prophets, and stoning them that were
sent of God for their salvation: And this miserable free will we acknowledge,
which Christ complains of.

Luke 10. 42. Marie has chosen the better part.

Answ. 1. Its not denied, that we have a free will to come to hear: 2. But to
hear as she did, and to make so blessed choice to entertain Christ's Word into
her heart, whilst her sister was entertaining Christ at the table, was of Gods
special divine grace, working in her the will and the deed.

Act. 5. 4. Being sold, was it not in thy power?

Answ. 1. This proves not the question of the power of will in the first act
of commission. Secondly, this speaks of free liberty and power, which a man
has of his own goods to give, or not to give: which power we acknowledge a
man has. Thirdly, this is of an ill act, withholding part of that from the
Church, which he seemed wholly to bestow upon it, which was hypocrisy: And to
such evils we grant man to have free will.

Philemon, verse 14. That thy benefit should not be as it were of necessity,
but willingly.

Answ. This speaks not of the question in things spiritual; but of Paul's
desire to have kept Onesimus with him in Philemons stead, to have ministered to
him in prison, if he had known Philemons mind, and willingness therein.
Absurd quotations, and nothing to the point controuerted. For who denies will
in man to lend, or not to lend his servant to another?

1. Cor. 9. 1. Am I not free?

Answ. Nothing to the question. He speaks of freedom A brief answer to the
Scriptures only cited by the Gagger.
which other Apostles used, verse 4, 5. So 2. Cor. 9. 7. of giving relief to
the poor Saints, Numb. 30. 14. speaks of the Husbands power over the wife in
her cause of vowing. Nothing to the question. Josh. 14. 13. is of Joshua, giving
Caleb Hebron for Inheritance. If the Gagger had cited the words, as he only
quoted the places, his folly would have exposed him to laughter. 2. Sam. 24.
12. I offer thee three things, choose thee one of them. This is meant of
judgments. What is this to the power of inward conversion? 1. King. 3. 5. God
wills Solomon to ask of him. What God puts into our hearts to do, that can
we do. And Solomon was one endued already with divine grace. But we speak in
the question of the first act of conversion, of which these places speak not
one word. Matthew. 19. 17. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.
This is but suppositiuely set down, not affirming the power of the will.
Again, it is spoken legally to a proudly conceited young man, who justified
himself, but untruly, as the event showed in the verses following. Josh. 24.
15. is answered before, in answer to Deuteronomy. 30. 19. But yet also note farther,
the former part of the verse, is of evil propounded, as the serving of other
gods, which man's will is apt to. The latter part speaks of Joshua, who was
already a holy Prince; and so is not to the question. 2. Sam. 12. no verse is
quoted. Prou. 11. 24. speaks of one that scatters, and withholds more
then is meet. This is of moral actions; the one part of liberality, the other
of niggardliness; in which we acknowledge free will. Esai. 1. 19, 20. If thou
be willing and obedient, etc. but if ye refuse and rebel, etc. The latter
words are spoken of that which man's will is free enough to do: the former
speaks of being willing by a supposition, as God spoke to Cain, If thou do
well, which Genesis 4. 7.
yet was far from him. And we acknowledge free will to good things, when God
makes man willing.

Revel. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, etc.

Answ. 1. These words are Metaphorically spoken, and so not to be taken after
the letter, and therefore cannot be a sound proof in a controuerted point.
Secondly, man's act is set down but only suppositiuely, and so affirms
nothing of him simply. Thirdly, it is said that man hears and opens: yet
the question is, By what power, whether by his own, or by Gods preventing
grace? which here is not expressed, but in other places it is: For it is
ascribed to the Lord that opens the ear, Esai. 50. 5. Job 33. 16. He
opens the heart, Act. 16. 14. yea, He it is that opens the door of faith,
Act. 14. 37. the door of utterance, Col. 4. 3. and the door of the passage of
the Gospel, 2. Cor. 2. 12. 1. Cor. 16. 9. Fourthly, Christ's knocking first by
the Word, is the means he uses to convey the grace of his Spirit into our
hearts, to make us to open to him. So by Paul's Ministry, he knocked at the
door of Lydia's heart, and he by his Spirit then opened the same, as the text
shows very plainly. Act. 16. 14. So Christ by his own preaching knocked,
and in knocking opened the door of understanding to his Disciples, Luke 24. 45.

To conclude this point of free will herein, that men be not deceived by the
Adversaries, deceitful Allegations of Scripture, let them diligently observe
the question, which is of the power of free will in matters spiritual, in the
first act of conversion, which is by Gods Word wholly ascribed unto God
himself. Neither can our Adversaries bring any Scripture to prove, that it is
in the power of man's will to prepare it self thereto. For all the places they
allege, are either to prove freedom of will in nature, humane, moral,
sinful actions, and in outward actions tending to piety: Or the places urged
are such as speak of man's free will in spiritual actions, and these may be
reduced to three heads.

First, to those which persuade, exhort, and command men to turn and repent,
to do good works, to believe, love and obey God. To which a full answer is
made before to Deuteronomy. 30. 19.

Secondly, to those which speak of men helped by God in works of piety,
which are to be understood of such as be helped by Gods assisting grace, who
have been prepared before by his preventing grace.

Thirdly, to those, where men are said to be co-workers with God, which must be
understood of them, in whom God has wrought both the will and deed first: for
so they work, and God also in them. Phil. 2. 12, 13. Through Christ, says the
Apostle, I can do all things, who strengthens me. Phil. 4. 13. I live,
says he, and Christ in me. So they live together, Gal. 2. 20. I labor, says
he, yet not I, but the grace of God, which was with me, 2. Cor. 15. 10. He
labors, and grace assisteth him.

To all these places we may answer generally thus: First, that we do
acknowledge a freedom of will in spiritual things, when God has first
wrought it in us. Secondly, that those places alleged of them, speak of Gods
commanding, yea, and commending of holy men's willingness, prayers, and holy
words, good works; but they do not manifest by what power they so will, so
pray, profess, and practice, and therefore do not determine the question in
hand. Which other Scriptures clearly do for us, and against our Adversaries.

XXX. Proposition. That some sins are in their own nature venial, and do
not deserve eternal punishment.
TO clear this point, and to make their error evident to all, observe what
they hold to be venial sins.

First, all those sins and negligences, into which through weakness, upon
every little occasion, men every hour do fall.

Secondly, all the ill motions of the heart, being without full deliberation
and consent; as the sudden passions of the mind, concupiscence, anger, desire
of revenge, and such like, so, vain and idle thoughts.

Thirdly, such words, as sudden and violent passion, without precedent
deliberation and intent, forces: as in a rage and fury to swear and curse. So
choleric answers for trifles, railing and reproachful terms. To these add
excessive prating, idle talking, scurrilous and filthy speaking, ribald songs,
officious lying, without damage to a man's neighbor, vain boasting, preferring
his own wit, strength and beauty before others.

Fourthly, such sins as a man commits against his own good; as to spend
his time idly, govern his estate badly, wastfully consuming his goods, loving
to play at Cards, and Dice, and to go to Plays; to exceed in apparel,
eating and drinking, with delight of his belly.

Fifthly, sins toward others; as children disobeying Parents, when it is of
negligence and sensuality. To steal trifles, and things of little value.

Sixthly, such sins as be outward to-moue delight, as painting the face: or
for pastime; as scoffing and obscene jests and gestures in Plays, and such
like in sport.

Seventhly, such sins as are against piety and devotion; as not to sanctify
well the Sabbath day; to fast, pray, give alms, and to go to the Church for
vainglory, to confess sins negligently, and many other besides: all these
they count venial sins.

Here may we see plainly how it comes to pass, that vain people love so
much that vain licentious Religion, run to it, and continue in it: and the
reasons are,

First, for that they make such evils as these, and many other more, yea, some
kind of soul secret evils, venial, or no sins at all; not simply sins,
but imperfectly and only sins in some sort.

Secondly, because they hold and teach, that these are not injurious to God,
are pardonable without repentance, not deserve hell, not in strictness of
necessity to be confessed to a Priest, neither can God in justice punish
them, more then with a temporal punishment.

Thirdly, because that as they teach, God does easily pardon and forgive these,
and the remedies prescribed, are for the most part very easy, which be these;
the giving of Alms, knocking upon our breast with some remorse, going into a
Church, receiving holy water with a devout motion, the Bishops blessing,
crossing of ones self, bearing with other folks defects, and froward dealings
toward us, confessing our sins in general, hearing of Mass devoutly, and
to be patient in adversity and troubles.

These things are taught, some by one sort, some by another sort of their
learned men: See Vaux his English Catechism: also the mirror to confess
well, and D. Whites Way, digress. 38. Doctor White, his Orthodox way, cap. 1.
obs. 2. sect. 3. page 28. in quarto, who do produce the Authors which teach
these.

To hold that there are any such sins as these, or any sins at all, venial
in their own nature, and not deserving damnation, is the very nursery of
fleshly liberty, and the highway to destruction.

Confuted by their own Bible.
First, it tells us, that death is the stipend of sin, (not excepting any)
Romans 6. 21, 23. and pronounces that the soul that shall sin, the same shall
dye, Ezekiel. 18. 20. and that he is cursed that abides not in the words of this
Law, and fulfilleth them not, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. making him that
offends in one, to be guilty of all, Iam. 2. 10. and by it also we learn
that deaths sting is sin, 1. Cor. 15. 56. And therefore, whatsoever is sin,
that same is mortal. If it be sin, it is the sting of death: and, if deaths
sting, then is it mortal. For death does ever sting deadly.

Secondly, it threatens death and hell for such sins as they count venial;
offenses seeming very little: as in anger to call one fool, is in danger of
hell fire, Matthew. 5. 23. and for filthiness, foolish talk, or scurrilitie,
comes the anger of God, Ephesians. 5. 4. 6. yea we are told, that for every idle
word men shall speak, they shall render an account in the Day of Judgment,
and that, as guilty of death, Matthew. 12. 36. And though our Adversaries do
hold it a venial sin, for a man not to husband well his own estate, living
carelessely and idle; yet Christ held it a sin worthy damnation, Matthew. 25.
26, 27, 30. To be a bragger, to be deceitful, to break a man's covenant, to
be without knowledge, though they rank not these among heinous crimes, yet
deserve they death, as we learn by their Bible, Romans 1. 32.

Thirdly, it tells us, that, for seeming small offenses, many have been
fearfully punished; as Lots wife, for looking back, to have been turned into
a Statue of Salt, Genesis 19. 26. For gathering sticks on the Sabbath day, God
commanded to stone a man to death, Numb. 15. 35. and one for blaspheming upon
passion, when he was striving with another, Leuit. 24. 10, 14. Some of Aarons
sons, for offering strange fire, were burnt to death with fire from heaven,
Leuit. 10. 1, 5. Vzzah, of a good intent, but touching the Arc, was stricken
dead of God, 2. Sam. 6. 7. The Bethshemites, for but looking into the Arc,
were smitten dead, to the number of above fifty thousand, 1. Sam. 6. 19. The
Israelites slain in the Wilderness, 1. Cor. 10. For unadvisedly speaking;
yea, when it came from a vexed and exasperated spirit, was Moses punished,
Psalm. 105. 32, 33. he was not permitted to go into Canaan, which was a type of
Heaven, but he must dye before, even Moses. Now, whatsoever sin under the
Law God punished with death, or commanded to be punished by death; the same,
without remission, deserved eternal death. For the first time that death is
mentioned, it is to be understood of death temporal and eternal, due to all,
had not there been a Mediator between God and us, Genesis 2. 17.

Fourthly, it teaches, that Original sin (which is less then any actual
sin, whether in thought, word, or deed) is punished with death, Romans 5. 12.
Now, if the reward of this sin be death, then surely much more any other
flowing from thence, (though it seem to man never so small an offense)
deserves death, as the very consent of the mind to other evil doers, among
which boasters are reckoned, is worthy of death, Romans 1. 32. yea, and
Commessations, which we translate Reuellings, wherein too many much delight, is
a sin, which keeps the doers thereof that they cannot obtain the Kingdom
of God, Gal. 5. 21.

Fifthly, sins of ignorance under the law, Leuit. 4. 2, 13, 27. had
sacrifices appointed to make an atonement to God for them. Now, all sacrifices
for sin, showed that a man deserved death for every such sin. Now, if
sins of ignorance deserve death, what may all men think of such sins, as
Papists call venial, beforementioned, plainly forbidden by the Word of God?

Sixthly, to commit adultery, is a mortal sin: but their Bible tells us,
that for one to see a woman to lust after her, has alalready committed
adultery with her in his heart, Matthew. 5. 28. And can any sin seem less
then concupiscence of the heart, suddenly arising by the object to the sight?
And yet Papists make wanton dalliances no sin, or as none in their account.

Seventhly, it shows, that it is Christ's blood, that cleanses from all
sin, 1. Ioh. 1. Now, if every sin needs cleansing by his blood, then every
sin in its own nature is mortal, in that it cannot be cleansed, but by his
death.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Austin. in Enchirid. cap. 79. speaking of sins which might seem small,
says, They might be thought very light, but that in the Scriptures they are
demonstrated greater then we do imagine. But that the truth speaks it, who
would think (says he) that for a man to call his Brother fool, is guilty
of hellfire?

The ancient Fathers earnestly exhort to beware of counting any sins light or
small.

Basil. qu. Contract. qu. 4. No sin is to be accounted as small: for that
(says he) it is the sting of death. See for this, Austin. Epist. 108. and in
Ioh. 11. 13. Chrysostom. on Gal. 1.

Jerome in Epist. ad Caelantiam: It is very safe to beware of small sins, as
if they were great, etc. Neither do I know, says he, whether we may call any
sin small, seeing it is committed with a kind of contempt of God. And he is
most prudent, who respects not so much the quantity of the thing commanded, as
the dignity of the Commander.

See Master Perkins his Demonst. of his Probl. of venial sin; and therein many
testimonies of the Ancients.

Gainsaid by their own men.
Almaine, out of Gerson Moral. Tract. 3. cap. 20. concludes, that no sin is
venial of it self; but only through the mercy of God.

Azorius instit. Moral. part. 1. lib. 4. cap. 8. does maintain against
Bellarmine, that venial sins are against the Law. Now, that which is against
the Law, is deadly. Of this opinion is Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, and diverse
others. See the Authors in Doctor Whites Way, digres. 38. page 247. and Bishop
Mortons. Protest. Appeal. page 646.

To pass over the oppositions of one against another, they all call them
sins. Now, every sin is the transgression of the Law, 1. Ioh. 3. 4. By
which we come to the knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 26. and 7. 7. And if there
were no Law, there were no transgression, Romans 4. 15. Therefore in confessing
venial sins to be sins, they make them transgressions of the Law, and then
the Law works wrath, Romans 4. 15. and so necessarily through venial sins,
they are under wrath, and so sin mortally, even to condemnation, except God
in Christ pardon them, and that they do heartily repent, pray for pardon, and
seek with God reconciliation by Christ.

Scriptures objected answered.
Matthew. 5. 25. Whosoever is angry with his brother without cause, is in danger
of Judgment: And whosoever shall say unto his Brother, Racha, shall be in
danger of Council: and whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, shall be guilty of
Hellfire.

Answ. This place proves not any sins to be venial, and not mortal in
their own nature. For first, this should be against the scope of Christ's
speech, in confuting the Pharisees misunderstanding the Law, and here in
particular, the sixth commandment. They stuck to the Letter; Christ here
extends the breach of this Law, to thoughts, and words; so making a man by
causeless anger, and railing words, to be before God guilty of murder. Is
this then to make sin venial? or are not rather those, which they conceit to
be venial, by Christ here made mortal, if to be guilty of blood before God,
be mortal? Secondly, here is no difference made of sins in their nature; but
only here is showed the degrees of sinning, and that one offense is greater
then another. For feign would I know of them, how they can distinguish these in
nature, that anger and calling one Racha, should be venial; and to call one
Fool, to be mortal? Thirdly, the punishments here expressed, distinguish not
the nature of the sins, but show the degrees of punishments, according as men
sin. For as God in mercy will reward men's well-doings with degrees of glory;
so in justice will he in hell, the damned with degrees of punishment, Matthew.
10. 15. Fourthly, whereas our Adversaries make Judgment, and Council,
temporal punishments for venial sins, and hell fire for mortal sins,
taking advantage by the translation of the word Gehenna:

First, it is clear, that punishments do not alter the nature of sins; but
being duly executed, do show only the degrees of sin, to be greater, or
lesser, and so are they accordingly punished. Secondly, Papists themselves hold
unadvised anger, and words even tending to blasphemy, coming of sudden and
unadvised anger, as the word Racha, and Fool do here, to be venial sins.
Therefore they err in distinguishing the sins thus into venial; and
mortal, which they themselves account to be venial. Thirdly, the punishments
here mentioned, are such as either concern the civil Magistrate, to inflict
temporally here; or such meant, as God will inflict eternally in another world;
but these are not punishable by the Magistrate in these cases: for we find not
in Scripture any Law of Moses, for Magistrates to call men into judgment for
unadvised anger; or to a Council, or to burn men for calling one Racha, or
Fool, proceeding no further. Therefore the punishments are meant, such as God
will inflict eternally in the life to come. If so, then I answer: Fourthly,
that Judgment, Council, and hell fire, are the degrees of Gods punishment
upon the wicked in hell. Fifthly and lastly, whereas by the translation, hell
fire is given to the third, and not to the other two, they would by the other
understand only temporal punishments, and by this, eternal; they are greatly
deceived, or would deceive, or do both. First, for that these kinds of sins
here expressed, will not admit this distinction, there being no such great
difference between the sins, as that the former should deserve but only
temporal punishments in this world, or (as they dream) in Purgatory, and the
other eternal in hell. Secondly, because the words in all the punishments, are
first to be conceived and taken, according to the proceeding after the
accustomed form of civil judgments among the Jews: for some punishment was
inflicted, according to the sentence of the lowest Court, here understood by
judgment, like to our petty Sessions; Some, according to the sentence of a
higher Court, their Sanhedrin consisting of three and twenty Elders, like to
our Quarter Sessions; and some, according to the sentence of the highest Court,
the great Council at Jerusalem consisting of seventy Elders, like to our
great Assizes, whose sentence was inflicted upon the presumptuous and greatest
offenders, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. worthy of the place named Gehenna, which was also
called Topheth, in the valley of the children of Hinnom, in the Suburbs of
Jerusalem, where Idolaters made their children to pass through the fire, to the
Idol Molech, 2. King. 23. 10. 2. Chron. 28. 3. Ier. 7. 31, 32. which places
Josias defiled with filth, in detestation thereof, and became to be for such
execrable Idolatry, most accursed, and so detestable, as that for such as were
worthy the greatest torments, Topheth was said to be prepared, Esai. 30. 33.
Whereupon it came to be at length taken for Hell fire, the place of the damned,
as here, in Matthew. 5. 29, 30. and 10. 28. and 18. 9. and 23. 25, 33. Iam. 3. 6.
but here first taken properly, as the other two are before, and then applied
unto Gods inflicting punishment: as if it had been said, As you Jews here in
your country do make difference of offenses, and so have differing degrees of
punishing with death, according to your several Courts: So after this life,
God accordingly in Hell has degrees of punishment, for differing sins, which
here men do commit. Thus stands the similitude: Else it were absurd, as
Papists make it to be, partly of temporal, and partly of eternal punishment:
for as there be three degrees of sin; bad, worse, and worst of all; and
three degrees of punishment with death, by hanging, stoning, and burning,
first, by judgment, which is great: then by Council, which is greater; and
lastly, by highest Court, as with Gehenna, the greatest of all: so is it with
God in punishing the wicked, with several degrees of punishments after death.

Matthew. 23. 24. Blind guides that strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Cammell.
Here is sin compared, one to a Gnat, and another to a Cammell: so in Luke 6.
41. one to a moate, and another to a beam.

Answ. The places show that all sins are not equal, but some far greater
then other-some; which we believe and teach. But they prove not, that therefore
some only deserve eternal death; and the other only temporal and not
eternal. For all sin, be it as a Gnat, or a moate, deserves in it own nature
death eternal, as well as the sin which is as a Cammell, or as a Beam, as
before is proved.

Luke 12. 59. Thou shall not go out thence, till thou have paid the very last
mite. This mite is venial sin, say they.

Answ. 1. The place is allegorically interpreted; and therefore from the bare
words is no sound proof. Secondly, the absurdity, and falsehood of such an
exposition, is before confuted out of Matthew. 5. 25, 26. where it is alleged
for Purgatory, in which place only venial sins are paid for, compared to
farthings, and mites. But what is this last mite a mite of? Is it of a sum
which consists all of mites? or else of other moneys, and of greater sums? To
affirm it a sum of all mites, were but an idle dream: and, if it consists
of greater sums, then is the party cast into prison for these also. Then the
Allegory urged to maintain Purgatory, makes it a place to satisfy both for
mortal and venial sins, which our Adversaries deny.

1. Cor. 3. 12. Where, by Wood, Hay, and Stubble, are meant venial sins.

Answ. 1. It has been alleged before for Purgatory, and there answered at
full. But here yet further I answer: Secondly, that the Apostle speaks here
of unwholesome, and unprofitable Doctrines. And are these venial sins? Is
error in Doctrine, not a sin in its own nature? Is it not worthy of death,
to mis-lead by impure preaching, and to breed errors in men's minds? He is
cursed with Amen, that makes the blind go out Deuteronomy. 27. 18.
of their way.

Iam. 7. 14. Every one is tempted of his own concupiscence, drawn, and
enticed: then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin when
it is finished, brings forth death. Where they make some motions, no sins;
some sins, but not deadly; and other-some, deadly.

Answ. Here is no distinction of sins in their natures; but a genealogy of
sin, from the mother concupiscence, and the deserved reward thereof in the
end, which is death. Here is no venial sin. For first, death is due to the
mother, lust; which lust is sin, Romans 7. and worthy of death, Romans 5.
Secondly, he speaks here of sin singularly, the fruit of lust, conceived,
brought forth, and ripened; as of one and the same sin growing to the full
height, and not of diverse kinds of sins, differing in nature. Thirdly, when
James says, that lust brings forth sin, it is not by calling the fruit
thereof sin, to clear lust from being sin: for Saint Paul calls it
sin, Romans 7. and what is it that naturally brings forth sin, that in it
self is not sin? but it is to distinguish natural corruption, from actual
transgression. Fourthly, death is put in the last place for sin consummate,
and not that lust is not worthy of death, nor the sin which flows thence;
but to show whereto our own corrupt nature drawn and entised, will at length
bring us by sinning even unto death, if it be not mortified. And therefore
this text is nothing for the proof of their untrue distinction of venial, and
mortal sins.

Prou. 24. 16. A just man falls seuentimes, and rises up again. Ergo, Men
may commit sins venial, and yet remain just.

Answ. Here is no proof, that these falls or sins are not mortal in
themselves. For that a just man sinning, remains just, is not from the nature
of the sins, which he does fall into: but from the state of adoption, and
Gods mercy which gives him grace to repent (which is here to be understood by
his rising again) God accepting of him in Christ, through whom he is accounted
just, and in whom all his sins are venial.

XXXI. Proposition. Of keeping Gods Commandments.
THe question is not of man before his fall: for he could then The state of the
question.
keep them: nor of man in corrupt estate: for he cannot keep them, being
altogether wicked, and evil, as before is proved: nor of man in state of
glory, being in all perfection, and able perfectly to do the will of God.

But the question is of man, regenerate in the state of grace, as he here
lives, going on, by Gods assisting grace, unto the perfection in glory.
Neither is the question here of any kind of keeping: for the regenerate man,
in diverse respects, may be said to keep Gods commandments. First,
Imputatiuely, in Retract. lib. 2. cap. 19.
Christ, who is our Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption,
and through whom we are pardoned. To this fitteth that of Saint Austin; All the
commandments are then reputed done, when that is for given which is left
undone. Secondly, in respect of his will, God having given him a will, and
hearty desire in sincerity to keep his commandments, and then in his mercy
accepting the same will for the deed. Thirdly, in respect of his endeavor, and
careful striving in all good conscience, to frame his life after these
commandments: so keeping them according to the measure of his grace received.
Fourthly, comparatively, in respect of others, who live loosely without care
and conscience of obedience. A godly gracious person, in respect of such, may
be said to keep the commandments. Lastly, in respect of his integrity of
heart to one commandment, as well as to another, and to all and every clause
of every commandment, at all times without sinister regard, according to his
knowledge and power of divine grace given to assist him therein. Of such kinds
of keeping is not the question, but it is this:

That a regenerate man, by assistance of Gods grace, is able to observe all and
every commandment of God, in every part, at all times, in thought, word, and
deed, perfectly, as God in his Law requires of him:

Confuted by their own Bible.
1. IT makes all to have sin in them, 1. Ioh. 1. 8, 10. If we say Prou. 20.
9.
we have no sin, we deceive our selves: If we say we have no sin, we make
him a liar. Now, here in the word we, is understood Saint John the beloved
Apostle, as well as others. So James says, In many things we offend, Iam. 3.
2. and, Where sin is, there is the transgression of the Law, 1. Ioh. 3. 4.
And they that sin, keep not perfectly the Law.

II. It makes just men imperfect and offenders against the Law. Eccles. 7. 21.
There is no just man in the earth that does good, and sins not. Prou. 24.
16. Seven times shall the just fall, and rise again. This they themselves
expound of sin, that a just man sins oftentimes.

III. It affords us a world of examples of most excellent men, which have
offended, and greatly transgressed the Law of God, Adam made in perfection,
just Noah, holy Aaron, righteous Job, zealous David, Jeremy the Prophet, Saint
Peter, and other the Apostles also, when they forsook Christ.

IV. It brings in Saint Paul, who was an Apostle, who had been rapt into the
third heaven, bewayling himself, calling himself an vnhapppy man, because of
that sin which yet remained in him, which made him to do the evil which he
would not, and hindered him in doing the good which he would do; and so
repugning the Law of his mind, and captiuing him in the Law of sin, which is
in his members, Romans 7. 19, 24. In like manner Job, cap. 9. 28, 31. fearing all
his works: for though he should be washed; yet, says he, speaking of God,
Thou shall dip me in filth, and my garments shall abhor me.

Lastly, it teaches the form of the Lords Prayer: wherein we all and every
one are taught to ask daily forgiveness of God, which shows that we all
trespass daily against him.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Ambros. in Comment. on Gal. 3. The commandments are such, as it is impossible
to keep them.

Austin. in Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13. Woe be to the most commendable life, that
we can lead: if thou, Lord, setting thy mercy aside, should examine it.

Bernard. on Cant. Sermon. 50. The commandments neither have been fulfilled in
this life by any man, nor can be. And afterward, he says, that the Law
exceeds man's strength, and acknowledges, that God commanded things
impossible, not to make us sinners, but to humble us.

Gainesaid by their own selves.
Doway in Annot. on Prou. 24. 15, 16. says, that without imperfections no man
lives.

Rhemists on Matthew. 6. 12. do acknowledge, that every man, though he be never
so just, lives not without venial sins. Now, having proved before, that all
sin in its nature is mortal: Therefore, by this their grant, all men sin
mortally, when they sin, if that there were not remission through Christ.

Ferus in Act. 15. The Law is an impossible burden: for it requires not only
the hand, but the heart. Secondly, it conuinceth us to be sinners; for, we
do all more against it, then for it.

Aquinas says, in Gal. 3. lect. 4. It is impossible to fulfill the whole Law:
and cites for it, Act. 15. 10.

Scriptures objected answered.
Phil. 4. 3. I can do all things through Christ, which strengthens me.

Answ. 1. All things must of necessity be limited: for Paul could not do all
things without exception. Secondly, they are to be applied to the all things,
which he before spoke of in the former verse: that is, to be abased, and to
abound. In all things, says he, I am instructed, both to be full, and to be
hungry; both to abound, and to suffer need. Here, we see, the Apostle limits
his all things, to these kind of things. Thirdly, herein cannot be included
the commandments, for that the Apostle should here contradict himself: For in
Romans 7. 18, 19, 20. speaking of the Law, he professes his inabilitie to
perform that which is good. Fourthly, let it be granted, that here the
commandments are included, as they would; yet, perfect obedience will not be
hence included. For its one thing to be a doer, and another thing to do all in
perfection. A man may say he is to do, and can do all his Masters business.
Will it therefore follow, that he so does it, as no defect ever at any time, or
in any thing, is to be found in him? Fifthly, Saint Paul speaks of his ability
of doing all things, through Christ strengthening him thereto. But where is it
written, that Christ strengthens any man, perfectly to fulfill the whole Law?
Saint Paul found not this in him, as before is noted out of Romans 7. Nor Saint
Peter, when he forswore his Master; and when he after dissembled, and was
openly, and worthily rebuked by S. Paul, Gal. 2. Nor Saint John, when he fell
down, and would have worshipped an Angel, Revel. 19.

Luke 1. 5, 6. And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord, blameless.

Answ. 1. That they were righteous, we acknowledge it, and also before God, by
the Text it is clear, and so are all the regenerate at this day. But how, by
works? Not so before God. The Apostle teaches the contrary, Romans 4. 2. and
the Psalmist, Psalm. 143. 2. But by faith in Christ, Romans 4. 3, 9. Phil. 3. 9.
who was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him, 2. Cor. 5. 21. By which righteousness, we are righteous before God: and
yet for all this, not without sin in our selves. For was not John and James
the Apostles righteous? yet both acknowledge themselves to have sin, 1. Ioh.
1. 8, 10. Iam. 3. 2. Secondly, Walking in all the commandments, is here added,
as the fruit of their righteousness, the manifest sign thereof, and
declaration of thankfulness, as in Genesis 17. and not as the cause of it. For
by the works of the Law shall none be justified before God, Romans 3. 20.
Thirdly, a man may walk faintly, he may halt; yea, now and then slip, and yet
be in the right way. Fourthly, by saying in all, it notes not perfection in
obedience, as may appear in David, though of him it be said, Act. 13. 22. that
he should perform all Gods will; yet he fell fearfully sometime; but it set
out their soundness of heart, having respect to all the commandments and
ordinances of God, as David speaks, Psalm. 119. 6, 117. for they did not sever
the commandments in their practice, but made conscience of one, as well, as of
another. Fifthly, whereas it is said, without blame, or blameless. This is to
be understood so before men; but not before God. For first, God struck him
dumb, for his unbelief, verse 20. Secondly, his very office, as he was a
Priest, conuinceth him of sin: for the Priest sacrificed as well for
himself, as for the people, Heb. 5. 3. So that he was not blameless before
God.

Luke 11. 27. Blessed are they, that hear the Word of God, and keep it.

Answ. 1. This place proves not the point in question: for we acknowledge,
that the regenerate do keep Gods Word. But how? Not fully and perfectly,
which is the question, and is not hence proved. Secondly, imperfect obedience
through Christ is accepted, and such a one may be blessed. Thirdly, who knows
not what imperfections are in hearing? And the same is much more in keeping.
Fourthly, hearing and keeping, are a declaration of such as be blessed; and
not the cause of their blessedness. The like answer may be made to Ioh. 13.
17. and 14. 23. Matthew. 12. 50.

Luke 11. 2. Thy will be done, as in Heaven, so in Earth.

Answ. 1. This proves not what men here on earth do; but what they should
pray for, and beg of God to do. Secondly, we are not here taught to beg
any thing impossible neither: for the word as, has not relation to the degree
of absolute perfection of obedience in heaven; but to the manner of doing Gods
will there, willingly, joyfully, faithfully, and constantly, which we desire to
imitate here, according to the measure of grace, which we received of God. The
Gagger calls this Petition a demand; as if in Prayer we were not beggars,
but claimers of our dues, and rights, from God: see the proud spirit of an
Antichrist.

1. Ioh. 5. 3. This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments; and
his commandments are not grievous.

Answ. 1. We acknowledge, that the love of God neither is, nor can be without
obedience to the commandments, for true love forces thereto: obedience is the
true fruit of love, and the true sign thereof. So as these words, This is the
love of God, may be thus expounded; This is the true sign of the love of God,
that we keep his commandments. Secondly, this does not prove the point: for
we acknowledge also the keeping of Gods commandments; but we deny the
perfect keeping fully, according to the rigor and strictness of the Law,
which this place speaks not of. Thirdly, touching the praise of them, as not
grievous, or heavy. This is to be understood not so, in respect of the
commandments themselves, for they are a heavy yoke, according to these
places, Act. 15. 10. Romans 8. 3. and 7. 14. but in respect of such as be in
Christ, to whom the commandments are not heavy nor grievous. First, for that
Christ helps them with his grace and holy Spirit to keep them. Secondly,
because they truly love God, and so are willing to undergo any thing for
Christ; and so to a willing mind, nothing is grievous. Thirdly, for that they
have a spiritual delight in Gods commandments, feeling the peace of a good
conscience, in well doing. Fourthly, for that such men do not in their mind
esteem them heavy, or grievous. Lastly, they may be said, not to be heavy and
grievous, respectively to that which they were before Christ, through the
manifest encumbrances under Moses: but now Christ has fulfilled them for us,
he has borne the burden, removed the curse, made us by faith fulfillers of
them; and thus are they not heavy, nor grievous: but yet it proves not, that
any man can keep the commandments.

The Gagger has collected many other places, only he cites them, but urges
them not. Ezekiel. 36. 27. Walk in my Statutes, and keep my judgments, and do
them.

Answ. Here is no mention of either the manner, or measure, which was the thing
he should have proved: else we grant all. The like answer is to Ecclus. 15. 15.
which book is not Canonical.

Matthew. 11. 30. My yoke is easy, and burden is light.

Answ. 1. Here is no mention of commandments. Secondly, Christ's yoke is not
the Law; but the doctrine of the Gospel, and his own discipline. Thirdly,
whatsoever is meant by yoke and burden, the same being Christ's to the
regenerate, it is easy, and light, by the former reasons alleged to the place
of 1. Ioh. 5. 3.

Matthew. 19. 17. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

Answ. 1. This place imposes a duty, but proves not performance: for it is
one thing for God to command, and another thing for man to perform his
commandment. Secondly, Christ speaks not here thus to this young man, as
employing ability in him to keep the commandments, but to answer to the
pride of his heart, to convict him thereof, and to discover to him his
hypocrisy: for when he commanded him but one thing, verse 21, 22. he failed in
performance.

Romans 13. 8. He that loves another, has fulfilled the Law.

Answ. As our love is, so is the Law fulfilled; but our love is imperfect: for
we are exhorted to increase in it, 1. These. 4. 10. therefore is our obedience
imperfect. Secondly, the Apostle tells us in verse 10. how love is the
fulfilling of the Law, for that it works no ill to our neighbor. Where note
first, that here he speaks of love to our neighbor, and not of the love to
God. And secondly, that loves fulfilling of the Law, is in the negative, in not
working ill; and not in the affirmative, in doing well; and therefore but a
poor perfection of obedience. Thirdly, it is the fulfilling of the Law,
because the commandments of the second Table, are comprehended in the
commandment of loving our neighbor as our selves, verse 9. and not for that
love makes us sufficient, perfectly to fulfill the whole Law.

Romans 7. 3. Is nothing at all to the purpose. It speaks of the wife freed or
not freed from the Law of her husband.

Josh. 11. 15. Answ. The praise of Moses and Joshua in their obedience. But
first, this was in their services performed in such outward things as God
commanded them, and not of their spiritual obedience to the Moral Law.
Secondly, if applied to prove perfection in them, it is mis-applyed: for Moses
offended God, so as he dyed, before the people came into Canaan; yea, he so
displeased the Lord, as God would not hear him in his request, to let him go
into the Land.

Also Joshua erred against the commandment of God, in making unadvisedly a
league with the Gibeonites. Thirdly, God is pleased to pass by his servants
frailties, in giving them praises, and speaks of them, as if they never had
done amiss, because he will not in his mercy impute their wants and defects
unto them, for his Sons sake, in whom they are, and in whom God is well
pleased.

Josh. 23. 5. This is Iosua's exhortation to the people of the two Tribes and
half. So it teaches what they ought to do; but proves not, that either they
did, or were able perfectly to do what they were bidden.

Psalm. 17. 3. There is no iniquity in me.

Answ. 1. This is to be understood of his carriage toward his enemies: for
otherwise he once sinned in both murder and Adultery. Secondly, David speaks
often as a type of Christ, whose person he did bear; so as Christ in the
Prophets is often called David. Thirdly, in the Original, the word iniquity
is not, but there may be understood deceit, or hypocrisy; so as David here
cleereth not himself of sin, but of hypocrisy: for in the Original, there
is only the Verb, Thou shall not find.

Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 14. This commandment, etc. is not hidden, nor far from
thee, etc. But in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it.

Answ. 1. The Apostle expounds this of the Word of faith, Romans 10. 8. And so
it is not for the Gaggers purpose. Secondly, if understood of the Law written
in the heart, and professed by mouth, yet this place shows only the end,
that it may be done, but not either the manner, or measure of doing.

1. Ioh. 2. 4. This speaks of keeping: but our question is of the perfection;
of which, not a word here.

Job 1. 22. Answ. 1. The words are to be understood, not of all Jobs life; for
he after fell into a cursing, and so sinned: but of his patient carriage in
this great conflict. Secondly, the words show what is meant by his not sinning,
to wit, that he did not charge God foolishly.

Job 27. 6. My righteousness I hold fast.

Answ. 1. This is of the righteousness of his cause, in pleading against his
friends, for he held that he was not punished so of God for his sins, as his
friends judged him to be. Secondly, if it be understood of his person, it is to
be taken so of his righteousness before men: for in chap. 9. 20. he says,
If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me. Thus he speaks
against himself, in the apprehension of righteousness before God: so also in
verse 21. 30, 31. and chap. 10. 15. abhorring himself, and repenting in dust
and ashes, chap. 42. 6.

Romans 2. 27. Shall not the uncircumcision, etc. if it fulfill the Law, etc?

Answ. This place teaches not, that a Gentile is able to fulfill the Law: but
Saint Paul speaks by a supposition, If he did, he should condemn the Jew,
which bragged of Circumcision, and yet was a transgressor of the Law.

Luke 10. 28. This do, etc.

Answ. This Christ spoke to a proud Iustitiarie, who rested upon the Law; so
he spoke in the tenure of the Law, which none could perform, to beat down
his pride, and not to show what man could do.

Luke 15. 7. Ninety and nine just persons, that need no repentance.

Answ. 1. To take the words after the letter, is flat against these Scriptures,
Romans 3. 10, 23. Iam. 3. 2. Eccles. 7. 20. Now, if the just man sin, then he
needs repentance. And the Lords Prayer teaches to ask daily forgiveness.
Secondly, the words were spoken against the proud conceited Scribes and
Pharisees, verse 2. who thought themselves such just ones: but we not. Thirdly,
the words may be spoken comparatively, in respect of such as notoriously
breaking out, as the stray sheep, the other keeping within bounds, may be said
to be just, and to need no repentance, like the other out-strayer.

1. King. 14. 8. David, who kept my Commandments, and who followed me with
all his heart, to do that only which was right in my eyes.

Answ. 1. This praise of David respects his care of Gods worship, which
Jeroboam had violated by setting up Idolatry, which David did not. Secondly,
if farther extended, then it is meant of his measure, the manner for his
uprightness, and the intendment of his mind, but not of full perfection in all
things, for he once fell fearfully in the matter of Vriah, chap. 15. 5. also,
in numbering the people, 2. Sam. 24.

Ephesians. 1. 4. That we should be holy and without blame before him.

Answ. Being chosen in Christ, as in the former part of the verse. So our
holiness, and vnblameablenesse in Gods accepting us in Christ: For we have no
righteousness in our selves to justify us before God.

Romans 4. Gal. 5. 14. All the Law is fulfilled in one word, Thou shall love, etc.

Answ. For this, see the answer before, to Romans 13. 8. yet further here note,
that he only tells them what is the excellency of love, but he also
rebukes them for the breach of it, verse 15. What is this to the perfect
fulfilling of the Law?

Genesis 6. 9. Noah, just and perfect.

Answ. In his generation, in respect of others; and before men, but not before
God. For did he not after fall into drunkenness? Now, having thus fallen, how
can they allege him, to prove perfect obedience? For perfection is not in one
point, or in all for a time, but in the same for ever. Thus we see, that there
is no perfection of obedience in any to keep the Law. Therefore is there no
works of supererrogation: for they that boast of these, must be in all
perfection obedient to the Law first, and then do more then God commands,
either expressly or deriuatiuely.

For reasons against this point: see Moulins his Buckler of faith, page 173.
70. Sect. and Doctor White his last Book, page 521. Sect. 2. to page 534.

Scriptures objected for works of supererrogation, answered.
Matthew. 19. 21. If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou have, and
give to the poor, etc.

Answ. 1. Christ here teaches not, that a man may in this life attain to
perfection, to do all that God commands; and more too: For first, he had
taught the contrary, Luke 17. 10. Secondly, in Mark. 10. 21. Christ leaves out
the word perfection, and tells him plainly that he lacked one thing. Thirdly,
Saint Paul, for all his excellencies, and his manifold sufferings for Christ,
2. Cor. 6. 4, 10. yet he did not attain to perfection, Phil. 3. 12. But here
Christ speaks to the vainly conceited young man; who as Austin. in Epist. 89.
says, answered more arrogantly then truly: and as Basil says, gave false
testimony of himself, when he said, he had kept all these, to wit, all the Ad
Hilarium, lib. 4. de linquendis facultatibus.
commandments, from his youth up, saying, What lack I yet? as if he had lacked
nothing, when he was apparently covetous, Mar. 10. 22. To suppress this
excess of pride, and to discover his folly, Christ thus speaks to him, and
not to set out a new Doctrine, and way to perfection, not contained in the Law.

Secondly, these words are not a bare counsel, as some conceit, because it is
said, if thou will. For this kind of speaking, notes not the thing spoken of,
to be ever in a man's liberty, and pleasure to do, or not to do; for so then
should we not be tied to Gods commandments: for thus he speaks in urging to
the obedience of them, in verse 17. of this Chapter, and Deuteronomy. 28. 1, 15. it is
said, If thou will, or, if thou will not. So in Esa. 1. 19. These words imply
not the liberty of choice, but rather the desire of the mind, to attain to
some thing yet lacking, as by comparing Matthew here with Mark. chap. 10. 21.
it may appear.

Thirdly, the words, give unto the poor, are plainly a commandment. This is
a duty commanded, and the Law requires the works of Charity, and Alms to be
given to the poor. This is no counsel left to man's free choice to do, or not
to do, as these places show, 1. Tim. 6. 17, 18, 19. Heb. 13. 16. to strive to
perfection is commanded also, Matthew. 5. 48. Heb. 6. 1. 2. Cor. 7. 1. increasing
more and more, 1. These. 1. 10. and 4. 1, 10. 1. Pet. 2. 2. 2. Pet. 3. 18. Act.
20. 32. So it is not in our liberty to stand at a stay, but we are tied, and
bound to grow in grace, in knowledge, in faith, and in good works. Thirdly,
Go and sell all that thou have. This also is a commandment, for it has the
form of a commandment, Go and sell. And though it be not an ordinary
commandment to bind all: yet was it a commandment to this young man for the
present, to try him, and to discover him; as Gods commandment to Abraham to
sacrifice his son, Genesis 22. Seeing therefore that these words contain in
them Commandments, and not a bare counsel, this place is nothing for
arrogantly conceited works of supererrogation.

Fourthly, if it were granted to be a counsel; yet being Gods counsel, it is
not best to our liberty, to do or not to do: for God (who is great and
wonderful in counsel, Esai. 28. 29. Ierem. 32. 19.) his counsel binds, and
to neglect and despise it, is sin, and deserves punishment, Psalm. 106. 13.
and 107. 11. Prou. 1. 25. Luke 7. 30. And therefore upon Gods counsels, they
can build no works of supererrogation.

1. Cor. 7. 25. Now concerning Virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord: yet
I give my judgment, etc. He that gives her in marriage, does well, but he that
gives her not in marriage, does better, ver. 38.

Answ. 1. Here is not the word Counsel, though they for advantage so translate
it. For the word in Greek, which is for (...).
counsel, is not here used: but another, which signifies a sound and grave
sentence and judgment, more then counsel and advice. (...).
For the Corinthians had written about the matter, verse 1. and the Apostle
gives his judgment what is most convenient, and fitting for the present time,
verse 26. Secondly, this his judgment he gives by the aid and assistance of
Gods Spirit, verse 40. and therefore were the Corinthians highly to reverence
his judgment, yea, and to submit unto it, as being given from an Apostle,
having Gods Spirit, and one that had obtained mercy of the Lord to be
faithful, verse 25. and had the wisdom of God, to judge what was best to be
done. Thirdly, by saying he had no commandment from the Lord, his meaning is,
he had no express precept in particular, but, not that he had no commandment
at all. For he taught nothing which he had not from the Lord, at least,
included in general precepts, from which, by the direction of Gods Spirit, he
deduced particulars, considering and applying them to the circumstances of
times, places, and persons. This the Apostle does here: for Christ commanded
his to be without worldly carfulness, Mat. 6. 25, 31, 34. and to mind
heavenly things chiefly, ver. 33. Now the Apostle at this time grounded his
judgment upon these precepts, and considering the present distress and
troubles of the Church, applied the same to the question of marrying, or not
marrying, as is most clear in verses 32, 33, 34, 35. So then, here is no
counsel, or bare advice, but his judgment upon the question, grounded first
on Christ's commandments, and then delivered faithfully by the guidance of Gods
Spirit. This place therefore is nothing for works of supererrogation, or for
counsels, tending as they dream, to perfection.

Matthew. 19. 12. There be Eunuchs, which have made themselves Funuches for the
Kingdom of Heaven. He that is able to receive i^, let him receive it.

Answ. There are here two things: First, a commendation of some. Secondly, a
commandment upon some. Out of neither of these can they build their works of
supererrogation.

Not out of the first. First, they are to prove that these Eunuchs were
perfect fulfillers of the Moral Law. Secondly, that they did this, which they
did, upon counsel, and not of duty. Both which they are to prove, before they
prove upon this their commendations, their works supererrogatory: which from
hence they can never do: for men praised for one action, justifies them not
therefore as perfect obseruers of the Law: Or, for that they do a voluntary
action praiseworthy; that therefore it will follow, they have done perfectly
all necessary duties. Again, these Eunuchs, which so made themselves, they
did it, the text says, for the Kingdom of Heaven: that is, to further their
passage to Heaven. Now, this every man, as much as lies in him, is bound to
do, and to avoid all the hindrances, according to that of Christ: If thy eye
offend thee, pluck it out; if thy hand or foot, cut them off: so he that has
the gift of Continency, and knows that Marriage would hinder him, must make
himself an Eunuch, that is, live as an Eunuch unmarried: And this not by way
of counsel, but as a duty to further his own salvation. Thus, this first part
helps nothing to these arrogant works.

Not the second: for it is not a bare counsel, but a very commandment of
Christ, to him that has the gift of continency, to use the same: He that can
receive it, that is, he that has this gift given him of God, to abstain from
marrying, (else he cannot, verse 11.) let him receive it; that is, let him
abstain from marriage. This is Christ's commandment. For God giving us any
gifts, binds us to make true and right use of them: even this very gift of
continency to further us: for he gives no gifts in vain to any one, but
will require the use thereof, Luke 12. 48. and the gift is Gods calling to
employ the gift to Gods glory, and to our own comfort, else he will punish the
neglect, Matthew. 25. 15, 25, 27, 30.

The Gagger cites Luke 10. 25. 1. Cor. 7. 1. Revel. 4. 3. All idle, and
nothing to the purpose. Perhaps he found them quoted some-where, and so set
them down, being sure his Popish credulous Readers would never examine them,
no more then himself did.

Act. 2. 45. So chap. 4. 34. These places speak of believers selling their
goods, and possessions, and that they were distributed to the poor among them,
as every one did need.

Answ. 1. Charity (we know) is a duty commanded, and so far, no work of
supererrogation. Secondly, at some time, so the case may be, that we are to
forsake all, for Christ and for his Gospels sake, so as he that does it not
then, is so far from doing a work of supererrogation, as he himself cannot
be Christ's Disciple, as Christ speaks in Luke 14. 33. Whosoever he be of you,
that forsakes not all he has, he cannot be my Disciple. So then, that act
of forsaking all, may be no work of supererrogation, but a necessary duty.
Thirdly, this act here of selling and giving all away to the poor then, was a
voluntary act, a virtue of very high praises, yet was it no work of
supererrogation.

First, for albeit no particular commandment did bind them hereto, and so was
it a free work; yet in general they were bound to it by the commandment, To
love our neighbor as our selves. Now, a man will sell all, Job 1. 4. to
relieve his own self, and by the commandment to do things honest, just,
pure, lovely, of good report, matters of virtue and praise, Phil. 4. 8, 9. The
present necessity of the Church also required a more then an ordinary
charity: and in such a case, Christian compassion moves even deep poverty,
to be rich in liberality, beyond ability, 2. Cor. 8. 2, 3. and so is it in
such a case a duty, which at another time binds not.

Secondly, it was the work of grace in them, it came of God; and what they
gave to the Saints, it was that which God gave them. The consideration whereof
in David's infinite preparation for the Temple, made him, not to conceit any
work of supererrogation, but to debase himself, and to admire the work of
Gods grace and mercy toward him and his people therein, and to give God the
sole glory thereof, read 1. Chron. 29. 13, 16.

Thirdly, to make this act a work of supererrogation, they must prove first,
that all these, that thus sold and gave all away, had done perfectly before God
all such duties, as they were bound to do: for this must ever be presupposed,
before we can dream of any work of supererrogation; but whosoever
presupposes so much, does presuppose that which is most false, as before is
proved, Iam. 3. 2. 1. King. 8. 46. Eccles. 7. 20. And therefore there are no
works of supererrogation. For the Apostle Peter, Matthew. 19. 27. speaks of
himself, and of the rest, that they had forsaken all. But had they perfectly
fulfilled the Law, how came it then after, that he fell so fearfully? and
that they forsook Christ, and so failed of their duty? yea, did not Christ
often reprove their ignorance, their weakness of faith, their dullness of
hearing, and once called Peter Satan? Therefore men may forsake all, and yet
do therein no work of supererrogation, as the Apostle implies, 1. Cor. 13. 3.

XXXII. Proposition. Of justification by faith only.
BEfore the question be propounded, the Reader is to know the terms of the
question, and what we mean by them.

First, by the word justification in this question, we mean not Regeneration,
and Sanctification. But we understand first the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, who by his perfect obedience fulfilled the Law, and by his
death paid the full ransom for sin, and fully satisfied Gods justice; all
which God accepts, and accounts as performed by us, and so makes us just
in Christ. Thus the word, justifies, is taken in Romans 4. 5. Whereupon the
Apostle out of the Psalm defines it the blessedness of a man, to whom the
Lord imputes righteousness without works, Romans 4. 6. Psalm. 32. 1. Secondly,
remission and absolution both from the guilt, as also from the punishment of
sin, for Christ's sake, Ephesians. 1. 7. and so are we pronounced just: and thus
is the word justifies, used Romans 8. 33. Which two we by faith apprehending,
our justification is formally accomplished.

Secondly, by faith we do mean: First, not the faith which is called
historical, assenting and believing that to be true which God speaks.
Secondly, not the extraordinary faith to work miracles. Thirdly, nor the
temporary faith which is for a time. Fourthly, not any conceited,
fantastical, or presumptuous faith, a fleeting opinion of Gods favor standing
only in imagination. Fifthly, not an ignorant, foolish implicit faith.
Sixthly, not an idle fruitless, dead faith, or a solitary faith, alone without
other graces: but a distinct, intelligent, lively, operative, obedient,
applicatiue faith, taking hold, as by a hand, of Christ, applying him and his
benefits, particularly to our selves, as God of his mercy gives him unto us,
which we do call justifying faith; and yet not as it is a grace, as other
fruits of the Spirit be, or that it has any virtue, or merit to justify us,
but that it is the instrument taking hold of Christ, and applying him to us,
which is not the property of any other grace.

Thirdly, by only, we mean that in the act of justification before God, this
faith only, and alone is that grace, which applies Christ unto us, and is the
isntrumental cause of our justification; and not that hereby we do seclude
repentance, charity, and good works, from being lively fruits and effects of
faith, but no causes at all of our justification before God. Yet understanding
these terms, thus they hold:

That a man is not justified before God, only by faith:

Confuted by their own Bible.
1. IT secludeth from our justification before God, three things. First, the
Law, from being able to justify us, Gal. 3. 11. It is manifest that in the Law
no man is justified with God, Romans 8. 3. It was impossible by the Law, being
weakened by the flesh. Act. 13. 39. You could not be justified by the Law of
Moses. Secondly, All the works of the Law, Romans 3. 20. and 4. 2. Gal. 2. 16.
By the works of the Law shall no flesH be justified before him, being
justified gratis by his grace, verse. 24. Thirdly, All a man's own justice in
the state of grace. For Saint Paul lays aside his own justice which is of
the Law, Phil. 3. 9. yea, and denies himself to be justified by his own
well-doing: for he says, I am not guilty in conscience of any thing; but I am
not justified herein, 1. Cor. 4. 4. Thus we see what is secluded from
justifying of us.

Secondly, it ascribes justice to faith, Romans 10. 6. justice which is of
faith; and this is the justice of God in faith, Phil. 3. 9. by which faith we
are justified, Romans 3. 8. Romans 5. 1. Gal. 2. 24.

Thirdly, in the act of justification by faith, it secludeth works from it,
saying, Romans 3. 28. We account a man to be justified without the works of the
Law, Romans 4. 5. Faith is reputed to justice to him that works not, Gal. 2.
16. A man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ. How clear are these places for justification by faith only, when they
seclude works, and give it to faith?

Fourthly, it no where exhorts us to justification. For justification is not
a virtue in us, nor our work, but the work of Christ, who is our
righteousness, Ier. 23. 6. Romans 10. 4. 1. Cor. 1. 30. But we are exhorted to
believe. Now, of faith most excellent and admirable things are spoken, for our
everlasting comfort. By it, Christ dwells in us, Ephesians. 3. 17. By it we are
made the children of God, Gal. 3. 26. Ioh. 3. 12. 1. Ioh. 5. 1. By it we live,
Hab. 2. 4. Romans 1. 17. Gal. 2. 20. we stand. 2. Cor. 1. 24. we walk, 2. Cor.
5. 7. we have boldness, access with confidence to God, Ephesians. 3. 12. Romans 5.
2. and peace with God, Romans 5. 1. and without this it is impossible to please
God, Heb. 11. 6. For to this is imputed justice, Gal. 3. 6. Romans 4. 3. and 9.
31. by this are we justified, Romans 3. 28. Gal. 3. 8. attaining to the
righteousness of God by it, Phil. 3. 9. By this do we overcome the world, 1.
Ioh. 5. 4. By this are we kept unto salvation, 1. Pet. 1. 5. By this we have
eternal life, Ioh. 3. 36. and are saved, Ephesians. 2. 8. we shall not perish,
Ioh. 3. 16. nor come into condemnation, but pass from death to life, Ioh. 5.
24. Thus we see the excellency of this faith in Christ, which is called the
faith of the elect, Tit. 1. 1. the end where of is the salvation of our souls,
1. Pet. 1. 9. And that we might not rest upon any other thing but upon Christ
by faith, the Apostle says, Gal. 5. 6. In Jesus Christ, neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Touching justification by faith only, the ancient Fathers are very clear for
us against the Papists.

Chrysostom. hom. 3. ad Tit. If thou beleeuest, why addest thou other things to
faith, as if faith only could not suffice to justify? And in Hom. 7. Romans 3.
speaking of Gods goodness, says, he not only saves us; but also justifies
and glorifieth us, using no works hereunto, but requires faith only.

Hilar. Can. 8. in Matthew. says, Faith only justifies.

Basil. Hom. de humilit. says, This is true and perfect rejoicing in God, when
a man is not lifted up in his own righteousness, but knows himself to be
without true righteousness, and to be justified by faith (...).
only in Jesus Christ.

Ambros. on Romans 3. They are justified freely, because doing nothing, neither
repaying again any thing in stead thereof, they are justified only by faith.
And on Romans 4. There is no need of the Law, seeing the wicked is justified
only by faith.

Theophylact. on 3. chap. ad Galat. Faith only, says he, has in it the
power to justify.

Hesychius in Leuit. 14. lib. 1. Grace is apprehended only by faith, and not
by works.

Primasius ad Romans 5. and ad Gal. 2. He does justify the wicked by faith
only: Faith only suffices you unto salvation.

Theodoret in Ephesians. 2. By faith only, he forgiueth sins.

Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 22. Believe in God that justifies sinners: and being
justified by faith only, he shall have peace with God.

Thus the Fathers speak according to the Scripture, in our manner of speaking
in plain terms.

Gainesaid by themselves.
Aquinas on Romans 3. lect. 4. and Gal. 3. lect. 4. Works, be not, says he, the
cause why a man is just before God; but rather they are the manifestation, and
execution of his justice. For no man is justified by works, but by the habit
of faith infused; yea, justification is done by faith only.

The ordinary Gloss, Iam. 2. says, That Abraham was not justified by the
works he did: but by faith only, his oblation being a work of his faith, and
a testimony of his righteousness.

Erasmus says, that the word only, which now a days they showt at so in
Luther, is reverently heard and read in the writings of the Fathers.

And Bellarmine de iustific. lib. 5. cap. 7. says, It is most safe, to repose
our whole confidence in the only mercy and goodness of God, which is in
effect that, which we teach in this point of justification.

Scriptures objected answered.
1. Cor. 13. 2. Though I have all faith, so that I could remove mounaines, and
have no charity, I am nothing.

Answ. 1. The faith here is of working miracles, and not of justifying faith.
Secondly, to have faith, without charity, is spoken of here by supposition:
for true saving faith is that, which works by love; which we teach and allow
not of a fruitless faith. Thirdly, this is not against the tenent, that faith
only justifies. For here is no word of justification: but a condemning of a
faith without love, which justifying faith is not without. For though faith
only iustifyeth, yet it is not alone without charity, and other fruits, which
ever accompany it, to show it to be saving faith, but yet not as any causes
with it of our justification.

Iam. 2. 24. Ye see therefore, how that by works a man is justified, and not
by faith only.

Answ. To show the sense and plain meaning of these words, which are the
conclusion from the former discourse, we must consider:

First, to whom James speaks: he speaks to vain men, verse 20. which
boasted of their faith, saying, they had faith, and yet were without works,
verse 14. This was the occasion of the Apostles discourse.

Secondly, the scope, which was not to show, what place faith has in
justification, whether that faith only justify before God, for that was Saint
Paul's drift to the Romans, Romans 4. 5. but this here is only to show, what
faith it is that saves not, verse 14.

Thirdly, the faith here spoken of and condemned, is such a faith, First, as
stood only in words, without works, like the charity of such, who say to the
poor, Go in peace, be warm, and filled, but yet give them nothing to warm
and fill them, verse 15, 16. Secondly, a dead faith, verse 17. 20, 26. Thirdly,
an Historical faith, which the devils themselves have. Fourthly, a faith
contrary to Abraham's faith: For his was an operative faith, and which he that
has, can show by works, verse 18, 21. a faith that works by works, showing
it self to be perfect, that is, true and sincere, verse 22. By which faith,
Abraham believing, it was counted to him for righteousness, ver. 23. where
note, that when righteousness, which was counted to Abraham, is mentioned, it
is ascribed to his faith, which so did show it self by works, and not to his
deeds done, which Saint Paul makes the fruits of this his faith, Heb. 11. 17.

Therefore all these things premised, and clearly manifest out of the Text,
these words in this verse 24. carry the sense, Ye see therefore (by all this
aforesaid) how that by works, that is, by faith showed by works, that a man
is justified, and not by faith only, that is by faith alone, a solitary
faith, which has no works, of which the vain man boasts: For only here is
used for alone. For when the Greeks place the word only after faith, as here,
then it signifies alone; but before faith, it signifies only, (...).
And this interpretation, first, is agreeing to the scope of the Apostle James
here. Secondly, it does not oppose S. Paul's Doctrine, Romans 3. and 4. which
secludeth works from faith, in the act of our justification. Thirdly, the
words in this Text of James confirms this exposition, that works are put for
faith, showed by works, in ver. 18. where he brings one in, urging to show
faith by works. Also when in verse 21. he had spoken of Abraham's justification
by works, he by and by says, verse 22. See thou, how faith wrought by his
works? And then thereupon produces Scripture in verse 23. to prove, not that
Abraham's work was counted to him for righteousness, (as James would have
done, if he had intended to teach justification by works) but that it was the
faith of Abraham which did work by works, that made him to be reputed
righteous before God.

Gal. 5. 6. For in Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love.

Answ. This place magnifieth saving faith, which works by love, for which we
plead: and therefore is nothing against, but altogether for that which we
teach: for we speak not of alone faith; but of only faith in the act of
justification.

The places cited by the Gagger.
Matthew. 5. 20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, etc.

Answ. This place is not to the purpose: for here is no mention of faith, nor
of justification by faith: but here is one righteousness preferred before
another: That of the Scribes and Pharisees brings not to Heaven: for it was
legal, sought by works, and to establish their own righteousness, being
ignorant of the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3. which is Evangelical,
sought by faith, and inherent in Christ, in all fullness of perfection, which
exceeded the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees.

Mat. 7. 21, 22. Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, etc.

Answ. This is nothing neither to prove the point. This is against idle and
vain professors of Christ, that have not the faith that justifies, Matthew. 11.
26. Yea, O Father, for so it was thy good pleasure. This is foolishly quoted,
Matthew. 12. 33. Is of a fruitful, and fruitless tree, Matthew. 16. 16. Thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God: Peter's profession of his faith. The very
naming of these, shows the vanity of this Gaggers citing of Scriptures.

Matthew. 19. 17. If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments.

Answ. 1. This is nothing against justification by faith only; which faith is
never without obedience to Gods commandments. 2. Christ speaks not of that
which the young man was able to do; but he seeking righteousness by the Law,
Christ answered him thereafter legally, intending to discover to him his
rashness and pride, as the event shows: For the young man was covetous, and
loved his riches on earth, more then treasure in heaven, verse 21, 22.

Gal. 3. 12. But the Law is not of faith, but the man that does them, shall
live in them.

Answ. The whole course of the context is for justification by faith, and
against justification by works. The eighth verse. speaks of the justification of
the Gentiles through faith. The ninth verse says, that they that be of faith,
are blessed with faithful Abraham. The tenth verse pronounces them that are
of the deeds of the Law, accursed. The 11. verse confidently auerreth, that no
man is justified by the Law, in the sight of God, and gives the reason: for
the just shall live by faith. In verse 12. is an argument to refell confidence
in works: For the Law, says he, is not of faith. So as, if we live by faith,
we cannot live by the Law; for it propounds life to the doers, but not to
believers, as the Gospel does.

1. Tim. 5. 8. If any provide not for his own, etc.

Has not he an idle brain, is not he worthy to be gagged for a lewd babbler,
that will allege this Scripture against justification by faith only, when we
speak of a holy, lively, and obedient faith?

1. Ioh. 2. 4. He that says he knows him, and keeps not his commandments,
etc. 1. Ioh. 3. 22. Whatsoever we shall ask, -- because we keep his
commandments, and do those things, which are pleasing in his sight.

Answ. The first place condemns knowledge without practice. So do we, and
such a faith too. The second is an effect of that good confidence in God,
spoken of in verse 21. describing such as have such boldness toward God, by
the true signs and fruits of faith; to which he exhorts in verse 23. saying,
that it is a commandment of God, that we should believe in the name of his
Son Jesus Christ.

Romans 3. 31. Do we destroy the Law by faith? God forbid: but we rather
maintain the Law.

Answ. The whole Chapter is against justification by works, and for faith, and
even in this very verse. For what mean these words? but to show, that faith by
which we are justified, does fulfill the Law; so as what men would obtain by
the works of the Law, the same they have by faith in Christ, who has for us
perfectly fulfilled the Law. So the Law is not destroyed, but by faith
established.

Phil. 2. 12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling.

Answ. What means this babbling Babylonian hereby? Will he conclude, that he,
which is to work out his salvation with fear and trembling, is not justified
by faith only? Justifying faith makes none presumptuous. It makes a man put
on the Armor of God. It so makes us confident in God, as withal, never to
neglect any good means in the way to salvation. It makes us not high-minded,
but to fear, and to tremble, and so to work out our own salvation, which
ever accompanyeth our justification.

XXXIII. Proposition. That no true believer particularly can in this life be
certain of his salvation, without a miracle, or extraordinary revelation:
Confuted by their own Bible.
BY their Bible we do learn, and it is clear,

First, that the unalterable ground of our salvation is laid in Jesus Christ,
God having chosen us in him, before the constitution of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4.
which he will perfect: for, whom he has predestined, them also he has
called; and whom he has called, them also he has justified; and whom he has
justified, them also he has glorified, Romans 8. 30.

Secondly, that Christ has taken away all and every cause of damnation, and
every thing that might hinder the salvation of such as believed in him; as to
wit, sin. He is made sin for us, 2. Cor. 5. 21. the curse of the Law; he
has redeemed us from the curse thereof, Gal. 3. 13. and from under it, Gal. 4.
5. the anger and wrath of God: for we were reconciled to God by the death of
his Son, Romans 5. 10, 11 2. Cor. 5. 19. So that there is no damnation to them
that are in Christ, Romans 8. 1.

Thirdly, that Christ is every thing for us unto God, our Wisdom, Justice,
Sanctification, and Redemption, 1. Cor. 1. 30. yea, in Christ, we are made the
Justice of God, 2. Cor. 5. 21. So that God justifies us with his own Justice,
which cannot be excepted against. Who therefore shall accuse the elect of God?
or who is he that shall condemn? Romans 8. 33, 34. And if free from accusation,
and condemnation, are they not sure of salvation? What is it that lets?

Fourthly, that no power (though they have many temptations, and many combats)
shall ever finally overcome them. The gates of hell shall not prevail against
them, Matthew. 16. 18. For in the virtue of God, they are kept by faith to
salvation, 1. Pet. 1. 5. and are in all power strengthened, according to the
might of his glory, in all patience and longanimitie with joy, Col. 1. 11.
Christ promises not to cast forth his, Ioh. 6. 37, 40 and he holds us, that
none shall pluck us out of his hands, Ioh 10. 28. Not Satan, for Christ has
overcome him, Matthew. 4. Heb. 2. 14. Not the world: for he has overcome it
also, Ioh. 16. 33. Not false Teachers: for it is not possible that the elect
should be induced into error, Matthew. 24. 24. meaning totally and finally. Not
our sins: for the blood of Christ has cleansed us from all sin, 1. Ioh. 1.
7. and in him we have redemption, the remission of our sins, Col. 1. 14.
Ephesians. 1. 7. See also Heb. 8. 12 and 9. 14. Not the terror and curse of the
Law: for he has fulfilled it for us, and removed the curse, Gal. 4. 5. and 3.
13. Not our once being under the power of darkness: for God has delivered us
from our enemies, Luke 1. 74. and from the power of darkness, and translated
us into the kingdom of the Son of his love, Col. 1. 13. Nor Gods once former
displeasure against us: for when we were impious, Romans 5. when we were
sinners, Christ dyed for us, verses 6. 8. and when we were enemies, we by
Christ's death were reconciled to God, verse 10. and have received
reconciliation, verse 11. Not any thing that may fall out after reconciliation.
For, if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled, much more being reconciled,
shall we be saved in the life of him, Romans 5. 10. No, not Gods just deserved
wrath for our often falls. For, if when we were sinners, Christ dyed for us;
much more therefore now being justified by his blood, shall we be saved from
wrath by him, Romans 5. 8, 9. 1. These. 1. 10. Not the Law of sin captiuing us,
so as we cannot do that which we would, but do often that which we would
not. For Jesus Christ shall deliver us from the body of this death, Romans 7. 24,
25. Not tribulation, distress, famine, nakedness, danger, persecution, nor
the sword, though we were killed for his sake all the day long. For to us it
is given for Christ, not only that we should believe in him, but also that we
suffer for his name, Phil. 1. 28. And in all these things we overcome; because
of him that has loved us, Romans 8. 37. and because God is faithful, who will
not suffer his to be tempted above that which they are able: but will also
make with temptation issue, that you may be able to sustain, 1. Cor. 10. 13.

To conclude, there is nothing possible that can separate us from the charity
of God in Christ Jesus our Lord. For I am sure, says the Apostle, that neither
Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, neither things
present, nor things to come, neither might, nor height, nor depth, nor other
creature shall be able to do it, Romans 8. 38, 39. For we know, that to them
that love God, all things cooperate unto good, to such as according to purpose
are called to be Saints, Romans 8. 28. And Christ Jesus is able to save for ever
them that go by him to God, Heb. 7. 25. he being entered into Heaven, now
appearing to the countenance of God for us, Heb. 9. 24. who is on Gods right
hand making intercession for us, Romans 8. 34. So that it is undoubtedly
certain, that those that be Christ's shall not perish, Ioh. 3. 15. nor come
into judgment, but pass from death to life, Ioh. 5. 24.

Fifthly, their Bible teaches, not only these things in the general; but
also how every true believer may particularly be assured that he has his part
in these things, and be certain of his own salvation; and that is by Christ's
Spirit, and by the grace of faith, wrought by the same Spirit.

First, by the Spirit. For the Spirit himself gives testimony to our spirit,
that we are the sons of God, Romans 8. 16. This Spirit of God we receive,
that we may know the things that of God are given to us, 1. Cor. 2. 12. Hence
it is, that John says, In this we know that we abide in him, and he in us,
because he of his Spirit has given to us, 1. Ioh. 4. 13. and 3. 24. What can
be more certain then knowledge, and that knowledge which is of Gods Spirit?
whose testimony is most infallible: for it is the testimony of God himself,
and the Spirit of truth, Ioh. 14. 17. 1. Ioh. 5 6. It is also Gods pledge to
us, 2. Cor. 5. 5. and 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 14. and his Signet, with which we are
signed unto the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30. Now Gods Spirit
being truth, being Gods own witness, being his own pledge, in every true
believers heart, and his own signet and seal, is he not certain and sure of
his salvation? Will any man question the truth of an earthly Kings word, his
hand and seal so affirming any thing to be as he says? How much less the
Word, hand and Seal of the King of Heaven, bearing witness to every true
believer, that he is the child of God; yea, and making him to speak to God as
to a Father, and so to call him by the name of Father, Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 6.
then which, what greater assurance of salvation can there be?

Secondly, by faith; which makes the party which has it, to know that he has
it, 1. Cor. 13. 5. and that which it believes, to be certain to the believer:
so as he can say, We know that he will raise us up, 2. Cor. 4. 14. We know
that we have eternal life, 1. Ioh. 5. 13. and we know, that we have a
building of God, eternal in Heaven, 2. Cor. 5. 1. Therefore the Apostle says,
We are bold always, verse 6. So as the Apostle James exhorts not to waver or
to doubt, Iam. 1. 6. So S. Paul, 1. Tim. 2. 8. For says is the substance of
things to be hoped for, and the argument of things not appearing, Heb. 11. 1.
Which could not be, unless there were certainty in it; yea, so certain, faith
makes things to be to believers, that the Apostle says, We walk by says,
and not by sight, having before spoken of constant boldness, and also by and
by after touching their assurance of future happiness, 2. Cor. 5. 6, 7, 8.
Moreover, this grace of faith gives a particular assurance to him that has
it, and applies that to himself which he believes. Therefore believing in
Christ, and receiving him, are made both one, Ioh. 1. 12. Now, he that
receives a thing from another for himself, is to lay hold on it, and so to
take it to himself. So believing, is a laying hold and applying Christ, and
his benefits, and all promises of salvation made in Christ to a man's self in
particular. Whereupon it is, that the Apostle speaking of faith, exhorts to
apprehend eternal life, 1. Tim. 6. 12. Also the more fully to express this
particular assurance and application, in Ioh. 6. to eat and to drink Christ,
is made the same with believing in him. To believe in Christ (says Saint
Austen) is to In Joan. tract. 25. and 26.
eat the bread of Life: He that believes, eats. Believe, and thou eatest.
Now, can any thing be more assured, and more nearly applied to a man, that it
is his infallibly, then that which he has eaten? And if to believe in Christ,
be the eating of him, and the eating assures him that eats him, to live for
ever, Ioh. 6. 51, 58. then faith does assure him that believes in Christ, that
he has Christ, and all the benefits of his death and Passion, for his eternal
salvation, as he that has eaten bread, has the benefit of it, to the
sustentation of corporal life. Of this lively and certain application of
faith, the Fathers speak. Austin says, that says sent up, lays hold on
Christ. Chrysostom Tract. 50. on John. On Mark hom. 10. On Luk l. 6. c. 8.
Li. de resur. Cor.
says, Let us believe, and we see Jesus present before us. Ambrose says, That
by faith Christ is touched, and is seen. Tertullian says, That by faith
Christ is digested. Now, if Christ by faith be laid hold on, seen present,
touched, and as food digested, it does, according to the measure thereof,
effectually apply him, and gives particular assurance of Salvation, which is
obtained by Christ; though we have neither miracle, nor extraordinary
revelation to tell us, that we are saved. Furthermore, faith is that which
receives the promise, Gal. 3. 14. It goes out of a man's self to fetch all
that it believes, concerning salvation from God; most fully knowing that
whatsoever God promises, he is able to perform it, Romans 4. 21. Hence is it,
that by faith which applies the promise, and believes that God is true of his
word, and able also to make it good, above all that we desire, or understand,
Ephesians. 3. 20. we are ascertained of that which we believe; neither does our
faith stagger, but makes us most assured, while it is fixed on God, on his
Word, on his will made known by his Word and promise, on the truth of that
also which he once has spoken, and on his almighty power to make it good
accordingly. But God has promised to every true believer forgiveness of
sins, Act. 10. 43. and everlasting life, Ioh. 3. 15. Thus having spoken, his
will and good pleasure is hereby known, this word will he keep, and his
power will make it good: All which, true faith applies to him that has it, as
spoken to him (for in this, faith excels all other graces) and so makes him
certain of forgiveness of sins, and of everlasting life, which we in our
Creed profess to believe, not only that there is remission of sins, the
resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting: but every true believer by
faith says, that his sins are remitted, his body shall rise again, as Job
was persuaded, and that he shall have life everlasting: For to believe them to
be, and not to apply them, is not a justifying faith, but such a faith as is in
reprobates, even the faith of devils.

Lastly, this saving faith brings forth such fruits, as will proclaim to all,
that faith is a grace of certainty. It makes a believer, that he shall not be
confounded, Romans 10. 11 to have affiance, and access with confidence, Ephesians.
3. 12. Now, where there is assiance, and confidence, there is much certainty in
that grace which works these. It works also hope; now hope makes us glory,
and confounds not, Romans 5. 2, 5. and is the anchor of the soul sure and
firm, Heb. 6. 19. yea hope is said to have glory and confidence, Heb. 3. 6. If
hope then be so certain, sure and firm, as that we are thereby confident,
yea glorying, as if we had in possession that which we expect to have, and
never confounds, nor makes us ashamed, that is, fails us not of that which
we look for, but we find surely what hope expects: then much more are we
made confident by faith it self, and particularly assured of that which God
has promised, even remission of sins, and eternal salvation, seeing hope is
the fruit of faith.

Contraried by Antiquity.
Tertul. in lib. de Baptis. Faith, says he, has safe security of salvation.

Cyprian. de Mortal. God has promised unto thee, when thou departest out of
this world, immortality and eternity, and do thou doubt thereof? This were
not to know God: this is to offend Christ, the Master of Believers, with the
sin of unbelief; this is for a man being in the house of faith, to be
without faith.

Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 7. page 641. says, The just man knows that
eternal life is laid up for him.

Austin on Psalm. 149. There is a kind of glorying in the conscience, when thou
know thy faith to be sincere, thy hope certain, and thy love without
dissembling. And Tom. 2. de verbis Domini, Sermon. 28. All thy sins are
forgiven thee: Thou art made a good son, of an evil servant: Therefore
presume thou not of thy working, but of the grace of Christ: for, says the
Apostle, Ye are saved by grace. Here therefore is not arrogancy, but faith: to
make known what thou have received, is not pride, but devotion.

Hilary in Matthew. Can. 5. The Lord will have us hope for the kingdom of
heaven, without any doubting: for otherwise there is no justification of faith;
if faith it self be uncertain.

Fulgentius lib. 1. de pradest, ad Monimum: The just living by faith, says
confidently, I believe to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living.

Macarius hom. 17. Although (speaking of the godly) they are not yet entered
into the whole inheritance prepared for them in the world to come: yet, through
the earnest which they now receive, they are as certain of it, as if they were
already crowned and reigning.

Bernard. in Epist. 190. ad Innocent. PP. If faith waver, then is our faith in
vain, and our Martyrs were fools to suffer such bitter things, for uncertain
rewards. And a little after he says, citing Austin for it, That faith is not
held of him, that has it in his heart, to be there by conjecture, or in
opinion, but by certain knowledge, the conscience giving witness thereto.

Gainesaid by their own men.
The Divines of Collen say, That we are justified by faith, as Antididagm.
Colon. page 29.
by the apprehending cause, such a faith, as without all doubting assures us
of the pardon of our sins through Christ.

The same Divines in Enchirid. Council. Colon. tit. de iustif. cap. Non habes
ergo, confess this for truth, that to a man's justification it is required,
that he certainly believe, not only in general, that they which truly repent,
have their sins forgiven them by Christ, but that his own self has also
forgiveness, through Christ, by faith. Now, if faith can assure us certainly,
and without doubting, of our justification, and remission of sins, then so it
can assure us of life everlasting.

Bishop Fisher, in opuscul. de fide and misericord. axiom. 10. says, that if
we will enter into heaven, we must not come with a double heart, or wavering
faith, but with that which is altogether without doubting, and most certain.

Ioh. Bacon. and Catharin. cited by Perer, in Romans 8. D. 7. Number. 27. 30.
select. disput. Tom. 2. affirm, that the knowledge of faith is equal in
certainty, and farie above, and more certain then all other knowledges.

Isengren pro Council. Trid. de certit. great. page 217. says, that their
Divines, all the chiefest which he had read for that purpose, though they did
not allow a man to be altogether secure and free from all care and
heedfulnesse, yet with one voice teach, that we must not tremble or mistrust,
but have a firm hope, and certain confidence: and says further, that this is
the doctrine of all the Schoolmen and Fathers since the Apostles.

Scotus 3. D. 23. page 46. As I believe God is three in person, and one in
essence, so do I also believe my self to have faith infused, whereby I
believe this.

Bannes in Thom. 22. Every one that believes, sees he does believe.

Medina 1. 2. q. 112. Art. 5. Caietan ibid. and Bannes too, dare affirm, that
a Christian man, by the infallible certainty of faith, which cannot be
deceived, certainly knows himself to have supernatural faith.

Dom. Soto, Apol. cap. 2. holds, that a man may attain to that certainty of
his own grace, that he may, without all doubting, be as sure thereof, as he
is, that there is a City called Rome.

See diverse other testimonies cited at large by Doctor White, In his way to the
true Church. Digres. 43. Number. 9. 10.
wherehe shows, that such as will not allow the certainty of faith, yet hold
sure and firm certainty of hope, as excludes all doubtfulnesse touching
remission of sins. And can they thus allow it in hope, which is but a fruit
of faith, and has all it firm and sure certainly from faith, and not admit it
in faith it in says it self? This is nothing but wretched perverseness of
spirit against the clear light of truth.

Before I come to the objected Scriptures, some things are needful to be
known, both more clearly to show that which we hold, that we may not be
mistaken; as also to help to the better answering of such places as be brought
forth against this particular assurance of a man's salvation.

First, that this justifying, saving, and applicatiue faith, comprehending in
it both historical and temporary faith, is ever accompanied with other graces
of Gods Spirit: as with knowledge, 2. Cor. 4. 13, 14. and 5. 1, 6. with hope,
1. Pet. 1. 21. with Love and Charity, Gal. 5. 6. Ephesians. 6. 23. 2. Tim. 1. 14.
1. These. 5. 8. 2. These. 3. 6. with holiness and sanctification, Jude, verse.
20. 2. These. 2. 13. with purity of heart, 1. Tim. 1. 5. Act. 15. 9. with a
good conscience, 1. Tim. 1. 5, 19. joy, Phil. 1. 25. with obedience, Reu. 14.
13. with good works, Iam. 2. 22. Heb. 11. with open profession, 2. Cor. 4. 13.
Act. 4. 20. Romans 10. 10. with Prayer, Iam. 1. 6. and 5. 15. Jude, verse 20.
Romans 10. 14. with godly sorrow, fear, holy revenge on a man's self, 1. Cor. 7.
11. with patience in adversity, Iam. 1. 3. 2. These. 1. 4. Heb. 6. 12. Revel.
13. 10. and with many other virtues, 1. Cor. 7. 11. 2. Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. 2. Tim.
2. 22. and 3. 10. 1. Tim. 4. 12. Revel. 2. 19. 1. Cor. 6. 11. So that such as
have this faith, are no Solifidians, as our Adversaries please in malice to
call us.

Secondly, that the graces have their proper operations, which this faith does
not hinder, but rather they have their strength from faith, and by it are set
on work, so as it and they together, make us that we neither shall be barren,
nor without fruit in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, as S. Peter
speaks, but hereby make our calling and election sure, 2. Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8,
10. For whilst faith holds Christ, and in him apprehends eternal life;
hope expects the accomplishment; patience endures trials; love exercises us
in duties of obedience, and works of mercy; fear keeps us from sin, and
aweth us, that we dare not displease God; a good conscience comfort us;
humility makes us lowly in our own eyes; hatred of sin makes us to fly the
causes, and occasions thereof, as ill company, counsels, and examples to
evil. Godly sorrow upon our falls, exercises us in fasting, praying and
labor; zeal makes us take revenge upon our selves, when we have trespassed,
and to oppose stoutly wickedness in others, and so forth in all the rest of Gods
graces, whatsoever they be: for as faith is said to work by love; so does it
work by hope, patience, humility, and all other virtues which accompany it;
never neglecting the means which God prescribes in the way to heaven, nor
abating the power of these other graces and gifts of God, nor withholding them
from their proper works, wherein they are to be employed, upon any vain
confidence of salvation by Christ, or imaginatie assurance of heaven. Hence is
it, that such as in the Scripture are said to believe, are said also to fear
God, to be charitable, to be just, to eschew evil, to do good, to fast and
pray, to continue in the Word, to hear it with an honest heart, to come to the
Sacraments, and so forth. See this in S. Paul, who was well assured of eternal
life, of which he could confidently speak, 2. Tim. 4. 8. 2. Cor. 5. 1. Romans 8.
38, 39. And yet nevertheless he had care to keep a good conscience toward
God and man, Act. 24. 16. endeavoring to please God, 2. Cor. 5. 9. and had
excellent virtues accompanying his faith, 2. Tim. 3. 10, 11. David had
particulat assurance of pardon of sin, 2. Sam. 12. 13. yet he afterward
prayed for mercy fervently, Psalm. 51. and Christ knew his hour, yet did avoid
dangers. Hezekias knew that he should live fifteen years, yet used the means
of life. So Saint Paul was sure of safety, yet would have means used, Act. 27.
31.

Thirdly, that neither this faith, nor any of these graces are perfect in this
life: for the Scripture speaks of degrees of Faith, Matthew. 8. 26. and 15. 28.
Romans 4. 21. and of the increase of faith, Luke 15. 5. 2. These. 1. 3. 2. Cor.
10. 15. Romans 1. 17. So likewise of the increase of knowledge, Col. 1. 10. of
love, Phil. 1. 9. of works of charity, 1. These. 4. 10. of walking and
pleasing God, 1. These. 4. 1. of grace, 2. Pet. 3. 18. and so of all other
virtues which do increase as the whole Church does increase, as the Apostle
witnesses, Ephesians. 2. 21. So that they are more at one time then at another, in
such as have them; and do increase by degrees, though not alike in all.

Hence it is, first, that ordinary means are prescribed by God, not only for
the first begetting; but also for the increase and continuance of all these
graces, to wit, the Word, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. the Sacraments, and Prayer, which
therefore the godly do ever make use of, Act. 2. 42, 46. Secondly, that the
godly are so often found fault with, reproved, admonished, and threatened for
failing in their duties. Thirdly, that they do so vilify themselves, and
renounce all righteousness in themselves, and fly to Gof for mercy through
Christ. Fourthly, that there are so many exhortations, as means to urge them
to their duties, in which they are weak and defective. Fifthly, that promises
are made with conditions annexed, to stir them up to their duties.

Fourthly, that with these imperfections of graces, there remains in the most
holiest persons natural corruption, which is sometime so strong, as it not
only hinders the work of these graces (so as a regenerate man cannot do
the good he would) but also is drawn to do that which he would not, Romans 7.
15, 18. Hence it is, first, that the best have sometime broken forth into foul
enormities, as may be seen in David, Solomon, and others. Secondly, that God
so threatens and chastises them, as means to awake and reclaim them.
Thirdly, that they so See an excellent discourse of this in Bishop Abbots
answer to Bishop -- in this point of the certainty of salvation, page 257.
humble themselves (...) cry and call, as if they were forsaken. Fourthly, that
this faith, and these graces are not seen, nor felt to be at all times alike
in operation; but so weakened through strength of corruption, and so brought
under, as if they had clean lost their virtues, and faith in a sort had failed;
which in some agony of spirit, causes them to utter some uncomfortable words,
sauouring rather of desperation, then of any hope of salvation, even as Christ
on the Cross, crying, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And as David
sometimes did in the Psalms, Ps. 13. 1. and 6. 1, 6. and 22. 1, 2. and 31. 22.
and 38. 1, 8. and 55. 4, 5.

Fifthly and lastly, that albeit the imperfection of graces, and corruptions of
nature do weaken thus the power of faith, and other accompanying graces, much
troubling the soul of a true Believer; yet do none of them hereby alter their
nature, nor change their quality; but faith holds its hold, though sometime
as does a Palsy hand, and strives against doubting, till it conquer in the
combat, as may be seen in David's conflicts.

First, he will say to his soul (as he does in a Psalm) Why are thou so
disquieted within me? yet trust in God. Secondly, he will run to God in
Prayer, which is the true fruit of faith. Thirdly, he will profess his faith,
and trust in God. So Job in his greatest terrors, said, If he kill me, yet
will I trust in him. So that faith gives assurance in the midst of troubles,
and saves Daniel in the very den of Lions, and other in the midst of a siery
Oven.

Therefore, for all the defects of graces, and power of corruptions
ouer-swaying too often; yet seeing they destroy not faith in the elect, nor
annihilate their graces, they are most certain of their salvation in the end.

Scriptures objected answered.
1. Cor. 9. 27. But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest
that by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self should be a
Castaway.

Answ. 1. This place speaks not of a Castaway, as one reprobated to eternal
destruction; but the word signifies one not approved (...).
(opposed to one approved) being like reffuse silver, which is not good and
current, Ier. 6. 30. So as the meaning is, I Paul preaching to other, do so
demean my (...) as my life may not scandalize my profession, and so be judged
as one worthy to be rejected. Thus understood, it is not alleged to purpose.

Secondly, but grant the word to be understood of a reprobate, yet is it
nothing against the assurance of salvation: for S. Paul speaking thus of
himself, was most certain that he was no Reprobate, 2. Cor. 13. 6. but one
sure of his salvation, Romans 8. 38, 39. 2. Tim. 1. 12. and 4. 8. Gal. 5. 20. as
is also clear out of the 26. verse, going before this objected place: I
therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that beats the
air. Therefore speaking so assuredly of salvation in the former verse, he
cannot be understood here, as making doubt thereof; for so should he be made to
speak contraries. But the Apostle shows, that with his faith of the promises
of assurance of salvation, he did join the means, the more to further, and
the more to strengthen his said assurance: For he knew, and taught, and so do
we, that the use of the means to salvation, weakeneth not the assurance; but
rather confirms it: and therefore do we that truly believe, use such
means carefully and constantly.

Thirdly, this place will not afford any good reason against the assurance of
salvation. S. Paul was sure of his salvation, and he used such lawful means
as might further him in the way; and that he might not be a Castaway, he
opposed his corruptions, not living carnally secure, nor vainly presumptuous;
nor did he neglect to do what he ought to do. Will it hence therefore follow,
that he doubted of his salvation? He professed as you see before, the
contrary. Faith, in the use of the means, loses not, but gets assurance, and
grows more consident.

Romans 11. 20. Thou stand by faith; be not high-minded, but fear, etc.

Answ. 1. If this place, spoken to the Church of Rome, will afford the
conclusion, that we cannot be certain of salvation, but that they which now
stand, may fall away: how comes it to pass, that Papists so brag of the
infallibility of their Churches not falling?

Secondly, fear here is opposed to high-mindednesse, and carnal security,
and not to the assurance of salvation.

Thirdly, the Apostle takes not hereby away the assurance of salvation, but
prescribes the means of securing us therein, that we fall not away. For the
true fear of God, and humility of Spirit, will greatly awe us, and keep us
from departing from God, Ier. 32. 40.

Fourthly, the Apostle here speaks to them, as to a mixed company, and as they
were outwardly professors of the faith of Christ; and not as the Elect of God,
and all true and sincere believers, of which the question is. For these cannot
finally fall away, but the other may, and so be uncertain of their salvation.

Phil. 2. 12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling.

Answ. This place may be, and is against the vain security of salvation; but
not against true and sound assurance thereof.

For first, the Apostle assures them of salvation, by saying, your salvation,
making it theirs already.

Secondly, he utters nothing that might cause doubting; but only exhorts
them to do that which they ought to do, for the better assurance of their
salvation, that is, to work it out with fear and trembling: thus warning them
hereby to take heed of vain presumption, and careless security, and not to
cause them to live in doubt of their salvation.

Thirdly, we must know that there is a twofold fear; The one a servile,
distrusting, discouraging, distracting legal fear, begotten by the spirit of
bondage, and is opposite to saving faith, and spiritual comfort, from which
fear every where the godly are dehorted Esa. 35. 4. and 41. 10. and 43. 1. and
54. 4, 14. Luke 12. 32. This fear Christ redeemeth us from, Luke 1. 74. Heb.
2. 15. the Spirit of God freeth us from, Romans 8. 15. 2. Tim. 1. 7. and perfect
love casts it out, 1. Ioh. 4. 18. The other is a filial fear, careful and
loving, a fear of awefull reverence, begotten by the Spirit of adoption, ever
attending, as a handmaid, on saving faith. To this the faithful are exhorted,
Luke 12. 5. 1. Pet. 2. 17. Revel. 14. 7. And this fear may be with rejoicing,
as in Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with
trembling. To which words in that Psalm the Apostle here alludeth. And he that
always thus fears, is pronounced blessed, Prou. 28. 14. And of this fear
speaks the Apostle in this place to the Philippians; which fear does not
hinder, but furthereth man's assurance of salvation, keeping him from departing
from God, as before is noted out of Ier. 32. 40. and from presuming upon their
own strength, and to rest upon God, and in him to be strong, Ephesians. 6. 10. as
in the next verse, Phil. 2. 13. is evident. See for this, Austins exposition,
lib. de gra. and lib. arb. cap. 9. Prosper, apud Ambros. Epist. 84.

Prou. 28. 14. Blessed is he, that fears always.

Answ. This filial fear that makes a man blessed, and keeps him with God
from falling away, affords no reason for a true believer to doubt of his
salvation.

Eccles. 9. 1. No man knows either love or hatred, by all that is before them.

Answ. It is true, that by beholding outward things, how all things come alike
to all: we cannot know love or hatred; for of these outward things Solomon
speaks. Nevertheless, though we cannot know by sight, yet may we discern by
faith and inward graces, by Gods Spirit and fruit thereof, that God loves us.

2. Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure, etc.

Answ. This Scripture is against our Adversaries, and for us: for it teaches,
that a man may come to assurance of salvation by this diligence.

Prou. 20. 9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?

Ans. 1. It is true, that either he can make himself pure and clean by his own
power, neither that he is pure by any inherent righteousness, neither that he
is made perfectly pure in this life by Gods Spirit, whereby he is in a measure,
not wholly sanctified.

Secondly, yet a true Believer can say, that faith purges the heart, Act. 15.
9. that by the blood of Christ he is cleansed from all his sins, 1. Ioh. 1.
7. that he is sanctified, Heb. 10. 10. and also by the Spirit, 1. Pet. 1. 2.

Thirdly, thus being sanctified, he is sure that he has the Spirit of Christ,
Ioh. 14. 17. and that he is justified, Romans 8. 1, 9. and then is he certain,
that he shall be glorified, Romans 8. 30, 33.

Fourthly, and although this sanctification be not perfect in this life; yet
this hinders not our says, to assure us of salvation; because faith takes
hold of the truth of Gods promises made to every true believer in Christ, who
is our Wisdom, our Justification, our Sanctification and Redemption, 1. Cor.
1. 30. who has perfected for ever by one offering, them that are sanctified,
Heb. 10. 14. and so has obtained everlasting redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. So
as though no man can say, that his heart is perfectly clean, nor that he is
pure wholly from sin in himself, or by himself: yet is he in and by Christ
most perfect; so as he need not doubt of his salvation.

Job 9. 20. If I justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me, etc.

Answ. 1. Job here disclaimeth his own righteousness; he was then no Papist.
Secondly, this is no argument against the assurance of his salvation: For
though there be no righteousness of a man's self, nor the righteousness of the
Law to assure him of his salvation, yet is there another righteousness, which
is called the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 13. by which a true Believer is
certain of his salvation: And though Job thus renounced his own
righteousness, yet was he assured of his salvation, yea and so assured, as in
the midst of his so grievous afflictions, he seemed through it to triumph, Job
19. 25, 26, 29. neither could his faith be made to let go its hold: for he
said, If he kill me, yet will I trust in him.

1. Cor. 4. 4. For I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified.

Answ. 1. What is this against assurance of salvation? What if Paul was no
Papist, rejecting justification by works? must it needs follow, that he had
therefore no assurance of salvation? It is clear, as before is proved, that
Paul was certain of his salvation. Therefore hence to fetch an uncertainty
thereof, crosses the plain evidences of his assurance, and so is a lewd
collection.

Secondly, the Apostle here, though he knows himself not justified by his
own innocent living and righteousness, Phil. 3. 9. yet was he sure that by
Christ he was justified, Gal. 2. 16, 20. and 5. 20. having attained to that
righteousness through faith, Phil. 3. 9. Of his justification he doubted not,
for he here absolutely denies himself to know as certainly, that he is
justified by Christ, Gal. 2. 20. Phil. 1. 19, 20. Therefore though by the first
he cannot assure himself of salvation, yet may he by the latter, as indeed he
was, Romans 8. 11, 30, 39.

Thirdly, the Apostle speaks not here of the justification of his person, but
of his office, as he was an Apostle, and a Teacher of the Corinthians, and of
the Gentiles. For when he says, I know nothing by my self, he means it of
the outward dispensation of the ministry, wherein his own conscience bare
him witness, that he had been faithful, as he also speaks in 2. Cor. 1.
12. and 2. 17. and 4. 2, 5. and had not failed of his duty, to his witting; yet
could he not hereby justify himself, nor would he judge himself, nor
regarded he to be justified of other, but referred the judgment thereof unto
God, who, says he, judged him, to wit, that he was faithful, by the
testimony of his own conscience. So as here is no argument against assurance;
but rather for his assurance, as knowing, that God judged aright of him, though
neither himself, nor other could so judge of him.

Phil. 19. 12. Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from secret
faults.

Answ. 1. It follows not, that because a man cannot know all his errors and
hidden faults, therefore he is not sure of his salvation. For as the knowledge
of them all, (if so a man could know them) would not give assurance of
salvation (for the sight of sins shows to us misery, and not hope of
felicity:) so the not understanding them, cannot debar a man from the
assurance of salvation, because salvation is purchased by Christ, who cleanses
us of all sin, secret, as well as open, unknown, as well as known; and
faith, taking hold of the promise of the forgiveness of sins through Christ,
assures of salvation.

Secondly, this speech, that none can understand his errors, being understood
of all men whatsoever, then it comprehends Abraham, and Moses, David, holy
Simeon, Peter and Paul, with other holy men, who yet had assurance of their
salvation, as our Adversaries deny not: And therefore the not understanding of
all the errors of a man's life, is no hindrance of the assurance of salvation.

1. Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinks that he stands, take heed lest he fall.

Answ. 1. Good counsel to use means, as wary circumspection, and diligent
endeavor to persevere, is no argument against the certainty of salvation: for
sound confidence causes no negligence in any good means: as we may see in
Saint Paul and others assured of eternal life.

Secondly, Saint Paul speaks to the presumptuous and conceited; for he says,
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed.

Thirdly, grant it spoken to the best assured; yet here is nothing against that
assurance; for the Apostle says not, Lest he fall away, as speaking of
Apostacy final, but of falling into sins, lest they provoke God to punish
them, as he did the Israelites.

Fourthly, if yet further it be yielded of falling away, then it is to be
understood only of such among them, as might finally perish; for Saint Paul
spoke to a mixed company, and not of the Elect among them: for in verse 13.
following, the Apostle strengthens their assurance very fully against all
temptations. Therefore take this place howsoever they please, yet it is nothing
against the certainty of salvation.

1. Pet. 1. 17. Pass the time of your soiourning here in fear.

Answ. Fear that is filial, attends on faith, keeps a man with God from
falling from him, and so rather assures them, then any way causes doubting of
salvation. The answer before to Phil. 2. 12. is a full answer to this place.

Places of Scripture objected, that justifying faith once had, may be lost,
and a true believer finally perish: And therefore no certain assurance of
salvation.
Before the objected places be produced, it is good to know the truth of the
Tenent, and how it is to be understood, to wit, That the faith of the Elect
once had, cannot utterly be lost.

Faith is diversely taken in the Scripture. First, for historical faith, a bare
and naked knowledge of God, with an assent to the truths of God, and profession
of Religion, but without lively effects and fruits; this is a dead faith, Iam.
2. 17, 24. Also it is taken for a certain persuasion of some wondrous effects
to be done through Gods assisting power, 1. Cor. 13. 2. Matthew. 17. 20. Acts 14
9. This is called a miraculous faith.

Thirdly, it is taken for knowledge with a joyful assent of the mind, Matthew.
13. 20. hearing gladly, Ioh. 5. 35. yea and doing many things, Mar. 16. 20. But
this endures but for a season, Ioh. 5. 35. Mar. 4. 17. for that it has not
root in him that has it, Matthew. 13. 21. wanting moisture, Luke 8. 6. the
heart being as stony ground, Mar. 4. 16. and so, in time of persecution for the
Word, it withers, and such a Believer falls away, Luke 8. 13. and is
offended, Mar. 4. 17. This is called temporary faith. Of these faiths the
question is not: for historical is also in Devils as well as men, Iam. 2.
Faith of miracles lasted but for a time, and was the faith of some few. Faith
temporary may be lost; the Scriptures are plain for it.

But the faith which we say cannot be lost, is that precious faith, 1. Pet. 1.
1. that unfeigned faith, which is accompanied with a pure heart, a good
conscience, 1. Tim. 1. 5. working by love, Gal. 5. 6. that faith which
justifies, Romans 5. 1. which saves, Ephesians. 2. 8. by which Christ dwells in us,
Ephesians. 3. 17. and by which the world is overcome, 1. Ioh. 5. 4. through which, by
the power of God, we are kept unto salvation, 1. Pet. 1. 5. This is called the
most holy faith, Jude, verse. 20. and is properly the faith of Gods Elect, Tit.
1. 1.

This faith may be shaken, and the power of it sometime very greatly weakened,
and sometime be so made to languish, as the true believer may cry with the
afflicted Father in the Gospel, Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief, Mar.
9. 24. the sense thereof being very little, and the power thereof hardly felt,
for a time the party being as it were in a swoune or trance, through the
force of the temptation. But yet nevertheless it is not lost totally nor
finally, so as that the elect Believers cannot perish utterly: which is proved
not only from all which has been said before, for proof of the certainty of
salvation, but also by other manifold reasons of great force to persuade hereto.

I. From God the Father, and thus, First, from his decree which alters not:
for in him is no variablenes, nor shadow of turning, Iam. 1. 17. he changes
not, Mal. 3. 6. no more does his decree, but his counsel shall stand. Now God
has decreed who shall be saved, Romans 8. 30. and he has decreed that such
shall believe, Act. 13. 48. that they shall be holy and blameless in love,
Ephesians. 1. 4. be confirmed to the Image of his Son, Romans 8. 29. walk in good
works, Ephesians. 2. 10. bring forth fruit, and that the same shall remain, Ioh.
15. 16. Therefore by this decree of God, neither they nor these their graces
shall finally decay. Secondly, From his Covenant, which is an everlasting
Covenant, not to turn away from us to do us good, but to put his fear in our
hearts, that we shall not depart from him, Ier. 32. 40. Therefore by this
everlasting Covenant they cannot perish. Thirdly, From his gifts, among which,
is faith to believe in Christ, to suffer also for him, Phil. 1. 29. But these
gifts and callings of God are without repentance, Romans 11. 29. Therefore can
they never be lost, nor they that have them, perish. Fourthly, From Gods
working all in us, both the will and the deed, Phil. 2. 13. and all things for
us, Esaias 26. 12. rejoicing over us to do us good, Ier. 32. 41. Psalm. 147. 11.
and 14 9. 4. and to beautify us with salvation, Psalm. 149. 4. for what work
he begins, the same will he perfect to the end, Phil. 1. 6. For every branch
that bears fruit, the Father purges, that it may bring forth more fruit,
Ioh. 15. 2. Such a branch then shall never wither or fall away. Therefore the
work of our salvation, being begun and continued of God, and not being our
work, but his, who can hinder our salvation? Fifthly, From Gods promises which
are infallible, never failing in any thing which he has promised, Ios. 21. 45.
and 23. 14, 15. 1. King. 8. 56. Now, he has promised, First, that he will
never suffer his to be tempted above their ability, 1. Cor. 10. 13. Secondly,
that he will give the issue with the temptation, that they may be able to bear
it, 1. Cor. 10. 13. Thirdly, that though the just man be so overtaken, that he
does fall, yet shall he not be utterly cast down, Psalm. 37. 24. Therefore
cannot the Elect fall finally and perish. Fourthly, From Gods power, who
establishes and keeps us from evil, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. vpholdeth all that
fall, and raises them up, Psalm. 145. 14. for he vpholdeth them with his hand,
that they may not be utterly cast down, Psalm. 37. 24. and so are kept by his
power unto salvation, 1. Pet. 1. Fifthly, therefore except a power be to
ouermaster Gods power, the Elect cannot perish. Sixthly, and lastly, From the
prime cause of all this dealing of God thus with his people, why he has thus
decreed, couena^ted, given gifts, wrought his work, made such promises, and so
supporteth them: which is the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1. 5. his
kindness, his love and mercy, Tit. 3. 3, 5. Ioh. 3. 16. without any desert
of ours, Tit. 3. 5. Now, the same cause everlastingly remaining in him, which
moved him to choose us, is that which continues ever his goodness toward us,
and therefore cannot the Elect finally perish. Thus far reasons from God the
Father.

II. From God the Son, Jesus Christ: First, he is not only the Author, but
also the finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 2. Therefore our faith cannot be lost.
Secondly, in him all the building fitly framed together, grows into a holy
Temple, Ephesians. 2. 21. That therefore which grows, does not decay, nor can
perish. Thirdly, He saves his people, Matthew. 1. 21. loses nothing, nor
casts any out that come to him, Ioh. 6. 37, 39. nor can any pluck them out
of his hand, but he gives to them eternal life, Ioh. 10. 28. How is it
possible then that any of his should perish? Fourthly, He has prayed God for
all his (whom his Father has given him, who either have believed, or shall
believe in him, Ioh. 17. 9, 20.) that he would keep them through his Name,
from evil, ver. 11. 15. and he also does still make continual intercession
for his, Romans 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25. and appears for them in his Fathers
presence, Heb. 9. 24. Now, unless men will say, that Christ's prayers are not
heard, contrary to Ioh. 11. 42. and that God is not well pleased with him,
contrary to Matthew. 3. 17. it cannot be, that his faithful children should
perish and lose their faith.

III. From God the holy Ghost, who dwells in us, 2. Tim. 1. 14. and abides
in us, 1. Ioh. 2. 27. who is called Gods earnest in our hearts, 2. Cor. 1. 22.
and 5. 5. and so are we sealed therewith, Ephesians. 1. 13. and thus not here for a
time, but even unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. Therefore is it not
possible for the Elect to perish, except this earnest of our God, and this his
Heavenly Seal be of no validity.

IIII. From the words of Scripture, speaking so confidently of true Believers
salvation: He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life, Ioh. 3. 36.
and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life, Ioh.
5 24. For through faith, by the power of God, they are kept unto salvation, 1.
Pet. 1. 5. yea, the begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked one
touches him not, 1. Ioh. 5. 18. for the path of the just is as a shining
light, which shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prou. 4 18. And those
that are planted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish, and still bring
forth fruit, Psalm. 92. 13, 14. Also, The righteous shall hold on his way, and
be stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. and nothing can separate them from Gods
love in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 38, 39. Therefore do not they perish, nor finally
fall from Grace.

V. From similitudes, setting out lively the dureable estate of Gods Elect from
falling away. First, from trees, Psalm. 1. 3. A godly man is as a tree planted
by the rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in due season, and his
lease shall not wither, nor fade, neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed,
Ezekiel. 47. 12. Secondly, From marriage: I will betroth thee to me for ever in
righteousness, in judgment, in loving kindness, in mercy, and faithfulness, Hos.
2. 19, 20. Thirdly, From a head, body and members, 1. Cor. 12. 12, 27. Christ
is the Head, we the body and members in particular, knit together, increases
with the increasing of God, Col. 2. 19. Ephesians. 4. 16. Fourthly, From a house
built firmly, not by any tempest to be beaten down, Mat. 7. 24, 25. Fifthly,
From lively fountains of water. For, says Christ, the water that I shall give
him, shall be in him a well of water springing out into everlasting life, Ioh.
4. 14. And out of his belly should flow Rivers of living water, Ioh. 7. 38. By
all these, the holy Ghost would express and set out the certainty of
perseverance, and that no adopted true believer can finally perish, and fall
away, no more then a fruitful tree that never withers, can decay; nor, then
a wife betrothed for ever in righteousness, in judgment, in loving kindness,
in mercies, in faithfulness, can be forsaken; nor, then a true head can suffer
a true member of the body to perish; nor, then fountains of living water, ever
flowing, can ever be drawn dry; nor, then a house wisely built upon a rock,
can by a tempest or storm be overthrown.

VI. From the power of faith it self, through which, by the power of God, we
are kept unto salvation, 1. Pet. 1. 5. for it is of a conquering nature. First,
it prevails against the flesh, purifying the heart, Act. 15 9. Secondly,
against the devil; Above all (says the Apostle,) take the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, Ephesians. 6.
16. The Apostle makes it above all powerfully preualent. Thirdly, against the
world; for our faith is the victory that overcomes the world, 1. Ioh. 5 4.
Fourthly, against all sorts of persecutions, afflictions and trials of what
kind soever. For by faith the Saints have endured tortures, cruel mockings,
scourgings, bonds, imprisonments, stoning, sawing asunder, killing with the
sword, wandering in Sheep-skinnes, Goat-skinnes, being destitute, afflicted and
tormented, wandering in mountains, dens and caves of the earth, and yet for
all this, were by faith more then Conquerors, Heb. 11. 35, 36, 37, 38. Romans 8.
37. This is further manifest in all holy and constant Martyrs in all ages.
Fifthly, it prevails against all the terrors of God, disquietnesse of mind,
and desperate apprehensions; as we may see in David, who being greatly
disquieted in mind, said, O my soul, why art thou so disquieted with me?
presently gave answer as a remedy thereto, Trust in God. Faith in God will
allay all such restlesnesse of man's soul. In the 22. Psalm, verse 1. and 2.
he says, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? There he speaks of his
roaring and crying day and night, and yet God heard not. What was his comfort
and stay, that he was not swallowed up with despair? Even his faith, which
both made him pray still, and cry, My God, my God, O my God; yea challenging
God for his God, Thou art my God, verse. 10. And so victorious was faith, that
at length he triumphed with joy, and said, I will declare thy name to my
brethren, and in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee, verse. 22. Of
such a force of faith may we observe in many Psalms of David, Of this
inconquerable grace we have a rare instance in Job, who in a Sea of miseries,
when the venom of Gods arrows was felt in his soul; when he saw God to set
him as a mark to shoot at; when his wife grieved him, his friends vexed him,
and Satan tried him to the uttermost, and he left of all as comfortless; even
then, even then, in this gulf of his sorrows, and whirlepole of despair, his
faith made him not to faint; and therefore he brast forth in the midst of
these his unspeakable calamities outward, and terrors inward, Though he kill
me, yet will I trust in him. So that great is the power of faith in desperate
cases, and therefore being so victorious, it cannot be lost.

VII. From the recovery of godly men from under their falls, when they have
been so wounded, as their wounds have stunke, and been corrupted, as David
speaks. Fearful were the falls of David, and Peter; but neither of them
fell finally; for they recovered: neither fell they totally: for David in
Psalm 51. 11. speaks as he that had, as yet, Gods Spirit, and had not
utterly lost it: for he prays God not to take his holy Spirit from him. He
says not, Give me; but, Take it not from me. And as for Peter, it is clear,
that Christ prayed for him, that his faith should not fail, as not finally, so
not totally, Luke 22. 31. For a true Believer, in the day of his conversion,
has a new birth, Ioh. 3. 3. and his state is compared to a resurrection, and
is called the first Resurrection, Reu. 20. 6. Now, if a man truly regenerate,
could wholly lose his faith and godliness, and yet after return again by
repentance, besides his first birth, and first resurrection, there would be so
many births and resurrections, as there be falls, and risings again: but the
Scripture speaks but of one spiritual new birth; and here, of one
resurrection, and not of more new births and resurrections: for the first new
birth they cannot lose: for the seed of God does remain in them, 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
and the second death (which is damnation) has no power on him, that has part
in the first Resurrection, Reu. 20. 6. But if such a one could totally and
finally fall away, it should have power on him, and he could not rise again
unto newness of life. Therefore the truly Regenerate, though they fall, yea,
and that sometimes fearfully, yet fall they not totally, nor therefore can
fall finally.

VIII. and lastly, From the sentence of the holy Ghost, upon all those which
finally apostate from Gods people, 1. Ioh. 2. See how Saint Austin thus
expounds the meaning largely cited by Bishop against Bishop, of the certainty
of salvation, page 321. 322.
19. First, says the Apostle, They were not of us, that is, not of the Elect:
for by us, John understands himself and the Chosen of God, effectually called,
true believers, lively members of Christ, and children of God, which they
indeed were not, though, by profession for a time, they had the name to be
such. Secondly, that if they had been of us (says he) they would no doubt
have continued with us. Where the Apostle co^fidently speaks, saying, No
doubt, that such as be of the number as he himself was of, do continue, and
fall not away from them. Thirdly, that all among those justified ones are not
of them, but other are mixed with them; these are they which fall away, and not
any of the rest totally and finally. Fourthly, that albeit these are not
manifest to men, so long as they abide in the Church, but seem to be the same
that others be; yet their falling away, discouers the^ to be none of that
blessed number; yea, and therefore they fall away, that it might be made manifest
that they were not of them. And to this add the place of Jude, ver. 19. That
they who separate themselves, are sensual, having not the Spirit; and, if any
man have not the Spirit, he is none of Christ's, Romans 8. 9. Therefore they are
not regenerate by the Spirit: they are none of Christ's, which fall away, See
Seigfridus Saccus, de Academica Pontisiciorum dubitatione in negotio
iustificationis, very largely handling this matter from all Topic places.
howsoever for a time they may seem to be his. These seeming faithful ones,
only fall away, and none of the truly justified.

The objected Scriptures answered.
Luke 8. 13. They on the Rock, are they which when they hear, receive the
Word with joy: and these have no root, which for a while believe, and in time
of temptation fall away.

Answ. It is not denied of us, but that some kind of believers may fall way.
This is not the question; but, Whether true believers having saving faith, and
truly persuaded of Gods mercy toward them, in Jesus Christ, bringing forth
lively fruits of faith, can finally fall away? This is the question, and not
the other. To this place then I thus answer, That it speaks not of them that
believe by a justifying faith, which rooteth us into Christ, but of an
inferior faith, as the words plainly teach: for it is said, that they have no
root, which for a while believe. Such indeed may, and do fall away in time of
trouble for Religion. Therefore it is weak and rootlesse arguing, from the
falling away of them which have this rootlesse faith, to conclude the falling
away of them which have true sound justifying faith. For albeit saving faith
includes historical and temporary, yet be they not one and the same, but do
much differ, as before is manifested, and even also out of this Parable: For

First, Temporary faith is in them whose hearts are rocky and stony, Luke 8.
13. but saving faith is in those, whose hearts be good and honest, verse 15.
Secondly, Temporary faith is in them that receive the Word immediately with a
sudden affection of joy, Mar. 4. 16. Matthew. 13. 20. Ioh. 5. 35. but no mention
is made of sound judgment and understanding, or of an attentive mind to
learn, understand and keep it: But saving faith is in him that so hears,
that he does understand it; in hearing, attends; and intends in hearing, to
understand. 3. Temporary faith is in them, which have no root in themselves,
Mat. 13. 21. nor moisture, Luke 8. 6. But, saving faith is in them that have
root, Ephesians. 3. 17. and are full of moisture, maintained by the fountain of
Christ's grace: for our of the belly of such believers shall flow rivers of
living waters, Ioh. 7. 38. which shall spring up to eternal life, Ioh. 4. 14.
4. Temporary Faith they may have, which yet want lively fruits, though they
may do in show many things, Mar. 6. 20. Therefore in this parabolicall
exposition, Christ mentions no fruits of this temporary faith: but saving
faith in them that have it, bears fruit, and brings forth, some an hundred,
some sixty, and some thirty fold, Matthew. 13. 23. Mar. 4. 20.

Lastly, temporary faith, in time of trouble and persecution for the Words
sake, does not preserve such believers from being forth with offended thereat,
Matthew. 13. 21. Luke 8. 13. But saving faith keeps a true Christian from
taking such an offense, making him to keep the Word, and to bring forth fruit
with patience, Luke 8. 15. in which patience they possess their souls, and so
fall not away. Therefore seeing there is such difference between these, it
will not follow, though temporary faith fall away, that therefore saving faith
should fall away. And yet either thus must they conclude hence, or they
conclude nothing out of this Text, for their purpose.

1. Tim. 1. 19. Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put
away, concerning faith, have made shipwreck.

Answ. 1. This speaks of blasphemous men, verse 20. who had put away a good
conscience, at least, the show of it; which can never be separate from saving
faith, verse 5. And therefore by faith here, cannot be meant that excellent
faith.

Secondly, here by faith is understood the doctrine of faith, Oecumen* on this
place.
and profession thereof, which they that lose the care of a good conscience,
soon make shipwreck of, and fall from. That faith is put for the doctrine and
profession of faith, these places show, Act. 6. 7. Gal. 1. 23. 1. Tim. 3. 8.
and 4. 1. Tit. 1. 3.

Thirdly, if it be taken for the gift of faith, it must then be understood of
groundless temporary faith, which may be lost, and not of justifying faith,
which (as before is proved) cannot finally be lost.

2. Tim. 2. 18. Who, concerning the truth, have erred, saying, that the
Resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of some.

Answ. 1. Faith is here put for the faith of the true doctrine concerning the
Resurrection, which by false Teachers was overthrown, and namely, by Hymenous
and Philetus. Secondly, these some, whose faith was overthrown, were not
Elect, nor true Children of God: for in the next verse 19. it is said,
Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, having the seal, The Lord
knows them that are his. As if he had said, Though these false Teachers
overthrow the faith of some, yet are these none of the Lords Elect, none of his
adopted children, whose knowledge of them is a sure seal, and an immovable
foundation, that they cannot perish. Therefore these some, not being of the
Elect, their faith was not the faith of the Elect, nor faith of that kind, but
another faith of baser mould, and so, not that saving faith, of which the
question is.

1. Tim. 6. 2. Which some professing, have erred concerning the faith.

Answ. Faith, as before, is here the sound and wholesome Doctrine of faith: For
it is opposed to profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of sciences,
falsely so called, verse 20. Also the word erred, showed as much; for error is
to be understood of Doctrine, and not of the gift of faith it self. And thus
is Faith taken in 1. Tim. 4. 1.

Revel. 2. 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen.

Answ. 1. Here is no mention of loss of faith, of which the question is.
Secondly, by falling, here is not to be understood of a total, or final
falling away, but only the decay of love, not being in him in such a degree,
as at the first. For this Angel had yet very excellent graces in him, works,
labor, patience, zeal against false Teachers, hating those whom God hated,
having patience, and not fainted, Revel. 2. 3, 6. If he fainted not, he had not
lost his faith. This place is therefore rather against our Adversaries, then
any thing for them. But our Gagger gazing about without judgment, where-euer
he found a word sounding to his fancy, though nothing to purpose; that he
will set down. He should have remembered, that every stick will not make a
gagge for every mouth.

Luke 19. 24. Take from him the pound.

Answ. 1. This is a Parable, and therefore affords no sound demonstration by
argument in a matter of controversy. Secondly, if the words be to be urged, he
lost not his pound, but it was taken from him; and then, when judgment was to
be executed upon him, Mat. 25. 30. Our question is, of losing it here before
judgment. Thirdly, by pound here, is not meant saving faith, of which the
question is, but some common graces afforded to Castawayes, such as this man
was, Matthew. 25. 30. which if not well used, or abused, God may deprive a man of.
But where is it read, that God will take away his saving grace from any man,
and damn them?

Matthew. 25. 8. And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil: for
our Lamps are gone out.

Answ. 1. This is a parabolicall speech, and therefore is not fit for
argumentation, in a controuerted point. Secondly, by Lamps and Oil, are meant
not justification, or justifying faith, or adoption, or Christ being made our
Wisdom: for then could not the receivers be deciphered by the name of
foolish Virgins. But some other more common graces, which in some receivers
vanish, in others are fed and increased unto a due progress of life and light,
putting them into a true state of justification. This was only in the wise
Virgins. The foolish had only a false fire or blaze of some good beginning,
which never came to growth: and herein they represent the Reprobates.

Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. It is impossible for those which were once enlightened, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost,
and have tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the world to come; if
they should fall away, to renew them again to repentance, etc.

Answ. 1. This is but a supposition, with an If they should fall away. He
teaches not positiuely that such may fall away. Secondly, grant that such may
fall away; It is meant of Reprobates, and not of the Elect: For they here are
said to be enlightened, and but to taste of the heavenly gift and Word of God,
etc. But the Elect do more then taste: for they receive it, digest, and
concoct it, and find nourishment and strength thereby. Again, these are such
as cannot be renewed by repentance; which is such a falling, as never happens
to the Elect. Moreover, these are such as make a general Apostacy, crucifying
to themselves afresh the Son of God, and even sin against the holy Ghost;
which the Elect in Christ cannot do. So by this Text we see, that they which
have these gifts and illuminations, may fall totally from Christ. But there be
proper graces to the Elect, and such things as accompany salvation, which as
the Apostle was persuaded, were in the Hebrews, though he thus spoke unto
them, verse 9.

Ezekiel. 18. 24, 26. When a righteous man turns away from his righteousness.

Ans. 1. There is a righteous man seeming so before men, Mat. 9. 13. but is not
before God: such a one may turn from his righteousness, and such a one is
here meant. For this righteous man here so falls, as that he may commit all the
abominations that the wicked does, verse 24, and dye therein, verse 26. and so
apostate finally: but a righteous man before God, does not so, for he shines
more and more unto the perfect day, Prou. 4. 18. and shall be in everlasting
remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6. and his memory is blessed, Prou. 10. 7.

Secondly, there is a double righteousness; the one Legal, and the other
Evangelical, which is the righteousness of faith, that is, the righteousness
of Christ applied to us by faith, and so made ours, which cannot be lost,
because it is Christ's. But the other may; and this is the righteousness which
here the Prophet speaks of: For this righteousness is such as is blotted out
by sin, and which in the day of trespass shall not be mentioned, as not
being able to clear him before God, verse. 24. But Evangelical righteousness is
not blotted out in the day of man's transgression, but is able to pacify Gods
wrath, and keep the repentant in Gods favor.

Besides these many objected places against the assurance of salvation, they
allege reasons, especially these, which to the ignorant carry a great show.



Answ. There is in effect as much, counteruailing a particular promise, as if
the true-hearted Believer were personally named. The promises are propounded in
general. It is true that in Gods book we find the proposition only in this
manner. Mar. 16. 16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Ioh.
3. 15. Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have life everlasting.
Act. 10. 43. Whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins, and
shall not be ashamed. Romans 9. 33. and 10. 11. The assumption or Minor is
suggested by experience, I believe. Thence the conscience with comfort
infers the conclusion necessarily following: Therefore I shall not perish,
but have life everlasting.

First, these and such like promises in general to all, include particular
persons. Whence it is, that sometime they are propounded singularly in the
second person: If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in
thine heart, thou shall be saved, Romans 10. 9. Awake, thou that sleep, and
arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5. 14. Thus
speaking as to particular men.

Secondly, Gods Ministers, they come in Christ's stead, 2. Cor. 5. 20. and do
allege these faithful promises of God made in general, and apply them to
their hearers, assuring them, that if they believe, these promises shall be
certainly performed. Thus Peter applied the promises, Act. 2. 38, 39. and 3.
25, 26. So did S. Paul, Act. 13. 26. and 16. 31. which assurance made by
faithful Ministers upon these undeceivable promises of God, is to be
received and believed, as from Christ's own mouth; because they speak not upon
any warrant of their own, but upon the undoubted warrant of Christ himself.

Thirdly, the Hearers (as many as be ordained to eternal life, Act. 13. 48.
believing, do apprehend, and by faith do apply to themselves these promises
so delivered, for that they know that they do believe, and truly repent; of
which their conscience bears witness; whose heart is so seasoned with grace,
and conformed to Gods voice, as the same like an Echo answers thereto: So
that when God says, Seek ye my face, the faithful soul answers to God,
Thy face, Lord, will I seek, Psalm. 27. 8. When God says, Thou art my people,
it sounds back, Thou art the Lord my God, Zach. 13. 9. When Christ says, If
thou beleeuest, al things are possible to him that believes, he answers,
Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, Mar. 9. 23. When God requires his will to
be done, and his commandments diligently to be kept, the gracious soul is
moved with desire thereto, Oh, that my ways were directed to the keeping of thy
Statutes, Psalm. 119. 4, 5. and shows it self ready, Lo, I come, O God, I am
content to do it, yea, thy Law is within my heart, Psalm. 40. 7, 8. Therefore
their faith claims these promises, and concludes the assurance of the things
promised in particular so to themselves, as if they in the same promises were
personally named.

Fourthly, to this spirit of true Believers the holy Ghost bears witness,
Romans 8. 16. and it is true, 1. Ioh. 5. 6. that we are the sons of God, Romans
8. 16. and that God has given to us eternal life, 1. Ioh. 5. 11. which true
Believers do know: for the Word was written also, that this they should know,
1. Ioh. 5. 13. Thus we see, how a true Believer has his particular persuasion,
not from an idle fantasy, or vain conceit, but from the undoubted Word of
God, and from the faithful witnesses of Gods Spirit, and his own conscience.
If our Adversaries will be yet obstinate, and say, that these general promises
cannot be thus particularly applied; I demand four things:

First, why is it said, Romans 15. 4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime,
were written for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the
Scriptures, might have hope? and in Romans 4. 23, 24. That the things written,
were not written for their sakes only, of whom they were spoken, but for us
also, if we cannot apply them as spoken to every one.

Secondly, why have the Apostles applied the general promises to particular
persons, so as they have done, as before is showed, Act. 3. 26. and 16. 31. and
13. 26. and why have they comforted the faithful in general, with a promise
made to one before in particular, Ios. 1. 9. Heb. 13. 5? And why did Zachary
include himself in those promises made long before to Abraham, as spoken to
himself and those then living, Luke 1. 73, 74. if faith might not apply them
to a believers own special comfort?

Thirdly, how can the Popish Priests, from a general Scripture, Ioh. 20. 23.
with such authority absolve their particular Penitentiaries? And are either
those Priests, or any of their Penitentiaries named in the Text? If upon so
general words they can be bold to assure their Confitents of pardon of sins,
may not a true Believer, upon the forenamed grounds, he assured particularly
of his own salvation?

Lastly, if there can be no assured application, without particular nomination,
how shall men become obedient to the precepts and commandments of God? how
shall any be stirred up by exhortation? how shall any be terrified by
threatenings? For in none of these is any man personally named, more then in the
promises. Therefore as in hearing the other, we apply them, and verily take
them without any doubt, as spoken to us in particular, to work obedience and
fear: so in hearing these promises are we to apply them, as spoken to us by
name, if we truly believe to our heavenly comfort, and assurance of life.



Answ. The Decree is absolute according to the good pleasure of Gods own will.
For therefore we believe, because he so has ordained it, Act. 13. 48. We
walk in good works, because he has so foreordained us thereto, Ephesians. 2.
10. We are in time called, justified, made conformable to Christ, adopted for
children, to bring forth fruit, that also the same should remain, and so be at
length glorified, because he has predestined and ordained us thereto, Romans
8. 30. Ephesians. 1. 5. Ioh. 15. 16. So as his Decree is the cause of all good to
us, and not our obedience and perseverance the cause of his Decree.



Answ. This is a very old objection, but altogether slanderous. There is indeed
to be granted a kind of security or assuredness, being understood spiritually;
for it makes us secure in God, in the infiniteness of his mercy toward us
through Christ, in the undoubted truth of his promises, in the full and perfect
satisfaction made by Christ, and in the unchangeableness of Gods eternal
Decree, to save all those which truly believe in Christ. But this Doctrine
makes them not carnally secure, which are upon solid ground, assured of their
salvation, which is thus manifest.

First, this saving faith, as you have heard, is ever accompanied with other
graces, which makes the true Believers neither barren nor unfruitful, 2. Pet.
1. 5, 8.

Secondly, this precious faith does not only claim the promises, but humbly
attends upon Gods will, in using such means, as God has appointed in the
way to Heaven.

Thirdly, it is evident from examples in Scripture, of such as were certain of
salvation, as Abraham, Moses, David, S. Paul and others, that they did not
therefore neglect their duties. And such with us, as conscionably hold this
doctrine, do walk nothing less carefully in the ways of Gods Commandments,
but do endeavor to keep a good conscience toward God and men. And what if
vain presumptuous spirits abase this doctrine, as they do other holy and
wholesome truths, to their condemnation? is the Doctrine therefore faulty?
Shall the abuse of truth make it to be judged falsehood. God forbid.

To conclude, this Doctrine of assurance, is most comfortable to humbled and
afflicted souls, as the other is full of slavish fear, and very comfortless.
For what can be more terror to man's heart, in the time of temptation, when
he has fallen by infirmity suddenly into some grievous offense, as Peter
did, and being assaulted by Satan to despair, as Judas did, then to be
persuaded, that Gods Decree depends upon man's perseverance, that the covenant
of Grace made with his soul may be annihilated, his promises fallible, his
power frustrated, Christ's strength too feeble to uphold him, Christ's prayers
not of force to prevail for him with Gods, the holy Spirit to have forsaken
him, the Seal of Gods Covenant broken off, the writing cancelled, Faith it
self, and the hope of heaven lost for ever? This wounded spirit, this soul
thus perplexed, this heart thus affrighted, cast into such a deep gulf of
despair, who can but pity, and withal beware of that desperate Doctrine,
which casts poor souls into such inexpressible misery and sorrows of heart?

On the other side, by the Doctrine of assurance of salvation, when a poor
weak Christian has been overtaken by some violent storm of temptation, and
comes to the sight of sin, with David, cries and calls with bitter tears
of repentance, and feign would find peace with God again, how comfortable
will it be in such a distress, when Satan with his fiery darts assaulteth him,
to think, that though he has failed on his part, and so undone himself for
ever, as much as lies in him, yet that God is one and the same, his Decree
unalterable, his Covenant not broken on his part, Christ still his Savior, his
prayers prevalent for him, the Spirit of God exciting him to prayer, with
groans not to be expressed, and his faith though shaken, yet not lost? O how
will the meditation hereof comfort such an afflicted spirit, and turn his
heart to seek after God, grieuing with himself that he should displease so
gracious a God, and after he has once again found some comfort, to put on a
resolution never to offend so any more, and in a holy zeal therefore to avenge
himself on himself, bringing down his flesh in subjection to the Spirit; and
all this, with an earnest love to God, and care to please him, even for that he
has not lost, through his fall, the assurance of his salvation, as justly he
had deserved? Thus is this Doctrine a comfort in distress, and an
encouragement after a fall, to rise again, and in the time of greatest peace,
never any cause of careless security, but rather of spiritual joy, and an
incitement to well-doing, to express all thankfulness to God, through
Christ, for the same. Even so, Amen.

FINIS.

