A KEY OF KNOWLEDGE FOR THE OPENING OF THE SECRET MYSTERIES OF ST JOHN'S
MYSTICAL REVELATION. By Ric. Bernard, preacher of Gods word, at Batcombe, in
Somersetshire.

The Contents ar in the next page before the book.

Blessed is he that reads, and they yt hear the words of this prophe^c^ie.
Reuelati^on. 1. 3. AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston. 1617.

Academiae (...)


REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI, AC DOmino, ARTHVRO, prouidentia diuina, Bath.
and Wellensi Episcopo, omnimo de in Domino debit a^ reuerentiam.
QVamvis (Praesul ornatissime) ab hac Sede, ad Episcopatum Wintoniensem, nupera
mei Domini Iacobi translatio, nonnullam moeroris causam adferre, non immerito
videri possit; (nam, dum in Academia Cantabrigiensi, bonis literis operam
darem, paupertatem meam ille sublevavit; ex quo autem, relicta Academia, in
publicum prodirem, humanissime semper habitum, consilio, atque auxilio juvit,
and cohonestauit; pro sua demum singulari in me beneuolentia, ex natali solo
evocatum, haud vana spe detinuit, donec, numinis divini suasu, vir ille
venerabilis, Phil. Bissi^s, sacrae Theologiae Doctor, and Pastor
vigilantissimus, quem hic etiam non possum non honoris gratia nominare,
Beneficii sui, cujus advocationem esset nactus, successorem me diceret,
scriberetque) tamen, ne rem meam pluris quam Ecclesiam Dei; *ne commodum
privatum, quam illustris illius viri (cui ita meipsum, meaque omnia debeo)
dignitatem and honorem, facere videar; tum hanc novam illi honoris accessionem,
tum etiam hunc Successorem impense gratulor. Dicant mihi fratres mei,
assumpsisse Iehovam Dominum meum a me: at vero ego illum non relinquam, sed
omni, quo possum, obsequij, observantiae, gratitudinis genere prosequar, and
obnixe (ut antehac solitus fui) apud Deum optimum maximu^ precibus meis
contendam, ut ad hoc dignitatis in Ecclesia and Republica fastigium, diuinae
benignitatis and gratiae cumulus par, nunquam deficiat. Abiit ille vir, multis
nominibus mihi honoratissimus, quo deus voluit, and serenissimi Regis nostri
gratia illum avocavit: Verum (ut fertur) Vno avulso non deficit alter.

Aureus, quandoquidem ad sedem hanc Episcopale^ Majestas Regia, tum singulari
gratia, tum summo judicio, dominationem tuam evexerit. Ad cujus publicam vbique
and solennem famam, quum viri cujusdam eruditi, and amici mihi fidelissimi,
etiam literae, de tuis virtutibus, accederent, in quibus ille hoc elegio
uteretur; nisi me spes mea, and, ad minus, septem supra viginti. annorum
experientia fefellerit, vitae morumque integritatem, tim^rem Dei,
hospitalitatem, and charitatem in fratres, una cum Arthuro ad nos appellere,
and nobiscum commorari experiemur: equidem non potui non vehementer gaudere,
and pro hoc maximo dei in nos collato beneficio, etiam ipse mihi, and hujus
vestrae Dioecese*s fratribus meis, and symmyst^s gratulari. Quid enim faelicius
evenire, quidve magis optari potest Ecclesiae dei viventis, quam Episcopus
vigilantissimus, quam Rector prudentissimus? Hic exemplari pietate, dei servos,
tum in officio retinebit, tum confirmabit. Hic Evangelium ipse annunciando,
emissos in Vineam Domini operarios, sudantesque, pondus aestumque diei
portantes, corroborabit. Hic, vigil ipse, somnolentos; sedulus ipse impigerque,
torpentes and negligentes excitabit. Hic, ut male feriatos homines, and vitae
perditae, coercebit, and in ordinem coget: ita aberrantes Christi oviculas,
tenerrima misericordia, in viam veritatis revocabit. Hic, cui Grex Domini
commissus est, ipsum se praestabit exemplar and typum Gregi; inculpatum, non
sibi pertinaciter placentem, non iracundum, non vinosum, non percussorem, non
turpem quaestum facientem: sed hospitalem, bonorum amantem, temperantem,
iustum, pium, continentem, tenacem fidelis sermonis, potentemque doctrina sana
exhortari, and contradicentes convincere. Ad hanc autem imaginem Evangelicam,
ad hoc Apostolicum exemplar very and germani Episcopi, Te fore conformem, non
familiarium aliqui, aut Oxonienses solum omnes tui, sed aliorum vbique vox
certissima, immo and tuijpsius dicta, facta, totusque vitae tuae tenor, de
dominatione tua spondent ac pollicentur. Et talem profecto Episcopum Ecclesiae
Dei apud nos status videtur magnopere flagitare, qui t^m mores nostros
instituat, restituatque; tum lupos a Christi ovibus arceat, ut nec Brounistarum
schismate pax Ecclesiae perturbetur, and ut Antichristianorum haeresis (quae
vires assumere, and cristas erigere, vulgo passim creditur) juguletur. Quid
dicam ego nunc de Papicolis, dominationi tuae? quorum insolentiam, atque
improbitatem, sat scio tibi notiorem esse, quam ut indigeat narratione mea;
quin etiam de remediis huic malo adhibendis, jam ante apud te deliberatum ac
statutum esse, quam misellus ego causas tam pestiferi grassantisque morbi forte
satis possum concipere. Tamen ex Iohannis Apocalypsi, prophetia quidem illa
nobilissima, and ad vnguem ediscenda, clarius mihi videor quam dudum,
certiusque didicisse, quid de tota nunc-Romana, seu Papana Ecclesia debeam
judicare. Non enim illic leaves aliquas opiniones, aut probabiles de illo
perditionis filio conjecturas, sed grandes mihi certasque videor apodeixeis
intueri, quibus Papam, Synagogae illius atque Apostaseos Caput, ipsissimum esse
Antichristum; pseudocatholicam Romanam Ecclesiam, Babylonem esse, illam
purpuream meretricem; Spiritus illos, ranis similes, ex ore Draconis, Bestiae,
and pseudoprophetae prodeuntes, immundos esse istos Iesuitas, liquido
demonstretur. De hisce autem Iesuitis, Satanae, regnique Pontificii Primipilis,
quid attinet dicere, quanta cum animarum strage feroces, spretis Regni legibus,
obambulent, qua humanitatis pietatisque lerva, quibus lenociniis illecebrisque
meretriciis, quali art, quoto fascinationum genere, Babylonem illam suam
restaurare studeant? Nostrum ergo est, fateor, conjunctis operum viribus, eor^
machinationes amoliri: and quando ad perdendas Christi oves, velut lupi
rapaces, audacter illi atque animose discurrunt, ad earum animarum vindicias,
quas pretioso suo sanguine Dei filius redemit, strenue ac fortiter, tanquam
fidos pastores, oportet nos vnanimiter convolare. Verum, quid nostra, si ita
dicam, pastorculorum vox fuerit illis, praeter inane, and ad momentum, futile
terriculamentum? Quid profuerimus nos homunciones, quos isti papani contemptui
habent, etsi quod and loci nostri, ac ordinis, illud, quanta possumus, fide ac
diligentia, faciamus, tum voce, tum stylo evangelizantes, nisi Antistitum
nostrorum zelus, veluti summorum pastorum ardor, una adcurrat? Bonorum certe
omnium tum oculi, tum animi in tuam dominationem sunt conversi, and ad certam
spem foelicissimae tuae administrationis eriguntur. Nam te inprimis facturum
quod tui sit officii, nobis non solum confirmant, sed etiam persuadent, and
ille anteactae summa cum laud vitae tuae decursus, and hic novus dignitatis in
domo dei cumulus: quorum alter, pro amore tuo in Deum, in Ecclesiam, in omnem
pietatem, magnopere te velle and cupere salvum gregem domini; alter pro eodem
plurimum nunc te posse, pollicetur. Quamobrem, ut testatu^ faciam, tum bonoru^
commune omniu^ gaudium, tum priuatum and meum; hasce, quales quantasque, in
Apocalypsin lucubrationes meas dominationi tuae affero, offeroque, tibi ausus
inscribere, and sub tui nominis auspiciis in lucem dare. Quin and in tanta
Commentariorum, tum mole, tum numero, and ^uando hodiern^ scribendi cacoethes
tantopere infamatur, and vero quum quod maxim videtur velle Spiritus sanctus
in hac Revelatione, idipsum quidam no^ indocti homines aliter long atque ego
interpretentur: necessarium mihi omnino videbatur, tum meipsum, tum quicquid
hoc opere praestiterim, in hoc tantum patrocinium recipere. Errare possum (and
quis non, and semel, and iterum in hac mystic^ Apocalypsi erraverit?) tamen
haereticus esse nolo. Nullo enim ambitionis aestro percitus sum, ut scribendo
priuatas spargam opiniones, easdemque erroneas, pro veris pertinaciter
defendam, nam abs quovis mihi errore monstrato palinodia^ canere statim non
gravabor: sed dei and inuictae veritatis promulgandae zelo, uti arbitror,
accensus, in gazophylaciu^ domini hunc meum quadrante^, eundemque sub tuis
(domine) auspiciis immisi. Et profecto, cui potius ego labores meos inscribam
dedicemque, quam privatus, publico; parochus, Dioecesano; pastor pusilli
gregis, tum gregu^ nostroru^, tum ipsorum pastoru^ Episcopo, cui non otii modo
nostri, sed and negotii and studioru^ ratio redde^da sit? Itaque, ut non
ingratu^ sit apud te officiu^ hoc meu^, and vero etia^ liceat praetensa nominis
tui dignitate homines Christianos ad haru^ Commentationum mearu^ lectionem
allicere, utrumque qua decet reverentia, peto obsecroque: Deumque Patrem domini
nostri, obnixe oro, ut quae in pectore tuo dona jam olim infudit atque
inspiravit, eade^ insuper de die in diem adaugeat, and in hac nova, quam
concrederit, provincia, spiritu sapientiae, intelligentiae, consilii,
fortitudinis, scientiae, pietatis, dominationi tuae semper adesse velit.

Summa observantia, domination^ tuae obsequentissimus, Ric. Bernardus.
Batcombia, Martij die 14.
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND, THE IVDGES of the common Laws of this Realm, and to
the four worthy Societies of the Innes of Court, the learned Lawyers and
Students of the same.
AS I highly esteem of my mother the Church of England, which at this day is
renouned in the Christian world, howsoever many with an envious eye look upon
her prosperity; and for the evil will they bear to her welfare, utter many
unsavory things against her: so I also bless God for the happy Policy of the
Civil state, wisely established, and most succesfully maintained, in peace and
justice, beyond all comparison of other kingdoms. The praise whereof, (next
unto God, and true religion) is to be ascribed to the most just and wholesome
laws of this Nation; by Leg. sanct. Edw. cap. 19.
which very tenderly and watchfully, the prerogative Royal is preserved, the
Supremacy is given to Sovereign authority, and the Bishop of Rome quite
shutout, Edw. 1. 19. E. 3. tit.
for having any thing to do with the regality of the Crown, or within the
dominions of our Lord and King; K. Rich. 2. An. 16. ca. 5.
as his Majesty himself fully has showed, in the Premonition to all Christian
Monarchs, free Princes, and States. Albeit that Jupiter of Olympus, and
ravening Wolf, (as once Boner, that bloody butcher Preface before Guard. b. de
vera obed. Romans 13. 1.
of Gods Saints, called him) chalengeth Saint Paul's sword, but altogether
contrary to Saint Paul's doctrine, to shake off all obedience to the higher
powers, and also by the same, to be as God above all that is called God, The
second part of the Catho. Apol.
and so to claim the right to depose Kings, and to dispose of kingdoms,
(which the Popes laws maintain, and challenge most wickedly, upon these words,
pasce C. praecipue XI. q. 3. Can. alius. 15. q. 6. Clem. vnic. de Iureius.
oues meas), having claues regni coelorum, to usurp authority, and enterprise
against all the Kings in the world; which made that proud beast, Alexander the
third, set his feet upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick Barbarosse,
saying, tu es Petrus, etc. C. venerabilem ext. de elect.
adding withal, ecce constitui te super Gentes and regna, the saying of God to
Jeremy; and that of the Psalmist, Super aspidem and basiliscum ambulabis, and
conculcabis leonem and draconem. In this pride, Pope Coelestine the fourth,
crowned the Emperor, Henry the sixth, with his foot; Gregory the seventh,
made Henry the fourth, with the Empress, and their son, to stand waiting long
at the gates of the Popes palace, to speak with him; and Adrian will have the
Emperor Frederick the first, to hold his stirrup. Oh damnable pride, to be
abhorred of God and men! But yet this is not all the ill fruit of this
Antichristian usurped power, but also treasons, open rebellions, and bloody
wars, making thereby these parts of Christendom a very butchers shambles of
Christen men; and yet must Read Acts and Mon. page 719. A sum of the Popes
laws for this.
his flatterers still stand for the same. So as Bellarmine, and his Ghost dare
boldly affirm, that this supremacy of the Pope is one of the chiefest points
of their faith, and Bell. epist. ad Archipresb. apud Matthew. Tort.
of the very foundation of the Catholic religion. Mark here then, you my
Lords the Judges, and you the learned in our Laws, how unsafe that religion is
for Kings, whose foundation is for the Popes authority to throw them out of
their Thrones; how dangerous Jesuits, Priests, and all other Papists be to
our State, which be acquainted with the foundation and principles of that their
hellish profession. For they cannot possibly be good subjects, entertaining
such a religion, builded upon such a foundation. And hence may it appear, that
it is no marvel, why Papists are such enemies to the common laws of England;
by which the lawful authority of Kings is maintained, the Popes pride and
usurped power flatly trodden under foot; such trait^^rs as Campion, Sherwin, and
others, have been indicted, arraigned, tried, adjudged, and executed; and so
the very foundation of that Antichristian heresy by our common Law utterly
raced, the Supremacy of our Sovereign maintained, and subjects hept in due
obedience, to the great tranquillity and happy peace of our present State, and
welfare of the Commonwealth.

Neither are these Laws for civil policy, for Prince and people only, as
they be in a body politic, but also for the singular benefit of the Church
of God; the rights and liberties whereof the common Law maintains inuiolably:
being (as one defines the same) sanctio sancta, Judge Fortiscue. Lib. 2. de
natura deorum.
iubens honesta, inhibens contraria: the same in effect which Cicero says; Lex
est recti praeceptio, praui est depulsio. And indeed, when the Pope, with his
pretended keys of Peter, ut contrary to Saint 1. Pet. 5. 3.
Peter's precept, would lord it over Gods heritage, in his cursed laws and
decrees, in his uncharitable usurpations, and intolerable exactions, in his
provisions upon the collating of benefices in his legatiue jurisdictions, in
his most unjust excommunications, and in forcing such a continual posting to
Rome, and a thousand such intolerable burdens, and Egyptian bondages; what
stayed the current of this stream? what dried up this corrupt fountain, and
filled up this de^ouring gulf, and whirle-poole, that no more men might
perish, in passing any longer too and fro, but the course of the common law of
England? The Clergy was in great thraldom, and by the Popes laws so bound
and fettered, as slaves in the Turks galleys, that they durst not so much as
mutter a word against his usurpations, encrochments, and most merciless
cruelties; so as his power was only opposed, and his proceedings hindered by
our own laws, as may be seen in the book entitled, de iure Regis
Ecclesiastico, set out by that most learned and judicious in the laws of
England, Sir Edward Coke, Knight.

As therefore, I understanding hereby, the excellency of these our laws, and
how forcible they have ever been against Antichristian tyranny, not only to
shake off that heavy yoke of cruel bondage, both from off the Church, and
commonwealth; but also still to maintain the absolute power of Sovereign
authority, and the laudable customs and liberties of our Church, against all
unjust innouations, and usurpations: I could not (next after the highest honor
to Gods law, to his Church, and to some such worthy of honor, as be in the
chiefest places of authority therein), but do this duty of honor unto you,
my Lords the Judges, and the worthy Societies, conversant in, and about such
laws, as (next to the law of Almighty God) are most Christian and just, and
most profitable for our Church, (her privileges ever preserved entire), and
for this our most happy and flourishing Commonwealth: if, if (I say) the
equity of the laws themselves (which the Lord move you ever to observe with
upright minds, that howsoever some grow desperate, and bloodily disposed, yet
your consciences may ever plead for you) be truly kept, and the proper and
right end of them, without by-respects, only aimed at.

But here, it may be, it will be said, as some unadvised perhaps have already
said, that this book of the Revelation little concerns you, and therefore
that this my labor will not be so acceptable to you, as I wish it might be,
and indeed as I desire to have it. Surely, except I mistake, (and, we think, I
should not lose my aim so much, when I know of you, both religious and very
virtuously given), I write to the servants of our heavenly Savior, as well as
of our earthly Sovereign; and to such as do as well study the laws of God,
(else far be their counsel from me, and all men of peace), as the laws of
man: and if so, how can this book but concern you, Chap. 1. 1.
being sent to be showed to the servants of God? whose you are, and whom it
shall very greatly profit, to understand, what the Lord has herein revealed to
his Church. For you (Right reverend, the Judges) do see the due execution of
justice, upon the enemies of our God and King: and you, the rest of those
worthy societies, learned in our laws, study cases, plead causes, and urge
reasons for sentence according to law, that due justice may be executed upon
Priests, Jesuits, and other traitorous spirits, set on work by them, when
they come to the bar of justice. Now that you may even before God, without
any scruple, in a good conscience, justify the equity of our laws, against
these enemies of the Gospel, and execute the due deserved punishments upon
such malefactors, as the Law in such cases has provided, for the preservation
of the Gospel, and the safety of our King and country: this book will tell
you, that there is no cause, why any man's spirit should quail in him, to
a^enge the Lords quarrel, in the cause of religion; and our King and
countries quarrel, in cases of high treason, and other unmatchable villainies,
upon the heads of all those wicked ones, which carry such traitorous hearts
against their natural liege Lord and Sovereign. They plead conscience of
their Catholic, as they call it, religion: which, indeed, is nothing else,
but a patched profession, framed of Iudaisme, Gentilisme, and superstitious
inventions of man; a very counterfeit of Christianity, but is Antichristianity
it self. And whereas they call themselves, the Catholic Roman Church, they
speak most absurdly, as to say, an universal particular Church, and more
absurdly, then falsely: as that right reverend Father, the now Lord Bishop of
Salisburie, (Nonnullis sui ordinis praeclarum exemplar, cum regendo, scit enim
regere prudenter; tum docendo, nam diligit Christum, vult igitur fideliter
ouiculas Christi pascere), has proved Counterproof. in the 1. part. chap. 1.
against Doctor Bishop, by an argument thus framed; No particular Church can
be the Catholic Church: But the Church of Rome, is a particular Church;
Therefore the Church of Rome, cannot be the Catholic Church. The mayor he
proves thus: No particular Church can be the universal Church: But the
Catholic Church is the universal Church: Therefore no particular Church can
be the Catholic Church. This false pretended title therefore, should not
hoodwinke any, to blind men's eyes from beholding that Church, to be that which
indeed she is, even the very whore of Babylon, mentioned in the seventeenth
chapter of the Revelation, as is after proved at large. So then the Church of
Rome, is not Catholic; much less, the Catholic Church, and spouse of
Christ. Neither is the Pope Peter's successor, as he would be accounted: nor
Papa, a Bro. in his com. upon chap. 9.
father; but Popes, (which is in Eustathius, demon) a devil. In a word, that
no man may mistake the Pope, and Papists, but judge so of them, as they be,
Saint John tells us, that that company in a body (as I may say) and
government, is a foul monstrous Beast, like a Leopard, Chap. 13. 2.
Bear, and Lion, substituted by the Dragon. The Head thereof, the Pope, is the
lamb-like beast, and false Chap. 13. 11. and 20. 19. Chap. 9. 1. 11.
prophet, the very Antichrist, the angel ascending out of the bottomless pit,
the star fallen from heaven, and king of Locusts. The Jesuits and Priests,
his emissaries, Cap. 16. 13. 14.
the very unclean spirits like frogs, the spirits of devils; Incendiaries,
setting on fire the hearts of desperate companions, to do one mischief or
other, to further their defignme^ts, hardening their hearts to an unheard* of
hellish ^urie, even to blow up at once, a whole State with gunpowder. The
religious orders of those Monks Cap. 9. 7. 8. 9.
and Friars, the fearfully deformed and misshapen Locusts. Chap. 11. 2. 10.
The Papists, those Gentiles, and Inhabitants of the earth, which wonder after
the beast, and rejoice at the murdering of Gods faithful messengers. That
Church, the whore. That City, Babylon; yea Sedome, Cap. 17. and 18. and 11. 8.
and Egypt; at the length utterly to be destroyed. Let ther^ (...) good l^^es
pass in their full power and strength, against those Iebusited, rather then
Iesuited, disloyal Ignatian Locusts; against the Priests pleading for their
Baal, and Balaam of Rome: that these seeds-men of the mystery of iniquity
being cut off, there may be less peril to our State, and less danger to the
person of our dread Sovereign, whom the Lord in mercy preserve still from
their bloody hands. Let the law also, have the due course against those
obstinate Recusants, which after all meek and gentle vsages to reclaim them,
will not be won; especially such wicked Apostates, as do fall from us, in so
clear light of the Gospel, whose example, (if they be not made an example of
justice, according to our laws) will do very much harm. These, with impudent
faces, discover their whorish hearts to that idoll-seruice. These are they,
that (above other) disgrace our religion, turning their backs upon it, like
Zimries, carrying their Cozbies, before all our Israel, into their habitations,
highly provoking Gods wrath against us. These are they, that contemptuously
tread under foot the blood of Christ's Martyrs, suffering for our religion; and
that with a high hand, offend against our King and his laws, intolerably
abusing his Majesty's singular clemency; and therefore are these most sharply
to be dealt with; yet ever according to justice, that they may not (as wickedly
and falsely some of them do) complain of cruelty. In thus doing, the laws of
our kingdom shall be to our religion a great furtherance; to Antichrists
kingdom, a ruin; to our King, glory; to our Church, peace; to our Country,
safety; and to all true-hearted subjects, cause of great joy and rejoicing,
when the traiterous-hearted are removed from among us. And you, the right
Reverend Judges, and sages of the Law, shall proclaim to all men, your Zeal
to religion, your hatred of Popery, your love to Gods people, and special
respect to the glory and praise of God, and cause such honorable esteem of
our laws. as is meet; and thereupon the like love to the study thereof, and
such worthy regard unto your persons, as shall procure a name of honor and
eternal praise to all posterities. The Almighty God, by the law of his spirit,
in the mouths of his messengers; and by the law of our kingdom, in the
mouths of all such as be advanced to high place of justice and judgment,
consume and utterly extirpate the adversaries of the Gospel from among us,
that we may (in peace and piety) enjoy thankfully, the blessings which the Lord
in mercy, has plentifully enriched this noble Island with, and sing to his holy
name all praises for ever.

Your Lordships, and the rest of the right Worshipful, in all due honor to
your persons, and to those worthy Societies: RIC. BERNARD.
Batcombe in Somersetshire: March, 14.
TO THE WATCHFVLL EYES IN THIS OUR STATE, THE WORTHY IVSTIces, Imprisoners of
Malefactors, and Preseruers of peace; that peace is wished which passes all
understanding, with the zeal of God, in due execution of Justice against the
enemies of Christ, and our Country.
WHat furtherance your places of Justice be to Judges, sitting in the seat of
judgment, is better known unto your wisdom, and learned selves, then I can
any way imagine or think. Yet I, by my light observation, perceive thus much,
that without your vigilancie and faithfulness; the Judges cannot do, what
either their places require, or themselves desire to do, for the good of our
country. As therefore I have been bold, in the zeal of God, and cause of
religion, humbly to petition them: so in like manner, I beseech you, in your
places; to do this good for Gods Church, to search out these walking spirits
of Antichrist; I mean, the Priests and Jesuits, that they may be coniu^ed
down by the power of the law and sword, which do so audaciously rise up, with
contempt of the word and spiritual power of Christ. Likewise that the statutes
be executed upon open Recusants, who too boldly dare to profess themselves of
the Popish Church. And withal, that a circumspect eye be had of our
Church-Papists: such, as for all their open coming to our assemblies, do
sufficiently in many particulars, declare themselves to be in their coming to
Church, the very mere servants of men; their course at home, and abroad, being
duly examined. And that you may see, what may truly, and without breach of
charity, be thought of these, I Mr. To. B.
will be bold with a godly learned friend of mine, to set down unto you, what
he, concerning these Church-Papists, openly delivered, as a preface before his
Sermon once, at Paul's Cross, word for word, as near as may be. His
affirmation was this:

Conformity to the Oath of alleagianed, and other outward formal satisfactions
of the State, concurring with a resolution to continue in Popery, is far
more pernicious to the State, then open and professed Recusancie.

I say it again (says he), A follow which has taken the oath of allegiance;
first, either by power of some popish dispensation, which great men especially
may easily procure, because by their wit, or worth, or high room, they may be
more hororiously serviceable to the Church of Rome; or secondly, by
proportionable deduction of some warrant to their consciences in that case,
from that brief of Pius Quintus, in the Queens time, mentioned before, which
any understanding Papist will easily apprehend: or thirdly, by the cousoning
art of mental reservation, of which (perhaps) some of their Priests and
cunninger sort, especially of the equiuocating generation, will be ready to
make advantage of; or fourthly, by reason of wideness of conscience, even
directly and grossly against the corrupt notions and instructions thereof; which
is much incident to the more ignorant and inferior rank of Papists, who through
baseness and lowness of state, are exempted from intelligence with the
Consistory of Rome, and acquaintance with the liberty of many popish
resolutions in such cases; and having no grounded and real assurance of
salvation in that profession, (which is an inseparable misery to popish
heresy), dare not hazard their temporal happiness, for any hope of future
comfort they are ever like to have, or reap by such a miserable religion: I
say, a fellow having thus taken the oath of allegiance, either by popish
dispensation, mental reservation, or directly and grossly against the check
and contradiction of his popish conscience, is by accident, and by consequent,
far more pestilentiall to the State, then he was before, for such reasons as
these:

By this formal outward false hearted-conformitie, First, he diuerts and
declines the watchful eye of state-iealousie, from ordinary excubation and
vigilancie over his popish villainies and machinations; from a more narrow
particular insinuation into his underground vaults, and timely observation of
his engrossing too much gunpowder; and so, works a great deal of mischief
vnobseruedly; fearfully undermines, without any countermine of policy; and
concurres most dangerously with the outraged malice of that man of sin, for
the wasting of our Church, and dis-strengthening the S^te, without sense or
suspicion.

Secondly, he is unworthily armed with the respect and reputation of a good
subject; and so may more boysterously, and with greater bravery, wound and
weaken the better side; vex goodness, and good men, more boldly without
controlment; and secretly promote Popery, and hinder proceedings against
Papists, even with authority, and some colorable ostentations of safer
policy, and flourishing pretenses of deeper reaches into the mysteries of
State.

Thirdly, he may thereby give deeper wounds into the heart of the truth,
through the sides of those they call Puritans; and over their heads do his
worst to knock out the brains of the blessed Gospel of the Son of God. It
is incredible, what a world of wrong and mischief is wrought upon the truth
which we profess, and true professors thereof, by politic conformable
Papists, upon the woeful advantage of certain Ministers inconformitie. If such
a fellow spy out a conscionable painful Minister, and find him obnoxious to
the rigor of the law, but in the least point; and that (perhaps) out of a
peaceful tenderness of conscience, while himself is in heart a rank traitor
to the State: O then he plies the advantage with much malice and bitterness,
by informations, aggrauations, exasperations, fawning concurrence with
Ecclesiastical Courts, until he have procured the putting out of that
burning and shining lamp, (for he well knows, when such lights expire, the
noisome snuff of Popery is like enough to infect that darksome place): and
God knows, all this is done, not for preservation of peace, as he publicly
pretends; but for promotion of popery, which he secretly intends. I would to
God, the reverend Bishops and Fathers of our Church, would wisely think of
this point, before it be too late. I speak not here any thing to harten the
Separatist, or any truly tumultuous; but to point out a dangerous depth of the
mystery of iniquity, which works pestilently upon such advantages. I rather
pray, that all the blessings of the God of peace, both in this world, and in
the world to come, may be heaped upon his head, whosoever he be, which does any
way (with holiness and good conscience) labor to further the peace of our too
much distracted Sion.

Fourthly, he that conformes, in outward obedience, to the State, by warrant of
popish dispensation, must labor to recompense the Popes liberality in that
kind, with some more remarkable and notorious service to the Sea of Rome. He
shall find himself, out of a sense of such extraordinary favor from that
unholy Father, bound in conscience, and engaged in congruitie, to be more ready
and resolute upon occasion or advantage, upon any desperate adventure and high
attempt, for the advancement of his triple infernal crown.

Fifthly, he that with wilful enlargement of conscience, and secret sturdie
resolution, takes the oath, will easily and naturally grow reuengefully enraged
against the righteous Torturers, and co^formers of his corrupt and exorbitant
conscience.

The conscience receiving a sting, transfuseth the smart into the affections.
Which when they feel, they are presently furiously enraged against the
occasioners of that their bitter misery. And therefore I am persuaded, such a
fellow, so taking the Oath, howsoever he may bear himself reseruedly, is
afterward transported, with more violent and implacable spite, against the
power of that truth, and patrons of that profession, (a sacred zeal where of
has justly brought a rack and vexation upon his misguided conscience), then
he was before. And assuredly, if the times should turn, (which God forbid) we
should find the Church-Papist, and the politic conformable
Psendo-Catholicke, more merciless and blood-thirstie against us, then the
Recusant. Though the best of them, no doubt, at that day, would be as a brier,
and sharper then a thornie hedge; nay even as a woolfe in the evening. For
there is no malice near unto the malice of Popery, faue the malice of hell.

Upon these grounds also, I have thought, that as the state of a Church-Papist,
obstinated in popery, is most damnable in it self, (even the popish Doctors
themselves being witnesses), as I have proved elsewhere: (see my book of legal
repentance, p. 59.) so it is most dangerous to the State.

I speak not this to drive or deteine any Papist from the Church; for I
pronounce unto him, out of the word of life and truth, he must fly out of
Babylon, into Sion, if ever he will save his soul: but to let him know, that
coming to our congregation, he ought with humility, reverence, and prayer, to
submit his understanding to illumination with truth, and his heart to
sanctification with grace, both for the procurement and comfort of his own
salvation, and the contentment and safety of the State. Otherwise, as his
dangerousnesse to the State is evident and extraordinary: so his own damnation
sleeps not. For, if popery were truth, as it is not, but the very doctrine
of devils; yet his state is damnable, because he should so, deny Christ before
men: if it be false, as indeed it is, and most accursed from heaven, then he
justly perishes in his heresy.

But, it may be, some will here reply; what can possibly be more required, and
exacted from these men, then conformity in outward obedience to the State? what
better security, or surer bond, can be thought upon, then an oath, the sacred
and sovereign instrument of all justice and obedience amongst men? what
further invention of State, shall be able to stay the fearful mischiefs, that
hang hourly over our heads, from this malicious and murtherous generation?

I answer, none in the world, while they stay amongst us: not the most
exquisite and quintessentiall policy of all the wisest Sates, that lie under
the face of the Sun, can afford help in this case. Idolatry is ever
attended with this inseparable curse, that it will plague the kingdom that
nourishes it, and pay it home at length with a witness, except some right
round, and resolute course be taken in the mean time, for the rooting of it
out. And indeed the depthes of the mystery of iniquity are so vnfathomable,
that they cannot be sounded by the plummet of any honest and Christian
policy, without diuing into the bottom of hell.

It is a right just and holy thing, to give them the oath, and to bring them to
the Church. But their violations of oaths, dispensations, equivocations,
mental euasions, corruptions of conscience, and execrable transgressions of
all laws, both of God and man, of nations and nature, are so infinite and
endless; and they so mingle their conclusions of Sat, with the very
confusions of hell; that it is even in proportion as easy, to chain up those
damned spirits, from tempting men upon earth; as to bridle those blood-thirstie
monsters, from undermining and ouerturning those States, which profess the
truth of Christ, if power and means were answerable to their malice and
reuengefull humors.

It was a royal providence of our gracious Sovereign, in his first speech in
the parliament, to admonish the Papists, that they would not so far presume
upon his lenity, as thereupon to think it lawful for them, daily to increase
their number and strength in this kingdom: whereby, if not in his time, yet at
least in time of his posterity, they might be in hope to erect their religion
again. But it is more then manifest, by daily and woeful experience, that
their maine end, all their plots, practices, strange insolences, and the whole
sphere of a world of Papists, that swarm amongst us, hold a strong opposition
and counter-motion to that gracious counsel and first motion of his Majesty. A
blessed and happy thing had it been, had his Princely pleasure been followed in
that point. For assuredly, were we rid of the Papists; and were Idolatry
banished out of the kingdom, as in conscience, and policy, reason, and
religion, it ought: the King and his posterity, by the mercies of God, might
sit upon the throne of England, as fast as the strong and mighty mountains
upon their sure foundations. Oh, then would the foreign mint and forge of
popish mischief, discontinue and expire. Jesuits, the devils Iourneymen,
would take breath, from hammering any more, their hellish powder-plots in have.
That malicious and murdering generation would grow dishartened and vnspirited,
for matter of project, and conspiracy, against this noble Sat. The royal
person of the King would have none about it, but Angels, and good subjects. The
concurrent fury of the greatest enemies in the world, durst not entertain a
thought of invasion, or stir a finger against the unconquerable glory of our
peace. For certainly, the crown of this kingdom is incircled and surrounded
with such infinite and endless variety of popish insidiations; and stands
far more liable to the furious thirst of foreign ambitions, upon this ground
principally; because they hope, when time serves, to find amongst us, a side
and faction of Papists, to serve their tume. Cut the thread of this hope; and
cut the throat of all plots against the Kings person; and crush the Popes
heart, for any probability, or possibility, of ever re-establishing, and
erecting his accursed tyranny, in this Island again.

Now this blessed business of most important and highest consequence, for the
pleasing of God, security of the State, and preservation of his religion, and
royal seed, that now sits with incomparable glory upon the throne, would be
happily furthered.

First, if laws worthily provided in such cases, might have their course and
current, without opposition, diuersion, partiality, interception by false
friends, or any cunning defraudations and delusions of the holy intentions
thereof.

Secondly, if on our side there were but half the care and conscience, for the
maintenance of Christ's truth, and extirpation of the infectious heresies of the
man of sin, which are incompatible, both with salvation of men's souls, and
the safety of imperial Crowns: as there is curiousness, and cruelty, in
popish kingdoms, for the continuance of Antichristianisme; and, by a bloody
inquisition into the very thoughts of men, (the greatest slavery that ever the
sun, or the world tasted), for the banishing and barring out, even of all
possibility, (so far as in them lies) of reformation, plantatio^ of primative
truth, and profession of grace.

Thirdly, and above all, the plantation and protection of a conscionable
learned ministry, must do the deed, when all is done, and strike the
deadliest and irreuocable blow into the heart of the Pope, if the neuer-erring
Spirit of God have told us the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. The Lord will consume the
wicked man, with the spirit of his mouth. Policy, State, wisdom,
confederations of Christian States, invention and execution of good laws, the
disarming and disabling of the Popes vassals, and the like are very notable and
needful means, glorious attendants, and assistants unto this holy work. But
the sword of the Spirit, managed by the hand of a powerful ministry, must
strike off Holosernes head; and knock out the brains of that great Goliath of
Rome, which with intolerable insolency does revile the host of the living God,
and trample upon the necks of the Lords anointed. The champions of Christ, in
the battle of the great day of God Almighty, at Armaged don, may bear
themselves bravely, and triumphantly: but the spirit of the mouth of the Lord
Jesus, shall carry away the chiefest glory of the day, in that conquest and
confusion of Antichrist, and in laying his triple crown in the dust.

But in the mean time, (until the Lord put to his helping hand, for setting
those means on foot, with resolution and constancy) it is a matter of
prodigious amasement, to consider, how mightily impunity of popish idolatry
prouokes the wrath of God against us, and in what danger we stand; the State,
the Gospel, the royal person of the King, the daily inualuable hope of the
succession of his children, and particular welfare of every loyal subject in
the Land. For, if any man be so void of brain, to do himself and the State
that wrong, as to think that there are not still new mischiefs on foot, and
secret workings against us still, by powder-plots, Parisian Massacres, or some
proportionable vilanies: let him think there is no devil in hell, no Pope at
Rome, no malice in the heart of a Jesuit.

Me thinks, it is an astonishment beyond the comprehensions of nature, reason,
religion, policies of State; that such an intolerable generation, so odious
both to heaven and earth, with abominable Idolatry; so visibly infamous, both
to this, and the other world, with many capital characters of blood; so
endless and implacable, in their ragefull designments, against the crowned
Majesty of the Kings Throne; so prodigious in their plots, that they have cast
an inexpiable and everlasting aspersion, upon the innocence of Christian
religion; such furious Assasins and Incendiaries, for murdering of Princes,
butchery of people, and fiering of Sates; so i^raged, even like Wolves in the
evening, to swallow us up quick (if the time did serve); I say, that such, in
so orthodoxe a Church, and noble a State, should by allowance, toleration,
conniuencie, or remissness, and paralyticall distemper of the arm of justice,
or some thing, be suffered to receive encreasement, and multiplication, both in
number, and insolency, to the great dishonor of God Almighty, the continual
vexation of Gods people and good subjects, and the most certain hazard of the
whole State, and the peaceful succession of the Kings posterity. It would
never be, but that the Lord in his just indignation, intends, and prepares us
for some dreadful judgment. And I am afraid, Papists will be the men, to
execute Gods heavy wrath upon us: because they are a principal matter in the
mean time, of high offense against his Majesty.

To let pass infinite more of very special, and material ponderations, to
this purpose; consider, I pray you, but this one point, with feeling
apprehensions, which is able to inflame the heart of an ingenuous Heathen with
extraordinary indignation. I am persuaded, there was not a Papist in this land,
whatsoever may be pretended, or protested to the contrary, but did heartily
rejoice, at the taking away of that thrice, nay thousand times noble and
blessed Prince, of sweetest memory, for which the heart of every true subject,
did shead most worthily, even tears of blood. Now, what a rufull case is this,
that such vipers should be nourished in the bowels and bosom of this
kingdom; the breath, heart, and life whereof, they heartily wish, and would
rejoice to have extinguished? To conclude the whole point for the present: it
is the general joint consent, and current conclusion of all the Christian
orthodox reformed Churches upon the face of Europe; and it is worthily, and
unanswerably demonstrated by our gracious Sovereign, that the Pope is
Antichrist; and Rome, mystical Babylon. Some particular men, (out of curiosity
and conceit of their own wit, affectatio^ of singularity, doting addictio^ to
popish writers, want of further illumination in the point, partial
inclinations toward the divinity of Rome, or the like), may dissent, without
prejudice of a truth, so universally resolved upon, by Divines of best
learning, and sincerest judgment. If so; then tell me the meaning of such
places as these, and to whom the spirit of God directs the edge and execution
thereof.

Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and give her double, according to
her works: and in the cup that she has filled you, fill her the double; Reu.
18. 6.

And the ten horns, which thou saw upon the beast, are they that shall hate
the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh,
and burn her with fire, Revel. 17. 16. This prediction, by the judgment of
the best divines, has the power, and passes into the nature of a precept, and
therefore is charged as a commandment, upon those of whom it is spoken.

These, and the like, do indeed strongly confirm, and make good those three
propositions of that learned man, and excellent light of Heidelberge, in his
book de iure regum, page 6. and sequ. The sum whereof may be contrived into
this conclusion: Princes and Magistrates, with their swords and scepters;
Preachers, by the word and writings; private men, by prayer, and all lawful
opposition, ought to do their best and utmost, to bring confusion upon that
man of sin, and his accursed doctrine. And thus to follow the counsel of the
blessed Spirit, in rooting out the limbs of Antichrist, and Antichristianisme,
is so far from being persecution, that it is a very glorious service unto the
Majesty of the God of heaven. The neglect whereof, and impunity of Idolatry is
able in short time, to shake the pillars, and distrengthen the sinews, to
decrowne the head, and shorten the reign of the strongest State, and most
potent Prince in the world. Delays are dangerous; policy to the contrary is
pernicious; and conniuencie, cruelty; in such places where these sayings have
place, blessed shall he be, that takes and dasheth her children against the
stones, Psalm. 137. 9. All ye that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no
arrows: for she has sinned against the Lord, Ier. 50. 14. In as much as she
glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give you to her, torment
and sorrow, Revel. 18. 7.

In the mean time, until the holy Spirits counsel and commandment to this
purpose, be taken to heart, and thoroughly put in execution, I pray the Lord to
stay their rageful malice, and to turn their popish murtherous hearts, from
whetting any more swords, to shead the blood of the Lords anointed: or else,
to return the sharpest swords from the point, with a cutting edge on both
sides, in up to the very hilts, in their own hearts blood. And in despite of
hell and Rome, good Lord, we pray thee, let King James flourish still, with a
crown of glory on his head, and a scepter of triumph in his hand; and still
wash his Princely feet in the blood of his enemies.

Thus much I thought good to preface at this time, from this place, for the
discharge of my own conscience, and the needful refreshing your memories,
with the apprehension of those dreadful dangers, which howerly hang over our
heads, by reason of the impunity of popish Idolatry, and the endless
inevitable malice and machinations of the Papists. We have had prouocations,
and warnings enough; from this place, from the Parliament house: from heaven,
by Gods messengers; from hell by the powder plot; from Rome, by the roaring of
their Bulls; from France, by their massacres, and butcherie of their Kings: by
more mediate, and politic; by immediate and miraculous revelations,
discoueries, deliverances: by a black and bloody catalogue of most hateful
and prodigious conspiracies, which run parallel with the golden fine of
Queen Elizabeth's life; by the daily villainous libels of the swaggering
runagates of our country; base and illiterate pamphlets, stuffed with ribaldrie,
and railings, and personal slanders, impudencies, out-facings, utterly without
any passage or impressions of grace, or gracious spirit. A thousand times, a
thousand ways. And yet what good have they done, since nothing will serve the
turn? Gods will must be done. For mine own part, I have delivered mine own
soul. If any will not take warning, whom it concerns, his blood be upon his
own head.

But blessed is he, who fore-sees the storm, and hides himself in the mean
time, under the wings of Christ, and shelter of a good conscience. With which
Conclusion as he ended, I also conclude, commending this pithie speech of my
so learned a friend, to your wisdom and godly consideration, your selves to
Gods holy protection, and all your just proceedings to his gracious blessing;
that you may confidently look for a reward of your well doing in the end of
your days.

Your Worships in all serviceable duties of my calling RIC. BARNARD.
Batcombe, March, 14.
TO ALL GENEROUS AND NOBLE SPIRITS, THE VAliant Worthies of our DAVID, even the
sons of valor, Martial men, and lovers of Arms, of what degree and place
so ever, resolute for Religion, ready to fight for the honor of Christ, the
safety of our King and Country, against the Popes usurped jurisdiction and
Antichristian power, renown for ever.
MAy I be bold (you valiant men of war, and Soldiers of Christ) to speak
unto you? Then prepare your selves against the Romish Midianits, and shoute
with courage, saying; For the Lord, and for our Gideon, at the day appointed:
for the time draws on, to avenge the blood of the Saints upon Babylon, that
where of Rome. Behold the progress, and whereto we now are come, that you may
look for the ruin of that mother of wheredomes, and abominations of the
earth. The Angel swore Chap. 10. 6.
solemnly, long since, that there should be time no longer; and the kingdoms
since then, are become the kingdoms Chap. 11. 15.
of our Lord, and of his Christ, so as he shall reign from this time forth for
ever. The Church shall flourish more and more: but the enemies power shall be
diminished. Wrath is upon them, though they see it not. For this is the time of
the pouring forth of the vials, the last plagues of God, upon that
Antichristian state; and they are Chap. 16.
to be poured out, by such instruments of the true Church, as God shall raise
up. And though I cannot conceit, that this prophecy points at any one
particular kingdom, or person, to say, this is the man, this is the Country,
that shall sack Rome: yet when we see what has already fallen out, according
to things foretold, and by whom the Lord has effected the same, we ought to
give glory to God, and also acknowledge those his instruments raised up,
either in other places, or here among our selves, to do his will; and by former
acts of God done by any of our Nation, we may (and not without reason)
conjecture, what may after be effected by us, the prophecy it self speaking
rather for, then any way against the same.

The destruction of the Popedom must be by degrees, and the same effected by
the power of God in us of the reformed Churches. For the Angels that must
plague that earthly state, come out of the Temple, the type of the true Church,
as is clear by the prophecy it self. These, Chap. 15. 6. and 16. 1.
all of them, are commanded to pour out their plagues upon the Earth, which is
the general term given to set out that worldly and Antichristian state.
Which commandment they fulfill, and execute the decree of God upon the
several parts thereof, one after another. As first, upon the Earth of that
Earthly state. And in this work, the Lord employed, as in Bohemia, and
elsewhere, others; so specially in this our Realm, that valiant Iehu, the
renowned King, Henry the eight, who took away the lands and possessions here,
from the Antichristian Locusts, dissoluing Abbeyes, and Monestaries, sending
that hellish rabble packing home again to their grandsire the Pope, that king
of the Locusts. Then in the next place, wrath is poured out upon the Sea of
that Earthly state, which is the Ecclesiastical part thereof, touching the
idolatrous service, and worship of that man of sin. And in this thing, the
Lord used (I exempt not here Gods work by men in other places) that our
blessed Josias, the noble Prince, Edward the sixth, renouncing that false
service and idolatrous worship, establishing Gods true worship among us. In the
third place, is the vial of wrath poured upon the Rivers and fountains of
that Earthly state, that is, both upon the heretical, and traitorous doctrines
of that Sea of Rome, full of poison, and plots of villainies; and also upon the
Teachers thereof, which come like rivers and fountains from thence, and return
back to the same again: all tending, to seduce people from the truth, to
withdraw subjects from their allegiance, that the Romish state, whorish
religion, and Sea of Rome might still be maintained. In this the Lord our God
set on work, that most high and mighty Princess ELISABETH, Semper eandem, a
Queen of everlasting memory, (their name rot, that do her not honor) a
zealous professor, a true defender of the faith, a succor to all her friends
and favorers of religion, a hater of Popery and Romish popelings, enemies of
the truth, a myrrour to the world, and a terror to all that bare ill will to
Sion, and against whom she had to do; blessed be her name for ever. Her
Majesty's royal authority made these Rivers and fountains, blood; by causing
it (and that most justly) to be death for any Jesuits or Priests, to come with
their heresies, and treasonable purposes, into her dominions; and for any of
her subjects so to receive them, duly executing the laws upon them: who so
therefore had (as they worthily deserved, and according to the words of this
prophecy) Chap. 16. 5. 6.
blood given them to drink, for shedding the blood of the Saints and Prophets
of God. In the fourth place, the wrath of God is poured upon the Sun of that
Earthly state; that is, upon that, which, as the sun in the firmament, is in
that state most glorious, giving that luster and shine unto it, as the Sun
unto the Earth. And this is the Popes supremacy, upon which wrath is come, and
the vial of contempt is begun to be poured upon the same. And in this has our
gracious God set on work, the most high and mighty Monarch of great
Britain, our now dread Sovereign, our wise Solomon; whose most learned
pen, in his Majesty's own Preamble to his reprinted Apology, has made
known to the Christian world (for which I say, and all Gods people; O King,
live for ever), that the supremacy of the Pope, is a proud usurpation; that
he has been (and of due, still ought to be) subject to Emperors and Kings,
who are to challenge their right of him, and to take it out of the hands of
that Antichristian Tyrant, that blasphemous usurper of Gods place; who will be
as God in the temple of God, yea the most great See Morneus his preface to the
mystery of iniquity.
and excellent God on earth, as the style must run of Paul the 3. Horrible
blasphemy! Marvel it was, that the thunder bolt of vengeance smote him not
dead from heaven. But great is the Lords patience: therefore will these
monsters of men still exalt themselves, and Paulus Quintus will even now be
Vice-God; and boast of his Lib. Benedicti de Benedictis Bouoniae excuss. Anno
1608.
power, being called the invincible Monarch of the Christian Commonwealth, and
the most valiant Protector of the Pontifical power. But oh! how suddenly should
he perish, and come to a fearful end; if the Lord would make a combination of
the hearts of Christian Kings against him, and his invincible Monarchical
power in his pontificality? He would then, like Zidkijah, that false Prophet,
run from chamber to chamber, seeking where to hide himself. But let him
boast, and presume of his prevailing, till the time come, that the Beast be
pulled out of his throne, and his kingdom become full of darkness; which
indeed is now the next thing, after the vial poured upon the Sun, that must
come to pass. For the fifth vial must be poured upon the Seat of the Beast,
which is Rome it self, for there Chap. 16. 10.
the Beasts seat is; as it was before, the seat of the Dragon, Chap. 13. 2.
which he gave unto the Beast.

They are under, we see, now, the fourth vial. The fifth therefore is the next,
even Romes ruin. Look for it, in the due time, (O you valiant hearts). And
when the hour comes, fear not: but, I say, as did Ioab to David's army,
going to battle against the enemies of God, and their King, Be of good
courage, and play 2. Sam. 10. 12.
the men; let your swords then do service for God, and his Church: and take
heed (you host of God) of that saying, which Jeremy pronounces in the like
case; Cursed be he, that does the work of the Lord negligently, or
deceitfully: and cursed be he that keeps back his sword from blood. These
be the Amalekites, which God has determined utterly to root out. Fight ye
therefore valiantly, and with stout courages. The cause is Gods. He will be
with you, and undoubtedly fight for you. Reward her (says the Lord) as she
has rewarded you, and double unto her Chap. 18. 6.
double, according to her works: and, in the cup she has filled, fill to her
double; only, in the Zeal of God, for the cause of religion, and hate of
Antichristianisme. Let not (you Sons of valor) just piety lose her perfect
work, for fleshly and foolish pity. For thus to repay her, is the Lords own
commandment, which may not be transgressed.

But it may be, you will say to me, that you perhaps shall not be employed
herein. Well, for this, know for your comfort (you that desire this honor),
that this most noble Island shall not have the least hand in this glorious
enterprise, when the time appointed shall come. For what kingdom in all
Christendom, has God made so renowned in the cause of religion, as this? Was
it not our Constantine, that made a world of Christians? Our Lucius, that was
the first Christian Monarch? Who was so valiant and powerful a Champion for
Christ, in the time of darkness, before him, as our John Wickliffe? You have
heard, how the Lord has set on work, our valiant Henry; our noble Edward; our
famous Elizabeth; and now, our most learned and renowned King. What Nation gave
ever the Pope, and Spanish power, such an overthrow, as this did, in the year
88? Has not the Lord hitherto, ever made us one, for his name, Church, and
people, against that Antichrist? and can you think, he will pass us over in
the last act of the tragical end of Rome? Are not we one of the ten horns,
Chap. 17. 11. 12.
that gave our kingdom once to the Beast? For who went at the Popes command,
to the holy Land, sooner then we? Who defended the Pope, more then we? What
kingdom, according to the power thereof, enriched the Popes coffers, so much
as we? What King yielded up his Crown to the Popes Legate, but ours? Thus were
we for him, and so shall we be against him. And, as the Chap. 17. 2.
Where made our Kings to love her, and to commit fornication with her: so have
they begun to hate her, and Chap. 17. 16.
still shall, and be with those, as chief, that shall make her desolate, and
naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Consider this, you that be
wise hearted, why above all other Nations, they have sought to invade us: and
why they assay by unheard of, and unmatchable villainies, to root us out from
under heaven, if it were possible. Why the Popes Bulls so terribly rore against
us. Why those spirits of Devils busy themselves so much about us. Can any
other reason be given, the^ this, that the Devil their Lord, and our deadly
foe, suggesteth into them, that we are, and shall be, one of the greatest
means, under God Almighty, to bring an utter overthrow and desolation to that
Antichristian state? And do we not all know, that there is a miraculous
protection of the highest, in sovereign authority? Who durst once touch King
Henry the 8, who shaked that Roman state, and made it to totter? What fiend
durst be-bloudie his murdering hands in Prince Edward, though he young, did
tread popish religion under foot? But wonderful was the preserving hand of
God upon the late Queen; and no less over our now dread Sovereign, when
other have elsewhere been cut off. And surely so long as we soundly maintain,
and uphold the faith, and truth of the Gospel, not fearing what the man of
sin can do against us, in spite of hell and Rome, of the Pope and all his
power, we shall stand safe and sure, under the Almighties powerful protection;
till gloriously, in that day of Romes utter ruin, we triumph over them. Even
so, Amen. And till then, for all you, that be ready to draw your swords in
this quarrel of Christ, for Christ, our King and Country, I heartily wish,
favor with God, honor with our King, a faithful and holy resolution in your
selves, victory over the enemies, praise of the Saints, and after this life,
the reward of eternal glory in heaven, for ever and for ever.

A true honourer of you, in your just attempts, for ever RIC. BERNARD.
Batcombe in Somersetshire: March, 14.
TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader, a lover of truth, all friendly well-wishes.
Friendly Reader, albeit I have given some reason of my omitting to speak of
the three first Chapters of the Revelation, for that they seem to all not to
need any great labor to explane the^, and are usually taken in hand of most
that preach out of this prophecy; and also because Master Perkins, a learned
and reverend Divine, has very largely commented thereupon; which I supposed
might have given al satisfaction, touching my omission of them: yet by
conference with some, I perceive that men rest not satisfied, but desire to be
informed in some particulars, and especially touching an opinion of Master
Brightmans, which is this, that the seven Churches mentioned in the first
chapter, verse. 11, and several Epistles written unto them in chap. 2. and 3,
are so many types representing and containing the universal condition of the
whole Church of the Gentiles. Now what may be thought of this, is the thing
which many stand in question of. Some will have the^ so, and are fully of his
mind; some do utterly reject the same, as a foolish fancy, a conceit without
ground or reason. I will not contend with either, neither will I presume to be
an Arbitratour between them, to judge of either, or to take upon me to give
either satisfaction; for in this I hold my self far too weak, the point not
so easy to be cleared, and men's forestalled judgment most hardly to be
reformed: only I will (as I hope I may without giving justly either side
offense) set down what I think hereof, with my reasons; and so leave the
matter to the indifferent judgment of every one, to allow or disallow, as upon
good reason they shall like best, without uncharitable contention, which from
my soul I hate and detest.

What Master Brightman has held, Iunius before him in a few words says as
much; In the number of seven, the Iun. Com. on cap. 1. verse. 13.
slat (says he) of the whole Church of Christ militant here upon earth, is
represented. And Grasser says, that the In his Plagae Regiae by pothesis.
Apostle in the Epistles shadoweth out a most general tincture of the
Antichristian infection. And to me the opinion seems probable (for otherwise
will I not say of it) and my reasons be these: I. Because the number of seven
is kept here, as elsewhere in this prophecy repeated 37 times; and is a number
of perfection, seven put for all of that, whereof the number is given: as here
seven Churches, for all the Christian Churches; so seven stars, all the Angels
of the Churches; seven spirits, all the manifold graces of the spirit. And from
this number, Iunius in his Comment. says, that it signifies to us perfectly
and Iun. on cap. 1. verse. 4.
generally the Church of Christ that is conversant here below. And it may seem
likely that the number of seven Churches (seeing there were more besides) was
observed of the Lord for further purpose, then to note out the present state
only and no more. II. Because at the end of every Epistle, though John be
commanded to write to the Angel of that Church, and in him to that flock; yet
the exhortation is, to hear what the spirit says to the Churches, and so by
one, teaching all those whereof that is a type: or if you will, so by one, all
the seven, and by them the whole universal Church. III. The things mentioned
in the Epistles, (to wit, the allusions to the old time, in these words, Jews,
Synagogue, doctrine of Balaam, and Iesabel, not mentioned so in other Epistles,
nor sound to be in any other Churches, to whom any other of the Apostles did
write) may seem to intimate hereby, that some other thing is intended, then
the discovery only of these Churches present state. So in like manner, the
predictions of ten days persecution to Smyrna (which Expositors are forced to
stretch further then Smyrna, when they apply the history to the text), bids
us in this Church so to consider it in affliction, as it also may type out a
more general state of Gods Church. Likewise the prediction of the hour of
tentation to come upon all the world, mentioned to Philadelphia, cannot
concern that Church in particular to have that exemption from the same, more
then the rest of Christ's Church then being in that hour of tentation, but as
it is here a type thereof. Furthermore, why should those Jews in Smyrna be
suffered to grow to such a height of wickedness, and must be made to stoop to
no Church, but to the Angel and Church of Philadelphia? and why (I say) to
this, and not to the other, or any of the rest, but that they be types of the
several times of the state of Christ's Church, as shall be showed afterward?
IV. It is said in the end of the Revelation, after that all future things
before spoken of, touching the whole Church of Christ, and of the kingdom of
Antichrist, to the full, that Jesus Christ sent his Angel to testify these
things to us in the Churches: which (as may seem) can no otherwise be
interpreted, but that these seven Churches (for no other is mentioned in the
whole prophecy) do type out to us, what in the rest of the Revelation is
foretold, touching the Churches future estate: which words, admitting this
sense, make the opinion clear, that they set out the whole Church of Christ.
V. Because there is such an answerablenes of the Antitype to the type in the
seuen-fold state of the Church, following so clearly one upon another, as the
beholding thereof may induce a man very much to entertain this opinion. Which
to see more apparently, we must first make a seuen-fold state of Christ's
Church, as there be seven Churches. Secondly, as these Churches are ordered and
set one after another, as first Ephesus, next Smyrna, and so forth of the
rest: so one state of the Church follows another, the first may be called
the Ephesine state; the second, Smyrnean; the third, Pergamine; the fourth,
Thyatiran, and so forth to the seventh and last. Thirdly, that every Church is
a type of that whole state of the Church, whereof it is a type, and does not
type out any one particular Church, as Master Brigh^man would have it in some,
which I take to be herein his mistake, as after I shall show. Fourthly, These
Churches are types of the Christian Church, as the same is troubled with
Antichrist in his breeding, rising up, height, the Churches knowledge of him,
departing from him, and prevailing against him, as it is foretold also in the
rest of this prophecy. Fifthly, that in the Churches therefore, we must take
notice of two things: first of the same as it is the Church of God, with her
graces and defects; and then next, of Satan his instruments in every of them:
that so by the one, Christ and his Church may be typed out, and Antichrist by
the other; and the false Church may be discerned in every state, as far
forth as they be mentioned together, which is apparently in the four first
Churches, but not in the three last. The four first set out the state of
Christ's Church, wherein and among whom Satan bred up his eldest son
Antichrist, till that false Church came to be Iesabel, that whore of Babylon;
the three last set out the threefold state of the Church, come out of Babylon.
For let it be marked, and the Reader shall see, that in the four first there
is mention made of the instruments of Satan, practicing evil, getting strength
over the godly; but not so in the three last, being not at all in them named,
but only once for the joy and comfort of the Church.

These things thus being first considered of, I will, according to my poor
ability, show how these seven Churches type out the seuen-fold state of the
whole Church of Christ, the Antitype answering fitly to every type. The first
type is Ephesus, the Angel of which Church is commended for labor, patience,
zeal, the using of his authority with boldness and wisdom against the
wicked, and hating the deeds of the Nicolaitans, and yet at the length did
decay in love. In this Church were such as took upon them the name of
Apostles, but were none. The Antitype to this is the Ephesine state, as I may
call it, because the one is like the other. And this is that which we call the
Primitive Church, or first Christian Church, during the time of the Apostles,
and Apostolical men, their immediate successors; or, as some think, to
Constantine the Great: in which these virtues of this Church of Ephesus did
shine, This first Christian Church was full of good works, Pastors Just. Mar.
Apol. 2. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33. Just. Apol. 2. Cyprians Epistles.
painful in teaching, the wicked not tolerated among them, but the censure of
the Church passed upon the obstinate, Tertul. Apologet. cap. 39. Origin in his
treatise on Matthew. 35. Hom. 7. on Joshua. Great was the patience of the Saints
and Teachers in the Church, whom persecutions could not daunt. Stories are
plentiful for this. In which time the deeds of the Nicolaitans were hated,
the Church was a pure virgin, from fleshly filthiness and spiritual
fornication, it had not yet waxed wanton with fleshly devices of humane
wisdom. But as the Angel of Ephesus left off his love at length, even so
this Ephesine state decayed in the first love, declining thereby to worse and
worse; as may be gathered from Cyprian, Epist. lib. 4. 4.
and Eusebius speaking of the Church a little before Dioclesian. It seems to
be like the state of the Israelites, who served the Lord all the days of
Iesua and Elders ouerliuing him, but after fell away.

Now Satan, in this defection of the Churches love, slept not; but when she
began to be drowsy, he awoke and rose up to sow tares. And as Ephesus had
counterfeit Apostles, the picture of false Teachers; so had this Ephesine state
detestable Heretics, Menander, Ebion, Cerinthus and diverse others. And thus
we see Ephesus, the type; and the Primitive Church, the Ephesine state.

The second type is Smyrna, poor and in affliction, yea and the same foretold
to be greater afterward, though the time should not be long. This poor
afflicted Church is approved of God, as rich.

The Antitype is the Smyrnean state, which followed upon the Ephesine, and was
from Constantine the Great, (if the former extended thither) unto the time of
the Emperor Gratian, for that so the type and this Antitype agrees. This
Smyrnean state was poor and afflicted, more toward the end, then at the
first; yet were even there found such as were, as this Angel of Smyrna, rich
in gifts and graces, earnestly contending for the truth; such a one was
Athanasius, a right Smyrnean Angel. But this state is better seen by
considering the false Church, of which much is spoken in the type.

At this time Satan's kingdom was greatly increased. His false Apostles in the
Ephesine state, had so bestirred themselves, as now in this Smyrnean there was
a Synagogue of Satan; before, only a sending out of his Apostles to gather a
false Church, and here in this state it was effected. So as now the counterfeit
Christians, and false Jews, blasphemed the true servants of Christ, the true
Smyrnean Angels; and they only would be the true Church. So here was now
Christians (in name) persecuting Socra. lib. 2. 4. Theod. lib. 2. and 4. Sozom.
lib. 3. 4. 6
Christians in deed. These Jews in type were Arian Bishops and their
favorites in this Antitype, who would be the true Church, but were indeed the
Synagogue of Satan, and forerunners of Antichrist. For from almost the
beginning of the Ephesine state in John's time, were many Antichrists, and the
mystery of iniquity was in working; and the now Antichrist of Rome his seat
was by Satan in these great broils (yea and bloody persecutions) in preparing:
when at this time a golden scepter was offered to Syluester, then Bishop of
Rome, by Constantine; Anno 314. Sabell.
which howsoever it was refused, yet we may see Satan's working, and abusing the
Emperors good mind, to get up, in this Smyrnean state, his son of perdition
into the chair of pestilence, and high throne, of which in the next Pergamine
state.

The third type is Pergamus, in a miserable condition, dwelling where Satan's
throne was, yet holding constantly the truth, even when some did suffer
martyrdom for it, and when Balaamites and Nicolaitans were among them, which
they too much bare with; so as the throne of Satan was erected, and false ways
taught.

The Antitype is the Pergamine state following upon the Smyrnean, which taking
beginning from the time of Gratian, unto the Popes, seated in their supremacy
at Rome, the Devils thrones, called the seat of the Dragon, Revel. 13. 2.
continued a long time after, till near the time of John Wickliffe. In which
time there yet were Pergamine Angels, such as held fast the truth of God. And
of that Church were holy Martyrs suffering death. Such were Antipases, a sit
name to the Martyr in the type to be called Antipas, to set out the Martyrs now
in this state; who might have y^ name, either because the whole world went
after the Beast, and so they against all; or else for that they were against
the Bishop of Rome, called Papa, and so they Antipapa, for contending against
the Pope and his pride. Among such Martyrs were the Bishop of Florentine, one
Arnulphus, Gerardus, and Dulcimus Nauarensis, with others. Yet this was a fault
in this Pergamine state of the true Church, that though some suffered, yet the
Church is blamed for too much forbearing; this was her weakness.

But now, touching the false Church. In the type at Pergamus, there was Satan's
throne, the murdering of Antipas, Teachers of the doctrine of Balaam, and the
doctrine of the Nicolaitans: so now, in the Antitype at Rome, the Pope
inthronized in his supremacy by Satan, who, as it was said, in the Ephesine
state, sent out his false Apostles; in the Smyrnean, got a Synagogue and false
Church; and here in the Pergamine, a throne: in which the son of perdition
being settled, murdered many Antipases, and like a false Prophet (as he is
called, Revel. 20. 19, even another Balaam) taught Balacs, that is, the kings
of the earth, to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel. That
is, he made them to take his part, to uphold his wicked Decrees, Canons,
Constitutions, and Popish doctrines, and to force Christians to the obedience
of the same; to eat things sacrificed to Idols, that is, to allow of his
Antichristian Idolatry, worshipping of Images, and praying to Saints, and so
to commit whoredom against the Lord. Yea, such was his filthiness, that the
Nicolaitans doctrine must be held, that is, stews must be allowed; and rather
then some sort of persons should marry, fornication must be committed, yea and
men's wives abused, being done caute, though not cast, as the old saying has
been among them. These things are so known, as the very relation, without
witness of story, is sufficient.

The fourth type is Thyatira, which is commended for love, service, faith,
patience, works, and that the last works were more then the first: yet herein
faulty, in tolerating Iesabel the false Prophetess among them, which Satan
had raised to deceive the people.

The Antitype is the Thyatirane state, following upon the Pergamine, beginning
somewhat before the twelfth hundredth year of Christ, when certain godly men
preached openly against Antichrist, and many other things in Popery. In this
time were the Waldenses, and other more, Tripart. hist. and Henr. Monachus
Tolosanus.
who showed the commendable virtues of Thyatira; much charity, service, faith,
patience, and good works. Which state increased more and more in weldoing. For
God raised up Wickliffe, and after him John Hus, and Jerome of Prage, which
greatly discovered the tyranny, idolatry, and filthiness of Rome, so as the
Bohemians would no more be under the Devils throne, as they had been. But
toward the end this Thyatirane state passed her beginning and middle state,
(in which, Iosabel was too much suffered of many) when Luther with others
shaked the Popes throne so, as they made him to quake, and his throne to
continue tottering unto this day. Thus much touching the true Church in this
Thyatirane state.

Now for the false Church in the time of this state, when Satan perceived how
now the game went; that the authority of his hellish son upon his infernal
throne, could not prevail any further, but that the Thyatirane Angels would
break out from under his obedience: to keep the Kings and inhabitants of the
earth still unto the sea of Rome, he taught the Romish Synagogue to act
Iesabels part, even to play the whore, the deceitful Sorceresse, to paint now
out her self with glorious titles of antiquity, universality, consent, the
Mother Church, the Catholic Church, the seat of S. Peter, and many other such
paintings: having also her false prophets to sooth her up, as the only
Prophetess and true Church that cannot err; yea to work miracles, thereby
seducing the world, and enticing earthly minds to commit whoredom with her,
as is at large set out in Revel. 13, and 17. Which great Whore there, is this
Iesabel here, whom (as in chapter 18) the Lord threatens to destroy: so here
in this place, to kill her children with death.

The fifth type is Sardis, which had works, and gotten a name of life; but in
the general state was dead, having only a few names, which defiled not their
garments. In this Church is no mention of false Apostles, Jews, Synagogue of
Satan, Balaam, Nicolaitans, Iesabel, or any such; because this is a type of the
Church, and the first of the three come out from Babylon.

The Antitype is the Sardine state, the first state of the reformed Church
escaped from the Whore; and therefore is not here either Balaam, or Iesabel
mentioned, but the Church is considered as being come out of Babylon. This
begun with Luthers time, and holds on to the time of the Harmony of
Confessions published. In this state the Lutheran Churches got a name, in which
they seemed to rejoice more, as being come out from Rome; and were no Papists,
then, indeed, sound Protestants. For, as it was said of the type, that her
works were not perfect: so may it be said of these in this Antitype, that
their works are imperfect, as appears by their erroneous doctrines, and
remainders of Popish devices among them. Yet in this Sardine state there was to
be found a few names, that is, some particular Churches, which clearly quit
themselves of Popery, so as their garments were not defiled therewith, as is
sufficiently well known.

The sixth type is Philadelphia, which has a door open before her, and none
can shut it; and though her strength be small, yet she holds the says, and
word of truth; and to her shall the false Jews be made subject, and do her
all honor, as beloved of the Lord.

The Antitype is the Philadelphian state, and is now that wherein we do live,
and shall continue to the overthrow of Rome. In this state, the passage of the
Gospel shall be no more let; the door is open by the power of Christ, and
no man shall shut it: though our strength (in the reason of man) be very
little, the word shall be vpheld, til the false Jews (the Romish Catholics)
be made to stoop unto us, as we have before time been subject to Rome. And
lest this might seem incredible, the Lord says. I, (that is, he himself,)
will make them come and worship at our feet: it will be his work, and not
man's: neither shall this be done for our desert, but his own love to us will
bring it to pass; that they may know, that the Lord loves us. This is the
beloved state, this is the Philadelphian state, beginning with the Harmony and
sweet consent of Confessions, wherein brotherly love should abound: which the
Lord grant, even for his Gospels sake, our peace, and the Enemies destruction.

The seventh type is Laodicea, a lukewarm Church, neither hot nor cold,
without all praises.

The Antitype is the Laodician state, which follows next upon this
Philadelphian, after the Church of Christ has gotten full victory over the
Enemies, and shall be enriched with abundance of all things, wanting nothing;
which is that, which breeds luke-warmnesse. This state then is not yet. For
first, in the Philadelphian state, the Enemies must be made to stoop to us,
which is not yet come to pass: then a tentation must come over the world, from
which mercifully the Philadelphian state shall be preserved; which I take to be
the great battle at Armageddon, Reu. 16. 16. upon which shall come such an
Earthquake and alteration, as was never, since men dwelt upon the earth: and
lastly, as is said, in the Philadelphian state y^ Church must grow to such
wealth after these things, and enjoy such peace and live so securely, as shall
breed that Laodician condition and state, a time like the days of Noah, before
the coming of the Son of man. But here we must think, that the following
state shall not be so of a sudden; but only by length of days, after the
Church has flourished gloriously for a time in a most graceful state; as the
new Jerusalem, in a very unspeakable manner.

These things being so, this shows us Master Brightmans error, in making the
Church of England to be typed out by the Church of, Laodicea: when we see,
that these be no types of any particular Church in any one Country or other;
but are types general, of a general state of Christ his Church. And he
himself makes no such particular application in any of the first types;
neither, indeed, could he, nor in this ought he so to have done. I cannot but
bless the Lord for very many things in his Commentary upon the Revelation; as
(be it spoken without offense to any) being the best of most before him, that I
have read of, and a labor praise worthy; but for descending to such
particulars, as by the text and words of the prophecy cannot be made good. And
yet have I observed, that for these particular applications, his book has
been more bought up, then for the rest of his most praise-worthie labor; and
the same places so applied, most studied of all other: by some for the pleasure
they take in them, but without good ground from the text; and by othersome, to
carpe so at them, as thereby they may vilify all the rest of his pains; by
which both the one sort and the other might greatly profit themselves, if they
would lay aside their by-respects in their readings, and give themselves to the
best things, and make a right use thereof, in his and other men's labors. But
as their sinister readings on the one side, makes the^ cunning, perhaps, in
their picked places; so it makes them barten in the rest of the prophecy,
which I find many very ignorant of, and yet can name very readily the
forementioned places. But I leave them both, the one sort to their
selfe-pleasing fancifulnes, and the other to their ill-bent carping perverseness,
til the Lord teach them a better way to read godly men's labors.

Thus (Christian Reader) have I, as I promised, showed briefly, what I think
probably of this opinion touching these seven Churches. In which (besides what
has been spoken) may be observed a gradation of corruption in every state, as
if one came out of another. As, defeat of love, or decay of zeal, in the
Ephesine state, brought This is implied in the exhort. Reu. 2. 10.
fear of man, in the Smyrnean. This fear brought forth a forbearing to deal
with the wicked, in the Pergamine. This forbearing brought a plain toleration,
in the Thyatirane. This brought forth a mere conformity to a bare outward
profession, without the life of religion, in the Sardine. And hereto a
superiority being added, and peace obtained over Enemies, in the
Philadelphian, brought forth luke-warmnesse in the Laodician state. And as
these may be noted in the states of the Churches; so here may be observed
certain steps, one after another, in the working of the mystery of iniquity
in the four first Churches. Where we may see, how Satan begun it with
subtlety, sending out his wicked seedsmen under the name of Apostles: he
increased it by hypocrifie, and contempt of the godly, by making men to
profess to be that they were not, and to speak ill of other better then
themselves: he enforced it by Tyranny, having exalted it into a throne: and
lastly, he did uphold it by wicked sorcerie, and all manner of
deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, by which to this day that Iesabel of Rome
yet remains, and so shall, till the appointed time come, of her final
destruction. Which Kings and Princes must atchieue by the sword; which
Preachers must urge them unto by the word; and which people must heartily pray
for: which I do; and so (friendly Reader) ought thou to do, and thou
verily wilt do, if thou be a sound Protestant, a Protestant in good
earnest, which I hope thou art; and if thou be not, I pray God thou may
be, and so I bid thee heartily farewell.

Thine, as thou art Christ's, R. B.
Batcombe: March 14.
THE WRITERS UPON THE Apocalypse, read by the Author of this book, for his
help and furtherance to the un derstanding of that heavenly Prophecy.
Andraeas Caesariensis. Rich. de Sancto Victore Rupertus. Haymo. Thomas
Aquinas. Dionys. Carthusianus.
Marlorat. Bullingerus. Lambertus. Meyerus. Aretius with N. Colado^. Leoninus.
Fox. Eglinus. Grasserus. Piscator. Carolus Gallus. Iunius. Bezae annotat.
Brocardus. Forthus. Alphonsus Conradus. Brightmanus.
Napier. Fulk. Gyffard. Dent. His Majesty's Meditations. Simonds. Forbes.
Broughton. Bale. Tafin. Master Perkins.
Pererius. Ribera. Viegas. Bulengerus. Alcassar, omniu^ pessimus.
Read we may all of all sorts: but in the first place, the best and last of
our own, and other reformed Churches; the more ancient, as living in greater
darkness, and so not so well seen into this prophecy, in the second place.
And the enemies, as peruerters, in the last place.

THE CONTENTS OF this Book.
I. That this book of the Revelation, is to be diligently studied of all
sorts, in these last times. II. That it is an Apocalypsis, and not an
Apocrypsis, but a mystery made manifest. III. What has made this book till
these later times so obscure; wherein the obscurity lies; and to whom
(chiefly) it becomes so hard to be understood. IV. What is to be done, to
come to the understanding thereof, to remove the obscurities, and so rightly to
expound the same. V. An interpretation given, of all the most difficult things
in the Chapters, throughout the whole book.
A KEY OF KNOWLEDGE, FOR THE OPENING of the secret mysteries of S. John's
mystical Revelation.
THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I.
The sum of this chapter.
This book ought to be more diligently searched into, and better known of all
Christians of what estate and degree soever, of Magistrates, of Ministers, and
people, then it is. Manifold are the reasons to persuade all Christ's servants
to read, heart, and carefully to study it.

THE very title may greatly Reasons moving to read and study this book.
move. It is not the Vision of Esaias, or of Obediah, but the Revelation of Jesus
Christ. A more excellent title then all the Prophecies that euerwere ^ (...),
the title.
before it* Many times fair titles prefixed to men's works not answering to
such glorious titles yet do entice us to take up and read, yea the very name
of an Author makes current often times his labor, and shall this excellent
title, and the name of Jesus Christ, the Author hereof, be no inducement to us
to take up, and read?

It is fore-fronted with admirable grace of authority, 2 Reason, the
authority.
not any other treatise of the sacred Bible has so worthy a fore-speech to
begin it with, as this has. It was given by God the Father, to his Son Jesus
Christ, who signified it by an Angel to John; and this beloved Apostle,
receiving it by the aid of Gods spirit, has written it at Christ's
commandment for us. Behold here the grace, the maiesticall authority of this
divine book! shall not the careless neglect hereof cause us to be guilty of
too great profaneness? weigh and consider.

The words of this book are the true sayings of 3. Reason, the verity, cap.
19. 9 and 21. 5. and 22. 6.
God, they be true and faithful, by the testimony of God sitting upon his
throne, and by the witness of his Angel. The love therefore of the truth,
should move all the lovers of this truth, to study the same.

The book was revealed for this end, to be showed 4. Reason, the end, cap. 1.
1. and 22. 6.
to the servants of Christ; it was unsealed for that purpose, therefore the
servants of God should thankfully receive it, and care to learn what herein he
would have them to know that they may not be guilty of neglecting the grace
offered from so high and excellent a Majesty, much less contemn the study
thereof, as some do too irreligiously.

Jesus Christ gives a commandment to every 5. Reason, Christ a commandment,
cap. 2. 7 11. 17. 19. and 3. 6. 13. 2^. and 13. 9.
one that has an ear to hear, to hearken what the spirit of God says unto
the Churches; and to show how earnest Christ Jesus is, to have all his people
acquainted with the things revealed in this book, this his charge he repeateth
eight times, as the quoted places show.

A blessing is pronounced upon the reader, hearer, 6. Reason, a blessing, cap.
1. 3. and 22. 7.
and doer of the things written in this book; if we believe this to be a true
saying, and that we judge it any thing worth to be blessed, let us read,
hear and study to keep the things here foretold.

Such as keep the sayings of this book, are fellow-seruants 7. Reason,
companion with Angels; cap. 22. 9
with the holy Angels, for so speaks the Angel of God himself unto John, so
much account do they make of them that become obedient to Gods will herein.

The excellency of this book is such, as neither 8. Reason, the excellency
of this book, cap. 5
man nor Angel, none in heaven, earth, or under the earth was found worthy so
much as to look into this book, till Jesus Christ went and took it out of
his Fathers hand to open it unto us.

The benefit of this book so much concerns 9. Reason. the profit of it, cap.
5. 8. 9.-14.
the good of the whole Church, as, when Christ had prevailed to open it all the
creatures of God, men and Angels sang praises unto him therefore.

The blessed Apostle John could not but weep 10. Reason, the Apostles desire,
chap. 5. 4.
for fear that this book should have bin kept close from him, and from the
Church; such an earnest spirit was in him to know those things which we
neglect to know.

Albeit it be the last book of the Bible, it is 11. Reason, the pains of
other.
thought yet to be the first that ever received any man's exposition, as a
book thought most necessary Bale his Preface to the image of both Churches.
to be known of Christians. The examples therefore of former and later
Divines, first and last taking pains to comment hereupon, should make us that
come after them, and have their helps before us, to be studious herein.

It as much belongs unto us now living as it did 12. Reason, it concerns us.
unto others in times past, and as it shall unto those which are to come after
us; for it concerns the whole Church to the worlds end, the state whereof is
fully set forth through her whole course upon the earth, till all be fulfilled
and this tragical Comedy be ended, the great and last Acts whereof are
shortly to come upon the world; at the finishing whereof the Plaudite shall be
given to Christ by the voice of a great multitude, as the voice of many waters,
and as the voice of mighty thundrings, saying, Halleluiah, the Lord God
omnipotent Chap. 19. 6.
reigns.

The matter of the book may move to the studying 13. Reason, the matter of
this book, which is fourfold.
thereof, which is fourfold, Dogmaticall, Moral, Historical, Prophetical.
Dogmaticall is that which serves to strengthen our faith in the points of our
Christianity the particulars whereof are many. I. Concerning the whole
Trinity, chap. 1. Dogmaticall points.
4. 5. II. Of Christ for his humanity, chap. 1. 13. Divinity, chap 2. 18. his
power and properties plentifully set down in many places chap. 1. 5.-7.
13.-16. chap. 2. 1. 8. 12. 18. and 3. 1. 7. 14. besides other places, speaking
of his Omniscience, chap. 2. 23. and 5. 4. 5. His care for the Church, chap. 7.
17. and 1. 9. 10. 11. and 10. 2. and 14. 1. and 12. 7. His sovereign power
over all chap. 19. 16. and 17. 14. and 1. 5. over Angels, chap. 1. 1. His
victory over his enemies chap. 1^. and 17. 14. and 19. 20. and his righteous
judgment chap. 18. 14. and 19. 7. III. Of Angels who are obedient to Christ,
chap. 1. 1. and 22. 6. They are for the Church, rejoicing with it, chap. 5. and
compassing about it, chap. 4. They are the fellow-seruants and brethren of the
Prophets and Saints, chap. 22. 9. They refuse to be worshipped, chap. 19. 10.
and will have God be worshipped, they are innumerable, chap. 5. IV. Of the
Church, showing what she is, a woman glorious, 12. 1. the Spouse of Christ
chap. 21. 2. 9. the new Jerusalem, chap. 21. 1. the holy City, chap. 11. 2.
Here is noted her attire, chap. 19. 8. her Crown, chap. 12. 1. her footstool,
chap. 12. 1. her Defender, chap 12. 7. and 14. 14. her Ministers, chap. 11. the
body of which she consists, chap. 4. 14. and 17. 14. Whence they be, chap. 5.
9. and 19. 4. their raiment, chap. 19. 14. and their Guide, chap. 14. Also whom
she serves, chap. 5. 12. 14. and 19. 7. and 4. 11. and how long, chap. 7. 15.
Eue^ jesus Christ day and night, cap. 5. 12. 14. and 19. 7. and 4. 11. who
therefore gives her constancy, chap. 12. 11. victory, chap. 12. 11. and
great rewards, chap. 2. 7. 17. and 3. 10. with unspeakable comforts, chap. 7.
15. 16. 17. V. Of the kingdom of darkness, and the enemies of the Church, of
the Devil, chap. 2. and 12. 9. and 20. 11. of his grand instruments, the beast
and false prophet cap. 13. and their practices against the Church, chap 11. and
their utter overthrow by Christ in the end, chap. 19. 20. and 20. 10.

Moral matters concerning virtue and vice, Moral matters in this prophecy.
this book is plentifully stored with. Here be precepts affirmative imposing
upon us duties of virtuous living, pressed by exhortations thereunto; neither
want here promises of reward and due praises for well doing, for
encouragements therein, chap. 2. 3. and 22. 14. 15. and 14. 13. and 20. 6. The
example, illustrating these precepts, is the Spouse and Church of Christ, even
the elect, chosen, and faithful, whose love to the truth, fervent zeal,
strong faith, rare constancy, admirable patience and other most excellent
Christian virtues, are here left us for our godly imitation. On the other side,
here be negative commandments forbidding all vicious living, with manifold
disswasions from the same. Here the offender is reproved, and the impenitent
threatened with destruction, chap. 2. and 3. and 14. 10. 11. and 21. 7. 8.
Neither do here want examples to explain the same. Are not here to be found
the authors of al mischief, both within and without the Church? Here may we
read of the Devil and the Dragon, chap. 12. of the first and second beast,
the false prophet, chap. 13. of the filthy Nicolaitans, deceitful Palaamites,
bewitching Iesabel, chap. ^. the devouring Locusts, chap. 9. and seducing
spirits of devils, cap. 16. The whole book is spread over with store of
examples, yea it may be as a fair table, in which is pourtraied and drawn
out to the view of the eye, lively pictures of the virtuous, and vicious; of
the good and bad, of Elect and Cast-awaies; and of such as go the way of life
to glory everlasting, or the way of death to endless pain.

Historical is the matter concerning the state of Historical matter.
the Church, from the days of John in Patmos hitherto, now above fifteen
hundred years. In the reading whereof (as far as we consider the things to
be fulfilled) we may see how in John's days, when he did write this Revelation,
Satan had began to sow his tares among the Lords wheat, sending forth false
Teachers of all sorts, to breed heresies, to raise contentions, to entice to
Idolatry, and filthiness, and in a word, either to overthrow utterly, or at
least greatly to hinder the holy profession of Christian religion. Of these
things may we read in cap. ^. and 3. to be sound in the particular Churches.
But Satan not herewith contented, being full of mischief and inueterate malice
against the true Church, raised up bloody persecutions against all Christians
by cruel heathenish Tyrants, who put to death infinite innocents: which wicked
outrage and cruelty, Christ Jesus avenged upon the heads of these miscreants
to the full (of this we may read chap. 12. and 6). And in time raised up a
Christian Emperor, by whom was expelled the Dragons heathen power from ruling
over the Church, and through whose embracing of Christianity, there became a
world of Christians; among whom the elect, faithful, and true people of Christ
were happily preserved, albeit Satan assaied once more by a flood of nations, a
barbarous people in this outward fury and rage, to have destroyed the remnant
of the Church, chap. 12. But at the length finding his force to be of no force,
he turned his course into subtle fraud, and so wrought, that he bred his
grandchild, that Antichrist and Pope of Rome the Dragons substitute; who after
deadly schisms, damnable heresies, (he falling as a star from heaven,
apostating from the truth through Gods permission, and Satan's power secretly
working in and by him) led (through the thick smoke of dark ignorance) the
Christian world captive again into heathenish ways, into heretical doctrines
and idolatrous courses; and became so great, that whosoever would not submit
themselves to his yoke, were not suffered to live; (of this we may read, chap.
8. and 9. and 13.) and under this spiritual yoke of bondage lived the true
Church trodden under foot a long time, (cap. 11.) mercifully yet protected by
the Lord Jesus, (chap. 7. and 14.) until the time came that Antichrist must be
revealed; then the Lord gave his word unto his servants and sent them forth to
preach, (cap. 10.) who (though they endured great and bloody persecutions) yet
prevailed against the beast, Christ plaguing his enemies, and making
successefully powerful the labor of his servants, by whom hitherto he has
gotten the victory, and also now begun to pour forth the vials of wrath
against that Antichristian state, which is fallen into a deadly consumptio^. Of
these things thus fulfilled, as the matter of History, may we read in chap.
7. and 11. and 14. and 15, and some part of the 16. Chapter.

The Prophetical matter (if we consider the book Prophetical matter.
from and in the time when John wrote) was the most of the matter contained in
it, and therefore called a prophecy, chap. 1. 3. but now passing over that
which is fulfilled, as historical, only that part, and so much of the book as
remains yet to come to pass, is prophetical; foretelling the utter ruin
of Rome, and Romish Hierarchy, with all the enemies of the true Church of
Christ, as also after that, the most happy condition of Gods people freed from
their enemies, for which they shall rejoice and sing. Which things are recorded
in some part of the chap. 16. in the whole: 17. and 18. and 19. and 20. and 21.
and 22. chapters. Thus briefly as I could, have I laid open the matter of this
book, still to persuade, to the diligent reading of the same.

THE OBJECTIONS THAT MAY be made to hinder the study of this book.
I. Object. This book is unpleasing, and there is no delight in the reading
thereof.
Answ. A godly man's delight is, to meditate in Gods Book, for therein he
finds pleasure and joy. That the words of this book are the sayings of God,
faithful and true, we have heard; what causes it to be so unpleasing then?
But to satisfy This book affoords as much delight to an understanding Reader,
as any part of Scriptare. It is full of all varieties.
thee herein, this book to an intelligent reader, will afford as much
delight, as any other book of Scripture whatsoever, it is full of variety, for
all sorts and conditions of men. To them that delight in history, or in the
knowledge of future predictions, here is a prophetical history, and an
historical prophecy, for them from John's days to the worlds end. Here the
Linguist has the Original text, and plenty of Hebraismes for his study.
Here are tropes and figures for the Rhetorician, variety of numbers for the
Arithmetician: the natural Philosopher may discourse of the Lamb and Lion, of
the Leopard, the Bear, and the Dragon, of Frogs and Locusts, of Horses, and of
Eagles; also of thunder and lightening, hail, and earthquakes. The Astronomer
may show his skill of the heavens, sun, moon, and stars. Here be strange
and rare pictures for the most cunning Apelles that ever was, of Christ, of his
Church, of the Dragon, the beast, and false prophet, of the holy City and
Temple, and of what not through the whole book? Is any skillful in metals?
Here is for him gold, silver, brass, and iron. Art thou a Lapidarie? behold
pearls and precious stones; the Jasper, the Sardine, the Emerauld, and
Carbuncle, the Saphir, Chalcedonie, Sardonix, Chrysolite, and Berill, the
Topas, the Chrysoprasus, the Iacinct, and the Amethist. But what need I to run
on in particular instances thus? seeing this book is full of similitudes It is
adorned with similitudes fetched almost from every thing.
fetched from every thing: from heaven, sun, moon, and stars: from the
rainbow, winds, hail, thundering, and lightening; from the air, fire,
water, sea, rivers, fountains; from the earth, and earthquakes, Islands, and
mountains; from fowls, fishes, beasts, and creeping things; from Angels, and
men; from trees, grass, green herbs; from wild wildernesses, and Cities
inhabited; from war hosts, and armies the sword and battle, horses and
Chariots, with triumph and victory; from high callings, Princes, Kings,
Priests, and Prophets, Merchants, and seamen; from thrones, crowns, and
seats; from music, and musicians, pipers, trumpetters, harpes, viols, and
sound of voices; from raiment, long robes, golden girdles, fine white linen
purple, silk, and scarlet; from vessels of thin wood, iuorie, brass, and
marble; yea here is mention of Cinnamon, odours, ointments, frankincense wine,
oil, fine flower and wheat, of the vintage and harvest; a very world of
particulars is mentioned in this book: so as if the heaven or the earth, or
any thing in either of them, either of nature, or art may entice a reader, this
book may allure him to the study hereof. And besides all Here be pleasant
allusions to the state of the ancient people of God under the Law.
these, here the Christian by allusions may behold the state of the old and
ancient people of God under the Law, their Kings, Priests, Elders, Temple,
Arc, Tabernacle, Altars, service and worship, and also Jerusalem the holy
City: as if in mentioning of these, John were Iudaizing and leading us again
to the old Law abolished* And the Jews (if now God would open their eyes) may
see in their own ceremonies, City, Temple, Priests, Altars, and incense; in
their Kings and Elders, the glorious state of the Christian Church, certainly
established by the blood of their promised Messiah, (...) blessed Savior.
Great herefore is the delight and pleasure, which may be had in reading and
studying of this book.

II. Object. Albeit it may hereby (...) indeed^ to be pleasant, and to afford
deligh^ (...) so great variety of things herein mentioned, yet the profit will
be littled perhaps not worth the labor which a st^dious reader would bestow
upon it.
Answ. The book is as profitable as pleasant, This book is as profitable as
pleasant.
and more too: indeed, the benefit of this book being unfolded and made
known, is more then by pen can be set down, or by the tongue be uttered.

I. We may see by this, all things falling out, in, The first benefit of this
book.
with, or against the Church of Christ, from the day of the revelation hereof
unto the worlds end, to have been by God fore-determined. So as nothing Chap.
1. 19. and 4. 1. and 5. 1.
has, does, or hereafter shall come to pass by chance, by policy of the
Church, by the subtlety of the enemies; but only according to the good will
and pleasure of God, guiding and ordering all things, in all circumstances, by
the hand of his providence, in divine wisdom, to the glory of his name, and
good of his Church. This will cause patience, quietness of spirit, and a
submitting of our wills unto Gods will, in all the Churches changeable courses,
whether in ebbing or flowing, rising or falling, in peace, or under
persecution; and never to fear the enemy, who can do nothing, but what is
foreordained.

II. We have here a book of Martyrs, showing The second benefit. Chap. 2.
13. and 6. 9. 11. and 11. 3. 7. 8. and 12. 11. Chap. 9. and 12. and 13. and 14.
and 16. and 17. and 18. and 19. and 20.
the sufferings of the godly, their zeal, and patience, and tribulation; their
opposing of the adversaries, their death and martyrdom; with all the enemies,
policies, and cruelties, and Gods reuengefull hand upon them for the same. The
consideration whereof may afford us examples worthy our imitation in the one;
and in the other, cause of thankfulness to God, taking his peoples part: and
to be courageous, and confidently bold in the Lords quarrel still against
these enemies, as the godly before us have been.

III. We here may learn, who were the enemies The third benefit. cap. 12. and
13. and 9. and 11. and 17. 18. 19. 20.
of the Church, who now be, and hereafter shall be, with their nature, courses,
intendments, and practices, from their vprising, to their fall and utter ruin;
by which we may learn truly to discern them, to stand against them, to
watch, and stand continually armed in the defense of the truth to prevent their
mischiefs.

IV. We may here see Christ's presence ever The fourth benefit. cap. 1. 13.
and 14. 1. and 4. and 5. and 7. cap. 11. 17. 1. and 19. 1-21. and 21. and 22.
with his Church, his care to teach them, and to prevent their destruction in a
world of mischiefs, safely carrying them through all the floods of evils (with
which earthly minds were overwhelmed) and sending them safe (as the
Israelites) to the shore, there to behold the utter destruction of all their
enemies. This will strengthen our faith, increase our joy, comfort our hearts
in a joyful expectation, and keep us constant unto the end. The fifth
benefit. cap. 17. and 13. and 18.


V. Hereby may we see, if we will see the clear light at noone day, that Rome
(not heathenish, but professing Christ) is Babylon, the Pope, that Antichrist,
and false prophet, under the name of Christ, to be the very enemy of Jesus
Christ, and that star fallen from heaven, whose Egyptian cruelty, sodomitical
cap. 13. and. 19. and 9.
practices, and Heathenish Idolatry, sorceries and deceits, has brought upon
the Christian world, cap. 11. 8. and 9. 20. 21. and 18. 23.
the furious and hellish rage of the Turkish power, as a plague, in his wrath,
for this Romish iniquity. This should cause all Christians to detest Pope and
popery, and such as yet remain under his jurisdiction, to get out quickly
from under that whorish government, and bloody state; and we, that Cap. 9. 14.
21.
have escaped, should be moved hereby to sing praises unto God for ever.

VI. By this book may we, the reformed Churches, The sixth benefit.
the true members of Christ's Church, know our happy estate, and what is our
duty, what God commands us to do, for the furthering of our promised future
happiness, in endeavoring the utter ruin of that cursed state of
Antichristianisme: Kings are to war against her with the Cap. 17. 16.
sword, and to burn the whore with fire: The Prophets, into whom is come the
spirit of life from God, are to fight against the same with the word, Cap. 11.
11.
sword of the spirit; and by the power of instruction and prophecy, to give
unto the Angels instruments of wrath, the vials full of the wrath of God, to
pour upon that state the plagues due, for Cap. 13. 7.
the blood of the Saints and Prophets, shead by the same. All the flock of
Christ, elect, called and faithful, which stand on the Lambs part are to pray
for her ruin, and to rejoice at her destruction. Cap. 17. 14. with 19. 1. 2-7.
This should make us keep the words of this prophecy, which is, in our
places, to seek the fulfilling thereof, and to bring that to pass which is
Cap. 1. 3.
prophesied of us, so shall we be blessed; it is our duty to fulfill all
righteousness, as Christ speaks, who did carefully fulfill all the words of
Scripture Mat. 3. 15. and 4. 14. and 2. 4. and 2. 4. and 26. 54.
prophesying of him, as the writings of the Evangelists every where do show;
therefore let us take heed, lest we will be lukewarm and careless, and the
Lord spew us out of his mouth. If we will not fulfill the words, and keep the
sayings of this prophecy, to be blessed, let us fear to be cursed; Cap. 22.
7.
according to that threat of the Prophet; Cursed is he that does the work of
the Lord negligently. Ier. 48. 10.


VII. By this book may all we Protestants see, The seventh benefit. Cap. 10.
11.
how far we have prevailed by the little book in the Angels hand, given unto
John, for the recovery of Christ's flock, from under the general Apostacy;
Cap. 11. and. 14. 6. 7. 8. 9.
how forcible the preaching of the Gospel has been hitherto against the
beast, and the whore sitting thereupon; how the time of Antichrists destruction
is very nigh at hand, so as we have no need to fear the rising up thereof any
more; but rather Cap. 10. 6. 7. and 17. 8. 11. and 19. 20.
certainly to expect the utter ruin and desolation thereof. This should cause
us to rejoice in the preaching of the Gospel, to seek to maintain and
further it, by all possible means, not fearing any of the plots or attempts of
the enemies, our popish adversaries. For by the Angels oath the Church is Cap.
10. 6. 7.
to prosper, and the enemies are no more to increase, but to be under the vials
of Gods wrath, as they now are, and shall be, till they be consumed. The
words of the book is plain for this. And now above fifty years God has
given us experience hereof: and every day shall the Church of God find the
verity of the Angels words more and more: for the seventh trumpet has blown,
the events contained under it, show it to the simplest that shall observe that
which is in the tenth, and eleventh chapters of this heavenly Revelation.

VIII, By this book are we foretold of future The eighth benefit. Cap. 16. 18.
evils yet to come upon the world, the like was never before, and that at the
pouring out of the seventh vial, which should make every one of us watchful,
that in the days of tentation we perish not. Yet for the consolation of Gods
people, let Cap. 19. and 21. and 22.
them know certainly this, that all shall turn to the good of Gods Church, the
evils shall light upon the wicked, but the Lords people shall in the end find
peace, even here, and shall sing praises to the Lamb, and to him that sits
upon the throne, for ever and ever. And thus we see the singular and
unspeakable profit of this heavenly prophecy, the words whereof are faithful
and true.

III. Object. Be it that it be pleasant and profitable, yet it is not a book
of that necessity, as we need to be so careful to study it.
Answ. How necessary it is for us to be well acquainted This book is most
necessary to be known.
with this book, the first reasans given to read it, and the manifold profit
coming hereby to Gods Church, show sufficiently to every indifferent man. Our
dread Sovereign, whose learned pen has proclaimed open war to Antichrist,
in his Highness meditations upon chap. 20. verse. 7, 8. 9. 10. says thus: As
of all books, the holy Scripture His Majesty's meditations on Revel. 20.
is most necessary for the instruction of a Christian, so of all the
Scriptures, the book of the Revelation is most meet for this our last age, as
a prophecy of the latter times. How can it be but necessary, when indeed the
matter therein concerns us so nearly? If we do judge our selves to be the
Church of God, and his servants, whose it is chiefly to know the things herein
contained, and to endeavor to fulfill them.

IV. Object. But many great scholars, and in no mean place, think it not so
necessary, but leave it as an obscure book not to be medled-with.
Answ. Why they leave it untouched, these great scholars best know in
themselves; but to their opinion, as a book not so necessary (as they say)
for all now to understand, I oppose, I. the authority of God, and the words of
this book, from whence the former reasons are wholly fetched. II. The Qui
augustissimis sacrosanctae hujus prophetiae coruscat donis, quibus omnes omnium
aetatum interpretes longo post se interuallo reliquit. Bullinger in his Preface
to the Revel. In his Dedicat. Epistle before his Com. upon this book.
authority of our gracious Sovereign, One hardly matchable for his knowledge
in this book, (as Eglinus a learned man affirms) who having studied it,
speaks according to verity and sound judgment, from the book it self.
III. The authority of learned men, Bullinger, Meyerus, and others; yea, I
oppose the painful labors of all the learned (both old and new) that have
written upon this book, as a sufficient confutation of their idle and ill
conceit, against the most necessary use of this book to the whole Christian
world.

CHAP. II.
The sum of the second chapter.
Not only we, who by Gods mercy are come out of Babylon, are to read, and
study this book; but also all those that never yet came out of that state, and
such miserable souls, as have woefully apostated from us, are to be acquainted
with this book, for these reasons following.

I.THis book does show them, that their The Papists are diligently to study
this book. The first reason.
dwelling is in Babylon, the habitation of Devils, the hold of all foul
spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird, chap. 18. 2. 3. yea it
is spirituallie Egypt and Sodom, chap. 11. 8. Not heathenish, but their popish
Rome is Babylon, even Rome now Christen. It is then Babylon, first, when
Antichrist Rome is Babylon by the Popes seat therein.
sits there, which must be after the heathenish Emperors, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Secondly, when it becomes a whore, deceiving by whorish allurements, chap.
17. 1. 2. 18. and 16. 19. and not only (by strength of arms) subduing as the
heathen Emperors did. Thirdly, when it is called a mystery, chap. 17. 5.
which cannot be, as it was heathen, but Christen. Fourthly, when it is the
beast with seven heads and ten horns, chap. 13. and 17. 7. bearing up the
whore, and having Crowns upon the horns, chap. 13. for being Heathenish the
Crowns were upon the heads, and not on the horns, chap. 12. Fifthly, when the
ten horns receive power as Kings with the Revel. 17. 12.
beast, which cannot be, while the heathen Emperors reigned, who shared no
kingly sovereignty to any other with themselves. Sixthly, when it has a
mark, a name, and the number of a name, having gotten such power by wonders
and miracles, as it causes al upon pain of death to receive this mark or the
name, or to have the number of the name, chap. 13. 11.-17. and 14. 9. which
things cannot be avouched of heathenish Rome: therefore of Rome Christen, or
rather Antichristian. Seventhly, when one of the heads is wounded and healed
again, then Rome is Babylon, chap. 13. Eighthly, when Rome bewitched Kings with
the wine of her fornication, chap. 17. 21, and God raised up Preachers to
proclaim for that cause her downfall, chap. 14. 8. Ninthly, when the seventh
vial is poured out, chap. 16. 19. which is many hundreds of years after Rome
was rid of heathen Emperors. Lastly, when Rome is threatened that it shall be
no more, but come to utter destruction, chap. 18. 2. 21, and that under the
seventh head, chap. 17. 8. 11, when the Heathen Emperors (the sixth head) was
past.

II. Hereby may they hear, how the Lord commands The second reason, they are
in Babylon.
them to come out of this their Babylon; if they will be held the people of
God, and if they will not be partakers of her sins, that so they may not
receive of her plagues, Revel. 18. 4; for as Babylon, she shall be laid waste,
chap. 18. 2. as Egypt be horribly plagued, chap. 16. and as Sodom with fire be
burned, chap. 18. 8.

III. This will show them, that their Pope is The third reason, the Pope is
Antichrist.
that Antichrist, the star fallen, and the King of the Locusts, chap. 9. 1.
11. the horned beast like the Lamb, speaking as the Dragon, chap. 13. 11. for
in Chap. 13. 11. 12.-17.
al things the Pope agrees with that second beast, which has the show of a
Lamb, but the very Chap. 19. 20.
Dragons mouth; which exercises all the power of the first beast, which
causes all to worship him for to advance the Roman state; which does wonders
and miracles, as a false prophet, to deceive them that dwell on the earth, and
commands them to make an image to the beast, and to worship the same upon
pain of death: which cures the deadly wound, and lastly forces all to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads, or else to have no
commerce with them. Al which are the Popes properties and practice, as after is
showed at large.

IV. This book will tell them, that their service The fourth reason, their
service abominable.
is but the acts of an whore (fornication, abominations and filthiness, though
that state seem never so glorious) being attired in purple and scarlet, decked
with gold and pearl; and though that these things be reached out to them in a
golden cup, in that whores hand, chap. 17. 2. 4. So as, according to the
positio^ delivered by a learned Divine, proved, and not hitherto disproued, a
Papist by his Romish religion cannot go beyond a Reprobate: Master Perkins
position.
which being true, is enough to condemn their religion, their profession and
practices therein for ever.

V. By this shall they know, who they be that The fifth reason, they shall
know who are Papists.
are carried away with that Romish religion and state, even such as be earthly
inhabitants, cap. 17. 2. Such as be seduced by their sorceries, chap. 18. 23.
by the wonders and false miracles of the beast, chap. 13. 13. 14. and of the
false prophet, cap. 19. 20. Such as be drunk with the wine of that
fornication, the outward pomp and glory of that whore, chap. 17. 2-4. Such as
gain thereby, and live in the pleasures of that state, cap. 18. 3. 9. 10. 11.
Such as have foolishly admired the power, seat, and great authority thereof
formerly received from the Dragon, cap. 13. 3. 4. Such as cannot submit
themselves to the powerful preaching of the Gospel, but hold themselves
tormented by the true Ministers of Christ, chap. 11. 10. Such as in the love of
life and goods have through fear submitted to the power of the beast, cap. 13.
16. Lastly, such as whose names are not written in the book of life of the
Lamb, slain from the foundation of the world: chap. 13. 8. and 17. 8.

VI. Hereby may they learn to see, what shall The sixth reason, to behold
their end.
become of their Pope and state, their beast and false Prophet; yea and what
shall become of those that worship that beast, his image, and receive the mark
of his name; verily they shall be plagued with exquisite torments, chap. 19.
20. and 14. 9. 10. 11: and of her plagues, in the destruction of that state,
shall all receive that will not depart from her, chap. 18. 4.

VII. By this book shall they learn to satisfy The seventh reason, to
satisfy themselves of a maine question between them and us.
themselves in that question, which they so often have propounded to us: where
our Church was before Luthers days? Certainly even in the wilderness with the
woman, chap. 12; having the two witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, cap. 11. 3.
and in the temple, while the holy city was trodden under foot by that
Antichristian state, chap. 11. 2. and 13. 5.

VIII. By this book they shall see the reasons The eighth reason to be ^ of.
of those things, which now do so greatly vex and torment that their state,
their Pope, their Jesuits, Priests, and all the obstinate route of them: I. How
it is, and by what means it comes to pass that so many countries, kingdoms
and people in Christendom, since Luthers time, have forsaken their
Antichristian state? Even Christ's own power by his Preachers recovering his
own, that is, people, nations, tongues and Kings from under that
pseudo-catholike and Apostatical Church, chap. 10. 11. and 14. 6. II. How it
was, that after they had slain and murdered John Hus, and Jerome of Prage,
with many other, at several times, and became so merry Chap. 11. 7. 10.
after their cruelties, as if all had been safe; yet must Luther, and with him
many other rise up in their sight preaching against them powerfully, and yet
nevertheless do escape death at their hands? Even because the spirit of life
from God entered into them, and took them up unto him, in the sight of those
their enemies, chap. 14. 7. 8. 9. and 11. 11. III. How it is, that now their
Jesuits and Priests are of us put to death, and with them other traitorous
persons? Even the judgment and hand of God upon them, who auengeth hereby the
blood of his Saints and Prophets, and does to them, as they have done to us,
chap. 16. 5. 6. and 13. 10. IV. How it is possible, that we can so prevail
against them, and that they get not the hand against us? why their invincible
Armado came to naught? why their unheard of plot of Gunpowder-treason came to
none effect? why they prosper not against us, sithen they be so subtle, so
treacherous and hellishly false, that no oath can bind them to faithfulness; but
now do, and daily shall by little and little decay to their utter ruin? Even
because their date of growth is past, chap. 10. 6. the kingdoms are become the
Lords, who shall reign for ever, chap. 11. 15. for now do come out of the
Church the Angels to pour out the last plagues, and that upon them, till they
be destroyed, chap. 15. 6. 7. and 16.

IX. The holy Apostle S. John our Prophet here The ninth reason, to see how
they overthrow themselves at unawares.
would let them see plainly (if they would see the light at noone day) that in
the mainest arguments they bring to overthrow us, they do unawares strengthen
us; and what they think do serve to make for themselves, in those they be
confounded and overthrown. Good Reader in wisdom discern, and judge
righteously.

The Papists against the Protestants. John for the Protestants. Their The
Papists arguments against us, answered by the Apostle, who overthrows them by
the words of the text.
Church (if it had any being) was hidden till of late years, trodden
underfoot, and of no esteem in the world. So should the true Church be, the
Temple and holy City must be trodden under foot, and be of no esteem in the
world; chap. 11. 1. 2. 10. and 12. 6. 14. Their number small, in comparison of
ours. The flock of Christ is but an 144000: chap. 14. 1. it is a small number,
when the whole world follows after Antichrist: chap. 13. 3. 16. Their first
vpsetters, which taught them this their religion, were but a few, and those
base fellows too. Christ's witnesses against the Antichristian state were at
the first few, and poor, and for a time clothed in sackcloth: chap. 11. 3.
They were judged and condemned, and not held worthy to live, and that not of a
few, but generally of the whole earth. So Christ by his Angel foreshewed the
same, that it should so fall out with the true Preachers of the Gospel: chap.
11. 7. 9. 10. They have wickedlie forsaken our Church, contrary to the
practice of their forefathers, many hundreds of years. Not wickedly, but
justly at the commandment of God, chap. 18. 4; not contrary to the will of
their heavenly Father, though contrary, to earthly forefathers misled by
Antichrist: chap. 13. 13. 14. They condemn our Church as an whore, and call
our estate Babylon; and yet they cannot but acknowledge that they came out from
us. The spirit of God calls your Church the Whore, chap. 17. 1. and Rome
(that great City) Babylon, cap. 17. 18. and 18. 2. out of which they may well
confess that they came, as the Lord commanded them: chap. 18. 4. They are all
for preaching, and singing of Psalms, leaving the old and ancient service of
the Church. The true messengers of Christ are Preachers, and do perform that
duty, cap. 11. and 14. and the true Church praises God, with singing of
Psalms, cap. 15. 3. They abhor Images, and will not worship either Saint or
Angel, which has been a custom of the Church. They justly abhor those
things, for which God plagued the Romish people, cap. 9. 20. and concerning
worship, the true Church only worshippeth God, cap. 4. 8-11. and 5. 14. so
being commanded, cap. 14. 7. and by an Angel forbidden to worship Angels, cap.
19. 10. These late vpstart-Preachers have troubled the world, and have drawn
away many from their old obedience. The true Prophets of Christ must torment
the inhabitants of the earth, cap. 11. 10. and by the ministry of the word,
preach to people, nations, tongues, and Kings, to bring them from Antichrist,
and the Romish Church, cap. 10. 11. and 14. 6-9. These Preachers do incite and
stir up authority against us, and to deal hardly with us. They exhort to no
more then God commands, saying, reward her, as she rewarded you, and give
double unto her, according to her works, in the cup she has filled, fill to
her double, cap. 18. 6. Their Kings and Magistrates murder holy and learned
men, Jesuits, Priests, and other of our religion. They murder none, but
execute justice upon them, as the Lord foretold they should do, cap. 13. 10.
and herein the Lord is righteous, to give them blood that have shead blood.
cap. 16. 5. 6.

The Papists for the Papists. John against the Papists. Rome is the
Mother Church. Yea, The Papists arguments for themselves, turned against
themselves, by the words of the prophecy.
the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth, cap. 17. 5. Our Church is
the holy Catholic Church. It is Babylon the great, cap. 18. 2. and 17. 5.
spiritually Sodom and Egypt, cap. 11. 8. The Pope in his Popedom, is a holy
father, Christ's Vicar on earth, and sits at Rome. He is the beast, cap. 11.
7. and 13. 1. 11. the Dragons Substitute, cap. 13. 2. and at Rome the whore
sits, cap. 17. 1. 3. Christ gave to him his power, seat, and authority.
No: the Angel has told thee, that the Dragon the devil gave him his power,
seat, and great authority, cap. 13. 2. 4. Kings and mighty Potentates have
submitted both themselves, and their kingdoms to our Churches authority,
which they would never have done, if it had not been of God. The Kings of the
earth must commit fornication with that where, cap. 17. 2. and must give their
power, strength and kingdom to the beast, cap. 17. 13. for God has put into
their hearts, to fulfill his will, ver. 17. All the world have bin of our
religion, and depended upon the authority of Rome. All the world must wonder
after the beast, and worship him, cap. 13. 3. and 17. 8. yea peoples and
multitudes, nations and tongues, must be subject to that whore of Rome. 17. 1.
15. Those that have worshipped this high Ecclesiastical power, and have given
the supremacy to that seat, were godly, learned, and devout people of all
sorts. They were such as were deceived, cap. 13. 14. or by fear compelled,
verse. 16. 17. (...) car^ally (...) that (...), cap. 17. 2. or that lived in
pleasures with her, cap. 18. and that were not in the book of life, cap. 13.
8. Our Church is full of glory and magnificence, we spare no cost to set out
our service with. Indeed the where must be arrayed in purple, scarlet color,
and decked with gold, precious stones, and pearls, cap. 17. 4. Our Church has
heretofore commanded all over, chalenging Supremacy, and had it yielded to her
generally. Great Babylon says in her heart, I sit as Queen, cap. 18. 7. and
the whore sits upon many waters, ca. 17. 1. that is, peoples, multitudes,
nations and tongues, verse. 15. Great was the unity and consent of Princes and
people, while the authority of our Church prevailed. So must it be, while the
beast bears rule; Kings will be of one mind, and agree with him, cap. 17. 13.
17. and the inhabitants of the earth will be merry, ca. 11. 10. Our Church
has bin famous for miracles, by which many have been moved to embrace our
religion. The beast, chap. 13. 13. 14. and the false prophet do wonders and
miracles, and deceive thereby earthly people, cap. 19. 20. yea Babylon by these
her sorceries deceive the nations, cap. 18. 24. Our Church has bin visible and
apparent unto all; yea, and has flourished a long time, in the spite of all
her gainsayers. This proves you not to be the Temple or holy City, but indeed
the out-court, which has been apparent unto the nations, who have heretofore
murdered and oppressed the Saints and people of God, that did refuse to
subject unto you, ca. 11. 2. 7. and 20. 4. and 13. 15. Our Church has ever bin
a co^demner (unto the death) of all those vpstart Preachers, and other
troublers of the peace of the Christian world: so zealous has she ever been to
uphold religion. Indeed the woman (the whore) could away with no opposition,
cap. 11. but has risen up against Christ's servants, and become drunk with the
blood of the Saints and the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, cap. 17. 6. Our
Popes have made war against such as opposed the Churches authority, and God
gave them victory over their victory over their enemies, and none were able
to withstand them; such power they had from God. The beast shall make war
against the Saints, yea and also overcome them, for not yielding unto him; and
put many to death therefore: and power was given him over all kindreds,
tongues, and nations, cap. 11. 7. and 13. 4. 7. 15. cap. 20. 4. Our holy
fathers acts against these busy fellows, that rose up to speak against the
established authority were (I am sure) approved then of all universally: which
would not have been, if they had been wicked and evil. Their beast full of
blasphemies, and his deeds full of cruelty against the true Prophets of God,
must be applauded of all the inhabitants of the earth, yea they must rejoice
at his ill deeds, cap. 11. 10. Our Church is so careful for soules-safety,
that she will permit none to live with in her lap, unless they show themselves
to be her obedient children. The beast will make all to receive a mark in
their right hand, or forehead, else no buying or selling where he has to
do, except they have his mark, name, or the number of his name, cap. 13. 16.
17. Our Church has yet many endued with gifts of miracles to go out for her,
and is able to make an army with kingly aid against our enemies. Indeed out of
the mouth of the Dragon, beast, and false Prophet come forth unclean spirits
like frogs, the spirits of devils working miracles, to go unto Kings, to fight
for them, cap. 16. 13. 14. Our Church wants not yet, neither ever shall (I
hope) the countenance of Kings, and great men, to like and approve of her, yea
and to maintain her, say, and do what men can, and all the Heretics in the
world with them. True it is, Babylon has, and shall have Kings, and great men
of the earth, to love and like of her, yea to fight for her, cap. 17. 14. and
19. 19. and when she is destroyed, then to mourn and to (...) for (...), cap.
18.

Thus may these deceived people, behold and see how they speak against
themselves, while they would gladly speak most for themselves. They would be
held to be the true Church, and yet they prove it by the infallible marks of
the false Church; they would be the c^^st spouse of Christ, and yet they set
out themselves with the apparent tokens of the woman the whore; behold, stay
and wonder! can there be under heaven a more evident bewitching then this?
consider thou that read, and give true judgment by evidence of truth.

CHAP. III.
The sum of the third chapter. Reasons for both Protestants and Papists. The
first reason, to know in what state they do stand.
Protestants and Papists (as severally, so jointly) should study this book,
for the good of them both.

I. BY this book shall they know, that which is most necessary to be known
of them both, that is, in what state they stand, whether they be for Christ,
or Antichrist; what mark they have, the fathers, or the beasts; in what place
they stand, in Babylon, or in the Temple of God; among whom they are, whether
of the Gentiles and nations following the beast, or with the Lamb on mount
Sion, among the elect, chosen, and faithful. To know all things, and not to
know these things, is to know (indeed) nothing at all; without this knowledge,
no true comfort, no assurance of salvation. Now this book, (above all other
parts of sacred Scripture) discovers plainly and fully these things unto us,
ranking all that bear the name of Christians, in their due order and place, to
the one side or to the other. For in this book is showed: I. Two persons
(principal heads) that is, Christ, and Antichrist. II. Two places, new
Jerusalem, and Babylon. III. The inhabitants of the one, and the inhabitants of
the other, with the qualities and conditions of either of them distinctly
noted. IV. Here be two marks, the fathers mark, and the beasts mark, either
of them to know their own by. Now every one of us, are either Christ's, or
Antichrists, either citizens of the new Jerusalem, or dwellers in Babylon, and
have verily upon us, the fathers mark or the beasts; which in this book we
shall, by Gods merciful assistance, well discern, if we by ardent prayer and
diligent study seriously peruse and carefully read it over. These are points
of so great moment, as every man, that has any care of his salvation, should
labor for the certain knowledge thereof, and right gladly should these things
cause us to take, now at the length, this holy book into our hands, by which
we may of so great and necessary truths be fully resolved.

II. This book will decide the mainest points The second reason, to know how
to decide maine points of controversy between us and them.
of controversy between us and them, as the last section in the former
chapter does show, concerning the Church, the Ministry, our callings, the
visibilitie, and hidden state of the Church, with such other points, about
which there is such eager contending, and about which many great and
troublesome disputations are daily in hand, thousands of questions propounded,
and learned men on both sides even wearied therewith; which bring weak
apprehensions into amazments, and the unsettled into desperate thoughts of
Atheism, to think it no matter whether they be of this or that side, or of
neither, but to live as Newters to either, and so to be in themselves of no
religion at all, as too many be. But if this book were better known, and more
plainly laid open, without all sinister and partial respect, the weak ones on
our side would be strongly settled, and many deceived souls on their part
would be recovered, and made zealous in this liberty of the Gospel and
freedom from Antichristianisme, which the Lord Jesus grant, even so, Amen.

III. This book so clearly sets out in flat The third reason, to know the
true and false Church asunder.
opposition the true and false Church, with their heads, members, parts and
properties, as any indifferent Reader, Protestant or Papist, may judge which is
the one, which is ye other; who are Christ's, who be Antichrists, who be true
Christians, who be Antichristians, as the difference and also the opposition
now here following fully declares.

Christ. Antichrist. The King of Saints: The opposition between Christ and
Antichrist, only out of this prophecy in all these particulars.
chap. 15. 3. The King of Locusts, chap. 9. 11. The faithful and true
witness, chap. 3. 14. and 1. 5. and 19. 11. The false Prophet deceiving, chap.
19. 20. A Lamb, chap. 14. 1. chap. 5. 14. A beast like a Lamb having two
horns, but speaking as a Dragon, chap. 13. 11. The Angel coming down from
heaven, cap. 10. 1. and the bright morning-starre, chap. 22. 16. The Angel of
the bottomless pit, chap. 9. 11. the beast ascending from thence, chap. 11. 7,
out of the earth, chap. 13. 9. and the star fallen from heaven: chap. 9. 2.
The Redeemer, chap. 5. 9. The Destroyer: chap. 9. 11. Upon his head a crown of
gold, chap. 14. 14. Upon his head the name of blasphemy, chap. 13. 1. He has
the Key of David, chap. 3. 7. This, the Key of the bottomless pit, chap. 9. 1.
He sits in his fathers throne, chap. 3. 21. This in the Dragons seat and
throne, cap. 13. 2. He warreth in defense of his Saints, chap. 12. and 17. This
makes war against the Saints, chap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. and 19. 19. He wins
people to him only by the preaching of the word, chap. 10. 11. and subdueth
them by the sword, which comes out of his mouth, chap. 19. 15. 21. This by
false miracles, by force and fear of death, if they will not submit themselves
to his will, chap. 13. 13. 14. 15. 16. Christ permits me^ to live, and to
buy and sell, though they do not yield to him. This counterfeit Lamb will let
^^ man buy nor sell, except him that has the mark, the name of the beast, or
his number, chap. 13. 17. Christ fitteth his servants to preach, and commands
them to do so: chap. 10. 11. This beast allows of no Preachers of Gods word,
but rises up and murdereth them, chap. 11. 7. Christ the Lamb has his wife,
chap. 19. 7. This beast and false Prophet his whore, chap. 17. Christ was, is,
and shall be, chap. 1. 8. and 11. 17. and reigns for ever: chap. 11. 15. This
beast was, is not, and yet is, and shall have power 42 months, and go into
destruction: chap. 13. 5. and 17. 8. 11.

The true Church of Christ. The false Church of Antichrist. This is the holy
beloved City, new Jerusalem, chap. 20. 9. and 21. 2. This that great The
opposition between us the true Church of Christ, and the popish Synagogue, or
Church of Antichrist, as this prophecy sets us at odds for ever in these
particulars.
City, chap. 14. 8. and 17. 18. the City of the nations, chap. 16. 19. great
Babylon, cap. 18. 2. This the tabernacle of God his habitation, cap. 21. 3.
This the habitation of Devils, the hold of every foul spirit, and the cage of
every unclean and hateful bird, chap. 18. 2. This the Lambs wife, chap. 19.
7. and 21. 9. This Antichrists whore: chap. 17. This the Temple, cap. 11. This
the Out-court, chap. 11. 2. This the Woman clothed with the Sun, and the
Moon under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of 12 stars: chap. 12. 1.
This the Woman arraied in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and
precious stones and pearl; under her the scarlet colored beast, and upon her
forehead, a name written mystery, Babylon, etc. cap. 17. 3. 4. 5. This trodden
under foot, cap. 11. 2. escapes into the wilderness, and there is hidden for
a space and nourished 1260. days, ca. 12. 6. 14. This treads upon the
Church, cap. 11. sits as a Queen glorifying her self, and living
deliciously, chap. 18. 7. This is hated of the Dragon, cap. 12. and 20. 9.
persecuted by the beast and false prophet, cap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. and 19. 19.
and against whom the Kings of the earth rise up, cap. 17. 14. and 19 19. This
favored to the utmost by the Dragon, ca. 13. 2. borne up by the beast, cap.
17. 3. 7. assisted by the Kings of the earth, cap. 17. 14. and 19. 19. who have
committed fornication, cap. 17. 2. and lived deliciously with her, cap. 18. 9.
This has in the hand of the Angel, the little book for to teach the people,
cap. 10. This has in her hand a golden cup, full of abominations, and
filthiness of her fornication, cap. 17. 4. This is led by Christ to the living
fountains of waters, cap. 7. 17. even the waters of life to drink thereof,
chap. 21. 6. and 22. 17. This woman is drunk with the blood of the Saints and
the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, cap. 17. 6. This has the Lamb to instruct
al hers, cap. 5. This has the false prophet working miracles to deceive all
hers, cap. 19. 20. This has only God himself, and Christ in the midst,
ruling her, cap. 1. 1. and 22. 3. This has Antichrist, the King of the
Locusts, whose harlot she is to rule over her, cap. 9. This has the
approbation of God, and the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory and
honor to her, cap. 21. 24 This has damnation from God, chap. 17. 1. and the
Kings at length shall hate this whore, as she deserves, and burn her with
fire, cap. 17. 16.

The Servants of Christ. The Servants of The opposition between the Preachers
of the Gospel, and the servants of Antichrist the Pope.
Antichrist. These are Angels and Stars, cap, 1. and 2. and 3. These are
Locusts, frogs, and unclean spirits of devils, cap. 9. and 16. These are
Prophets, and do preach the Gospel, cap. 11. and 14. 6. These preach not, or
preach m^ns precepts, and do torment men, chap. 9. and work deceitful
miracles, to deceive them that dwell on the earth, cap. 13. 13. 14. and 19. 20.
These come out of the Temple, and are sent by Christ, cap. 14. and 10. 11. to
whom he gives power, cap. 11. 3. These come out of the smoke of the
bottomless pit, cap. 9. and are sent by the Dragon, beast, and false prophet,
ca. 16. from whom they receive power, cap. 9. 3. These go forth with the
everlasting Gospel, exhorting men to fear God, and to worship him, cap. 14.
6. These go forth, without the Gospel, to hurt, chap. 9. 3. 10. and to inrite
the Kings of the earth unto mischief, against Christ his people, cap. 16.
These preach against Babylon, and proclaim her fall, and do threaten vengeance
against such as do subject themselves thereto, chap. 14. 8. 9. 10. 11. These,
out of the mouth of the Dragon, beast, and false Prophet, do use all their
deceitful working of miracles, to procure helps for the upholding the same,
cap. 16. 10. 13. 14. These have been killed only for preaching Gods word, and
for the testimony of Jesus, cap. 14. 6. and cap. 11. 7. and 20. 4. These are
put to death for the blood they shead, chap. 16. 6. and for their damnable
trecheries and treasons.

Christians. Antichristians. These are they that dwell in heaven, cap. 13. 6.
These are the inhabitants of the earth, chap. 13. 8. and 11. 10. These do
worship God, chap. 4. and 5. and 11. 16. and 22. 3. These worship the Dragon
and beast, chap. 13. 4. 18. 12. devils and idols of gold and silver, and
brass, and stone, and of wood, cap. 9. 20. These are without guile in their
mouths, cap. 14. 5. These be guilefull equiuocators, and makers of lies,
chap. 22. as their practice proclaims to the world. These are not defiled with
women, but are virgins, cap. 14. 4. These are guilty of fornication
spiritual, cap. 17. 2. and corporal. cap. 9. 21. These do follow the
commandments of God, and do keep the faith of Jesus, cap. 14. 12. These do
what the beast and false prophet will have them to do, by whose false miracles
they are deceived, chap. 13. and 19. 20. These reverence the voice of Christ's
Ministers, and openly show it, cap. 4. 9. 10. and 5. 14. These hold them to be
a torment to them, and rejoice and are merry, if the beast kill them, cap. 11.
10. These rejoice, that Christ takes to him his power and reigns, ca. 11.
16. 17. These like Heathen nations, and Gentiles, cap. 11. 2. are angry
thereat, cap. 11. 18. These are written in the Lambs book of life, cap. 21.
27. The names of these are not written in the Lambs book of life, cap. 13. 8.
and 17. 8. These get the victory over the beast, and he cannot make them to
take his mark, or worship his image; but do get out from the number of his
name, ca. 15. 2. All these both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond,
he causes to receive his mark in their right hand, or foreheads, cap. 13.
16. These have the Lord and his works in admiration, cap. 4. 11. and 5. 12.
13. and 15. 3. 4. These have the beast and his power in admiration, cap. 13. 3.
4. These are content to be martyred, and to be slain for the word of God,
rather then they will worship the beasts image, etc. cap. 20. 4. These do shead
the blood of the Saints and Prophets, cap. 16. 6. for testifying the truth,
chap. 11. 7. and for not worshipping the beast, and his Image, cap. 13. 15.
These follow the Lamb, cap. 14. These wonder after the beast, cap. 13. 3.
These have his fathers name written in their foreheads, cap. 14. 1. and 7. 3.
4. and 22. These have the mark of the beast in their hand, or foreheads, cap.
13. These have been by the beast and his instruments, afflicted and brought
down, cap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. but now are prevailing, and shall be glorious,
chap. 7. 9-14. and 11. 11. 12. 16-18. and 14. 6-20. and 15. 2. and 16. These
now are plagued, chap. 16. 2. and rewarded for their cruelty, verse. 6. their
kingdom grows dark, verse. 10. and shall come to destruction, chap. 18.
These will rejoice, and so ought to do, at the ruin of Babylon, chap. 18. 20.
and 19. 1. 2-7. These do rage and blaspheme at Babylons decay, chap. 16. 10.
11. and shall at length bewail and lament her final destruction, cap. 18. 9.
16. These with the names in their foreheads, cap. 14. are sealed of God for
assurance of their safety, cap. 7. These with the mark and name of the beast,
cap. 13. are cursed of God, and unless they turn, are sure to be damned,
chap. 14. 9- 11.

Here behold now and see, all these particulars An exhortation.
set forth to the open view of every man's eye; let us, which have happily
escaped, and those that are yet among them, which in honest simplicity of
heart mistake things, learn hereby to discern between Christ and Antichrist,
the true spouse, and the filthy whore; the faithful servants of Christ, and
the devilish instruments of Antichrist; between true Christians in name and
deed, and Christians only in name, but Antichristians in deed; so shall we
still stand in the way of life, and they (poor souls) escape the snares of
death, even so Lord Jesus, Amen. But because I know, that obstinate spirits
will object against the clear light; but other, for better satisfaction to
themselves; I will here do my best to resolve the one, of whom I am hopeful,
and leave the other more inexcusable, of whom there is no hope; for full well I
wot by this book, that such as live in this Romish fornication, such as
partake of her delicacies, such as gain by her, such as God leaves, and Some
shall never be brought from Popery.
the false prophet, or Lambe-like beast, and beastly Lamb deceives, they
shall be her lovers to the utmost end; and therefore of these we shall be
sure to find some wickedly opposing against the most plain truths that may
be, still to harden their own hearts, and to deceive others; which point
(good Christian reader) I pray thee seriously take notice of, that by these
obstinate persons, thou be not either seduced from us, or miserably kept within
that most accursed state. Lord open thine eyes to see, to consider, and to be
resolved, if yet thou shall doubt; and the Lord confound all obstinate and
malicious gainsaying. Amen.

I. Object. You in these oppositions do take for granted, By Babylon is not
meant Rome.
that by Babylon is meant Rome; which if it were so, who would not come out of
her, seeing the Lord so plainly commands it, cap. 18. 4? but it cannot be
proved, that by Babylon is meant Rome.
Answ. It is most clear to the eyes of all that It is clear, that by Babylon,
Rome is to be understood.
wink not wilfully, that by Babylon, Rome is understood by John, which I thus
evidently prove from the text. The City which then reigned over the Kings of
the earth, was Rome, the Evangelist shows it, Luke 2. 1. The Acts of the
Apostles, where is showed what a great matter it was to be a Roman, ca. 16.
37. 39. and 22. 25. 28. Also the dominion of Rome over Cities and countries,
cap. 16. 21. and 23. 24. 26. 33. and 24. 2. 3. and the sovereignty of Caesar's,
cap. 25. 10. 12. and 26. 32. Of this, humane stories give witness, that the
point herein is undeniable; except man's impudency Machabees, Josephus, and
others.
will give the lie to God and men. Now this great City so reigning, is said to
be the woman, ^euel. 17. 18. this woman is the condemned whore sitting upon
many waters, in verse. 1. which are peoples, multitudes, nations, and tongues,
verse. 15. the dominion of Rome. This whorish woman has the name of Babylon
upon her, chap. 17. 5. therefore I conclude, if the reigning City be Rome, and
this City the woman, and the woman's name Babylon, that Rome is here meant by
Babylon. Again, that City which is seated on seven hills is Rome; that Rome
was seated upon seven hills, all that have described it, and spoken thereof do
witness the same. Virgil, lib. 2. Georg. in fin. lib. 6. Aen. Propertius,
Eleg. 10. lib. 3. Varro, lib. 5. de lin. lat. Plutarch calls Rome
seuen-hilled, and the names of (...).
the hills are known; Palatinus, Capitolinus, Quirinalis, Caelius,
Esquilinus, Viminalis, Auentinus. But the City here understood, and called
Babylon was seated on seven hills, for the woman the City (says the text)
sits on seven mountains or hills: therefore by this must Rome needs be
understood: consider with this, chap. 16. 19. where this great City, and
Babylon are mentioned together, as one and the same. To this the testimonies of
good authors may be added, and the confession of Papists themselves, which may
be seen at large, in Master Doctor Downhams book against Antichrist, cap. 2.
page 11. and 12. to which I refer the Reader.

II. Object. I think it is granted, indeed, that Babylon Rome Heathen, and not
Christen, is Babylon.
is put for Rome, but so it must be understood, as it then was Rome, heathen,
being a bloody City by the persecution of those tyrannical Emperors, and not
as it is Rome Christen, under the holy Father, the Bishop of Rome.
Answ. Rome is in this prophecy called Babylon, Rome is Babylon, as it is
Christen, under the Pope. 1. Reason. Esaias 1. Hos. 2. 1. -5.
not as it was then Heathen, but as it became Christen, and that under the
Pope. I. Rome cannot be called the whore, but in respect of her Apostacy from
her former faithfulness, for she was a glorious Church, Romans 1. from which she
falling, the faithful City became an harlot, as in the like case the Prophet
speaks. Therefore is it not Rome Heathen under the Emperous, which was
neither then, nor before, the Church of Christ; but ever lived in Gentilisme;
wherefore Rome must be understood to be the whore, as it was Christen and an
Apostaticall Church. II. Rome is not 2. Reason.
described in the woman, cap. 17. 2. 3. as it then was in John's time, but as it
afterward should be. 1. For that John was in a great admiration at this sight
of her, as a thing not before known unto him; now he knew Heathen Rome in the
present state well enough, and so he had no cause of so great admiration, as
at this, which should be: 2. This City was not yet (as is proved) become the
woman, the whore. 3. The text says plainly, that the beast, described so as
John saw him bearing the whore, was not then, cap. 17. 10. 11. which may by
reason be further proved; because his original is showed unto John, cap. 13.
1. which cannot be the original of the Roman Empire; for that nothing
prophesied here, must be extended beyond the time of John's receiving of this
prophecy, cap. 4. 1. and 22. 6. Now the Roman Empire was, before John's
Revelation, set out in the Dragon, whose original therefore is not mentioned,
chap. 12. 3. this one point observed would loose many a knot in this book:
also, for that this beast here is after the Dragon, which being cast out of
heaven, the beast receives his power, seat, and great authority, cap. 19. 12.
and 13. 1. 2. Lastly, for that the horns of this beast are crowned, cap. 13.
and are ten Kings, cap. 17. 12. which in John's time, (as the Angel says) had
(as yet) received no kingdom, but should (at one hour) with the beast, cap.
17. 12. therefore was the beast (so described bearing the whore) yet to come.
III. Then is Rome Babylon, when it is 3. Reason.
also a mystery, chap. 17. 5. and such a mystery as needs an interpretation,
verse. 7. as also being the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth,
verse. 5. alluring Kings, verse. 2. and making all the earth to wonder after the
beast, verse. 8. which must needs be Rome Christen, deceiving the world, ca. 13.
13. and not Heathen, murdering such as made open profession of the very name
of Christ, in John's days, which to him was no wonder or mystery. IV. Rome is
Babylon, when she sits upon 4. Reason.
the beast, for so the text says, the great City is the woman, cap. 17. 18.
and the woman sits upon the beast, verse. 3. but this is, when Rome is Christen;
for this beast (as we have heard) was not till the Heathen Emperors were gone
from Rome. V. Rome is Babylon, when the beast whereon she 5. Reason.
sits, had gotten with his Gentiles (for so are the adherents of this beast
called) the out-court to tread down the holy City 42. months, cap. 13. 5.
and 11. 2. which had the continuance many hundreds of years after John's days,
and after the time of the Heathen Emperous. VI. Rome is Babylon, when the beast
like a Lamb wrought miracles and wonders, and was the false prophet deceiving
the people, cap. 13. 11. 13. 14. and 19. 20. and causing them to make an image
to the former beast, etc. cap. 13. 14. 15. which was not when Rome was Heathen,
but Christen, because the first vprising of this beast is showed unto John,
chap. 13. 11. Thus therefore we see plainly, that Babylon here is Rome after
she received Christianity, and when she was (as now she is) ruled by the Pope.

III. Object. If this be so, as me think you do make it most apparent, then
of necessity should the Pope be that Antichrist; for all learned Catholics
acknowledge that here he is to be found, even that great Antichrist, which they
do look for to come: but you cannot prove the holy father the Pope to be
Antichrist.
Answ. As it is clear, that Rome is Babylon, and The Pope of Rome is that
Antichrist.
the same so, when it became Christian; so is it also, as apparent, that the
Pope of Rome is that Antichrist, out of this book, thus: Whom by this book we
may find to be that Antichrist, be it is and none other: But by this book we
may find the Pope to be that Antichrist: Therefore the Pope is be and none
other. The first proposition is acknowledged of the Papists Ribera and Viegas
in their Commentaries.
themselves, for they say and write that Antichrist is described in this book,
even that: (...), the grand Antichrist. The other proposition, that by this
book we may find the Pope to be him, is evident by these arguments following.

I. Argument is from the beast, chap. 1^. 1. and The first argument.
17. 4. Thus; This beast is that Antichrist but the Pope is this beast:
therefore the Pope is that Antichrist. The The proposition is his Majesty's in
the Apology to all Christian Monarchies, etc. page 55. and 91.
former proposition is proved, because this beast in this book is showed to
be against Christ, and yet is the state of Rome Christen, bearing up the
Apostaticall Church, chap. 17. 4. and has the power over the holy City; and
the Out-court, which is the visible profession of Christianity, (as a part of
the temple, which is the true Church) is granted to him and his Gentile-like
Christians, who do tread under foot the holy City (Christ's true Church) for
a time, chap. 11. 2. 7. and 13. 7. Let my godly and learned brethren (I humbly
beseech them) not reject, as vain, this assertion, though the most say, that
this beast is the Roman Empire of the Heathen. Let not our eyes be shut upon
the truth, when it appears, though ten thousand have thought otherwise. I
confess it calls that to remembrance in some sort, and I acknowledge it also
to be a Roman Empire or Monarchy; but not that Heathen, but this under the
Pope, in his pontificalitie and Popedom: which I thus prove, by the way, to
every indifferent judge. I. The Roman The first beast in chap. 13. 1. is not
the Heathen Empire, but the Popedom.
Heathen Monarchy was in John's days typed out in the Dragon, as all the
particulars show, chap. 12. II. That gave way to this in power, seat and great
authority, as the text shows, chap. 13. 3. II. This was not in John's days,
but to come, as before I have showed, and the reasons alleged. IV. The
difference of this Monarchy is such from that of the Heathen, as they can no
ways agree. The Heathen Empire received her power, seat and authority from
no earthly power, but this we see does; whence that arose is not noted, but
this is Such difference between this beast and the heathen Empire of the
Romans, as they cannot possibly be one.
out of the Sea, chap. 13. 1; that had crowns upon his head, this on his
horns: This followed of all the world with admiration and worshipped, so was
not the other; That was set out but by one form of a Dragon, this by several
beasts in their parts; This must war against the Saints, chap. 11. 7. and 13.
7. and these against him and his company, and at length overcome him, cap. 17.
14. 19. 20. so did not Christians against the Heathen Monarchy. The horns of
this, by which he was defended, shall be his destruction, chap. 17. 16. so
were not the horns to the other. This has his time limited 42 months, which
the Papists acknowledge, and that more truly then they wot of, to be the time
of Antichrist; and therefore cannot be the Heathen Empire, because the
beginning of this is after that, as is aforesaid; this unlike all that ever
were before him, a beast of so variable beastly qualities, as that, one beast
is not enough to express his nature, and in chap* 17. 10. he is not called
the seventh, but another, to note a variable difference from all the rest
before him: more such differences might be noted. V. This bears up the Woman,
which I have proved to be Rome Christian, which that never did. If we
acknowledge the Woman the City, this Babylon, and Babylon Rome, we cannot
hold this beast to be the Heathen Monarchy, for it continued not to y^ Whores
sitting upon this beast. VI. This beast is in the days of that beast, which
the Papists acknowledge to be Antichrist, chap. 13. 12. 13. for there the text
says, he caused him to be worshipped, exercising all his power before him, yea
the beast, verse 1, and this other beast, which is the false Prophet, shall
ever live together as one, chap. 16, and perish together, cap. 19. 20:
therefore with the leave of all the godly learned, not offending them, I hope
I may hence conclude that this beast is not the Roman Monarchy Heathen, but
indeed, and truth, Antichristian, and against Christ in a Christian profession.

Now how contrary to Christ this beast is, appears This beast is contrary to
Christ.
fully from the text: I. Christ is against the Dragon, chap. 12. 7: but this
and the Dragon be in amity, chap. 13. 3. 4. II. Christ comes from heaven,
chap. 10. 1. this out of the bottomless pit, chap. 11. 7. and 7. 8. III.
Christ warreth on the Saints part, chap. 17. 14. this against them, chap. 11.
7. and 13. 7. and against Christ himself with all his, chap. 19. 19. IV.
Christ exalts the true Church on high, chap. 14. 1. this with his Gentiles
treads her under foot, cap. 11. 2. V. Christ protecteth his Ministers,
having them as stars in his hand, chap. 1. and 2. 1. and praises their well
doing, chap. 2. and 3. This, for the discharging of their ministry and
preaching, murthereth them, chap. 11. 7. VI. Christ honors his Father, but
this like a very Rabshekah, blasphemeth God, his name, his tabernacle, and them
that dwell in heaven, cap. 13. 6. VII. Christ maintains his Spouse, Bride and
wife, araying her in fine linen, clean and white, which is the righteousness
of the Saints, cap. 19. 7. 8. This vpholdeth a damned and drunken common whore,
attyring her costly, to make others to commit filthiness with her, cap. 17. 3.
4. 5. Therefore is this beast, that great and opposite enemy, even that grand
Antichrist: So much for the proposition, that This beast is Antichrist.

The minor proposition is, The Pope is this beast, which, besides the text,
cap. 17. 11, I thus prove: Whom this type only sets out and represents
unto us, that is the Antitype and beast here meant. But the Pope in his
Pontificalitie and Popedom is the Antitype and beast here meant. The mayor
part needs no proof; the minor is manifest by the full agreement of the
Popes Pontificalitie and Popedom with this beast in all the particulars. For
this Popedom is, I. a Princedome or King-like, yea rather, The agreement of
the Popedom with this beast, chap. 13.
an Imperial state, as the word (beast) is taken in Daniel. II. This arose out
of the Sea of false doctrine of the supremacy to Peter's Chair. III. It has
seven heads, that is, hills, where the principal seat of this Popedom is,
chap. 17. IV. It has ten horns crowned, a potent power of Princes aiding him
and giving their strength to this authority, cap. 17. 13. Such were the Kings
of Spain, Portugal, France, Hungary, Bohemia, England, Scotland, Denmark,
Poland, Russia with others. V. His heads, the high place of his Popedom has
ascribed thereto what is proper to God, to be the foundation of Churches, the
Vicar of Christ's seat; yea upon one of the gates of the City has this
blasphemy been written to Sixtus the fourth, Merito in terris crederis Iunius
upon this place.
esse Deus; Thou art worthily on earth taken for God. VI. Like a Leopard is
the Pope in his Popedom, a State spotted with all filthiness vncurably; of an
alluring sweetness to get the prey, and firce with all eagernes to rampe at it;
flying at the faces and eyes of men hindering the booty, as the Leopard will
do; wholly it is as a Leopard, but partaketh of Bears feet only, which are
smooth, long and broad, the nails whereof in going enter the earth, where they
are set down. This Popedom partakes of the Bears feet, it passed smoothly a
long time, spreading far and wide, and wherefoeuer it settled, there it left
good testimony of the piercing nails, and strength of the feeting behind
continually. A Lions mouth it has, terrible is it upon the prey, and roaring
out fearful excommunications and cursings, making, as the Lion, the rest of
the beasts of the forest to tremble with fear. VII. He has (the Heathen
Emperors taken out of the way) the Dragons power to enforce and subdue
perforce, as they did; his throne is Rome, for he has reigned and obtained so
great authority, as he has said and done, even what he pleased, without
controlement, as did the heathen Emperors.

VIII. It received a deadly wound by the Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, and other
Northern people coming as a flood, making as it were no being thereof for a
space, but the deadly wound was at length healed, and this Popedom, this
Roman Ecclesiastical Monarchy and Papal dignity revived.

IX. With this pontifical state fell the world in admiration, highly esteeming
the seat, for that it was the head of the Roman heathen Empire, and so strong
was this beast (the Pope) in his Popedom, that none was able to make war with
him; Emperors had the worst, and their necks have been trodden upon, and glad
they were to kiss his feet.

X. A mouth, that is, ability to declare his pleasure, and power was given to
the same by the flattery of some learned men, by base fear of other some, by
the wicked decrees of Councels, and by Kings yielding their power and kingdom
to the beast: so as great things and very blasphemies were commanded, taught
and maintained by this Antichristian Hierarchy; for the particulars of these
great things and blasphemies, read D. Downhams book of Antichrist, chap. 5.

XI. In this hautie state and proud blasphemous loftiness he has had his 42
months to continue, or 1260 days, to tread down Gods true Church, which are
prophetically put for years, which is the full time of this popish rule and
usurped power, now again greatly decayed, blessed be God.

XII. Of the Popes purple and scarlet colored garments, given (as they say) by
Constantine the Emperor unto Siluester the first, may we read in the Decret.
distinct. 96; and how bloud-red this Popedom has been made by the wars
raised against the Saints, the stories do show.

XIII. This pontifical dignity and power has been over all kindreds, tongues
and nations, this is the Universality which this beast has, and we yield to
the Popedom.

XIV. This Antichristian authority bears up that whorish religion, for the
woman Babylon sits thereon, as is noted chap. 17. 4.

XV. The Popes dominion was the next (to the heathen Emperors) that spread out
it self from Rome, so considered is the beast that was, vz. in the beginning
to rise, but is not, upon the comming-in of the Goths and Vandals was
overthrown for a time, and so in men's opinions seemed not to be, for that
Gensericus bereaved Rome of every dweller: Totilas made it a wilderness, as
Bloudus witnesses in his book of Decad. And Adaulphus so destroyed Rome, as
she was minded to change her name to Gothia; so the reign of these Goths
darkened the rising of (this new dominion) the Popedom, which yet is had a being
in the time of this Gothian fury, and so was the seventh head: but the Pope
arising and recovering his begun dignity, curing the wound given, and being
established in his Popedom, ruling over Kings and Emperors, was now as another
government, and state from the former, and so in account the eighth, and yet of
the seven; to show, that though he be the eighth now, he is one of the seven,
as before he was, retaining the right in the Roman Kingdom, which one of the
seven heads, and not the eighth, must do, for that the beast has but seven
heads. And this is the reason, why he says he is the eighth, and one of the
seven; to show (I say) that being thus the eighth, yet he held the place among
the seven heads, and so his right to the beast, that is, to the Roman
kingdom, and not to put us into doubt, which of the seven he should be; when
it is evident, that the Caesar's were the sixth head in John's days, and the
Popes Ecclesiastical jurisdiction following upon the translation of the Empire
was the seventh, as our Sovereign most learned in these mysteries, in his
Apology affirms. For if the Apol. page 81.
Goths and that rabble had been the seventh, how could this be the eight, and
one of the seven? there should have been no room for him there then, all the
places in full order being taken up before him. And if we note it, though it
be said one of his heads was wounded, chap. 13. 3, without naming which; yet
it is said, it was his own deadly wound, meaning the wound of him which now is
the eighth, and which John in all this type points us unto. Therefore was he
one of the heads in the time of the wound given by the sword, which head though
wounded, yet did live, chap. 13. 14: by which it is evident, that this beast
was in the seventh head, is not in respect of the deadly wound received in that
head, in which he was to have his being, and now might seem hopeless of that
being, and yet is by being alive, that is, retaining life still under that
deadly wound: which coming to be cured, and having gotten now an addition of
temporal power (in this his second appearing) to his former Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, he was the eighth and one of the seventh, even indeed the
seventh, which was in the view of the world, but of a short continuance, and so
scarcely taken notice of, to be any head at Rome succeeding the Emperors.

Lastly, this beast for all his great power and glory goes into perdition, in
him this Romish dominion must come to ruin. And do not we see, blessed be
God, do all the Papists in the world what they can, that this Popedom
decaieth daily, and shall so do, even to utter perdition? And thus have I
showed, the Pope in his Popedom and the beast to be all one: therefore the
beast being Antichrist, the Pope must needs be so also; so much for the first
argument from the beast arising out of the sea, to prove the Pope that
Antichrist, for a greater then this beast never was, nor shall be, as that
which has been said sufficiently makes manifest.

Quest. If this beast be the Popedom, and not the Heathen Empire; why is it
said that he has seven heads and ten horns, as that had?

Answ. Indeed, by this likeness in the number of heads and horns it has
passed along, by a mistaking at the first, from hand to hand, in the pen of
almost all Expositors, that hereby is typed out the Roman heathen Empire: but
we see by the difference so great between this beast and the Dragon, as also
by other reasons, that they cannot be both one, though they do agree in these
things, which agreement is made only to declare, how he is the Dragons
substitute. For it is said, chap. 13. 3. Why the Dragon and Beast agree in
seven heads and ten horns.
I. That the Dragon gave him his power, that is, leave, way, and withal,
ability to succeed him; because what he had, he gave to this beast, to make
him great: thus is the word taken, chap. 17. 13. for when the Dragon (called
the Devil and Satan) chap. 12. 9. in the Heathen Emperors, was cast out from
Rome, there was leave and way for this beasts entrance in, and the Devil by
all his force and subtilties gave power and strength to this beast, to take
possession of that place, in stead of the heathen persecuting Tyrants. II. He
gave him his seat, hence is it, that this beast has seven heads, because Rome
is his seat, where the Emperors sat, being situate upon seven hills, chap.
17. 9. and because of the seven kind of governments at Rome. III. Great
authority: Now to express this, this beast also has ten horns, and the same
crowned, which are ten Kings, chap. 17. 12. by whose great authority he
gets victory and prevails against all that rose up against him. Thus we
see the text takes away this mist, which has been before the eyes of many
Interpreters.

II. Argument proouing the Pope (out of this The second argument, that the Pope
is that Antichrist.
book) to be Antichrist, is fetched from his seat at Rome thus: He that is
the lively head of that Church, which professing Christ is against Christ and
his Church, is that Antichrist. This is clear from the like nature of the true
head and body together; for if the body be against Christ, the head by which
that body lives and moves, must needs be against Christ. But the Pope is
the head of that Church, which professing Christ is against Christ and his
Church. For he is the head of the Romish Church, and that City, which first
is mystical Babylon, the whorish woman, chap. 17. 5. 18. as has been proved,
and the same also opposite to the true Church, as is also before fully showed.
Therefore is the Pope of Rome that Antichrist. If any say, that they are not
Antichristians, neither he Antichrist that makes a profession of Christ, for
Antichrist must be one in opposition to Christ. I answer, that the preposition
(...), notes not only an opposition, as in the word (...), to resist and stand
against, Matthew. 5. 39. as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, 2. Tim. 3. 8. but
it notes the putting of one thing for another by way of exchange, as Esau sold
his birthright (...) for a morsel of meat, Hebr. 12. 16. The Pope herein is
Antichrist, being more profane then Esau, in changing Christ's Spouse, the true
Church, for y^ whore of Babylon, the false Church. Also it notes one to be in
the place of another, thus Archilaus reigned (...) in the room of Herod,
Matthew. 2. 22. And thus is the Pope Antichrist, even a proud Archilaus, ruling
as a Prince over Gods people; and as wicked Herod, pretentending to such as
seek Christ, to be his Vicar, and to desire to worship him, when indeed he
seeks to murder Christ, in his members, as Herod did seek the life of
Christ himself, and to destroy him did put to death many innocents, as this
Herodian Antichrist, or Antichristian Herod the Pope has done. If these
adversaries reply, that (...) may note subordination in opposition, yet not in
composition, I answer, what is (...), but one case for another? (...), such
things as are ordained in the new Testament for those that were in the old time
before, 1. Pet. 3. 21? Therefore albeit he proclaim himself Christ's Vicar,
and those of his kingdom to be Christians, yet he being against Christ
indeed, and his, the false Church also, as is proved, he is Antichrist, and
they (the Papists) Antichristians.

III. Argument in this book, is in chap. 13. 11, The third argument, proving
the Pope that Antichrist.
where mention is of another beast, from which I reason thus: This beast is
that grand Antichrist, so Bellarmine says all men do confess, lib. 3. cap.
10. and 15. de Pontif. Romans and if any should deny it, the text it self
makes this proposition sound. For he that exercises all the power of the
kingdom of Antichrist, is Antichrist: but this beast does so, chap. 13. 11.
for he exercises all the power of the first beast, which I have proved to be
the kingdom of Antichrist, or Roman Ecclesiastical state under him: therefore
is this beast Antichrist. Again, this beast gives life to that state, chap.
13. 15. and with this beast that state is overthrown, chap. 19. 20: therefore
is this the head thereof, and that very Antichrist. Many other arguments may be
urged from the text, but these two shall suffice to confirm what is already
granted. But the Pope of Rome is this beast. Therefore that grand Antichrist.
He that is the eighth and one of the seven, is this beast. This is also
acknowledged by Bellarm. lib. de Pont. Romans 3. cap. 10. 15. from chap. 17. 10.
where the first beast, chap. 13. 1. with chap. 17. 3. with this head (the
eighth and one of the seven) are made one and called the beast, that is, the
head with the body, the King with his kingdom, the Antichrist with his
dominion. But the Pope of Rome is the eighth and one of the seven. This I
before have showed, how he in his Pontificalitie and Popedom is this beast,
accounted the eighth and one of the seven. Therefore is he this beast, which
fully appears in this, that the Pope in all things is like this beast, as his
Popedom is like the other beast.

THE TRVE LIKENESS AND FVLL agreement of the Pope and this beast, showing them
to be one and the same in substance.
Verse. 11. This comes out of the earth. The Popes original is earthly, The
second beast (chap. 13. 11.) and the Pope are one and the same.
by earthly means and favor of earthly men, who were seduced and gave their
power to him, chap. 17. 12. He has two horns like a Lamb. The Pope is but
in show a Lamb, he is indeed (...), a ravening beast, having two horns, a
double power, Ecclesiastical and temporal. And he spoke as the Dragon.
Empiring peremptorily, commanding, decreeing, and ordaining as heathen
Emperors did, what he pleases without all control, teaching damnable and
devilish doctrine. Verse. 12. And be exercises all the power of the first
beast before him. And whatsoever is the power of the Popedom, that does he (as
head and chief) exercise in the highest places of that state, even before him,
that is, at Rome the very face (as I may say) of that Antichristian dominion;
so that, the other beast, the Popedom, is but as a dead thing, without this
beast (the Pope) who works all in all therein. And causes the earth, and
them that dwell therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was
healed. So the Pope caused all earthly Christians and worldly minds to admire
(as verse. 3.) and to worship that Roman power and dominion set out under the
former beast, after that it was recovered from under that misery and deadly
wound received by the Goths and other barbarous nations. Verse. 13. And he does
great wonders, so that he makes fire come down from heaven on earth, in the
sight of men. The Pope becomes a false prophet, and does great wonders, chap.
19. 20: and thus learned men commenting upon this place show out of histories,
and give instances of the kind here mentioned, in Hildebrand, Zacharias, and
Innocentius bringing fire from heaven. Verse. 14. And deceineth the^ that dwell
on the earth, by the means of those miracles, which he had power to do in
the sight of the beast. But it was to deceive worldlings, such as had submitted
to that state, chap. 19. 20. and were not in the Lambs book of life, chap.
13. 8. as all the Popes and fained miracles of Papists have been done ever, to
misleade the people, read their Legenda, which was to uphold lying doctrines,
Idolatry, and false worship. Saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they
should make an Image to the beast, which had a wound by a sword and did live.
This beast (the Pope) wrought miracles, and withal adjoined thereto his
doctrine, declaring whereto his miracles tended, even to bring to pass this,
to wit, that the people would make an Image to the former beast, that is, to
his Popedom; which is nothing else, but that means, by which his Popedom,
and pontifical state might (by the remembrance thereof) be had in authority
with men. For so the word Image is taken for power and authority, represented
in one that has power and authority over another, 1. Cor. 11. 7. Now what
other thing then is this Image, but one The Image of the Beast, what it is.
of these two? either first (as the Pope would persuade the people to believe)
Peter's supremacy Apostolical, from Christ Jesus over all the Apostles and
Churches of God, and so he Christ's Vicar on earth. This Image, the Pope did
striue-for long, and at length obtained it; for the beast (after the deadly
wound was healed, and the people also believing the same, and yielding to it,
which was their making of it) had his triple crown, and his cross keys for
his arms; then sat the whore upon the beast, arraied gloriously, for the
people worshipped this Image, giving to this Church, gold, pearls, and
precious stones. Indeed the Pope, by obtaining the Image to be set up, even to
be above all Churches in his Popedom, made Rome to be as a Queen, cap. 18.
7. yet a queen for all that. cap. 17. 1. being a Catholic, that is, a common
whore with all she could allure to her, cap. 17. 2. Now that this obtained
prerogative is an Image, is plain, not only by the use of the word, as before
is noted, but also in the common acception thereof, for a likeness and
resemblance of one thing to another: for a Vicar, is an Image of him in whose
place he is; then here is, as the beast persuades the earthly sort, Christ's
Vicar; first Peter in his supremacy, and the Pope his successor sitting in
Peter's chair, with the cross keys in his hand, and triple crown upon his
head; all which, in the minds of such as believe this, is an Image of the
authority, antiquity, and glory of the Popedom; which this beast will have
to be believed, by all the wonders that he can work, without which (indeed)
his dominion would come to nothing quickly. And here we may see, how the Dragon
(the devil) makes How Heathen and Christen Rome under the Pope, agree.
Christian Rome, and Heathen Rome alike: in Heathen Rome there belonged to it a
great dominion; so to the Christian, a Popedom: in the Heathen were Emperors,
in the Christian, Popes: the Emperors were Empiring in their dominion over all
Kings and kingdoms; so these Popes Empire over all Kings and kingdoms: they
had titles given, by which they claimed and held sovereignty over all; so have
these this their title, by which they claim and usurp authority over all. Or
secondly, this Image is a representative power (agreed unto by the people, and
so established by the Pope) of such persons, as were most fit for the
maintenance of the Popedom: hence arose the Spanish Inquisition, a lively
Image of the cruel beast. Reu. 11. 7. Verse. 15. And he had power to give life
unto the Image of the beast, that the Image should both speak, and cause that
as many as would not worship the Image of the beast, should be killed. After
the Pope had gotten up this Image, to the honor of the Popedom, he wanted not
power then to give life, that is, power to move, and to do actions of life for
selfe-preseruation, and the state; making it speak, that is, making decrees,
laws, canons, constitutions, and sending forth edicts all from this
supremacy, and authority over the Churches, Kings, and kingdoms, and if any
withstood this authority, and would not worship the same, the Pope, (as a
Nabuchadnezzar, that had his Image despised, would cause this authority to be
of force against them, and so to be put to death: of which, stories give
plentiful examples, as well in most mighty, as other mean persons. Verse. 16.
And he caused all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads. The Pope, because
he would be sure to know his own, devised a mark for his subjects, without
respect of person, for all and every of them to receive; that so, either by
some act, or by outward profession, they might (as by a mark) be known to
belong unto his kingdom. Verse. 17. And that no man might buy or sell, save he
that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. Yea,
so peremptory has this beast (the Pope and false prophet) been, since the
making of the Image, as none might buy or sell within his dominion, but such as
professed, or did some way show themselves members of the Roman Church, and
subjects to the Pope, of which the world can speak, and stories do hereof bear
witness.

Thus we see this beast, and the Pope to be both one; and therefore that grand
Antichrist.

IV. and last argument is from chap. 9. verse. 1. The fourth argument, that the
Pope is that Antichrist.
and verse. 11. that the Pope is Antichrist, which I will only but propound for
brevity sake in these forms. The star fallen from heaven to the earth is
that Antichrist, as may appear by his authority given him, and effects
thereof; But the Pope of Rome is the star fallen from heaven to the earth,
that is, from the true and heavenly Church, to the false and earthly, as his
doctrines, now held and taught by him, contrary to the doctrine of the Church
of Rome, taught in S. Paul's Epistle written to the true and heavenly Church
then, do plainly euince.

The doctrine of The now present Church of Rome is Apostated from the Church at
Rome, in Saint Paul's time.
the Church of Rome, in Saint Paul's time. THE DOCTRINE of the now Romish
Church. 1. That Church might err, as well as other have done, cap. 11. 20. 21.
22. The present Roman Church, nor head nor members can err; n^ll^ casu, in no
case the Pope, because he is supreme Judge of faith and manners; Bellar. de
Romans Pont. lib. 4. cap. 1. 3.
nor Councels particular, if he approve them; nor general, if he confirm
them, Idem lib. 1. de council. et ^ccles. ap. 25.
surely not their particular Roman Church, that is, their people and clergy
cannot err in the faith Idem de Rom: Pont. Ib. 4. cap. 4^
. 2. That Saint Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, cap. 11. 13. and 15. 16.
19. 20. and was at Rome. Act. 28. The Pope styles Peter universal Bishop,
though the Scripture call him the Apostle of circumcision, and though it do no
where expressly teach that Peter was ever at Rome. Hence their outcry, that
we are pernicious heretics, to deny Peter his headship, whereas; they say,
Christ established the same Idem lib. 1. ^e summo Pont. cap. 10.
. Hence they call Peter the Ordinary shepherd, and head, upon whom even the
Apostles depended, the Rock of the Church, the only person upon whom the
keys were immediately, truly, and principally bestowed Idem lib. 1. de Pont.
ca. 12.
. Hence rather then fail, to prove him to have bin at Rome, they confess
Rome to be figured and meant, in the name both of that Babylon whence Peter
wrote, as also that Babylon in the Apocalypse Idem lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 2.
. As for his presence at Rome, judicious and learned Calvin holds the whole
matter doubtful, and questionable Caluins Inst. lib. 4 cap. 6.. 15.
. But Illyricus says, that it is a certain demonstration that he was never
at Rome Illyric. lib. cont. primat. Papae.
. And Velenus by eighteen motives has so cleared that demonstration, as that
it has not hither to by any adversary (that I know) been sufficiently
disproued (...) presso^^^
. 3. That Church and all thereof, were taught to be, and so were, subject to
the civil power and worldly Rulers, cap. 13. 1. 2-7. The Pope and his Clergy
exempt themselves from duties, tribute, custom, fear and honor in true
subjection to Kings, and temporal authority. He will tread in the necks of
Kings, and sway their Scepters, taking the words of the Psalmist as literally,
as did Alexander the third, treading upon the neck of Frederick the first
Emperor, saying the words of the Psalm in extreme pride and high blasphemy,
super aspidem and basiliscum, etc. He will have the Emperor, and Kings to wait
on him, and to hold his stirrup Lib. sacrae. ceremon.
. But how excessive is that pride and usurpation, when alone, without the
Council, he has power to depose Kings and Emperors, to substitute Legates,
and protectors, and co-adiutors at his pleasure Lancellot. concord.
: to transfer Empires, Kingdoms, principalities, from race to race, not
only among Christians, Heretics, and Schismatickes Bellar. de translat.
Imperij.
; but even throughout the whole world, as Lord and sovereign of the world
Jacob de Terano, cited in the re^ision of the Council of Trent. lib. 2.
? and these are not words only, but this sovereignty he did put in execution,
Anno dom. 1493. Alexander the sixth, bestowing all the territories and
dominions of the poor barbarous Princes of the West, upon Fordinande of
Aragon; as some other, both of his predecessors and successors, have given away
Christian Kingdoms, yea the Empire, in their displeasures. And as himself
withdraws his obedience, in like manner he exempteth his whole Clergy; so
that his Clerks offending the Prince his laws, may not be judged by the
secular power Bellar. lib. 1. de clericis, cap. 28.
. Yea one dare to affirm, That it is better that sins should rest
unpunished, then such immunities and privileges should be cancelled Ioh.
Mariana Iesuita, lib. de Rege and lib. 1. cap. 10.
. As their persons, so their goods also they challenge to be exempted, whether
they be secular, or Ecclesiastical, from tribute unto Princes Bellar. lib. 1.
de cler. cap. 28. propos. 5.
. 4. All true believers in Christ, then were Saints, chap. 1. 7. and 8. 27. and
15. 31. The Pope will have those only to be generally throughout the whole
Church, esteemed, and without all doubt to be believed for such, whom he only
canonizeth for Saints Bellar. lib. 1. de beat. sanct. cap. 8.
: yet it is a confessed case, that the first Pope which invented this
canonization was Leo the third Idem eodem cap.. Dices.
, even some 800. years after Christ: and the pretended saint may also be a
limb of the devil, as may seem by the view of the lives of Saint Francis
Hospiniam lib. de origin Monachatus.
; and Saint Thomas of Canterbury Histories of England.
. Yet forsooth we must believe in every such canonization (yea though it be,
perhaps) the sainting of Henry Garnet, or Catesby, or Faulx, and such like
monstrous traitors) that the Pope cannot err Bellar. lib. 1. de beat. sanct.
cap. 9.
. 5. They were taught and bel^eued, that by works then none were justified,
Romans 3. 20. and 8. 3. and 9. 31. 32. and 11. 6. The Pope teaches, and his
believe and profess, that they shall be saved by their works, and attain
eternal life thereby. That their good works after justification, are truly
properly deseruings, or merits, not of any slender reward, but of eternal life
it self Bellar. lib. 5. de ius^^. cap. 1.
. That to have confidence toward God, a man must seek after such merits, and
may also safely trust in them Idem lib 5. de (...) cap. 7. propo^ 1. 2.
. That the works of love deserve eternal life by inward value, worth,
proportion to the reward Idem lib. 5. cap. 16.
. Nay, that an unreconciled wicked man may in a congruitie, deserve the grace
of justification Idem. lib. 5. cap. 20.
. 6. They were taught, and believed, that by preaching, and hearing the word of
God, faith was wrought, Romans 10. 14. 15. 17. The Pope, with his, teach and
believe, that there is no absolute need of Scriptures Bellar lib. 4. de verbo
Dei non scripto.
: they keep the word of God from the people, by not suffering the Scriptures
to be translated into known tongues, and to come abroad, holding them to be not
only not profitable, but hurtful to Gods people Bellar. lib. 2. de verbo Dei.
cap. 15.
; using unknown tongues to them in their divine service, and prayers: as
namely, Hebrew, Greek, or Latin; approouing the faith of the Colliar, pinned
upon the unknown infolded belief of the Church, affirming, that faith is
better defined by ignorance, then by knowledge Bellar lib. 1. de iustif. cap. 7.
. 7. They believed, and were taught, that religion stood not in difference of
days, and meats. Romans 14. 5. 6. 14. 17. The state and Church of the Papacy
believe and teach, that there is holiness and religion to be put in observing
of days, ordained by man, being celebrated ( ratione mysterij) more sacred and
holy then other days, and a part of Gods worship Bellar. 3. lib. de cultu
sa^ct. a cap. ^^. ad finem.
. That the observation of such days is well enjoined by the Church, by a law
binding conscience Idem ibid. cap. 10.
. Likewise the like holiness is taught amongst them, to consist in the
difference of meats; commanding, that who so fasteth according to the manner
and form of the Church, should make choice of his meats, but especially take
heed to abstain from flesh Idem lib. 2. de bonis operibus in partic. cap. 1.
and at large, cap. 5.
. 8. They were taught, and believed, that all borne of a woman, Jews and
Gentiles, are sinners, Romans 3. 9. 19. 23. and 5. 12. The Pope and his, believe
and teach, that it is an holy opinion probable, yea more probable then the
contrary, that the Virgin Mary was without sin, both actual and original
Idem lib. 4. de amiss. gratiae et statu pe^cati. cap. 15. 16.
; albeit she with her own mouth acknowledged the contrary, Luke 2. 9. They
were taught and believed, that every sin is deadly, Romans 6. 23. yea Original
sin, Romans 5. 14. and 7. 7. 17. 24. The Pope and his Church teach and believe,
that some sins are venial, and pardonable in their whole kind, not
disagreeing with the love of God or man, though their object be disorder or
evil. Again, that some are pardonable, through the imperfection of their
work, either as they overtake him at unawares, or as the matter wherein they
are committed is of little or no value: and thus idle words, excessive and
foolish laughter, ill motions of the heart, filching and stealing small matters
are accounted pardonable. Bellarm. de amiss. great. and stat. peccat. lib. 1.
cap 3.
Moreover, concupiscence or natural corruption, is so lightly esteemed, as it
is not to be thought original sin, nor to be imputed for sin, nor
possible in justice to be imputed for sin, but in it own nature to be no
manner sin at all, Idem lib. 5. cap. 5. de amiss. great. and statu peccat.
. 10. They were taught and believed, that they were to avoid such as served
their own bellies, and caused division and offenses contrary The Pope with
his Ecclesiastiques serve only their own bellies, as may appear by the
complaint of their own friends. A Secretary of the Popes says, in the
universal Church, from the head to the sole of the foot, there is no part
sound. Theodor. a Nihem. de schism. lib. 2. cap. vlt.
A learned Bishop to the doctrine, which they had learned. Roman. 16. 17. 18.
of France, besides his own complaints, has filled 10, or 11 pages with the
verses of Baptist Mantuan an Italian, and a Prier Carmelite, which speak of
nothing more, then the vices, abuses, abominations of the Popes and Courts of
Rome. Espencaeus ad Com. in epist. ad Titum digres. 2. page 76. etc.
A Cardinal says, All care is for the temporal estate, and none for the
spiritual. The best and the fat, which the Emperors gave and ordained for the
service of God, and public good; is so imbezeled by colorable pretenses and
new tricks, (since lust and avarice stole in) that what was imperial is
become Papal, and the spiritual is become temporal. Cusanus lib. 3 de
concor. cap. 29 as he is alleged, lib. 1. Reuil. of the Trident. Council,
cap. 3.
An Augustine Friar speaking of ye Church, which was so much abased and
degenerated, that from gold by degrees it came to clay and dirt, asks this
question, What is baser then dirt? and thus he answers; I remember my self,
it is the dung wherein the whole Court walloweth. Theodoric. vric. de consol.
Eccl. ad Sigismundum Imperatorem, cited by Paulus Langius in Chronico Citizensi
sub anno Dom. 1404.
And as they live in this manner, so they rend and divide the Christian world,
causing scandal, division and sedition, contrary to the doctrine taught and
learned out of this Epistle to the Romans. Who was the cause of those horrible
tragedies in Sicilia long since, when the French were cut in pieces in one
night? Paulus Aemylius.
Who gave counsel and armed the French at the marriage of Hen. the 3, to commit
that barbarous massacre? Invent. of France.
Who strengthened the Spanyard against France, stirred him up against the
English, enraged him against his own subjects the united Provinces? Who
praised the murderers of Hen. the 3 of France? Whence Meteranus his history
of the Low Countries.
came the blow, which took away blood and life at once from the last Henry?
Where had the intended unmatchable powder treason, counsel, comfort, pardon
aforehand, Proceedings against Garnet.
and promise of eternal reward, if not from this spring of murder and blood
the Pope? Not to speak of an Hildebrand, that sets son against the
father, subject against the Prince, brother against brother, since for these
many hundred years the very seat and state of the Roman Church has bin as a
brand of hell fire, to consume every friend and opposite.

Thus in these and many more points of great weight do they teach and believe,
contrary to the ancient Church of Rome in S. Paul's time; and therefore has the
Pope and his people fallen from that first true and heavenly Church, to a false
and earthly. Therefore is he the star fallen, and that Antichrist. Again, to
conclude this point: The king of the Locusts is that Antichrist for he is the
Angel of the bottomless pit, and also the beast ascending out of it, chap.
11. 7. and 17. 8. But the Pope of Rome is the king of the Locusts; for these
Locusts are his creatures, and he is Apollyon a destroyer, as all his doctrine,
worship, bloody persecutions, massacres, treasonable practices in his approved
servants, set on by him to stab, poison and otherwise to murder Kings at his
command, do publish to the world. Therefore is he that grand Antichrist. And
thus it appears fully and plainly by this book to all us Protestants that
do see, and to any Papist that will see, that the Pope is Antichrist, that
Rome is Babylon, that very Church the Whore, and all thereof Antichristians.

Quest. Some perhaps here will ask me, if the true Church be so lively here
painted out, and this Antichristian state of Rome so plainly discovered, as I
seem to make it; why do not the Papists themselves, especially the learneder
sort of them, see the same and come out of Babylon?

Answ. Many reasons there be for this, and to give the Reader satisfaction,
that he may not stumble hereat, as many do, (who do so behold men, their
place, their learning, and seeming devotion, as they are therewith carried
away, because they ignorantly know not, or carelessly regard Reasons why the
learneded Papists come not out of Babylon.
not to know, the true reasons of this their so continuing in such a damnable
estate) let him consider seriously of these reasons.

I. Because Rome is an enticing whore, beautiful, 1. Reason, Rome is an
enticing whore.
rich, and of great authority, chap. 17. 2. and 19. 2. and makes her lovers
drunk with the wine of her fornication, and carries them away with her
delights, chap. 17. 2. and 18. 3. We see that a man addicted to whoredom, and
led with such an enticing whore, and made drunk by her; can he in that state
forsake her? Yea though he sometime awake and consider with himself of his
estate, yet as long as she is with him, he still yields, as Samson to a
Dalilah, till he come to destruction. Such is the state of the great pompous
Clergy and Clerks of Rome; and therefore no marvel they return not, being
drunk with the pleasures, profits and honors of that state, and living
deliciously with that enticing stately Queen and mother of harlots, who has
variety of whorish tricks to retain her best beloved lovers.

II. Because this book of the Revelation 2. Reason, they cannot understand
this book.
was sent from God to his own servants, to be showed to them, and not to the
wicked, though never so witty bondslaues of Antichrist, branded with his
character and mark, chap. 1. 1. to whom it is not given to know the secrets of
the kingdom of heaven, but only to the flock of Christ and his chosen ones.
Matthew. 13.

III. Because they be of the world, and cannot receive the spirit of truth,
Ioh. 14. 17: neither can 3. Reason, they cannot receive the spirit of truth.
they believe, because they receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor which comes from God only. Ioh. 5. 44. 4. Reason, they feign a false
Antichrist.


IV. Because they be like the Scribes and Pharisees, who could speak of their
Messiah; but yet when he came, some would not acknowledge him through
infirmity, fearing to be put out of the Synagogue, and because they loved the
praise of men more then the praise of God, Ioh. 12. 42. 43: so some believe us
to be in the truth, and themselves out of the way; yet for fear to lose their
places and credits with that state, they confess not the truth.

Some other would not acknowledge Christ of mere envy and malice, convicted
of the truth in their own consciences; some such also there may be, whose
state is most damnable. Othersome there are, and these the most of the learned
sort, who like as the Jews did acknowledge the Messiah in the Scriptures, yet
framed a Christ and his kingdom out of their own brains, such a one as the
Scriptures never taught; whereby the people misled, could not know Christ
indeed, but then did, and yet do expect the coming of such a one, whereas
Christ was already come, and was among them. Even so these learned Papists,
though they acknowledge that the grand Antichrist is in this book; yet for
that they have framed such an Antichrist out of their own wicked wits, as the
book does not lay open unto us, they expect him to come, who indeed and truth
is their head in the midst among them: and so by their false doctrine of
Antichrist, and by their wilful opposing the light clearly discovering him,
they wretchedly keep the poor seduced people blind, that they cannot see how
they live under, in stead of Christ's Vicar, the very Vicar of the Devil, the
grand Antichrist and Pope of Rome.

V. Because in general the things that belong 5. Reason, that is hid from them
which they should know.
to the peace of that people are hid from their eyes, in Gods secret counsel,
as once from Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42, though plainly enough then by Christ
foretold, that that Antichristian state might come to destruction, and the word
of the Lord be fulfilled, according as here in this book he plainly
foretells, that so due vengeance may be taken thereof, for the blood of the
Saints and servants of Christ shed upon the earth. What God has decreed shall
come to pass: the wicked will not have that grace to foresee betime, and
prevent by amending, but through vnbeleese will go on in sin and perish. Did
not the Lord say plainly that the dogs should eat Iesabel, and that in the
gates of Iesrael? was it not plain enough? yet neither she, nor her 400
priests of Baal took heed thereunto to prevent it, but rather soothed her up
in her wickedness, and secured her in sin, till the day of her destruction. So
shall it verily fall out with this Iesabel of Rome, who is plainly told of her
destruction, cap. 17. 18. and 19; yet by the soothing of her Baals priests they
make her secure, till a day come that God shall raise up a Iehu to revenge his
quarrel upon the head of them all, to their ruin and overthrow; which the
Lord Jesus haste^, even so Amen.

VI. Because these great Clerks simply seek 6. Reason, they seek not after
the truth.
not the truth, but the glory and maintenance of their state, as appears by
their dealings: I. In withholding the word from the people. II. In maintaining
a corrupt translation. III. In only allowing those truths which serve to uphold
their state, but opposing, teaching and practicing contrary to any evident
truth, which may any way cross their Antichristian doctrine and government,
and idolatrous worship and superstitious practices; approve they will not any
truth against them, but what they are forced unto for common shame. IV. In
perverting the truth, by wicked and most false distinctions, playing fast and
loose, as they list and like of. V. In falsifying Councels, corrupting Fathers,
pretending their authority, where they make for them, (whether the writing,
whence the testimony is fetched, be true or false, they care not): but if any
Council or Father be against them, they by one device or other shake off the
authority. VI. In upholding their state and the credit thereof by counterfeit
miracles, lying signs, forged devices, humane traditions, legends of lies,
treachery, treasons, murders, sorceries and open rebellions. The truth of
these things are to be either read in stories, or seen in their daily
disputatio^s against us, or else are well enough known to us all, by their
courses and continual practices among us, and therefore no marvel that these
come not out from that Romish Antichristian state.

VII. Because they seek to expound this book only by mere wit, and by their
only humane learning, 7. Reason, they of purpose obsture the truth.
and by sole testimonies of men consenting with them, the truth thereof, their
comments hereupon do plainly show; by which only natural and outward helps,
they are so far from opening the book, and declaring the truth thereof, as
they may seem to any judicious reader, to endeavor of set purpose to cover
their Antichristian state, to obscure utterly the Text, and to bury the truth
it self, that it may never come to the light. They should know, that though
wit and reason be necessary, learning in tongues and arts be very needful,
much reading in histories, and the labors of godly and learned men cannot be
wanting; yet if one thing be wanting, all these are of no efficacy or
forcible effect, to open unto us the mysteries of God in this book. The author
must be the reuealer, even the holy spirit, without which we cannot conceive
the things herein delivered. John must be in the spirit, to see things
present, cap. 1. 10. He must be in the spirit to see things to come, chap. 4.
2. to see the whore of Babylon and her damnation, chap. 17. 3. and to see the
spouse of Christ, the new Jerusalem, chap. 21. 10. Spiritual things are
spiritually discerned, 1. Cor. 2. and by the spirit must be taught, without
which, though the words be never so easy and plain, the reader shall not see
what is before him. If God open not our eyes, we shall remain blind, and not
behold what is before us in the open Sunshine.

Let me here demand of such as do stumble at No reason to stumble at the
Papists blindness.
the blindness of the Papists yet, in the clear light of truths, as if it
still were of force to make them to doubt, whether their state be so bad, as we
show it to be, or no; let me (I say) ask them: I. why Why men remain ignorant
of apparent truth.
did not the people in Moses days know the Lord, who so apparently showed
himself unto them by miracles, and wonders, by judgments and strange
deliverances, the like never seen nor heard of? was it not (as Moses says,
Deuteronomy. 29. 4.) because God gave them neither eyes to see, nor ears to hear,
nor hearts to perceive? II. Why did not the foolish Idolaters discern their
gross folly Why Jdolaters discern not their madness and folly.
and madness, when they bowed unto a piece of wood, worshipped it, and prayed
unto it, desiring deliverance from it, as God; which Idol themselves made with
their own hands, yea and of the same matter which they made it of, they took
and turned to othervses? does not the Prophet give a reason? Because God (says
he) has Esa. 44. 17.* 20.
shut up their eyes, that they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot
understand, nor consider what they do, a deceived heart has turned them
aside: read the place, and weigh it well. III. If Why Balaams Ass saw, what
his master could not see.
any yet think, because they be such great Clerks, that it should not be
possible for them not to see, what other seely ones do see, I ask them; why
Numb. 22.
did the poor and seely Ass see and speak before his master Balaam? Was it
not for that God had opened the poor beasts eyes to see and avoid the peril,
and also his mouth, to speak unto his great master, so renouned with Balak,
and worldly potentates; who yet remained without the sight of that which the
Ass saw, though he wanted not his natural eyesight? The Lord hides his
counsels from the wise and prudent when he will, and reuealeth them unto
babes, and very asses, in comparison of these great and grand masters, high in
the eyes of earthly minds; because so it is his good pleasure. Mat. 11. 25. 26.

Object. But some (perhaps) may yet have one stumbling block before them, and
may say unto me; well, though this be a good satisfaction to any concerning
those that are in Babylon, of the Roman state, and never were of us; yet why
should such as be among us, some learned, some great persons, and others fall
off from us to them?
Answ. If any one propound this out of an honest Who they be, that be come now
in this so clear light, Apostates from us. Malcontents.
heart to resolve himself, then let him consider and be satisfied, and the
Lord persuade him as the truth is: Such as fall from us, are either
malcontents, high spirits, thinking better of themselves then they deserve of
the state, and wanting an answerablenesse to their own expectation; out they
go like malcontents, with ill intents. Or they be Busy headed,
quick-wicked.
Polypragmaticall fellows, and will have employments according to their
humors; and if not here, then in, and under that busy state, which by an
instrument will put an oar into every man's Nouices in religion.
boat, as we say: or they being young Nouices, travelers, not before well
grounded, (though some (perhaps) by good education well instructed) who by
vain sights, great shows of devotion, glorious outward worship, outward
works of great cost in that voluntary religion, and by quick-wicked wits,
instruments of seduction, cunning Artisans of Antichrist, christ, (pretending
antiquity, urging universality, alleging men's testimonies, and falsely
accusing us) are brought into a foolish conceit and approbation of that way,
and into an ungodly dislike of our holy profession, against al truth and verity
of Scripture. Such as had no love of the truth.
Or they be mere carnal prosessours formally, serving God in our Church; but
indeed never received any sincere love, of the truth, neither ever felt any
effectual power thereof; therefore God in his just judgment, sends them
strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they might be damned, 2.
Thessal. 2. 11. 12. Or they be Bad-liuers.
wicked livers here with us, either as open profane, or more closely vicious;
who (for that they, according to their knowledge and means of sanctification
offered, glorify not God, neither were thankful) do become vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart is darkened, and are given over of God,
Romans 1. 21. Or they be such, as in a wellmeaning Simple and ignorant.
(as men say) have a will to serve God, but yet know not how, for want of
illumination, and spiritual wisdom in heavenly things; and so by seducers,
Priests, Jesuits, and papisticall spirits, pretending antiquity of old
religion (which indeed is new) the custom of forefathers, and many such false
grounds, (the only grounds of Antichrists religion) are taken in the snare of
men's inventions, and are led by a false devotion, to death and damnation,
unless they repent. Or else they be such as have played the hypocrites with
God and men in this state, pretending to be of our Church, but indeed and
truth, Antichristians in their hearts; such as be all our Church-Papists at
this day among us. These are the Apostats from us to the Apostaticall Romish
Synagogue. See before who are Papists, and weigh the causes there.

Thus I have showed why some Papists, though learned, return not to us, and
why some miserable souls fall away from us, that we might not stumble at these
things, when the reasons truly laid down be well weighed, which (I hope) will
be of force to establish the heart of every true believer, and if God please,
may serve also to bring some back again, or at least be a means to prevent
others from falling; which God of his mercy grant.

Amen.
THE OPENING OF SAINT JOHN'S Mystical Revelation. THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.
The sum of this chapter.
This book, though it be held obscure, yet is it not soobscure, but by Gods
help, if not easily in all, yet even in the most things, it may be understood.

IT is too generally received an opinion, that this book is inextricable hard,
and the truth so infolded in obscurities, that it is not to be understood; so
as of most it is laid aside, as a sealed book, not to be unsealed, or almost
at all to be read. But that godly and studious Readers may be encouraged to
undertake the study hereof, with good hope to understand Reasons proving the
sum of the chapter.
what the Lord has herein signified, to be showed to us his people; let them
weigh these reasons.

I. The very title tells us, that it may be understood, 1. Reason, it is a
Revelation.
for it is a Revelation, that is, a discovering and making manifest of secret
and hidden things, cap. 1. 1. If it could not be understood, it should not be
answerable to the title, and might rather have been termed an Apocrypsis, then
an Apocalypsis.

II. It is unsealed by Christ himself to be read, 2. Reason, it is unsealed.
cap. 5. and a commandment is given, not to seal the sayings of the prophecy
of this book, cap. 22. 10. but if it be not to be understood, it is the words
of a sealed book, Esa. 29. 11.

III. The end why God sent it is, that his servants 3. Reason, sent to ^e
know^e.
should be acquainted with the things therein contained, cap. 1. 1. and 4. 1.
and 22. 6. Now this end should be frustrate, if it could not be understood;
shall any think God in vain gave it, or that John needlessly wrote it?

IV. The manifold exhortations so earnestly 4 Reason, exhortations to (...),
(...)
stirring us up to hear what the spirit says, chap. 2. 11. 17. 29. and the
promise of a blessing repeated, cap. 1. 3. and 22. 7. to the keepers of the
words thereof, do assure us that it may be understood, for what readers,
hearers, and doers are here to be understood, but such as be intelligent,
believing, and conscionable?

V. The holy Ghost himself (to further our understanding, ^
expounds plainly his own meaning in very many places, as in chap. 1. 13.
expounded in verse. 17. and verse. 12. and 16. expounded in verse. 20. so verse.
15. expounded in chap. 17. 15. the chap. 4. 4. expounded in chap. 19. 8. yea in
chap. 4. 5. and 5. 6. the exposition is with the words.

So chap. 13. 1. 2. expo. in chap. 17. 8. and 12. 3. expo. in verse. 9. and 17.
3. expo. in verse. 15. and so are many other places. Now if here any man ask
me, Why does not God expound all places, as well as some, if he would have it
understood? I answer, for that the Lord has given to his Church the gift of
interpretation, which he will have them to exercise, which she could not do,
if all were plain; and to shake off sloth. and to stir us up to a diligent
searching, invocation, and prayer, at Gods hand, to crave his aid, the grace
and assistance of his spirit to understand them.

VI. And lastly, diverse godly men have attained 6. Reason, the learned
commentaries of the godly.
to a great measure of understanding in much of it, in the most of those things
which are now come to pass, and have left their labors behind them to the
Church of Christ, of which we may have the benefit to further us very greatly,
to find out the true sense and meaning, by the good and blessed assistance of
Gods spirit.

Object. It is delivered in strange and obscure figures, as no true meaning can
be gathered thereof. The tropes and figures are not unusual.

Answ. I. The types and figures are no more strange here, then in other
places, as in Ezechiel, Daniel, and Zachary. II. Though it be delivered
mystically, and in figures, yet nothing is set down doubtfully, for this
should argue either uncertain knowledge in the author, or deceit; neither of
which we can impute to God without blasphemy. III. Albeit metaphorical
speeches, and allegor call discourses may have (in some sort) a double
understanding; yet the words weighed, as with a balance, in the circumstances
of the text, and proper scope with all, they have as certain a signification
as other places, and as direct an end; from which they cannot be drawn without
manifest absurdity; and therefore this is no reason to force such an
obscurity upon this book, as if it were not at all to be understood.

Object. If God would have had it known, John would not have penned it in such
a dark manner as it is.
Answ. I. John must write it as he sees it, and no John wrote so mystically in
three respects.
otherwise; as also the former Prophets did their visions. II. John here
pleases not himself, but is guided by the spirit of God, to set down the
matter in that form of words, as it seemed best to him, not to hide the truth
from Gods people, but for other respects in all probability; and first for 1.
Of Christ.
the safety of Christians, that the Heathen raging already enough against them,
might not understand, that Christians had any such book among them, as did
foretell their ruin to them, and deliverance in time from them. This was the
reason that S. Paul spoke so warily, and in such covert terms of the Emperors
remouall from Rome, in 2. These. 2. 7. And also why Daniel wrote his Prophecy,
some part in one tongue, and some in another, to conceal from the enemies,
what might have bin the cause of more mischief to the Jews, 2. Of
Antichristians.
the people of God then. Secondly, in respect of Antichristians, the now deadly
enemies to the Church, to whom it is not given to know the secrets of the
kingdom, but by parables and dark speeches; that so they seeing, might see,
and not perceive; and hearing, might hear, and not understand, lest at any
time they should be converted, and their sins forgiven them, Mark. 4. 11.
12. but they must go on still to fulfill, (as they do) the Lords secret
purpose, that their destruction may come upon them, as is here certainly
foretold. Thirdly, in respect of the Jews, Gods ancient 3. Of the Jews.
people, that they might see (as it were) a paraphrase of the Prophets, and a
spiritual application of the City, Temple, Altar, Elders, Prophets, Kings,
Priests, ceremonies, and service; from which (and the words of the Prophets)
all the frame of John's speech is fetched; that by this last book, thus clothed
in the Jews habit, they might learn, and The Jews shall return to the
truth, and be one people with us.
we might foresee, that at the last they shall come to us, and we to them, to
be one people to God in Jesus Christ; of which I am further persuaded by these
reasons: I. By their distinct preservation still, these 1600. years, in all
confusion of states under the Heathen Emperors, Saracens, Turks, and in all
other countries dispersed, and dwelling only by leave, the like never so seen
to befall a people (which was once a stately commonwealth) since the beginning
of the world. Which strange providence of God, may conclude some future good
unto them at length, seeing the Israelites of the ten Tribes once removed, were
no more any known distinct people, as these Jews yet be, but their name
perished among the nations very soon. II. By the words of S. Paul, Romans 11.
25. 26. 2. Cor. 3. 16. and the words of our Savior, Luke 21. 24. foretelling
their conversion. III. By the writings of the Prophets, Ezech. 37. 16. 17. etc.
Zach. 14. 7. 8. etc. and cap. 12. Esa. 60. and 61. and 62. not heretofore
fulfilled upon that nation; and therefore hereafter to be performed, for the
word of the Lord is true, and stands fast for ever. IV. The consent of godly
and learned men giving witness of their faith herein, from the place in Romans
11. 25. Thus may we see, why the spirit of God thus led John on in this kind
and manner of writing this Prophecy.

Object. The matter of this book is obscure and hard to be conceived.
Answ. I. All dogmaticall points, and moral, What matters in this book are
not obscure, Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 43.
are here as plainly set down, as in any other place of Scripture. II. That
also which is fulfilled has a clear and certain exposition, and may without
great difficulty be understood, as one says. III. Al generals are agreed upon,
that here is Christ, and his Church set out, and the enemies, the devil and
his instruments, Heathen Emperors, and Antichrist, of these be no doubt made,
either by Protestant or Papist; so as this matter is clear, though the
circumstances of the time and place concerning Antichrist, are not so easy of
all to be found, and to be fitly applied. Some actions both of the Church and
enemies are to be done, which yet are not come to pass, these must we be
content to guess at, till the very fulfilling of them expound to us the
prophecy in that behalf. We live now undoubtedly under the sound of the
seventh trumpet, and in the time of Antichrists consumption, the strength
whereof began about 1558. or 60. soon upon the beginning of the reign of the
late Queen of most blessed memory: if we reckon the 42. months of the beast
from after 300. years, when by Constantine the Dragon wa^ constrained to leave
Rome, and to substitute h(...) ^^ristian vicegerent in his Throne; since
w(...)e (inspight of Roman subtlety, Spanish power, and Jesuits villainy) he
has decayed, and oven our nation has obtained great victory against him. And
therefore we being now so long time hitherto under the seventh trumpet, in
which space the seven vials must be poured out, there is fulfilled a great part
of this prophecy, and the most of it thereby made clear unto us.

Object. Oh but (will some say) there is such disagreement among expositors,
even in things that may be thought to be past, as well as in those things yet
hereafter to be fulfilled, as we cannot but held it a book too obscure to be
meddled with.
Answ. This is no reason to condemn the book Differences in expositions may
not cause us to condemn the book of obscurity, nor dishart us from the study
thereof.
it self of such obscurity, but it rather discovers men's weakness in
mistaking the Lords meaning; the light is clear, if men have but eyes to see:
Hagar will be wailing for want of water, because she supposes there is not a
well of water, when yet it is before her, till the Lord open her eyes, and she
see it. But for further answer to this, we must know; I. That Expositors do
vary in some other books of Scripture, as well as in this, and the same
books, plain histories* therefore not obscure, though men in some things do
therein vary and differ in judgment, neither for this their difference, do
other cease to meddle with the book, or with that very place of difference.
II. As Expositors do in some things, in some places disagree, so in many
places they do well accord and agree in one. Therefore as their discord may
seem to withdraw us from the study of this book; so their unity and concord,
in the maine and principal things, should stir us up to the reading and
meditation of the same: and as their disagreeing may make men to think, that
those places wherein they agree not, are hard to be understood: so their own
and also full consent together, well grounded upon the text, may note to us, that
those places, wherein they so constantly agree, are easy to be understood.
III. Their differing opinions upon one place ought to be so far from making
any to think the meaning to be more hardly found out; as by their variable
interpretations thereupon, a wise and discerning Reader may peradventure find
out the the true sense: for among so many Expositions, some (perhaps) may hit
upon the true meaning of the place. Expositors show their judgments, and are
so far from obscuring a place to a godly and judicious Divine, as he may
read them as his friends, (if they be godly and holy men, and not malicious
peruerters of the truth) giving their best advice and counsel, for his better
understanding of the place in hand; therefore we see, that variety of
interpretations may not hinder us, or make us unwilling to study this book.

Object. Lastly, it may be demanded, if it may be understood now, why was it
not better understood of the ancient fathers, who were learned men, and lived
so near the time of the Apostle himself? surely it may be held, if they
understood it ^ot, as many do now say, let not men at this day think
themselves, so wise, so learned and so h^^y, as that they can now understand it
better then those so renowned men before them.
Answ. I answer thereto with the words of our most learned Sovereign: That
the Fathers of the first age, spoke of this matter, but only by conjectures,
whereas we speak of it by experience; for as one says, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 43.
All prophecies, before they have their efficacies, be riddles, and ambiguities
unto men: but when the time is come, that that which is prophesied be come to
pass, then have the prophecies a clear and certain exposition. Likewise
(says one of our learned Divines Whitak. de Pontif. To. q. 5. page 631.
speaking of Antichrist, the Pope of Rome) Surely we are not to be urged with
the testimony of Fathers, who in many things belonging to this question have
bin deceived, and have grossly erred, because they lived before Antichrists
coming. For as they were nearer We may understand this prophecy, though the
Fathers could not.
to the times of the Apostles, so much the more were they the further from
beholding the things fulfilled and done; and therefore less able to show the
true meaning, then we which have the fulfilling hereof (as it were) a good and
true exposition of the words before us. Therefore, albeit the fathers could not
then well understand this book, yet (without any derogation to their persons,
learning* and piety, and without any proud conceit of our selves now) men
learned and godly, may in these days truly interpret the matters of this
book, then much mistaken; for now Antichrist is revealed, the beast
discovered, and many things come to pass, which so far do make clear to us,
that which could not but be obscure and hidden to them then, except they had
had the same spirit, which John had, to give a prophetical exposition, as he
had toforetel things to come, and as the Prophets had of Moses and the Apostles
of them both.

CHAP. II.
An exhortatiue conclusion for the studious reading of this book.

NOw therefore (my brethren) in a reverend fear, with a mind bent to endure
some pains in this study for a time, let us take this so divine, heavenly and
profitable a book into our hands; in the first part we have many reasons there
to move us, The rare title, the admirable grace of authority, the truth of the
sayings, the end of reueiling it, the earnest exhortation, and commandment of
Christ, the blessing promised, the association with Angels, the eminency of
the matter, only meet for Christ alone before all other to reveal it to us,
the earnestnes of John, even with tears, to have the book opened; likewise the
profit, pleasantnes, and necessity of the knowledge thereof, is fully laid
down.

In this part we see, that by Gods blessing it may be understood, as the
title, the vnsealing, the exhortation to read, the blessing promised, the
spirits own interpretations upon places, and the succesfull pains of godly
men, may fully persuade us. What if many things at the first seem very
intricate? Let us not therefore despair, but therein reverence the Lords
wisdom, and crave his assistance, and not idly lay it aside; pray with
Daniel, and wait the time: Peter had a revelation, Act. 10. 17.
which he, a while, understood not; yet did not therefore let it slip out of
his mind, but still continued in meditation thereof, until, as I may say, an
actual exposition was given him to understand the meaning: so let us read,
pray and wait in our godly and diligent study, till an exposition be given us
from God.

It is a common thing to read men's writings, some learned Philosophers, some
the pleasant Poets, some the most exquisite Artists; some study one thing, some
another, as this man the Common law, that the Civil and Canon; yea some cannot
be withheld from the devouring study of Alchymistrie, till all their substance
be eaten up thereby: and all this undertaken for pleasure, profit, or
honorable fame with men. Yea to win praises, and in great hope of profit and
preferment by their studies, men can take great pains, be at excessive
charges, and spend much time: though the Authors which they read be very
obscure, the words unusual, the phrase harsh, the style crabbed, the matter
very intricate, and the whole order of the book, be almost in a manner
altogether disordered; yet will men for these worldly and carnal respects,
endure all, and not give over their study for any such very troublesome lets
and impediments, but will bend their wit to make straight the crookedst thing,
to clear the darkest point, and to loose the most difficult knot. And should
we by any thing be dishearted, in the study of Gods most holy word, wherein
is the most hidden treasure of wisdom, abundance of heavenly delights, and a
name of blessedness to be gotten, which never shall be forgotten?

Object. But it is well known that not one or two, or few men, but very many,
and those also persons of note, which speak of the obscurity of this book,
and do as much, as lies in them, to withhold men from the study of it hereby.
Answ. Many (I do confess) cry out against the Four sorts cry out against
the obscurity of ^his book. They which never made sound trial.
study of this book, as full of unintelligible obscurities: but these may be
reduced to four sorts, whereof the first are they, who yet never made any
painful assay upon it. These be like unto Salomons sluggard, loving to sleep,
and to lie in bed at ease, crying, A Lion is in the street, because he would
not arise to labor: so is it with these, this evil thought they do nourish in
themselves, and I wish it did remain only with themselves: but hereby they
do not only seek to cover, indeed, their own negligence and sloth, but
endeavor to disheart others from taking pains therein, by judging (in scorn
and contempt) too basely both of other men's persons, and of their pains
bestowed herein, according to the measure of grace received; for that these
want (perhaps) the outward endowments, learning, gifts, power and place that
those men have. But I leave them to themselves, with their pride, sloth, envy,
or malice, and wish them either more grace, or less learning and esteem with
men, that so they may not cause contempt upon other men's well doing, or at the
least upon their honest endeavor and desire to do well.

A second sort are Papists, who have good cause The second sort are Papists.
for their own behoof to have this book of Scripture, above all other, to be
hidden from men; because it touches them to the quick, it shakes their state,
and will batter to the ground their great Babylon: for no part of Scripture
lays Rome, the Pope and Papacy so open in their colors, to be had in
detestation of all true Christians, as this book does.

A third sort are such, as perhaps, with an unbelieving The third sort are they
which make a light assay, and give over.
heart have taken a view of the book, and, with an evil eye, being like the
bad spies returning from Canaan to the Camp, who did unjustly bring up an ill
report of the land, which God himself had commended, because they saw some
giants, and places hard by humane power to be won: so these men finding some
things hard and very difficult to be understood at the first view, do bring
an ill report upon this book, which the Lord himself has so highly commended
unto us. But let us beware we take not up this ill report made by these men
against the Lord and his word. If they did but urge only the obscurity, to
make men seek more unto God for help, and to become more studious herein to
get the understanding hereof, it were praise worthy; but these like wicked
spies do thus speak of the hardness, to disheart men altogether from taking
any pains at all in the book, who are herein no less instruments of Satan to
keep the book close, which God would have opened for the salvation of his
people, then the ungodly spies, who by their false report brought evil upon
themselves, and upon all that believed them.

A fourth sort, are such carnal Gospellers, as live The fourth sort, carnal
Gospellers.
in ignorance of the whole book of God, who speak of this book but only by
report and heresay, having never read a chapter in it all their life. None of
all these are any fit Judges, or to be believed in this case. Let us hearken
therefore rather unto God himself, to good men also, who have with all their
power and strength, with Gods blessing written of this book; these out of
knowledge and conscience do commend the study hereof unto us, as neither so
difficult nor obscure, as these former sorts would have it. Now whether these
lovers of the truth, having care of men's souls, be to be credited before the
Antichristian lovers of lies; these painful laborers, before the other
loyterers, these speaking of trial, the other taking all upon trust, let any
wise man judge.

Object. Belike you make all clear, as if there were nothing in it dark and
hard to be understood.
Answ. No, not so, but I confess all such things as are not yet come to pass,
are very hard to be understood, yea and some things fulfilled, hard also, for
want of wisdom to make a fit application of the words of the prophecy to the
things done, which is rare understanding, and not every man's gift.
Nevertheless, this I say, that most of the things fulfilled, are plain and
easy to be understood, though some yet make riddles of them; and that the
obscure part is not such, or so much, as should persuade any to believe the
whole book to be beyond all men's understanding, as enemies to the true Church
of Christ, and friends of Antichrist would make men think. But thus much for
the second part.

THE OPENING OF SAINT JOHN'S Mystical Revelation. THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. I.
Of the obscurity of this book, to whom it is obscure, and whence the same
does arise.

THis holy book, and all other Scriptures, are the clear The Scriptures are
obscure to the wicked.
truths of God, though they become obscure to men, through our own default,
as this book does generally to all the wicked and ungodly, such as are not
helped by the heavenly illumination of Gods divine spirit. For men naturally
discern not heavenly things, 1. Cor. 2. even as Eve believed Satan rather then
God, Genesis 3. so men in corrupt nature love darkness more then the light, and
till they enter into the Sanctuary of the Lord, they are but as beasts, Psalm.
73. 22. 27. Again, God will not give holy things unto dogs, nor cast pearls
unto swine; therefore must we labor and pray for grace; for as Solomon says,
Surely Eccles. 1. 26.
to a man that is good in his sight, God gives wisdom, knowledge, and joy.
And they are they that shall know the doctrine of Christ, that do his Fathers
will: Ioh. 7. 17.
but those that hate to be reformed, are so far from expecting a blessing in
meddling with the word of God, as to them the Lord says, What have ye to do to
declare mine ordinances? neither shall they Psalm. 50.
understand, Dan. 12. 10.

But more specially this book becomes obscure This book is obscure to seven
sorts especially.
to seven sorts of persons: as, first to all Antichristians, and subjects to
the Sea of Rome, especially the marked ones of that grand Antichrist; for else
how should this prophecy be To all the marked ones of Antichrist.
fulfilled upon them? how should they perform what here is foretold of them,
and of their damnation? If they should see, understand, believe and return;
How should that body and state be blinded, and go on to destruction, chap. 17.
8? I confess, that the learned Papists may show great skill in the outside,
the ryne or bark (if I may with reverence so speak) of holy Scriptures, that
is, of the Grammar, the Logic, the Rhetoric, the natural Philosophy of
the Bible, and such other things to be found here, as well as in other writings
of men, which may be called (as it were) the humanity of the Scriptures; yea
they can speak of moral precepts, of duties, of common honesty very
excellently; neither can we deny their knowledge in the general heads of the
Gospel, wherein we and they agree, and by profession whereof they be called
Christians; but the secrets of the kingdom they know not, neither the working
of the mystery of iniquity among them, these things are hid from their eyes;
that that might come upon them, which is determined on all those, whom the Lord
in justice will leave in that spiritual captivity, and not call out from
among them.

Secondly, to all proud selfe-conceited readers, To the proud and
selfeconceited.
coming in the strength of their wit, memory, learning, and reading, and not
in fear and humility; for such proud ones God resists; this wisdom of the
flesh is enmity with God; the key of man's wit, or mere artificial skill,
cannot open the closet door of Gods secret counsels, man's corrupt reason is
too shallow to comprehend the deepnes of Gods determinations; to the humble
will the Psalm. 25 9-14.
Lord teach his ways, and to such as fear him will he reveal his secrets.
Wherefore let men, how learned soever, come in all humility and reverence to
Gods word, and handle the same with such holy sobriety, as is meet for the
sacred oracles of God, that the Lord may bless them.

Thirdly, to all such as come to these true sayings To such as have not the
love of the truth. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
of God, (cap. 19. 9.) without the love of truth; for it will be just from
God, to give such over to believe lies; and such are all they which read it,
but not in simplicity of heart, to make it their guide of life, to see their
errors and mistakings to be better informed, and their vices to be reformed;
but force it to maintain their fore-conceiued opinions, their own inventions
to the pleasing of others, and for advantage to themselves in outward things;
causing it to speak according to the present times, and what they themselves
do love and like: making the word of God (indeed) their own will, to say, as
they would have it say, and to approve of what they do, though it be never so
unjust, wicked or evil. These sacrilegiously rob Gods word of the due honor,
and profanely abuse it, which the Lord reuengeth upon their own pates, in
giving them over to their own lusts, and to the wantonness of their own
wits, to live in the error of their own ways without repentance, to their
confusion.

Fourthly, to such as read this book cursorily, To such as read it
carelessly, and superficially.
with a careless and vnattentiue spirit, without diligent searching and
comparing of one place with another. It is not possible but that this book
should be hid, and be obscure unto them, who endeavor so little to get
understanding of those things which are herein revealed; let not the slothful
hand think to prosper.

Fifthly, to such as come with a too much dejected To such as only and wholly
tie themselves to the opinions of others.
spirit of fear, without daring to attempt any thing, beyond, besides, or any
whit otherwise then other men write or speak before them; such can never have
certain knowledge in themselves, or be satisfied: for unless they can judge
from the text it self, between opinion and opinion, the variety of
expositions will ouerwhelme their mind, and be as a dark mist before their
eyes, obscuring rather then clearing the text unto such. As it is good not to
be presumptuous, or of too daring and bold a spirit in holy mysteries, where
great, learned, and many godly men have erred and been mistaken before us; so
it is not evil, in godly humility, with reverence of others, by earnest prayer
for Gods assistance, to try what the Lord may do by us, for the wind blows
where it lists, and the spirit enlighteneth whom he pleases.

Sixthly, to such as be altogether ignorant in the To such as be altogether
ignorant of histories.
stories of the times, by which there may be made an illustration of the
prophecy, and a fit accommodation of the things falling out, according as in
the words here they are foretold to come to pass, without which a prophecy
cannot be well expounded, as before I have showed

And lastly, to such as know not some necessary and maine points, which greatly
serve to lay open, and (as it were) to conceal the whole book, without the
understanding whereof, it will not be so clear, as otherwise it would be: of
which things in the next part at large.

CHAP. 2.
THis book, even in the things, otherwise Obscurers of the text.
clear of themselves are somewhat obscured by some sort of Expositors, which
may be accounted the troublers of the text, muddying the clear running
stream by their interpretations, and they be these:

I. The enemies of the truth, the Jesuitical sect, The Jesuits, and other
Papists.
and others adhering stiffely to the sea of Rome, who of very set purpose by
false glosses, false expositions, and by urging the erroneous judgments of
men, seek to obscure the light of truth, shining upon them, as clearly as the
Sun at noone, but that they will needs wink, and also maliciously will (with
the cloud of their own inventions) darken, and hide the same from the eyes of
others. They study not carefully the text, as their comments do show, but
whatsoever they can find delivered by others, either for their state, or not at
all Read with judgment Ribera, and Viega's, the Jesuits commentaries.
against them, that they greedily take, not at all caring how it can stand with
the text, and the truth of the word it self. Let* none therefore which desire
simply to be informed in the truth, be led with their false expositions; yea it
were indeed very good not to read them at all, unless the readers be well
grounded in the truth, and well acquainted with the text itself, that so in
reading them, they may try all by the touchstone, lest their words prevail
without authority. Whosoever is thoroughly acquainted with the truth, cannot but
detest their damned expositions, as far from the truth, as darkness from
light, and falsehood it self from the truth it self, in those things which set
out the Pope, and Papacy.

II. The vain and faithless Expositors, who in The vain and faithless.
their interpretations, respect neither the truth, nor falsehood much, but write
not to offend, and so balke or obscure the truth; or to please, and then they
do writhe and wrest every thing to make for their purpose; or to get
themselves praise, then they labor to bombast and stuff up their writing with
all variety of what themselves have, or would seem to have, and this they do
to the utmost, too much pains to themselves, and a needless labor for
others, if they did intend only the opening of the truth barely and nakedly,
to the true informing of the readers understanding; or else do write, to try
and oppose some time, in some thing their readers, and then, if they have ever
an odd conceit, crochet, or question, forth it must come, to make (as they
imagine) themselves merry, while they think they can propound a riddle for an
Oedipus. These now in so doing, spend time, and are altogether vain in their
labors, troublesome to the text, and unprofitable to the Reader.

III. The singularly-opinionated, who having The singularly opinionated.
fore-conceiued an opinion from themselves, or otherwise, before they learned
it from the text, they frame in themselves a building, and then come to the
words of God to underprop the same, turning all vpside-downe, to make good
what they have fancied; these must needs therefore obscure the text, when they
think to lead the text, and not it them, of whom in reading we must beware;
for, they seldom write soundly, that will be ever writing singularly, and going
by themselves, without respect of others: Nevertheless it must be yet
acknowledged, that sometimes in expounding some part of a prophecy, a man may
go almost alone, and yet not be condemned of pride, and conceited
singularity. For the truths of prophecies appear in the accomplishment, and
the wisdom of discerning, rightly to apply the same, is not every man's gift,
nor at one time given unto all; very plain things to some are hidden, and
hidden points, by well observing of some circumstances, become most clear to
othersome. If God therefore afford this light to one, which he does not to
another, nay not to many, and he publish the same in the spirit of humility,
before others; must it be adjudged pride and singularity in him? verily not
justly.

IV. Such as do make this book dogmaticall, They that neglect the historical
sense.
and make of almost all these things a spiritual sense: these draw the readers
quite from the historical sense, and so from observing things to be done,
which is the true scope and proper sense of this book; and which in the
reading must be most carefully attended to, as we may learn out of cap. 1.
1. and 4. 1. and 22. 6.

V. They do greatly darken this prophecy, They that mistake the time.
who do draw back the beginning of these things, which do concern the whole
Church, higher then that time in which John did receive the same; when these
things do follow after the time of the giving of this Revelation unto him, as
chap. 4. 1. with 22. 6. sufficiently euince: which not being observed by
Expositors, greatly obscureth the order of the things here foretold unto us.

VI. Lastly, hereunto may be added, the negligence The negligent
Historiographers.
of Historiographers, not marking the daily administration of Gods providence,
from time to time (even from the beginning to this day) bringing things to
pass, as herein they are foretold: This has been (and is yet) no small
hinderance to the revealing of this heavenly Revelation. If this book (from
the beginning) had been observed, and made the ground ever to our history
writers; and that in the acts done (which was by them recorded) they had been
careful to have had respect to the course of this prophecy, how things herein
were foretold, to be fulfilled; their histories had been so clear an
exposition, as there had now been no doubt of the true interpretation of it.

THE OPENING OF SAINT JOHN'S Mystical Revelation. THE FOVRTH PART.
Herein is showed what is to be observed and done, to come to the understanding
of this Revelation; the particulars are in the several Chapters.

CHAP. I.
Of the scope of this book.

THE first thing to be observed to To mark the scope.
understand this book, is the scope and drift of this Revelation, which, what
it is, is most evident out of the text, chap. 1. 1. and 4. 1. and 22. 6, even
this, to make the servants of God acquainted with the things, that were to come
to pass, and to be done in the world, as far as the same things do concern
the Church of Jesus Christ, from the days of John, unto the very end and
second coming of Christ. So that in the first place we are to look upon and
behold the Church, and to attend this principally, for whose sake this
prophetical history was written, as the first verse of the first Chapter does
show. And therefore also we have in the very beginning of the prophecy
(concerning future things from the time of John's Chap. 4. and 5. Chap. 21. 22.
receiving the Revelation) a goodly type of the Church, and when the prophecy
comes to an end, there is a glorious description thereof; so as all may see,
that the principal thing to be marked in this tragical Comedy, (if I may so
call it) is The Church of Christ and her state is first and principally to be
considered of.
the Church of Jesus Christ, that is, consisting of true and faithful
Christian believers, their doings and sufferings, their battles, and victory
at the length over all their enemies: of which to have, according to this
prophecy, a short history related, and the same kept well in memory, shall
be exceeding auailable to the understanding of this Revelation. When the maine
scope is certainly known and attended unto, other things will be discerned in
their place, and become apparent and every thing be seen in due order, as may
particularly be observed, from one Chapter to another throughout this book,
unto the end. But if this scope be neglected, and the Church her estate,
rising, decay, eclipse, recovery, her dangers and alterations be not diligently
attended unto, ( from whence the reason, causes, and order of all other things
are to be fetched) it will make this book to such Readers very obscure, and
confused. For the world and plagues upon it are not here brought in further,
then there is in them a respect, and a consideration had unto the Church;
neither any other thing, but as the same has to do with the Church, and the
Church with it. Therefore the Church must first be attended unto, and then the
reason, the causes, and order of other things brought in, and foretold for the
Churches sake, will be better understood, as will appear by the order of the
Chapters, and the orderly cause of things therein contained.

Now next and secondarily the greatest and chiefest A second thing to be
attended unto, is the Churches greatest enemy.
enemy of Christ and his Church is to be considered of; which is not here
indeed the heathen Empire, and Tyrants then in John's time ruling the world,
and bloudily persecuting the Church, but the Popedom and Bishop of Rome, that
grand Antichrist. For the Dragon and heathen Empire was well enough known to
the Church then, so as there needed not a prophecy to speak of that enemy or
outward power and rage of the Dragon, further then to declare their end; and
how Antichrist came into the Dragons place, obtaining his power, state and
great authority: of which, in chap. 13. 3, this man of sin, this
Antichristian state, this mystery of iniquity is next the Church chiefly to
be considered of, as the enemy principally to be discovered unto y^ Church in
this prophecy. For this Empire is the longest during, the heathen Tyrants from
the time of John's receiving this Revelation (about anno 96, to anno 311, when
Constantine began his reign) reigned but a small space about 215 years; but
this Antichrist must have his reign 42 months of years, being prophetically
spoken and expressed by days, every day being put for a year, is 1260 years;
and we see by lamentable experience, that he has endured long, albeit now his
power be abated.

Again, this enemy is the worst that ever The Pope the worst enemy to the
Church.
the Church had, for he bloudily persecuteth the godly, as did the heathen,
chap. 11. 7: he blasphemeth God, his name, his tabernacle and Saints, chap.
13. 6, as they did; he has done and yet does trouble the world with bloody
wars (chap. 13. 7. and 17. 14.) as they did; he has gotten great power over
kindreds, tongues and nations, chap. 13. 7, as they had; but he (which they
could not do, neither ever did) bewitcheth the world by sorcerie, false
miracles and wonders, chap. 13. 13. 14. and 19. 20. and will be worshipped of
all upon peril of their states and lives, chap. 13. 15. 16. 17. This sells
also souls, chap. 18. 13: so as he is such an enemy to the Christian world as
never was: to which may be added this to all the rest, that his cursed
apostacy brought upon the Christians, the hellish fury and outrage of the
Turks power and tyranny, chap. 9. 14. 15. 21. Lastly, the greatest part of
this prophecy is spent about this wicked enemy, either in the preparation to
his fall from the Church, chap. 8, or in the fall itself, chap. 9, or in his
rising in worldly state and power, chap. 13, or in his cruelty in persecuting,
chap. 11. and 13, or in his plagues begun upon him, chap. 16, or in his
womanish condition enticing to filthiness, chap. 17, or in the overthrow of
his state, chap. 18, or else lastly in his own final destruction, chap. 19.
This therefore is the grand Adversary principally by this book to be found
out, as the greatest, the worst and longest enemy in continuance against the
Church. And thus much for the scope, the first thing to be observed.

CHAP. II.
Of the order and method of this book.

THE second thing for the understanding of this book, next the scope, is the
order and method which the holy The method and order is to be observed after
the scope.
Ghost has kept, in revealing to us the things herein contained. For the order
being known will carry us a long, and will be, as it were, a guide leading us
by the hand to the view of every thing in their due places. And to have a full
sight of this, the studious herein must look to three things.

I. He is to take a view of the whole work, and The first thing to be done for
to understand the order and method.
lay it out in his principal parts analitically, that so the outward frame and
proportion of this work in the maine parts may be easily seen, and that so
the chiefest matters and scope may be understood; in which some latest
expositors have taken pains, which the godly reader may take for his help
herein, till he be able to discern the platform of the work himself, and
so he with his own pen set down his own judgment before his own eyes.
Many in reading think they see fully enough, what by others is laid before
them; but when they come to the work themselves, to draw that out, which in
conceit before, they judged themselves skillful in, they shall often find that
they come short of their conceit by many degrees.

II. He is to consider the general contents of The second thing to be noted.
every Chapter, and the orderly laying down of things successively therein;
which will marueilously hearten an intelligent reader to the study of this
book: for he shall see a delightsome coherence of one thing with another, and
a pleasant passing-on of the prophetical narration, with a reason of every
Chapter following orderly one another. Which for better encouragement to such
as will take pains in this holy and blessed prophecy, I have thought fit here
to set down, Chapter by Chapter unto the end, only omitting the three first,
as more easy and well known to every one; except only perhaps in this thing
that they be set out as so many types of the universal condition of the
Churches of the Gentiles, and so have in them some future thing to be
considered of, as well, as that present state of every one of them then in
John's days. Which I leave, whether any such thing be so or no, to the wisdom
and learning of the godly-wise in such mysteries. The future state of the
Church is set out, from the beginning of the fourth Chapter, whence, for the
order of the prophetical narration, I will begin.

The fourth Chapter shows us the Lord God Chap. 4.
of heaven sitting upon his Throne in the heaven, his Church, and all his
Saints and servants round about him; which godly type of him and his Church is
to be considered of in the first place, to whom and for whose sake, he
reuealeth his secret counsel in this Revelation, and which also he carries
through all troubles, with a strong and outstretched arm, as Israelites
through the red sea, and brings them safe to their rest.

The fifth shows the means by which this Chap. 5.
Church becomes acquainted with her future state, to wit, by this book of
the Revelation, the opening whereof none but Christ Jesus could obtain at the
hands of his Father, who gave it him, (chap. 1. 1.) and he here took in hand
to open to the joy of all, both men, Angels and other creatures, blessing God
therefore.

The 6. shows to us his Church, how in the opening Chap 6.
of the six seals of the book, the Lord with variety of plagues, would punish
y^ heathen world under the persecuting tyrants of Rome, til the Dragon should
be cast out of heaven, (cap. 12) and that heathen Empire be overthrown, for
murdering of Christians, professing so constantly Christ and his Gospel.

The seventh Chapter comes in by the way Chap. 7.
of a prevention. For in the time of the heathen tyrants, the Devil had
hatched and prepared great mischiefs, that, against the time that the world
should become Christian, (by means of Constantine) and the heathen Empire be
abolished, he might thereby overthrow the Church; which mischiefs were
prepared and advanced under the sixth seal, but the power thereof not seen,
till the opening of the 7. seal. Now for that the plagues under the seventh
seal, in the blowing of the Trumpets, should be so great a plague to the
earthly Christian world by a fearful apostacy, and that the Church might not
doubt yet of her own welfare, here in this Chapter is given us another general
type of the Churches state to the worlds end, showing two things: I. That in
the world of earthly Christians apostating with Antichrist, there should be a
sealed number, though but a very few in number, certainly preserved from
falling from Christ, and so escape this plague and the mischiefs which God
brought upon the Christian world for the earthlinesse thereof, and for falling
to Antichrist and that Romish Whore; for in this time are these sealed Ones a
hidden number with Christ Jesus on the Mount, (chap. 14. 1.) and with the
Prophets in the wilderness (chap. 11.) whitherto the Woman was fled, chap. 12.
II. That the Lord in his time would bring these hidden Ones to light again,
and by the word win an innumerable multitude unto the Church of all nations,
kindreds and people and tongues, to worship him, and to serve him joyfully
without interruption.

The eighth Chapter shows under the seventh Chap. 8.
seal the breaking out of the mischiefs restrained (in chap. 7. 1.) for a
while; being from God so many plagues to the world, called Trumpets, and in
themselves the four steps to the general apostacy of that Roman Bishop: for
after the heathen persecutors were taken away, the Devil caused great
contention among Christians, set their minds to ambition, and wrought
effectually in many to make them damnable heretics, and by part-takings was
much bloodshed. So that hereby found doctrine failed, sincere worship decayed,
and faithful teachers were hard to be found, but in general a dark mist of
ignorance began to spread it self over the Christian world, which was an
effectual means for Satan to work thereby, for the advancement of his
grandchild the son of perdition, that Antichrist the Pope of Rome.

The ninth Chapter shows that the apostasy Chap. 9.
was now come to a head; for here the fall is showed, and the Angel of the
bottomless pit made a King, having his hellish Locusts to trouble and torment
the earthly Christians. Now was there a world of misery upon men and manifold
mischiefs, the worshipping of Devils, and Idols the works of men's hands,
murders, sorceries, fornication, and thefts, for which God in his wrath sent
an horrible vengeance upon them by the Turkish power, his hosts and armies
furiously raging: which yet brought not any amendment to the Antichristian
state and apostating Church of Rome.

The 10. Chapter shows how after long darkness Chap. 10.
and defection, the Lord (as he did to the Israelites oppressed in Egypt) in
mercy comes down to deliver his people from this spiritual Egypt, (so
called chap. 11. 8.) and does furnish with knowledge of Gods word such as
should recover by preaching of the truth from under the Antichristian
apostasy, many again unto the true religion of Christ, even people and
nations, tongues and kinreds.

The 11. Chapter is a story, as it were, of the Chap. 11.
great troubles which fell out upon the Preachers executing faithfully their
ministry, and in seeking to bring Christ's people out of this Romish Babylon,
as Moses and Aaron did, in bringing the Israelites from under the bondage of
Pharaoh. Which Preachers, after great persecutions and troubles, at the length
prevailed; for which the people of God rejoiced, as we may do at this day.
And here is the end of the sixth Trumpet hitherto: the seventh beginning to
blow, Christ begins to reign powerfully, and kingdoms become his from
under Antichrist.

The 12. chapter begins the more large explanation Chap. 12.
of such things as were but obscurely handled before, in chap. 6. touching the
Roman Heathen Empire (under the type of the great red Dragon) and of the
overthrow thereof, that hereby we might more clearly see, when the out-Court
(chap. 11. 2.) was given to the Gentile-like Christians, the Romish
Antichristians; and also when the true Church, the heavenly woman fled into the
wilderness, and when Antichrist succeeded in the place of that Dragon.

The 13. chapter is a continuing-on of the explanation, Chap. 13.
amplifying that short and brief mentioning of the beast, in chap. 11. 7. the
very same that is here now set out at large, substituted in the Dragons room,
so as now the old Pagan Empire, is turned into an Antichristian Popedom; the
tyrannizing Emperors, into tyrannizing Popes; and the lawful civil
authority, into an unlawful Hierarchy, and ecclesiastical Regencie: in which
his original, the means of his rising up, the power and properties of him,
are fully laid open.

The 14. chapter goes on to tell us more largely, Chap. 14.
what became of the sealed number mentioned in cap. 7. where they were, and
with whom, in that Antichristian Apostacy; then is showed more amply also what
was foreshewed summarily concerning the ministry of the word, (in cap. 10. 11.
etc. cap. 11. 3.) the Ministers doctrine, the power and effect thereof against
Antichrist, his Babylonish state, and that whorish jurisdiction.

The 15. chapter shows, how the Church (being Chap. 15.
by the former ministry, and powerful efficacy thereof, set free from the
Roman beast, and his Antichristian power) now does exceedintly rejoice, and is
rising up into a prevailing estate, having now received vials of wrath, and
power from heaven to plague that state, which so long time had wickedly ruled
over the people of God.

The 16. chapter declares in order, how from Chap. 16.
the Church, the instruments of Gods anger do pour forth their vials of
plagues, and do execute vengeance according to the power and commandment from
God, with the effects and events thereof.

The 17. chapter shows the reason, why the Chap. 17.
Angels of these vials did so plague this Antichristian state, therefore is it,
that one of them informs John of their doings, and expounds what is meant
by the great City, and by Babylon, which the Preachers so preached against, in
chap. 14. as also, what the beast is, which is mentioned in cap. 13. that we
might know plainly Rome to be Babylon, and the Pope certainly to be that
Antichrist, with the wicked conditions, pride, and cruelty of that whorish
Church, for which she, and all her associates received such plagues, and
deserved so justly to be punished and hated of all Gods people.

The 18. chapter foretells, how upon the vials Chap. 18.
poured out; also upon the lively discovery of her, not to be the true Church,
but that whore of Babylon; and withal, upon their forsaking of her, who gave
their power and kingdom formerly unto her, she should come to utter ruin and
her place and seat to be found no more.

The 19. chapter foretells, how great joy the Chap. 19.
Church of Christ should conceive at this destruction of Rome, singing aloud
praises unto God for the same, being formerly exhorted thereunto, in cap 18.
20. and which here they perform, exhorting one another to praise the Lord, for
this his righteous judgment upon this Babylon, and whorish state; after which,
for further increase of joy, is foreshewed the full victory over the beast and
false prophet, with their final damnation.

The 20. chapter falls in, to speak of the Dragon, Chap. 20.
mentioned in chap. 12. and chap. 16. 13. showing first what was become of him
since his casting out of heaven, and since the beginning of the reign of his
grandchild, the Antichrist, set up in the Dragons seat, cap. 13. 3. that he
was chained up, and kept from his open rage a long time, but at length let
loose again; and then secondly, after that his loosing, and now also
Antichrists destruction, what his utmost and last attempt should be, to wit,
open force, and what also should be the event thereof, even his own and their
destruction also, (which were deceived by him) and that everlastingly.

The 21. and 22. chapters, after this destruction Chap. 21. and 22
of these enemies; do set out the graceful and most happy estate of Christ's
Church, in the gloriousest manner that may be, and so thereupon concludes
this prophecy. And thus from chapter to chapter, we see a most heavenly order
observed, which being well marked and understood, will give to the godly and
studious reader, a great insight into the chief and principal things laid
down in this prophetical narration. If any doubt whether yet this be the
order, course, and progress hereof thus laid down chapter by chapter: Let
such, (as I myself have done) painfully examine the truth by the matter in the
chapters, and by the general parts of the whole prophecy, and see whether
this will stand, or another more agreeing to the text, and the truth of story;
if so, I embrace the truth gladly, but if not, let this be accepted.

III. He that would understand the order yet The third thing to be observed,
for the knowledge of the method.
more at large in particulars, he must make a literal analysis of every
chapter, following the guiding of the spirit in his own order, word for word.
By which, this benefit shall he reap, that the text shall become familiar
unto him, and the order of things more apparently seen, and the circumstances
better observed, and through Gods mercy, shall he see, (as I may say) round
about him, that he mistake not grossly in giving the sense and meaning of a
place (as some have done) contrary to the clear light before them, in the very
words of the text, which was for want of observing this course, and withal, by
an unadvised rushing upon the text, with a hasty interpretation, or with a
received opinion, but unexamined, to the great prejudice of the truth. By this
course shall he come to the first degree of the knowledge of this prophetical
narration exactly; for it is to be noted that there is a double knowledge, or
rather a twofold A twofold knowledge of a prophecy or rather two degrees
thereof.
degree of understanding of the words of a prophecy. The first degree is this,
to know what is foretold in the very letter and words, without any particular
application, further then in the text is laid open plainly, and also without
the consideration of the accomplishment and fulfilling thereof. The second is to
know the fulfilling, and to be able rightly to accommodate to the text, the
truth of story, to declare the verity of it, according as in the words it is
laid down. The first is easy to almost every one; as to tell for example,
that the 12. chapters speaks of a woman thus and thus arrayed; also how she
was with child and traveled, and that there was a red Dragon watching, etc. In
like manner, chap. 17. there is mention made of a whore, and how she is
apparelled, and sits on a beast in glorious raiment, with a cup in her hand,
and so forward, as it is in the text. This may seem an idle labor, which yet
will not prove so to him that endeauours seriously to attain to the second
degree, which indeed is wisdom; but this other is in the first place to be
observed, that we may know what to expect and look for to be fulfilled. This
first degree the holy and ancient people of God sought after in the old
Prophets, reading them diligently before they were fulfilled, expecting and
waiting for the accomplishment. The second was the wisdom in Christ and his
Apostles, applying fitly the Prophets sayings, as they Matthew. 2.
were fulfilled; the former understanding had the Scribes and Pharisees, who
could readily tell by the words of the Prophet, where Christ should be borne,
and did expect his coming, but had not the knowledge to apply the same to the
time, and to the person fulfilling the same, according to the prophecy of the
place, where he was to be borne; and such understanding may now also the Roman
high priest, his Scribes and Pharisees have, but the latter is the wisdom of
Gods servants, to whom the Lord is pleased to make known his will. And thus
much for the order, the second thing to be observed, to come to the knowledge
of this divine prophecy.

CHAP. III.
Of the matter and historical sense of this book.

THe third thing in reading this Prophecy (now in respect of our times) is to
consider what is done already, what is in doing, (for it is in continual act)
and hereafter to be done, concerning either the Church, or the enemies thereof.
The matter of this Prophecy, was things to come to pass, chap. 1. 1. was
things that were to be done after the revealing of this revelation to John*
cap. 4. 1. even things to be done, chap. 22. 6. The matter then of this
prophecy is historical, as it comes to be fulfilled. It is therefore not a
spiritual or allegorical, but an historical sense, which in this book we
must attend unto, from the beginning of the fourth chapter, to the end of the
prophecy. For to John was revealed what things should come to pass here upon
earth, before the worlds end, as far as concerned the Church; and the same he
here sets forth to us, as to him it was revealed. If we then do loose the
historical The matter of this prophecy is historical.
sense, we loose the proper sense of this book, what other spiritual use
soever we make of it.

By this then we see what necessity there is to It is necessary to be well read
in histories.
read histories, into which we must look and search diligently, according to
the times, and according to the course of this prophetical narratio^, but in
the reading of histories we must be guided by the order kept here; and as the
things are foretold by the holy Ghost to come to pass: for as I have before
noted, if Historiographers had kept the direct course of this prophecy in
penning their stories, concerning all the troubles and alterations in the
Church, they had clearly commented upon this prophecy, as far as it is
fulfilled. And so should these likewise that yet write an ecclesiastical
story of the things now in doing, or such as live to write what shall
hereafter fall out. In applying How to read histories with the order of this
prophecy.
the histories to the text, the way is to read them in the order of the
prophecy: and to do this, we must consider these things: I. That the
narration of future things takes date from the time that John received this
revelation, as is to be learned from chap. 4. 1. and 22. 6. about Anno 96. in
the reign of Domitian, and therefore to begin from that time to read, marking
the order of the prophecy, and the fulfilling thereof.

II. That it begins with the Dragon, the Heathen persecuting tyrants, in
chap. 6. and 12. showing how God would plague (with sundry judgments) the
world then, chap. 6. and would overthrow that Empire, and cast out those Pagans
for ruling and tyrannizing over the Church, as is noted in chap. 12. therefore
the stories of those times are to be studiously read, attending unto the text,
as the spirit of God leads, to find the fulfilling and accomplishment thereof
accordingly.

III. That the prophecy carries us from the Dragons rage, to the view of
Antichrist, but yet by degrees from the time of that godly and worthy
Emperor, Constantine the great. And so we are to search and apply the stories
of those times, but (I say) going on with the prophecy in the steps thereof
concerning Antichrist. As first to mark what went before the general
Apostacy of Rome* or Roman Bishop, set out in the blowing of the four
trumpets, in chap. 8. from Constantines days, till about the year, as some
think, of Christ, 530. or thereabout, some 230. years space; for exposition
whereof, the stories of those times are to be searched into, the prophecy will
be a guide into the stories, and these an exposition to the prophecy. Then to
consider his getting into the Dragons seat, with power and great authority,
causing a general Apostasy, (chap. 9. and 13.) regaining great glory to Rome,
as before under the Heathen Emperors. To understand these things, and to have
an exposition of the 9. 13. and 17. chapters, we must read what Rome does
challenge from Constantine, for the Romanists bragging of Constantines
donation, gives us light to know how the Pope crept into the Imperial seat;
also we must read the Popes lives, their decrees, their practices, in, and
over Councels, the arising up of their religious orders, the whole body of
their Canon law their Legenda aurea, for lying miracles and words, their
wars, with all other the deeds, power, seat, and great authority of that
Antichristian state, because they give clear light unto such things, as be
spoken of the beast in those chapters, to the full. For how can the prophecy
of the Pope and his popedom be otherwise cleared to us, then by reading of
those things which are set forth of them by authenticke authors, and approved
authorities? So to come to understand such things as be in the 10. 11. and 14.
chapters, touching the arising of the Church from under Antichrist; as also the
preaching of the Gospel, to bring that hidden number unto open light, the
witnesses of the truth and their doctrine; also Antichrists opposition thereto,
his tyranny, and their constant suffering must be known by such as have
faithfully made known these things.

Now for that Antichrists power of generally persecuting is restrained, and
that the true Church (blessed be God) now some late years since, has begun to
get an upper hand against him, as is foreshewed in chap. 15, and 16, that they
that killed must be killed, and such as murdered, must have blood to drink,
the vials of wrath being begun to be poured out upon those Antichristians from
us; as also for that this part of the prophecy is in fulfilling, and shall not
now cease till full wrath be poured upon that Romish state, to the utter
destruction thereof. We may read late writers, and, as The stories of the
present times concerning things done between Protestants and Papists, are to
be read of us.
I may say, yesterday histories, and make a daily observation of those things
which now do fall out, or of late have fallen out, between the Papists and
the Protestants, especially from the year 1558, or 60, about which time was
the full period of the Popes general prevailing; and since which time he has
nothing increased upon us, but we by Gods power have prevailed against him,
and so, maugre their malice, and in spite of their policy, trecheries and
treasons, we shall go forward to a better estate against that Romish power for
ever unto the end. Do not we see here in England since that time the truth
hereof; have not the Papists had ill success in all their attempts against us?
Though impious Pius roar with his Bulls, though Jesuits, these frogs coming
out of the Dragon, Beast and false prophet, stir up Kings against us, with a
supposed invincible Armado to conquer us; though Gunpowder-plots be devised The
Popes power shall no more increase.
to destroy us in our Regal and princely powers, yet we stand* and they fall;
and so must they now continually, for by an oath from God it is confirmed unto
us, chap. 10. 5. 6, That there should be time no longer. Let none doubt of this
exposition, the acts of God from the forenamed time confirm it unto us;
howsoever other have, or yet do take it, we must certainly know this, That
things done, in doing, or hereafter to be done, are the exposition of this
prophecy, and not what men do imagine. And if the Pope daily decay, and not
prevail, as formerly heretofore, and we also still prevail against him, the^
let this work of God give authority to this interpretation; but if contrariwise
and hereafter any shall see things fall out to cross this exposition, then
reject the same as false: in the mean space, let the observation of the acts
of our blessed God, past, present, and to come, be judge herein, and therein
let us rest and praise him.

Object. But may some say, because the Pope has not prevailed against us, can
it be made a general rule for a testimony of the decaying of his whole state?
and for that we have, and do prevail, therefore shall also the whole Church
of Christ prevail with us in other places? what is this nation, that hence
should be made such a conclusion?
Answ. Surely I am not led by any vain fantasy upon the love of mine own
country so to think; but from things done by God himself, leading me by the
hand thereto, from the Popes first rising, and the Lords honoring this little,
but most noble Island, above all other places in the Christian world, in the
matter of Christianity: First, our Constantine, whether by birth, or here
first proclaimed Emperor, was the first Christian Emperor, The renown of our
Nation in the matters of Christian religion.
that brought to the profession of Christ a world of Christians. Secondly,
Lucius our King the first Monarch, that was Christian. Thirdly, Wickliffe our
countriman, the first man of fame, standing up against the abominations of
Rome. Fourthly, Henry the 8 our King, the first Monarch that utterly rejected
the Popes supremacy, and cast him out of his Dominions. Fifthly, Elizabeth our
Queen, a Queen of eternal memory, the first kings daughter that suffered
persecution for the Gospel under Antichrist; the first Queen that banished
the public Idol service of the Mass out of her Kingdom, and the whole
Popes power irrecouerably to this day. Sixthly, Our now learned Sovereign
James our King, the first Monarch, that ever publicly with his own pen,
proclaimed to the Emperor, Kings, and Princes, the Pope to be Antichrist.
Seventhly and lastly, this our Nation has vexed, and yet does vex, the Pope
and his marked Antichristians more then any, yea or all the kingdoms in this
part of the Christian world, where the Pope has had jurisdiction at any time.
First, in making most just laws, before all others, to put deservedly their
Jesuits and Priests to death, therein following the words of this prophecy,
chap. 16. 1. 6. 7. Secondly, in getting so admirable and glorious a victory in
the year 88, the like never heard of, and with so great shame, loss, and
destruction to the Pope and his powers aiding him, as the like they never had
at the hands of any people or nation, from the beginning, to that day. Thirdly,
in our aiding, and relieuing, all other needing our help, against the Pope;
this the Low Countries can witness, Geneua, yea and the late King of France,
when he was but King of Navarre. Fourthly and lastly, in the Lords most rare
and wonderful preservation of us, our late Queen, and our now Sovereign
king, from all their hellish plots, trecheries, conspiracies, treasons and
rebellions, that have at any time been devised, practiced, or raised up against
them, the mischief ever returning back upon the heads of the evil instruments
themselves. So as this nation may be the instance for all Christ's people, to
behold Gods mercy and favor to his Church, to conclude the overthrow of the
Popedom, according to this prophecy. And from which (if from such strange
works of God, formerly any thing may be concluded) it is most likely, that
Rome it self shall chiefly receive her utter destruction, when God shall see
his time, to advance his glory, by such an heroical spirit, and princely
power, as he may, and can make fit to do the deed, which verily is not long
to, even so, Amen. If this conjecture may seem any thing probable, then let
not the accommodation of some things in this prophecy, particularly to our
nation, and to some of the Lords instruments in the same, raised up to do Gods
will, according to this prophecy, be held too foolish and ridiculous. And thus
much for the matter and principal sense which in this Revelation is to be
sought out.

CHAP. IV.
Of the manner of setting down this prophecy, and the revealing of the things
foretold in this book.

IT may be said of this book, as is said by the Lord in Hosea, chap. 12. 10. I
have multiplied visions, and used similitudes: for here are manifold visions
and similitudes; the Lord by certain forms, shapes, and figures, as it were
Images and pictures, did lively represent the whole Comicall tragedy, or
tragical Comedy, that was from the time of the revealing of the Revelation,
to be acted upon the stage of this world, by the Church militant, unto his
Apostle, and Prophet John; who This prophecy is delivered, after the manner of
prophecies of old, by visions, similitudes and figurative speeches.
was an eare-witnes of all that was spoken, and a beholder of these shadows
and resemblances of what was truly to be done upon the earth, being played, as
I may say, before him, even as in the words it is written. So as we must learn
by these visions, things done, things in doing, or hereafter still to be done,
till the world come to an end, as has been already said.

Again, as it is composed of such similitudes, so the words are figurative,
the whole prophecy full of Metaphors, and almost altogether Allegorical; so
as we must take heed, that we look further then into the letter and naked
relation of things, as they are set down, otherwise the book should be full
of absurdities, impossibilities, falsities, and flat contradictions unto other
truths of Scripture: all which are far from the words of Gods holy spirit,
which are ever holy and true. For who can believe a Lamb to have seven eyes, a
mountain burning to be cast into the sea, and this thereby in a third part to
become blood, a star to fall from heaven, Locusts to be of so monstrous a
shape, as is set down in chap. 9. and horses with Lions heads, fire, smoke,
and brimstone coming out of their mouths, and a hundred such things?
Therefore we must not stick in the letter, but search out an historical
sense, which is the truth intended, and so take the words typically, and not
literally. For prophetical descriptions much differ from common historical
narrations. A story sets down things indeed done: a prophecy represents to
the view, as present, by similitudes, the things not come to pass, but
afterward to be done.

Also we must note, and this very carefully, that This prophecy is framed to
the words of the Prophets, and custom of the Jews.
all this whole prophecy is framed after the state and condition of the
ancient people of God, the Jews, and after the words and visions of the
ancient Prophets; as we may see by comparing the words and visions of this
book, to Moses and the Prophets, to which the Prophet John alludeth
euerywhere. To what John alludeth in this prophecy.
First, to their sufferings under their enemies, of which there were three:
first, Pharaoh in Egypt, called by Ezechiel, a Dragon, and therefore here
mention of a Dragon, chap. 12. The Second, Babel, and the beasts noted in
Daniel, chap. 7. and 11. therefore here is mention of the beast, ca. 13. Ezech
38. and 39.
and of Babell, chap. 14. and 17. The third and last enemy was Gog, and Magog,
even the Kings of Syria, and among them, chiefly Antiochus Epiphanes, therefore
the last enemies here are called Gog, and Magog, chap. 20. Secondly, to the
twelve tribes, chap. 7. to the wilderness, chap. 12. thunder, lightening, and
earthquake, chap. 5. to the Tabernacle, chap. 13. and 21. 3. the Arc of his
Testament, chap. 11. 19. the Priests, chap. 1. to white raiment, chap. 1. a
golden girdle about the paps, cap. 1. the Altar, incense, chap. 8. Odours, cap.
5. lamps, chap. 4. Candlesticks, chap. 1. and 11. golden Censor, chap. 8.
Temple, chap. 11. to singing, chap. 5. and 15. to instruments of music, chap.
5. and 15. to the sea, chap. 4. and 15. 2. to the smoke filling the Temple,
chap. 15. 8. to the Trumpets, chap. 8. to Jerusalem, chap. 21. Kings, chap. 1.
Thrones, Crowns, and Elders, chap. 4. Thirdly, to the saying of the old
Prophets, as chap. 1. 7. to Zach. 12. 8. and 21. 3. to Ier. 31. 32. and 7. 17.
and 21. 4. to Esaias 25. 8. and chap. 3. 12. to 1. K. 7. 15. and infinite other
places, and also to their visions, as chap. 1. 13. to Dan. 7. 13. and 10. 6.
cap. 4. 6. 7. to Ezech. 1. 10. Yea the allusions are every where to the words
of the old Testament, which were too long to set down here, though most
necessary to be quoted, of such as would truly comment upon this book.

Now an allusion is a respect had, and a resemblance What an allusion is.
made unto some other thing, agreeing in some sort together; as in all the
things before mentioned, the Apostle, (or rather the holy Ghost) has respect
unto that which has been formerly, and makes some resemblance in some sort
thereof in the things in hand, of which he (here in this present prophecy)
does speak: which allusions are made in this last book of holy Scripture, for
many reasons: I. And that most usually, rather for Why John is so full of
allusions.
amplification and illustration, then for proof and confirmation: as for
example, as Babylon held captive Gods people a determined time, but at length
they were delivered, and Babylon at last, came to utter destruction; so shall
it be with Rome, spiritually captiuating Gods people, these being delivered,
and the heavenly Temple built, she shall utterly perish, and so of every other
allusion. II. For that the ancient people, their state, sufferings, ceremonies,
worships, Temple, City, Priests, and Kings, were lively types of Christ and his
kingdom of true Christians; and therefore now does our Prophet set out the
truth by the shadows, and the substance by the very words of the ceremonies.
III. To show that the words and vision of the holy Prophets, to which our
Prophet alludeth, besides the first and proper accommodation, had also
typically in them a further signification and relation, as the frequent
allusions in this book, from them does show, and in other places of the new
Testament, Romans 10. 18. Psalm. 19. 4. and Galath. 4. IV. To teach us by these
mystical speeches, (wrapping, as it were, the old covenant into the new, the
Jews into Christianisme, and we Christians, by these typical terms, made
mindful of them) that the mystery of God, declared to his servants the
Prophets, is not finished, but shall be, when this prophecy is fulfilled, at
the blowing of the seventh trumpet, chap. 10. 7. These I take to be the reasons
of these frequent allusions, from Moses, the Law, and the Prophets: the
knowledge hereof, and the manner of the delivering of this prophecy, in
similitudes, types, tropes, figures, and allusions, will give a great light to
the understanding of this Revelation, and prevent the foul mistaking of many
things, by marking the allusions, and the common use thereof. It would be a
work worthy praise, and requiring the diligence of a learned man, well
acquainted with Moses, the Law and Prophets, to set down throughout this
prophecy, to what places of the old Testament, this our Prophet alludeth every
where; it would clear many points, which for want of this knowledge are to
many very obscure; it would prevent an usual mistaking, and an
ignorantly-seeking of propriety of speech, in a mere allusion, as may be
observed in the writings of men, and their comments on some places of this
prophecy. And thus much for the manner, the fourth thing to be noted for to
further our knowledge, in the understanding of this heavenly Revelation.

CHAP. V.
Of the way and means to expound this book.

TO interpret this most heavenly prophecy, most necessary for these our times,
after those things in the former chapter, laid down and well observed, the
Expositor, before all To begin with prayer.
things, is to beg at the Lords hand earnestly, in a holy affection to the
truth, in a desire to advance Gods glory, and to edify the Lords people in the
truth, the aid and assistance of the holy Ghost: For the things of God knows
no man, but the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2. 11. by whom we know the things freely
given us of God, 1. Cor. 2. 12. There is a spirit Job 31. 8. Job 38. 36. Prou.
2. 6. Dan. 1. 17. and 2. 20. 21. Iam. 1. 5. 1. King. 3. 9.
in man, but the inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding. The Lord
puts wisdom into the inward parts, he gives understanding unto the
heart. The Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding, which if any man lack, (says Saint James) let him ask of God,
that gives to all men liberally, as it Prou. 2. 4.
appears in his mercy toward Solomon, asking wisdom at his hands. But we
must cry for knowledge, and lift up our voice for understanding, and seek it
as silver, and search for it as treasure, then through Gods mercy, we shall
attain to knowledge, in that measure as shall be fit for us. After this holy
and heavenly preparation, I suppose it to be very meet to proceed in this
manner following.

I. To look carefully into the very text it self, The second ^canes,
carefully t^ ^^oke into the text.
originally set down by this our Apostle and Prophet, as also by faithful
translations, turned into other known languages: be exercised, first in
reading Act. 8.
the words of God himself, like the godly Eunuch, though at the first thou
do not understand them, God may send thee an interpretor, as he did to him.
What things thou do understand, bless God for the same, therein rejoice,
and retain that knowledge of those things, and labor for more; give not over
to read the book again and again, thou that art able, in the original;
others, in the best translations, as most excellent helps to give men
knowledge of the things therein contained, in that tongue with which they be
well acquainted. For the oftener we read it, the better shall we understand
it; but where we do not understand, there let us admire Gods wisdom, and
the depth of the mystery: be humbled in our selves, but not give over, as
without hope, either through impaciencie, not enduring the pains in study, or
pride of heart, not vouchsafing any longer our labor thereto, because the Lord
forthwith descends not to our capacity in these his mysteries.

II. In the next place observe, whether there be Observe the allusions.
any allusion in the words, (of which before in the former chapter) and then
whereunto the allusion is made, that from thence the place in hand may be
illustrated, as in chap. 2. 7. is an allusion to Genesis 2. 9. from whence the
reward of eternal life promised to him that overcomes, is illustrated by
eating of the tree of life; and the heavenly mansion, by that garden and
Paradise; so the allusion gives the exposition of the words. Likewise in chap.
4. 4. mention is made of 24. Elders, which is an allusion unto the 1. Chron.
24. where the governors of the Sanctuary and house of God, (verse. 5.) were
before the King, (verse. 6.) ordered into the number of 24. elders, or chief
Fathers, in verses, 7. 18. likewise the chief for the temporal affairs, were
ordered in the number of 24. 1. Chron. 27. 1. So whether we respect the laity,
or Clergy, as we now speak, the body of the whole people of God, were 24.
Elders and principal Fathers, being for all the rest. This allusion will make
plain the truth, and clear the interpretation from the obscurity, wherein it
is inuolued by many erroneous expositions; I need not instance more places, the
whole prophecy being full of allusions, as is before showed; only here the
interpretor is to consider the great benefit, which he shall reap by observing
the allusions in expounding of the text. whether an allusion be in the words or
no; as also how to know whereunto the words do allude? Moses, and the
Prophets, the types and figures, the worship, and manner of worshipping God
then; also with the troubles and deliverances, the state and government of that
ancient people of God under the Law. Likewise to know whereunto the Apostle
alludeth, the place in hand must be well considered of, and that in all the
circumstances, if there seem to be any doubt of the allusion; for some are so
plain, as the very words carry us to the place, as chap. 2. 7. to Genes. 2.
9. chap. 4. 7. to Ezech. 1. 10. and 10. 14. chap. 11. 4. to Zach. 4. 3. 11. 14.
and 6. 5. and an hundred such, the very words being taken out of the old
Testament, and so will direct us plainly to the places. But some are not so
clear at the first without some further consideration of circumstances; and
therefore to find whereto the allusion is, we must mark what is spoken of in
the place of this prophecy, where we seek the allusion, then, where any such
thing is in the old Testament, where the fittest resemblance may be made, How
to find a more hidden allusion.
most agreeing with the matter, and the circumstances of the text in hand; as
for example, to know whereto, the allusion of the 24. Elders is in chap. 4. we
must consider, first, that the chapter is a common type of Gods Church, and
then these 24. the type of all the faithful, both Kings and Priests, unto God,
which is clear out of chapter 5. 9. for they be redeemed by Christ's blood,
out of every kindred, tongue, people, and nation; by which words it is evident,
first, that they be in type, men; secondly, Christian men; thirdly, put for
all, as being redeemed out of all places. Now this so understood, the allusion
must be to a number of 24. Elders, or chief Fathers, under a Sovereign, as
these here, which is in the 1. Chron. 24. and 27. and therefore thereto the
allusion is, and not to any other place: for that the resemblance cannot be
found elsewhere. So chapter 8. 3. 4. has a type of one mediating between God
and the people, to preserve his from destruction; now to know whereto he
alludeth, we must find one having this office, to stand and offer at the
Altar, which was the high Priests office, in the Leuiticall ministry; and
therefore does John allude thereunto, Exodus, 30. 3. 7. 10. Leuiticus, 16. 17.
Thus we see how to know whereto our Prophet does allude, in many of his
allusions; which one thing being well observed, obscurities will be better
cleared, the truth in differing opinions will be more discerned, and the words
of the prophecy become somewhat more easy to be understood. For the allusion
will keep us to the resemblance, it will illustrate the place clearly, it
will afford a reason of the speech, and of the thing in hand, and prevent also
moreover gross mistakings, and erroneous expositions, as we see in those that
make the 24. Elders, the 24. books of the old Testament; in others that make
them the twelve Patriarchs, and twelve Apostles; all which loose the allusion,
the scope of the chapter, also the historical sense, and are besides most
plainly consuted, out of the 5. chapter, and the 9. verse.

But yet for more full clearing of this point, about Three things to be noted
concerning an allusion.
an allusion, let these three things be diligently noted: First, that all the
allusions from chap. 4. to the end of the prophecy, are taken out of the old
Testament, and therefore there let us look to find them. Secondly, that in
one and the same place of this prophecy there is variety of allusions, as
chap. 4, and 5, so chap. 7: so in one chap. as in chap. 8. and 11, etc.
Thirdly, that albeit in an allusion, there is a resemblance and some
proportion, between one thing and another; yet may we not think that in
those two places, one and the same thing is meant, as such have thought, who
have made the four beasts (chap. 4.) to be all one with those in Ezech. chap.
1. 10. and 10. 14, because there is some kind of likeness between them in
number and fashion. And thus much for the allusion, which is to be observed in
the exposition.

III. Next after the allusion, to interpret any The third means. To mark
whether the place be expounded by the holy Ghost himself.
place, let the Reader mark whether the holy Ghost does expound the same or
no: for as I have showed before, the Lord himself does interpret his own
meaning in very many places of this book; whose interpretation is most
faithful and true. Now this his exposition is twofold, either The holy Ghosts
exposition is twofold.
more clear, and this is sometime in the same chapter, as in chap. 1. 12, by
verse 20. and in chap. 17. 1, by verse 15, and verse 3, by verse 9. 10. and
sometime in one and the same verse of a chap. as chap. 4. 5. and 5. 6. and 19.
8. Or it is more obscure and hidden, and is to be found out thus, first by
considering the words with all the circumstances of the same place, also the
argument of the chapt. and the scope thereof. Thus may we see the four beasts
in chap. 4, to be ecclesiastical persons, the very argument and circumstances
of the same chap. fully shows it: for it typeth out the whole militant Church
in the head, and body, and principal members, and that unto the end; their
place, their properties, and their office considered, plainly tell us what they
be. So we may see the great City mentioned chap. 17, to be Rome, the
circumstances considered there, verse 18, with the 9, and also the same to be
Babylon; for the great City is the Woman, verse. 18, and the Woman has a name
written Babylon, in verse. 5.

Secondly, if the exposition cannot be found in the same Chapter, then seek
the interpretation elsewhere; for surely the Scriptures are interpreters of the
Scriptures, and the meaning of the spirit is to be found out by his own words.
Therefore seek the like phrase, words, or matter elsewhere mentioned, and
there compare place with place, circumstances with circumstances, and one thing
carefully with another, to find out the true sense of the place sought for.
But first seek y^ exposition thus in this book, and if the book expound not
every thing in it self, then compare the place with other places of Scripture.
As for example, I would know what is the beast in chap. 11. 7. therefore I
look into the very place it self, and do observe first, That he ascends out
of the bottomless pit, and then, that he makes war against the Saints, and
prevails. Now I seek out first the word Beast, which I find in chap. 13. 1:
but there is not this original nor practice here set down, in chap. 11. 7
therefore I seek a beast -- ascending out of the bottomless pit, such a one I
find in chap. 17. 8: next I seek one making war against the Saints, and
prevailing, such a one I find in chap. 13. 7. Therefore I conclude, the beast
in chap. 13. 7. and 17. 8, is the same that is mentioned in chap. 11. 7, for
the agreement is full without any difference. Now who, and what this beast is,
I have before fully showed, by comparing one place with another at large.
Again, I would know what is that company with the Lamb in chap. 14. 1.
therefore I look upon the place, and find a number 144000, and which have the
Fathers name written in their forehead; I seek therefore the number, and the
mark in the forehead, and I find it in chap. 7. 4, and those there sealed in
the forehead; so as those 144000, and the sealed Ones in cap. 7, be one and the
same number in the type, and therefore cannot be Jews properly so called; but
there is only an allusion, the number are those elect and faithful number of
Christians protected by Christ, and hidden with him in the time of Antichrists
tyrannical rule and dominion. Which exposition the course of this prophecy
and circumstances of the places will prove, if any doubt of it. If I would know
what is the seal in chap. 7, Exodus 28. 38. and 12. 13.
I seek in the Revelation, but cannot find the word; therefore I consider an
allusion in the speech, and that I find in Ezech. 9. 4; by which in a
resemblance and conformity of case, I see what kind of persons these sealed
Ones in this Revelation (chap. 7) be, such as sigh and cry for all the
abominations committed, as they did, and therefore are protected as they were.
Now for the exposition of the seal, I find by comparing of places, 2. Cor. 1.
22, with Ephesians. 4. 30, and 1. 13, that it is the earnest of the holy spirit of
promise given into their hearts, by which they are sealed unto the day of
redemption. And thus do we see, that the holy spirit of God interprets
himself, either in this prophecy, or in some other places of Scripture.

IV. With these helps and means the faithful The fourth means. Manifold
considerations.
interpreter must besides have with him these manifold considerations, as so
many directions and guides in the way.

I. That from the beginning of the fourth chap. The first is of the time of
this prophecy.
are those things handled, which concern wholly and only the Christian Church
to the worlds end; and this prophecy takes beginning from the time of the
Revelation made, and the things showed unto John in the I Will Patmos; for so is
it clear by the words of him that spoke unto John, chap. 4. 1. and chap. 22.
6. which diverse learned men have noted upon the words of the chap. 4. 1, but
have not observed in their expositions: and therefore have greatly mistaken
things, and confounded the order and course of this prophecy. This
consideration gives us to know, that this prophecy of future things takes
beginning only in the reign of Domitian, the twelfth Roman Emperor after
Caesar, who exiled John into Patmos in the year of our Lord 96, or 97, or
there about, as before is noted; above twenty years after the destruction of
Jerusalem; so as hence may be noted, that it is an utter mistaking to call
back the beginning of this prophecy, to the time and life of Christ, of his
Apostles, of Jerusalem, or any thing literally of the Jews. For although
allusions be frequent to the Jews, yet this prophecy touches nothing those
times, much less the times before from the worlds beginning; but it only
concerns, as I say, the Christian Church, as easily appears by the order,
and whole course of all the parts of the prophecy, from the beginning of the
fourth Chapter unto the end. Therefore to conclude this, the entrance upon this
prophetical history, takes beginning by and by after this was showed unto
John; which rule being kept, the whole order and course of the prophecy will
be better seen, and the wide mistakings of others better discerned, and their
error avoided.

II. That this part of this book, from the beginning The second concerns the
seven seals, seven trumpets, and seven vials, and what they be.
of the sixth Chapter to the end, (after the introduction in the fourth and
fifth chapters) is set out in the opening of the seven seals, blowing of seven
Trumpets, pouring out of seven vials; of which for our better understanding we
must know thus much: First, that they be all plagues upon the worldly sort; the
seals are plagues, the sixth chapter does show it, in the events upon the
Heathen world; the Trumpets are plagues, the events at the They be all plagues
upon three sorts, Heathen, earthly Christians, and Antichristians.
sounding thereof do manifest, chap. 8, and 9; as also that the three last are
called woes, in chap. 9. 12. which fell upon the earthly Christians. The vials
are plagues, the events show in chap. 16, and they be called the seven last
plagues, cap. 15. 1, which light upon the Antichristians; and by terming them
the seven last plagues, it teaches that the former are plagues also. So as
they tell us, how God in the first place revenged himself upon the Heathen for
despising the Gospel, and persecuting of Christians: in the opening of the
seals which are the first plagues; how next (in the second place) he punished
such as professed Christianity, and were but earthly, and carnally minded, in
the sounding out of the Trumpets, in chap. 8. and 9. verse. 21. the second kind
of plagues: lastly, how at length he would plague these Antichristians for
upholding a defection, and an apostaticall course in the pouring out of the
vials, chap. 16. which are the last plagues, as they be called, chap. 15. 1.

Secondly, that these are in order and time one They are in order and time one
before another.
before another, the Seals before the Trumpets, and the Trumpets before the
Vials; so one Seal is opened before another, so one Trumpet blown before
another, and one Vial poured out before another, as the order of 1. 2. 3. 4.
5. 6. and 7. observed constantly by the holy Ghost in all of them evidently
does declare, chap. 6. and 8. and 9. and 16. The Seals are the first sorrows,
the Trumpets the second, and the Vials the third and last plagues; and so
considered, are one before another in order and time. For the effects of the
six Seals, are before the seventh Seal, which brings forth the Trumpets,
whereof six be the proper events thereof, then the seventh Trumpet brings
forth as the proper effects thereof the seven Vials. Therefore the first
Seal, Trumpet, and Vial, are not of one time, nor the second Seal, Trumpet
and Vial, nor so the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7, as some would have them; for they are
brought forth one of another, as we plainly see. Secondly, they are plagues
upon different sorts of persons, in differing times, as is aforesaid, and as
story will witness. Thirdly, this iumbling of them together, confounds the
clear order of the prophetical narration, as the wise and judicious Reader
acquainted with the order, will easily perceive in the reading thereof. Such as
hold this tenent, do make balkes of whole Chapters, either cutting the^ off, as
idle; or else bringing them into such a misconceiued order, as is without all
order, either of the prophecy it self, or history to explain the same. Yea
some would make the first of the seven Churches, to agree with the first Seal,
Trumpet and Vial; and the second, with the second, and so in order also
throughout all the seven: when the text shows, that the seven Churches are of
the times then present, and the other three seuens, of the time to come, chap.
1. 19. and 4. 1. Yea every one may see, that will, how the seven Seals,
Trumpets and Vials, differ both in varying types, and also in the degrees of
evil:

Thirdly, that one Seal from another Seal, one They are distinguished within
themselves one from another, and how.
Trumpet from another Trumpet, one Vial from another Vial, is not
distinguished clearly by periods of time, but by diversity of matter, and
differing events. Therefore to find out the time of opening a Seal, sounding
of a Trumpet, and pouring out of a Vial, and so Seal from Seal, Trumpet from
Trumpet, and Vial from Vial, we are to mark carefully the diverse and
sundry events, of all, and every one from another, and to search in story,
when such things fell out, and so come both to a true and full distinction of
them one from an other; and also to know whether they be as yet come to pass,
or no. Nevertheless note, that their Note this.
perfect difference and a true discerning of them is not, nor cannot be taken
from the first moment of the time of their beginning, but by the height of one
from the height of another: for as the former or precedent plague, of Seal,
Trumpet, or Vial, may hold on in the next succeeding, some space of time; so
may the latter take beginning before the former be come unto the very height.
For as God has ordained judgments, so have they their beginnings, and their
periods; which beginnings and endings in the continuation of linked plagues one
continually succeeding another, have their measures and terms between the
height of the one, and the height of the other, from whence the several
plagues do take their denomination, of 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. and 7. plague; or
else at least when the latter is come to such a degree, as the former plague is
not thought of, in comparison of the latter; in respect whereof the former evil
is not much felt, albeit the evil effects thereof remain still; so in the
height of the former, though the latter be begun, and growing, yet is same
much complained of, so long as the strength of the former evil continues. As
for example, a man tormented with the gowte, in extremity complains of that,
as in a sort his only disease, albeit the stone be breeding, which he but
lightly feels, for the anguish of the gowte in extremity or height; but when
the stone is grown to the height of torment, though the gowte be not gone, yet
the grievous torture of the stone, makes the less pain of the gowte, being
somewhat also allaied, not to be remembered or spoken of, while the torment of
the stone is in the height. So must we conceive of these plagues, in one
Seal, Trumpet, and Vial, going before and following another, hereby rightly
to distinguish them, and to know one from another, where to begin the account,
and to end the same: as also that we do not mistake them, when we see the
effects of one with another, preceding and succeeding in a continual link one
in another, not only in Seal and Seal, Trumpet and Trumpet, Vial and Vial,
but also in the Trumpets following upon the Seals, and the Vials the Trumpets
in one continued course, without interruption, till all the wicked sort be
overthrown. For this prophecy tells us, that there has been from John's
time til now, a continued vengeance of God upon the wicked, first upon those
that were not Christians, but Heathen, then on earthly and worldly Christians,
making a defection; and now is upon the Antichristians, and so shall continue
till they be utterly destroyed, as we may see from the beginning of the
sixteenth Chapter, to the end of chap. 19: and by the parts of this prophecy,
which are as it were drawn on and coupled one to another, Trumpets to the
Seals, and Vials to the Trumpets, so as the same show a continued course of
Gods plagues upon the wicked, till they be destroyed, and the Church
victoriously exalted.

III. We are to consider, that the beginning The third consideration. Nothing
past, or present, which has the beginning showed in type unto John.
and original of any thing showed in type unto John, was not past, nor then
present, when this Revelation was showed to John, but to come afterward,
according to that saying, I will show thee the things that must be done
hereafter, chap. 4. 1. Therefore we see that the original of that great red
Dragon, typing out the Heathen Empire, is not noted in chap. 12. because it
then was. But the original of the beast, in chap. 13. is set down; therefore
it is manifest that that beast was not in John's time, and so not a type of the
Heathen Roman Empire. The benefit of this consideration.
This consideration will distinguish between one thing and another, and by
marking under what seal, trumpet, or vial, the original is mentioned, we may
know the time. Which yet is not (as I take it) meant of the very beginning and
first moment of time, but of the first powerful effect of the thing typed, by
which the same is notably manifested; as in chap. 9. 1. the fall of a star
from heaven is set down, which was yet in falling before, but now was fallen
under the fifth trumpet, to the place where it should be. As appears by the
power of the key, received forthwith upon this fall mentioned. So chap. 13. 1.
the rising of the beast, must be understood of an eminent height, and not of a
creeping, and secret rising; for that upon this rising, his enthronizing, his
great power and authority is mentioned withal; for the types here are
remarkable things of that which is typed, at least in the most principal
matters, instruments, and agents, if not in all and every particular.

IV. That one singularly mentioned in type, The fourth consideration. One in
type, put for many, and all of that sort, whereof the one is a type.
(except it be of that whereof there is but one in nature) is to be taken for
a general type of all of that sort, whereof that one is a type, paterning out
the nature and acts of all: for in such signs of future things, the agreement
rather of the things themselves, are to be marked, then the very unities of
persons. In Exodus 4. 2 2. there is the singular number of person, put for all
Gods people in Egypt. It is not rare therefore to have one put, to set out
many, agreeing and alike in the same matter. Thus is Angel after Angel, chap.
14. 6. 8. 9. to be taken for the several sorts of Evangelical Preachers, in
the diverse singular types. So one or many in a type, for one and the same thing
in kind, condition, or office, is to be so taken of some, at one time, as the
succeeding posterities also be therein understood, and not a continuing of one
and the self same to all succeeding ages. As for example, the 24. Elders,
chap. 4. are a type of the people of God, even then when this prophecy came to
John, as also of the posterity continuing in the faith, or such as shall
succeed in their place, they being dead. The four beasts are types of
Ecclesiastical governors, not only the first, but of the last that shall be,
to the worlds end. The two Prophets, in chap. 11. being slain, as is noted in
verse. 8. and raised up again, verse. 11. are a type of the first in that act,
and also of others succeeding them when they be dead. So the one false prophet,
chap. 19. 20. and the beast like a lamb, chap. 13. 11. is a type of a
personal succession in the continuing of Antichrist, in one and the same
apostaticall seat, power and authority.

V. That some time, one and the same person, The fifth consideration.
and thing, is diversely set out; we shall find Christ set out in a diverse
manner, in sundry places; as A person or thing but one, yet diversely set out.
chap. 1. 5. 13. 14. 15. 16. chap. 3. 7. chap. 5. 5. 6. chap. 10. 1. 2. chap.
19. 12. 13. 14. So is the Church of Christ typed out diversely, in chap. 4.
chap. 12. 7. chap. 14. 1. 5. chap. 15. 2. 3. chap. 19. 8. chap. 21. 1. 2. 10.
27. Likewise Antichrist is diversely set out in sundry types; chap. 9. 1. 11.
chap. 13. 11. chap. 19. 20. as also the Ministers of the Gospel, by stars,
chap. 1. 20. by beasts, chap. 4. 7. by Prophets, oliuetrees, and candlestickes,
chap. 11. 3. 4. and by Angels, chap. 14. 6. 8. 9. This is necessary to be
observed, lest out of the variety of figures, terms and types, of one and the
same person and thing, we imagine differing things, and differing persons.

VI. That the holy descriptions here, and types The sixth consideration.
of differing persons and things, well weighed in all the circumstances
together, do truly give the The descriptions of things, or persons, do give
us the true difference of them, one from another.
difference of these differing things and persons, one from another; for the
descriptions are not so general and common, as that they may be applied, now
to this, and then unto that thing, which does differ one from another: for that
is contrary to the nature of a true description of differing things, which
should, and here indeed do, point out one thing from another, truly and
faithfully, according to the meaning of the holy Ghost. Therefore as things the
same, may not be made differing; so things clearly distinguished, are not to
be confounded; but yet to have a right judgment to know the same things to be
the same, and to distinguish well, and to prevent this confounding of things,
let us consider carefully in what they agree, and in what they fully differ.
For some things may in some light circumstances vary a little, and yet be the
same; so may there be some manner of agreement in some special points, and yet
again withal, such a clear disagreeing in some other maine matters and
circumstances of great ^^^ment, as thereby they may be fully known, not to be
the same things. The Dragon and first beast, chap. 12. 3. and 13. 1. agree in
some things plainly, yet in othersome so disagree, as they cannot be one and
the same, as is before showed at large. The star, chap. 9. 1. and the Angel,
chap. 20. 1. agree in this, that both have the key of the bottomless pit, yet
in other things, such is the difference, as they cannot possibly be the same;
the one falls, (which is ever to be here in this book taken in the evil
part) but the other does descend; the one opens, the other shuts the pit:
the time also makes a great difference, the one is under the sixth seal, the
other is under the fifth trumpet. The Angels, in chap. 7. 1. and chap. 9. 14.
agree in number, 4. and 4. as also, that they all be angels of wrath; but yet
such is the difference, and so great, that by no means can they be one and the
same: as by comparing them together, from their places and standing, from their
time before one another, and from their differing executions, may appear. This
consideration is very behoofefull, to know what things are one, and what do
differ, and are not the same.

VII. And lastly, a special consideration is to The seventh consideration.
be had of the times mentioned in this prophecy, which are put partly
indefinitely, as in chap. 2. 10. Where ten a (certain number) is put for an
uncertain, and is a common figurative number, thus put in many places: as in
Genesis 31. 7. 41. and Number. 14. 22. Job 19. 3. so half an hour, chap. 8. in all
common speech for a little space; so is an hour, day, month, and year, in
chap. 9. 15. put indefinitely, which is a gradation of the time, the lesser
making the greater, as a day is of hours, a month of days, and a year of
months, to show only how from time to time, from the least space to the
greatest, God has certainly set them their terms, which they shall not pass.
Othersome I take to be set down definitiuely, yet so, as one number is set
down in proper terms, as is that of binding of the Dragon a thousand years;
the rest prophetically, days put for years, as in Dan. 9. 24. 25. 26. weeks
of days for years; such are these numbers 5. months, chap. 9. 42. months,
in chap. 11. 2. 1260. days, in chap. 11. 3. and 12. 6. And albeit they be
allusions, as some will have the 5. months to allude to Genesis chap. 7. 24. as
the time, two times and a half, to Dan. chap. 7. 25. which is all one with 42.
months, and 1260. days, (counting 30. days to a month) that is three years
and a half, alluding unto 1. King. 17. 1. which time is expounded to be so
much, in Luke 4. 25. Yet allusions to the times in the old Testament, do here
no more take away the certainty and definitenesse of number; then the allusion
to the beasts in Daniel, takes away the certainty of a state in the beast,
typed out unto us in chap. 13. 1. I confess that allusions in the numbers
given unto persons; as the number of four, to the four beasts; the number of
24. to the Elders; the number of 144000. in chap. 14. 1. and the number of
twelve times twelve, to the Tribes, cannot be taken for so certain a number,
the absurdities thereof is so apparent; but that these numbers of time before
mentioned, are definite and certain limited spaces of time, we may yield it;
for that the spirit of God sets down Why some numbers are here to be taken
definitely.
this number of five months, as it were; so carefully, again and again; so
the 42. and 1260. as thereby aduising us to a careful taking up of the same; as
also for that these numbers are tied to some certain circumstances of persons
and actions. Moreover, for that this is a prophetical history; and therefore
shows us with the persons and their deeds, the certain time thereof; also
for more clear sight of things and comfort to the Church. Lastly, because the
holy Ghost takes up such numbers of 5. 42. 1260. as are no where put
indefinitely in Scripture, nor else in any common use of speech, which the
spirit does not so much swerue from in such things, but to make us to
understand more certainly times set down. And thus much for these
considerations, as being the most general and necessary to help us to the
understanding of this book.

V. Means in expounding this prophecy is, The fifth mea^^
to use the helps of the servants of Christ, to whom To take help of others.
this Revelation is sent to be showed, such as be living, and have painfully
studied this book, are to be consulted with; for albeit there be but one
spirit, yet are there variety of gifts, and the measure of knowledge is not
alike in all. By godly conference, done in true humility, and in only love
unto the truth, (which ought in all the true godly only to be sought after)
great good may be gotten. The labors and learned Commentaries of other holy
men, must also be carefully read, wherein it shall be profitable to observe,
how they do expound every place; noting, first, by what means What to observe
in reading of commentaries upon this book.
they do it. Secondly, what reasons they do give for their interpretations.
Thirdly, wherein one differs from another, and upon what grounds; all which
carefully marked (partial respects of opinions laid aside) the text diligently
viewed, and the reasons brought to the true touchstone, the truth will (by the
aid of Gods spirit) better appear. Yea and by these observations, an
intelligent Reader may gather rules for himself, to help to the interpreting
of this book, as peradventure some have done. The sixth means.


VI. And lastly, to confirm the exposition, there is to be added the story,
according to the progress of this prophetical narration here, given from
God, unto Jesus Christ; and from him to his Angel, to signify the same to his
holy Apostle, for the use of the Church, and profit of all Gods people. The
accommodation of story will The accommodation of story to the text.
greatly clear the words of the text, and open the meaning of this prophecy
unto us, some have taken commendable pains herein, and are worthy of praise
therefore. It were much to be wished, that learned men, and well read in
histories, would labor yet more to apply the same to the prophecy, but
according as the order of this book, and method thereof requires; not
explaning some places only, but to take up this prophecy before them, and
that also in the very steps trodden out by the holy Ghost, foreshewing, in an
even and very orderly progress, how every thing should come to pass, from the
times of John's receiving the same, to the worlds end. For seeing this prophecy
foretells most orderly, how one thing in time goes before another, and in
the same order as it is set down, and no otherwise; it must needs be most
meet, to bring the story to the methodicall prediction of the holy spirit, to
clear every part in his proper place, and not to inuert the order of the
prophecy, to draw it to our method in reading of histories.

CHAP. VI.
Of the interpretation of the most principal and hardest things in every
chapter, from the beginning of the fourth chapter, throughout the Prophecy.

Notes upon Chap. 4.
Heaven is the true Church, (so taken, Verse. 2.
Esa. 65. 17. and 66. 22. Dan. 8. 10. Luke 10. 18. chap. 9. 1.) in a heavenly
state and condition here upon earth, and the Church is called Heaven, first,
because their names are written in heaven, which are truly of it, Hebr. 12. 23.
Secondly, for that their consolation is in heaven, Philip. 3. 20. Thirdly,
because it is a lively image thereof, here on earth. Fourthly, because it is
the true home of the Church. And fifthly, because the true Church is from
above, chap. 3. 12. and 21. 1. Here is a description of the true Church
militant, which shall get victory over her enemies, and reign on earth, chap.
5. 10. Also such as be typed out by the Elders, and beasts, are continual
actors with the Church in every estate, as appears out of chap. 6. and 14.
15. and 19. And this note, that throughout this prophecy, that Heaven, in
opposition to the earth, is taken for the state of the true Church, as the
earth is for the worldly sort.

Verse. 4. 24. Elders, type out the whole company of the elect people, chapt. 5.
9. Kings and Priests to God, Exodus 19. 6. 1. Pet. 2. 5. being round about him,
Psalm. 76. 11. the allusion is to 1. Chr. 24.

Verse. 5. Lightenings, thunders and voices. An allusion to Exodus 19. 16. for
the effects whereof in Moses, see Hebr. 12. 21. and the use, Exodus 20. 20.
these words are repeated in three other places of this prophecy, chap. 8. 5.
and 11. 19. and 16. 18. which well considered do show, that these signify
Gods judgments going forth from God, for the Churches safety, upon her
enemies; for here they are said to come out from the throne, as being for the
Churches good, Ier. 25. 30. Joel 3. 16. and in the other places of this
Revelation, they be named with judgments, as earthquakes, and hail, and do
come forth only against the wicked, chap. 16. 18. for lightenings and thunder,
see Psalm. 18. 13. 14. for voice, Psalm. 46. 6. His judgments are swift as
lightenings, terrible as thunder, and unavoidable, also not without fearful
speaking to the consciences of his enemies, as voices to make them to tremble.

Verse. 6. A sea. Though waters in this book be put for people, nations, and
tongues, chap. 17. 15. yet the word Sea, is not here so to be understood; we
must take the words, as may agree with the scope of the chapter, and the rest
of the circumstances setting out the Church, and those things which are
behoofefull for it; neither will the matter, nor that whereto it is compared,
admit that exposition. This is a Sea of glass like unto Crystal, which be
words of praises to set out this sea by: it is also such a Sea, as on which the
godly stand rejoicing, and admits a mixture of sire, chapter 15. 2. It is also
ever with the people of God, they and it never separated, so as it cannot be
meant the sea properly, nor yet be put, as the word waters be, for multitudes
of people of diverse nations; here in this, as in the other words, is an
allusion to the huge vessel called a Sea, 1. King. 7. 23. 2. Chron. 4. 3. the
use whereof was for the Priests to wash their hands and feet, when they went
into the Tabernacle, and when they went to the Altar, Exodus 30. 18-21. It is
therefore here put for the whole worship of God, being that which the Priests
were first to go unto, before they came before God, and for that, water is put
for doctrine, Esaias 55. 1. 2. for Baptism, 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. for the Lords
Supper, 1. Cor. 10. 4. for prayer, 1. Sam. 7. 5. By which sanctified means, we
are (as it were) washed to draw nigh unto God, as David said, I will wash my
hands in innocence, and so will I go to thine Altar, Psalm. 26. 6.

Verse. 6. and 7. Four Beasts, an allusion to Ezra. 1. 5. and 10. 5. they are
types of Ecclesiastical persons, their place between God and the Elders show
it; also by this it may be known, that they be leaders of the public actions
of Gods worship, verse. 9. 10. chap. 5. 14. Types of men they are, because they
be redeemed from among men by Christ's blood, chap. 5. 9. therefore no Angels.
They are also said to be redeemed out of every kindred, tongue, people, and
nation, chap. 5. 9. Yea they also do type out such as live after the
destruction of Rome, rejoicing with Gods people, chap. 19. 4. and therefore
cannot be the four Evangelists: and where do we find a man typed out to
himself in a vision, as John needs must here see himself in a vision? yea
moreover he should be made to speak to himself, chap. 6. 1. 3. 5. 7, if by
these beasts were signified the four Evangelists; but John here, verse. 1, is
showed things not present, nor past, but that must be after the revealing of
this Revelation.

Notes upon Chap. 5.
Verse. 1. -- A book. This is this book of this Revelation, for the book in Gods
hand, which Christ Jesus took of him, verse. 18. is that which is called the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, chap. 1. 1. Again, the
matter of that and this is one and the same; for the things which fell out upon
the opening of the several seals, are the particular matters contained in
this book; neither came John to the knowledge of what here is written to us,
before this book was opened, to show unto him things to be done afterward. So
as this now written book, called the Revelation, has the full contents of
this book in Gods hand, and neither more nor less, and so both books are one
and the same. The opening also of the book and opening of the seals is one,
chap. 6. 1, and here verse. 9, for the seals are the parts of the book:
neither is there any thing contained in the book, which is not within the
seven seals, for out of these come the trumpets, and out of the trumpets the
vials, as before is noted.

Notes upon Chap. 6.
Verse. 1. Seals are the first plagues upon the world of heathen, called
seals, as certain and irreuocable judgments, from Gods determined counsel,
to revenge the wrongs of his Church upon them, and as assurances to the godly
to confirm their faith, in the truth of the rest which follow in this
prophecy. Or, they may be called Seals, because they imprint Gods displeasure
upon the parties plagued, making certain their damnation, except they do
repent: Or, for that the things contained under the seals were hidden, and the
reason of them unknown, till* the Lamb Christ Jesus did open them. For though
other did sound the Trumpets, and pour out the vials; yet he only opens the
seals, as containing the whole book, which he only took out of his fathers
hand, and was only found worthy to open the same, chap. 5. 9.

Six seals are opened in this Chapter, and are so many types of ensuing evils
to fall out, after John's receiving of this Revelation, upon the heathen
persecutors of Christ's Church.

Verse. 2. A type of a prevailing judgment, the Habac. 3. 8. If these seals
begin with Constantine the Emperor, then the first seal is his triumph over
the heathen Emperors conquering to conquer: the second seal the bloody wars
following. 3. the famine. 4 the mixture of all, an allusion to Ezech. 5. a type
of peace granted for a space. 6. the fury of the Goths and Vandales: and so
after in the Chapters following, the arising up of Antichrist, which may
perhaps stand, if truth of story will go with this order, which I do leave to
the learned to examine.
Horse here and in the other are an allusion to Zach. 1. 8. and 6. 2. 3, to set
out (as it were) the act and carriage thereof by the Horse, which is strong,
Job. 39. 19, swift, Iere. 4. 13, and careless of any opposite, not turning
back, Job. 39. 22, without the command of the Rider. White is a color for
triumph and peace, which as in this, so in all the rest, shows the quality
of the plague, to be a destruction quiet, as in peace and triumph without
resistance: for if it be marked, a color is given to every horse, according to
the several plagues. The Rider to guide this horse is not named, yet chap. 19.
11, Christ so rides, and it is sure that the wicked took notice of the Lambs
wrath, after these judgments came out, verse. 16. The story of this time in
the latter end of Domitian, and after him would (perhaps) clear this more to
us. A bow: an instrument used in war, Psalm. 44. 6, it is put for some means,
by which God uses to destroy the wicked, Psalm. 7. 12. Lam. 2. 4: but with the
bow must be understood Arrows, Lam. 3. 12, which are called instruments of
death, Psalm. 7. 13. and by shooting of an arrow Gods heavy judgment is noted,
Psalm. 64. 7. A Crown: noting victory; the words conquering and to conquer
give the reason thereof, and are added to this first plague, as the end why God
does punish, to bring men in subjection; which if it will not be, then other
and greater plagues shall follow, (so in Leuit. 26. 18. 24. 28.) as we may
note in every one of these to be greater degrees of plagues one after another.
Whatsoever the plague here is, I cannot be induced to think it the power of
the preaching of the Gospel, first, because the Gospels power was known to
all Gods Church, but this not known till the seal was opened. Secondly, this
is one of the things to be done after the revealing of this prophecy, chap.
4. 1. Thirdly, the Gospel cannot be counted, neither is noted any where, as a
plague, in Gods word. Fourthly, because the other types following, as also the
Trumpets and vials are plagues, therefore it seems to me altogether an utter
mistaking, to make this type to differ in nature from them all; and to make
that a plague among the rest, which is in deed and truth the first of all
blessings, howsoever the wicked make it to them the savor of death. Fifthly
and lastly, this was such a plague, as the faithful believers need rousing up,
by the first beasts voice as thunder, to take knowledge of the same. If I may
give my conjecture, I suppose it (with learned Iunius) to be the pestilence;
first, because the arrow and pestilence are together in Psalm. 91. 5. 6.
Secondly, it is the judgment in which God of all other most triumphs, as
being his immediate hand, and acted of him, as in triumph, when such as be so
plagued do lie dead before him, and he riding over their heads. Thirdly,
because of the degrees of these evils, one greater then another; as first
pestilence here; the second, sword, in verse. 4; the third, famine, in verse. 5.
6; the fourth, all these four great plagues together, verse. 8.

Verse. 4. A type of war: It is plain and easy, only note here as before in
the other, the color red, is answerable to the judgment, bloody wars.

Verse. 5. A type of famine: The horses color, the ensigns and the voice give
the explication, and show what is hereby meant. The voice in the midst of the
four beasts, is the voice of Christ, for he is in the midst of them, chap.
5. 6.

Verse. 8. A type of deadly mortality. The color of the horse, the name of the
Rider, his power to kill by the sword, do tell us fully the meaning of this
type; the allusion is to the four great plagues in Ezech. 14. 21.

Verse. 9. 10. 11. A type of the bloody slaughter of Christian Martyrs calling
for vengeance against their cruel persecutors, as Abels blood did for revenge
upon Caine, Genesis 4. 10; as also showing Gods justice ready to avenge the blood
of his Saints upon the murderers, so as here also is given a reason of the
equity of the great plague in the sixth seal. This is a great plague of God,
to be guilty of innocent blood, which so loudly cries in Gods ears, as in
justice he cannot, but as a Lord holy and true, judge and avenge the same,
verse 9. an allusion to Exodus 29. 12, where the blood of the sacrifice was
poured out, at the bottom of the Altar. Christ is our altar, at whose feet,
he being now in the highest heavens, these faithful martyrs have their blood
shed and poured out, whose persons are as acceptable sacrifices to him; but
their blood call for vengeance, as Abels blood, to which the allusion is. White
robes notes their justification, and peace obtained. For their robes are only
made white by Christ's blood, cap. 7. 13. The crying loud voice, and answer
thereto, must be well noted, for they show the scope and meaning of the type.

Verse. 12. 13. 14. A type of the wrath and fearful vengeance of God coming
upon the wicked world, verse. 17, tells us, that all is to express the great
day of Gods wrath, which none should be able to endure.

A great earthquake: that is, a great change, and Esa. 24. 19. 20.
notable alteration of the present state in the world by Gods judgments upon
the wicked, so it is taken, cap. 16. 18. and elsewhere, Heb. 12. 26. Psalm. 68.
9. because great alterations in high matters, either in the Church or
commonweal, cannot be without great stirs, moving every man in his place
and standing, to tremble, as by an earthquake*

The blackness of the Sun, the turning of the Moon into blood, the falling
of stars, and the departing away of the heaven, the moving of mountains and
Islands, are figurative and hyperbolicall kind of speeches, framed according to
the words of the Prophets, Esa. 13. 10. 13. and 50. 3. and 34. 4. Ier. 4. 23.
Ezech. 32. 7. 8. Joel 2. 31. and 3. 15. only to express, as Esaias speaks, in
chap. 13. 9. 11. the day of the Lords coming, cruel with wrath and fierce
anger, to make a desolation, and to punish the world for the evils and
iniquities thereof. The storm and tempest, whereof shall be so boisterous and
terrible, as shall make all sorts to be as at their wits end, not knowing what
to do.

The 15. 16. 17. verses, with the allusions, show the sense and scope, and that
the words are not further to be extended. They are not meant of the last
judgment, for this is (...) of the sixth seal, the seventh remains (...)
these to be opened, and the effects thereof (...) be showed in the trumpets,
and after them the vials before the day of the Lord come. Neither can they be
meant of the decay of the visible Church, for that matter is handled in the
opening of the seventh seal, and the six trumpets which be the parts
thereof: also the deed and words of such as felt this plague, in verse. 15. and
16. show, that it is not to be understood in any sort of the Church, for the
plagued of all sorts acknowledge, this horrible vengeance to be from him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrathful displeasure of the Lamb, the
Churches Savior.

Notes upon. Chap. 7.
Verse. 1. Four Angels: These are ministers of indignation, and of the ensuing
evils to come upon the world, upon the opening of the seventh seal, in chap.
8. which yet were prepared here in some degree under the sixth seal, as the
words imply, being ready standing to execute their power; as also for that they
be named here before the seventh seal be opened, that they be instruments
of evil, is plain in verse. 3.

Four: A number according to the four corners Ier. 49. 32.
of the earth, and the four winds, noting an universality (Matthew. 24. 31.) of
the judgment.

Holding the four winds: Winds properly taken, when they be tempestuous are
hurtful, but moderate blowing is most necessary and profitable: and the
restraint of them from blowing, causes corruption, and so breeds diseases,
and brings destruction to the creatures; therefore in this figurative
speaking, holding of the winds from blowing, is noted here a plague, which
should be hurtful to the earth, sea, and trees.

Wind: Four winds are named, because of the parts of the earth from whence
they blow, yet in nature all but one, and therefore also he here speaks
singularly, that the wind should not blow. Wind is here taken figuratively, we
cannot understand it after the letter, for we read not of ever any such
plague, and if any such had been, the sealed ones could not have escaped it,
being so universal, and being so notable a plague, it could not but have been
observed of some in the world. Therefore by winds, we must conceive some other
thing then wind properly, even an heavenly inspiration, and spiritual
breathing of truth; as it is taken in Cant. 4. 18. Ioh. 3. 8. Act. 2. 2. which
these are said to hold, by hindering the faithful and sincere preaching
thereof. A spiritual plague upon the earthly Christians, is here to be
understood, which now follows after all the former corporal plagues upon the
Heathen. For the preservation signified by the sealing in the forehead is
spiritual, and such a preservation as keeps the^ that are sealed, safe from
the hurt which the earth, sea, and trees were subject unto, verse. 3. And this
calamity, though prepared under the 6. seal, yet has his force and power felt
under the seventh seal; the events whereof are spiritual plagues, contention,
ambition, corruption of doctrine, fearful Apostasy, and Antichrists getting
into his throne, the false prophet deceiving the world; all which follow upon
the blowing of the trumpets, the proper effects of the seventh seal, whereof
these withholders of the wind, are a part, and from whence the other mischiefs
ensue, which yet so are spiritual, as there is also corporal calamities often
mixed therewith.

Earth: Is the place of the visible Church; and the earthly ones of it, among
which the sealed ones are, and therefore need special protection. Sea: is the
common worship, pure, or impure. Trees: are men, chap. 9. 4. to which usually
men are compared in the Scriptures, Psalm. 1. 3. Esa. 61. 3. Ezra. 47. 7. as
the wind and withholding thereof, has a spiritual interpretation, so must
these also. For if they be taken literally, they are not capable of a
spiritual plague. Of the Seal: see before in chap. 5. of this preparatiue.

Of all the tribes of the children of Israel: As the Israelites were together
the visible Church of God, yet but a chosen number the true Israelites indeed,
Romans 9. 8. 27. for all were not Israel, which were of Israel, Romans 9. 6.
neither he a Jew which is one outward, but one inward, Romans 2. 28. so here by
an allusion to them, the Prophet shows, that among Christians, and in the
visible Church of Christ, and in the ouerspreading of Antichrist, there are
only a special chosen number, in comparison of worldly Christians, a few the
true Israelites of God, as they be called, Galath. 6. 16. For an Israelite and
Jew, are now common names to Jews and Israelites by nature, and to Gentiles,
Israelites and Jews by grace. For such as be of the faith of Abraham, are his
children, Galath. 3. 7. and now the Israelites of God, are now Jews inward,
and circumcised in heart, Romans 2. 29. These here are not to be taken for
Israelites properly, and natural Jews, for the consideration of the time here
to be noted, when this number was taken, will not permit that they should be
so understood. Again, this is a part of the things to be done after John's
time, chap. 4. 1. Moreover this number of 12. times 12. is the same with chap.
14. 1. that number of an 144000. which was in Antichrists time; these have also
the common name of the servants of God given them, in verse. 3. of this chapter,
and which sung the new song, in chap. 14. 3. before the throne, and before the
beast, and Elders, that is, in the true Christian Church. And what should
persuade any man to think, that God respected only the Jews, to seal them,
and to let pass all other true and faithful Christians, under this so great
and universal a plague, here foreshewed to be over all parts of the earth,
from which these sealed ones were to be exempted? Therefore the sealed ones are
all that chosen and secret number of true and faithful servants of Christ,
following him, and redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God,
and to the Lamb, (chapt. 14. 4.) preserved in the general defection and
Apostasy of Antichrist, till the light should break forth again, and a great
multitude without number be added to them, and so make an open profession of
Christ, and sincerely worshipping of him, as is foreshewed here in this chap.
7. 9. 15.

Notes upon Chap. 8.
Verse. 2. Seven trumpets: these are the events of the opening of the seventh
seal, these be the second evils upon the worldly sort, as the 6. seals were
the first. They are called trumpets, as sounding out Gods displeasure to the
earthly minded, to awake them; as also to note, that these plagues should not
be without open hostility, a proclaiming of open defiance, and provoking to
war, gathering troops together, to make assaults, and to encounter one
another, as deadly enemies in battle. These seven trumpets and alarmes, upon
the worldly-minded Christians, shall shake them, and the last sound shall bring
down their strength, as at the sound of the seven trumpets the walls of
Jericho fell, Josh. 6. 20. to which is the allusion.

Verse. 3. The Angel. Here by all probable arguments is the same, that is in
chap. 7. 2. there sealing the godly, here praying for their safety; it is an
allusion to the ministry of the high Priest under Exodus 30. 1. 7. 8
the Law; noting that at the going forth of wrath, God remembers mercy, and
receives by Christ, an atonement for his people.

Verse. 5. For the fire of the Altar, it is an allusion to Leuit. 16. 12. 13.
and the casting of it to Ezech. 10. 2. 7. a type of Gods wrath. It is here
cast into the earth, among the earthly Christians, whereupon follow voices,
etc. of which in chap. 4.

Verse. 7. An allusion to the plague, in Exodus 9. 24. Psalm. 105. and 18. 13. 14.
as waters be put for the graces of Gods spirit, and holy Scriptures, Psalm.
46. 4. Esa. 12. 5. and 55. 1. and 44. 3. Ier. 2. 13. and 17. 13. Zach. 14. 8.
Ioh. 4. 10. 14. and 7. 38. 39. 1. Cor. 36. So hail, of a waterie nature, is
corruption of Scripture, and false doctrine, and may well be called hail. 1.
because it is not of pure water, but of a vapor from the earth; so false
doctrine cannot arise from the pure fountain of Scriptures, but as a vapor
from earthly minds. Secondly, hail is neither in extremity of heat, nor cold,
but between both: so false doctrine commonly is hatched in a state of
luke-warmenesse. Thirdly, it is of drops of rain congealed, and by staying
above, and turning in the fall, becomes round: so false doctrine is of
parcels of Scriptures abused, turned up and down in man's vain heart, without
the heat of Gods spirit, and becomes hurtful hailestones, being not square
and stable as truth, but round, unstable, resting grounded sollidly upon no
place of Scripture, but very easy to be tossed too and fro. Fourthly, because
hail is hurtful to corn and fruit: so is false doctrine hurtful to them
upon whom it falls, destroying the graces and fruits of the spirit.

Fire mingled with blood: Thus is the heat of contention* like fire not
without blood-shead. Trees are men, (Luke 23. 31.) as before is noted. Green
grass, young and tender plants in religion, weak and fading, as grass; so
weak persons are compared, Esa. 37. 27. This is the first plague, and step to
the general Apostasy of Antichrist.

Verse. 8. An allusion to Exodus 7. 20. 21. by earth before is noted the visible
Church; now a mountain is that which is of height out of the earth; so it must
be a proud aspiring above others, in ambitious eminency, showing it self
aloft an the visible Church, whereupon it is called great; which inflameth men's
hearts, as fire burning with the heat thereof. For unlawful authority above
others, both in the getting and maintaining of the same, is not without burning
and the fire of contention: men eagerly and hotly pursue their desires therein.
Now that here is meant an unlawful getting up above others, is evident. First,
because this, as well as the former trumpet is a plague. Again, it is ( as it
were) a great mountain, not one indeed truly arising out of the earth, as a
true mountain does. Moreover it is of an ill effect, working destruction,
which lawful authority does not, but as it is abused. Lastly it keeps not
the proper place on the earth, but is cast into the sea, that is, into the
ordinary worship of God, and so is where it should not be, usurping power in
spiritual things.

The third part: It is usual in the Prophets to speak of a third part, Ezech.
5. 11. Zach. 13. 8. 9. So here Saint John, verse. 7. 10. 11. 12. and cap. 12.
4. and 16. 19. which is to be taken for a great part. Became blood: that is,
deadly corrupted bringing death, as the next verse shows, the like phrase is,
chap. 16. 3.

Verse. 9. Creatures in the sea: are the sort of Churchmen, which exercised
about the service of God. Ships are the principal and chief offices, in and
about the public worship. Of such ships mention is also made, cap. 18. 19.

Verse. 10. A great star: Here is some one minister of special note typed
out, yet so, as other declining with him be herein also understood. Stars,
cap. 1. 20. are Angels of Churches. Heaven is the true Church: Burning as it
were a lamp. Such a one was this star in his fall, not shining with a
clear, gentle, and comfortable light, as a star; but flaming as a torch,
with great heat of spirit, making his falling most apparent. Fountains and
rivers, are the Scriptures and interpretation thereof.

Verse. 11. Wormwood, is a bitter herb, Prou. Deuteronomy. 29. 18.
5. 4. the Lord expresses a heavy plague by this, Ier. 8. 14. and 9. 15. and
23. 15. And hereby the afflicted Church of God sets out her affliction and
misery, Lam. 3. 15. 19. This star has the name from the effect upon these
spiritual waters, as the words of the text it self do show: and this is the
plague, the lord giuing-ouer some to drink of these bitter waters, to make
them die.

Verse. 12. A type of great darkness, for here smiting of the Sun, Moon,
and stars, is plainly interpreted darkening of them. By Sun, Moon, and
stars, is noted all means of spiritual lights in the highest, middle, and
lowest degree; all is to aggrauate in these speeches, the gross ignorance,
darkening all true knowledge in every degree.

Note here, that in all these four there be degrees, according to the
letter, from the lowest to the highest, as first, earth, the Sea, then rivers
and fountains, then Sun, Moon, and stars, spiritually, giving us the
degrees of evil, and corruptions in religion. First, corruption and decay of
religion in men's hearts and lives, verse. 7. then in Gods worship, verse. 8. 9.
after this the abuse, and corrupting of Scripture, verse. 10. And then lastly
great ignorance: for that darkness had come upon the lights of truth, noted in
this verse. 12. all in course of time, following one upon another in order, as
notable steps and degrees of that general Apostasy, noted in the blowing of
the next trumpet, cap. 9. 1. And as the other were corporal plagues, so these
are for the most part, spiritual plagues, therefore need there trumpets to
awake men to take notice of them, for spiritual plagues are more hardly taken
notice of, then corporal.

Verse. 13. A type of godly learned men, among which, some of most special
note, foreseeing the mischiefs ensuing upon these former evils, gives
warning. Flying: notes an exceeding forwadnesse, and earnest endeavor with
all speediness to do a thing. Through the midst of heaven, the like phrase
is, chap. 14. 6. and 19. 17. which notes a being in the open view and hearing
among others: Thus is ( in the midst) taken. Act. 2. 22. Heb. 2. 12. Phil. 2.
15. It may imply some of special esteem above the rest in the Church, whom God
had qualified with excellent gifts, and endued with heavenly wisdom, to
fore-warne the true people of God, of the things which should after fall out.

Notes upon Chap. 9.
Ver. 1. A star: is here a Pastor or Bishop, or great Clergie-man set out,
for a star is an Angel of the Church, chap. 1. 20. yet not to be taken for
one man personally, but the general type of such as be here understood. Fall:
so it is an Apostaticall Churchman. Falling is to be taken in the worst part in
this book, it may be an allusion to Esai. 14. 12. This falling or great
apostasy, grew up by the former evils mentioned in the other Chap. as so many
steps to this, which is the first of the three woes spoken of before. From
heaven to the earth: that is, from the heavenly state of the true Church, to a
worldly state among earthly Christians. This star is not that mentioned in
chap. 8. 20, for they are under several Trumpets, and are also one before
another: moreover that falls upon rivers and fountains, this on the earth;
that is limited to a third part, this is without limitation; the difference is
great in other particulars, to show they are not one and the same: for if they
had, John would not have said a star, but that star; neither would he have
said I saw, which is ever upon some thing not mentioned before, as may be
observed in all the places where the speech is used, chap. 6. 1. 2. 5. 8. 9.
12. chap. 7. 1. 2. 9. chap. 8. 2. 13. and so elsewhere.

Key: This is a sign of government, Esai. 22. 22: so this Apostaticall Bishop,
obtained to have power and authority in the earthly Church: but this key is
the key of the bottomless pit; by this cannot be meant properly hell, for all
the words are figurative: Star, Heaven, Earth, Key, and so the rest
following, in verse. 2. 3. etc. Again, this book being a prophetical history
of things here to be done on earth, we must needs here find things done by
men, and among men; it were very absurd to take it then for hell it self, for
it breeds no Locusts, that can come out thence to hurt men here in this world;
neither has any earthly man power to open or shut that place. Therefore these
words of the bottomless pit are added to show, that the power which this
Apostaticall Churchman has, is a hellish and a destroying power and
jurisdiction, according to his name Apollyon, in the height of this his
dominion and rule, verse. 11, and is a minister of the kingdom of the Devil
and darkness.

Verse. 2. The opening of the bottomless pit, is the using of his key and
authority to cause those ensuing evils to be, which are of the devil, and as
it were from hell, for the depth of the impious mischiefs thereof, leading to
utter perdition. This star falling to the earth, has then his key here in
earth, to note an earthly condition; here is a pit, noting peril and mischief
within this earth, unto which this star has fallen; and it is bottomless,
to set out the depth of the hellish policy of this accursed power, not to be
sounded, nor the bottom thereof to be found out of men, for Antichristianisme
is a mysteria.

Smoke: This is of a moist and earthie matter very hurtful to the eyes, and
causing obscurity, taking away the light, that we cannot see, which is the
effect of the smoke here; so hereby is meant spiritually, whatsoever, as
smoke, darkeneth the light of truth, as errors, heresies, inventions of men,
humane traditions, will worship, superstitious observations, Decrees and
Canons, inhibiting the clear shining forth of the light, and such like. The
smoke cannot be the darkness it self, but is the cause of it, the words of the
text distinguish them.

Verse. 3. Locusts: These are, after the star is fallen, and after that his
authority is obtained, and put in execution. The pit makes the smoke, and
the smoke breeds these Locusts, who with the star are upon the earth, so
as they have their whole dependencie from the star; which being the
apostaticall Bishop of Rome, these must needs be his Roman clergy. By
Locusts cannot be understood the Saracens; first, for that these Locusts arise
upon the fall of a great Churchman, are under his power, and are let out to the
earth by him. What Churchman once in heaven, that is, in the true Church, were
ever the Saracens under? Again, these are bred of that ignorance and darkness,
which came over the light of the Church, in which they were; but not so, the
Saracens. Thirdly, these have no power allowed to kill, but to torment people,
and that only the cast-awaies; when the Saracens made horrible slaughters of
all sorts. Lastly, these Locusts lively paint out unto us the popish Clergy,
by which description is foretold, what they should be, and what now the world
have found them to be, as the particulars do show.

Verse. 7. First these Locusts are like horses prepared unto battle, that is,
they go out with strength, fierce courage, and ready bent to attempt
whatsoever they shall be put unto; such have been the Roman Clergy, like
lusty, fed, strong and fierce horses, ready to rush upon all, that did but
mutter against them and their authority. Secondly, on their heads were as it
were Crowns of gold: This notes out both their immunities from Kings, (as
being subjects to none, except to their own king, the Angel of the
bottomless pit) as also their usurped authority; for Crowns note authority,
which they also got, commanding and ruling, even as Kings By Crown some hold
the round shauing of the crown of the head: the anointing of the head is a
crown. Leuit. 21. 12.
for a time; yet their Crowns were but as it were of gold, they were not truly
Crowns of gold, that is, their authority was but counterfeit, not true and
lawful indeed, only like to gold, that is, which carried a show of lawful
authority, but in very truth counterfeited and false. Such as was, in the show
thereof, so like gold, as the blind world could not then, in the smoakie
darkness of those times, see and rightly judge of, because they wanted Gods
word, the true touchstone to try gold by. It is here by the way worthy our
noting, that the type of the true Churchmen in the four beasts are not
crowned (chap. 4.) but these Locusts must domineere. Thirdly, Their faces were
as the faces of men: Here is noted their hypocritical show of courtesy and
humanity; but they were nothing less then they pretended to be, that is,
they made show to be gentle, loving, full of courtesy by bowing and becking,
that by these means and fawning insinuations, they might allure the peoples
hearts unto the^.

Verse. 8. Fourthly, They had hair as the hair of women: This notes their
effeminatenes, their lust, and wantonness in themselves, and withal their
carnal allurements to spiritual idolatry, as women do by their hair entice
to corporal filthiness. Fifthly, And their teeth were as the teeth of lions.
This shows their strong devouring of their prey. Where they set their teeth,
that could not be gotten from them. How they got lands and livings, and preyed
upon the estates of men, the world can witness, and the signs, where they set
their teeth, yet remain among us? They are of a devouring nature, Deuteronomy. 28.
38. 2. Chron. 7. 13. for Locusts are most belly, and therefore insatiable.
Sixthly, They had breast-plates of iron: They were of Verse. 9.
daring spirits, being hardened as iron in their hearts, in their unmerciful
deuourings, and are armed strongly with their kings power, as with a corselet
of iron, so as they were without fear of any; and what durst they not do? and
who durst resist them, or offer violence to any of them? for they were all
alike, and all armed alike, how differing so ever in themselves. Seventhly,
They had wings, to pass with more speed, and to get up aloft, the sound
whereof was as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle: This
sets out the great fear they wrought in all places where they came, for the
noise of chariots and horses is terrible, as appears 2. King. 7. 6. 7, which
made the Syrians leave all that they had, to the King of Israel and his people;
and such effect this their sound wrought in men's hearts, to make them to leave
all to them and their king, for safety of their souls, as they foolishly and
fearfully imagined. Eighthly, They had tails like unto Verse 10.
Scorpions, and there were stings in their tails: Tails are ascribed to all
the Locusts, without distinction, and also to have stings all of them in their
tails; therefore by tails cannot be meant any particular sort of them. Tails
sometime are put for the base and contemptible sort, as in Deuteronomy. 28. 13. 44.
Esai. 9. 15, but then the Head is of one sort, and the Tail understood of
another, and not both attributed to the same things, as is here, and in verse.
19. Tails are the hindermost part and furthest from the sight of those, which
behold and look upon the fore-parts; and therefore as the fore-parts of these
Locusts have been set out, and thereby their properties, so here is noted to us
by Tails that, whereby they do play the Scorpions, and sting men unwitting to
them at the first. This is the power they have, and this is the end of their
coming forth, even to play the Scorpions with their tails, (verse. 3.)
stinging men therewith, and so grievously tormenting them, (verse. 5.) as they
shall be thereby weary of their lives, verse. 6. So the plague and mischief,
which these Locusts bring, is chiefly by their tails, that is, their last (but
worst) act, which is their popish and Antichristian doctrine; for this is
common to them all, and may be called a tail, for the baseness and filthiness
thereof. It has also the nature of a Scorpion, for as the Scorpion is first
earthy, so is their doctrine, earthly men's inventions: secondly, poysonfull, so
is this doctrine, as poison infecting their soul, with superstition,
will worship, idolatry, lying equivocations, deceits and periuries, also with
heathenish practices, yea hellish attempts, trecheries, treasons, and
rebellions. Thirdly, as some do write, the Scorpions poison is white; so this
Antichristian doctrine to the ignorant and besotted people is white, that is,
seems pure and good, though it be poison indeed unto the soul. Fourthly,
the Scorpion when he would strike, turns himself somewhat round before he
can do it; so this doctrine of the beasts, before it can be made to be
received, must come circularly about, by pretended antiquity, conceited
universality, and fained consent, that it might enter more deeply into weak
hearts. Lastly, a Scorpion has a sting which wounds deadly; but women (as
one writes) sooner then men, whom yet also they Bartho. Angl. lib. 18. cap. 96.
greatly hurt, but especially when in the morning the Scorpions come out of
their holes: so this Antichristian doctrine, deadly wounds weak women, who
sooner, as Eve, receive the Serpents false persuasion, then Adam. As now our
present days show us by experience, so does it some unadvised men, at the
first broaching, as it were the morning thereof, till they have found out y^
poison. To conclude, it is a stinging doctrine tormenting the believers by an
uncertain hope of salvation, by fire of Purgatory, by seeking heaven in their
own righteousness, etc. Ninthly, And their power was to hurt men five months.
The Romish Clergy is to do hurt, this is the end why they are, for they be a
plague of the fifth Trumpet. These Locusts had their time limited five months.
Now this time is called five months, by a proportionable speech fitting to the
Locusts, which live the hottest month of the year; for a little cold either
kills them, or makes them to lie as dead. Tenthly, They have a king over
them. Wherein though they differ from natural Locusts, Prou. 30. 27, yet does
this agree well with our popish Locusts, who have (Antichrist) this Angel of
the bottomless pit over them, who as a Monarch and Sovereign King, makes
laws, prescribes rules, orders, and ordinances, to be without all exception
observed, under that great penalty, even the peril of men's souls; for he
does and will sit, as God, in the Temple of God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.

Verse. 11. And they have a king over them: This king is the same which before
is called the star, for he is the Angel of the bottomless pit: to the
star fallen was given the key thereof, the Locusts came out from under his
authority, his using of the key brought them forth; yea the pronoune
demonstratiue points out that which was before, for the words are, That
Angel, of the bottomless pit: now hitherto no mention has been made of any
one having to do with the pit, but the star. That stars authority was for
destruction, as the execution of it shows, in opening the pit and letting out
smoke to cause such darkness, and there-out such Locusts to come to do such
mischief; and therefore may by his authority over the Locusts be their king,
and by the evil thereof be well called Abaddon and Apollyon destroyer. If any
stumble at the Angel, chap. 20. 1, who has the key of the bottomless pit
also, and shall think (perhaps) that he may be the king here. I answer, that
that is a good Angel descending, not as this, falling from heaven: and he
comes to bind up the Dragon from doing mischief; but this king is Abaddon,
a bad one indeed, a very destroyer, Apollyon, even as Apollo, the heathen
Devil of Delphos.

This star and king is the Pope of Rome, and none other, in all things they
agree. The Bishop of Rome was a star in heaven, it cannot be denied, but is
the star fallen, as before I have proved, by his differing (yea contrary)
doctrine to Saint Paul, writing to the Church of Rome in his time. This star
is become earthly, so the Pope; this got a key, so the Pope bragges of a key,
though he would not have it to be this key of the bottomless pit, as it is
indeed: a King also he will be; for what Churchman ever wore a Crown, but
he? or ever took upon him to usurp authority over Kings, but he? He is a
murderer of souls, a murderer of bodies, a destroyer of the Church of
Christ, and an ouerthrower of his true worship; for the things (for which the
next woe under the sixth Trumpet came) noted in verse. 20. 21, arose from this
Apostaticall star, this hellish king, (who has power to command, and to do
what he list) and from his smoakie Locusts.

Verse. 13. Here is the next woe and terrible plague, from Christ, upon the
wicked idolatrous Antichristians. The just cause of this great woe is set down
in verse. 20. 21. a corporal punishment, after the spiritual, which was under
the fifth trumpet; and those two verses show against what kind of persons this
sixth plague came out from Christ, for the good of his Church. This plague is
the plague of Turcisme, following upon the Antichristian Apostasy. The words
show this to be a plague of war, the army infinite, even a Turkish power,
as stories tell us, raised up to scourge a wicked and idolatrous people, and
such as did apostate from the true Church, by the wickedness of the angel of
the bottomless pit, and his Locusts.

Verse. 14. Loose: Therefore here is necessarily employed, that they were at
liberty once, but restrained till now, the word is so to be taken, chap. 20. 7.
The story of the Saracens and the Turks, will show this first liberty, then
the restraint or binding, and now liberty again. Four Angels: not devils and
evil spirits, though (no doubt) devils may be in such instruments, but hereby
men are to be understood; for this is a prophetical narration, of such things
as are to be done here by men; howsoever also devils may be among them, and
in them. Again, these Angels are heads and chiefetaines of the army, which
were raised up to fight, and by war to kill men; therefore these must be
judged to be of the same nature that the army is of; that by Angels may be
understood men, but such men as are sent out to execute Gods will, whether in
good or in evil, is plain in chap. 14. and 16. Four: they are said to be,
not for such a certain number, either of chief heads, as some would have
them; for no such certain number can be found out, or of so many nations, but
for that it is a competent number (as in chap. 7. 1. chap. 4. 6.) for all
occasions. The great river Euphrates: which was once the bounds of the Roman
Empire that way, is that famous river that did run nigh the City Babylon, in
Chaldea, and here is mentioned, to show from whence, and from what part of the
world this great army should arise, even from about Babylon, and the countries
bordering upon Euphrates; whence they got free scope, in Gods just judgment,
to destroy a third, that is, a great part of men, in Asia, Africa, and some
part of Europe, where God was dishonored by all manner of impious and
unrighteous dealing, as the verses, 20. and 21. do show.

Verse. 16. Two hundred thousand thousand, it is almost an innumerable
multitude, as such great numbers do imply, cap. 5. 11. Dan. 7. 10. The adding
of John's hearing the number, is only to show that certainly, how incredible
soever it seems to men, the army should be exceeding great. Horsemen: these
are only named, because they are the greatest strength of an army; (not that
the Turk comes into the field only with horsemen, as we well know) as also
to note the swift course of the Turkish power, in their hostile invasions,
fierce and irresistable.

Verse. 17. A description of the warlike expedition of this furious, and (as I
may say) infernal host. Horses cannot here be properly meant in the type,
such as we call horses properly; for there were never any of so monstrous a
shape as these, whose head should be Lions, and their tails like Serpents,
with heads at the end. These therefore type out not horses themselves, but by
the horses, a part put for the whole, is to be understood the carryage and
managing of the whole Turkish army, and all warlike instruments, and hurtful
means, from the head to the tail, from the beginning to the ending. This
Turkish power and forces thereof, is likened to horses, because of the
properties of horses fitting thereunto (of which, in chap. 6. verse. 2. before);
they are strong, Job 39. 19. swift, Ier. 4. 13. careless of any opposite,
taking pleasure in battle, not turning back without the riders command, Job
39. 22. And such is the Turkish army, strong, swift, careless of any enemies,
yea taking delight in war, never returning without their masters command. The
forefront thereof is like the heads of Lions, that is, fearful and terrible to
those whom they come against, and of vndauntable courages, roaring upon the prey
before them, which they are ready to devour. Fire, smoke, and brimstone,
proceeded out of their mouths; this is called (verse. 19.) their power to kill;
so this shows to us their merciless rage, as fire; their fury, as smoke;
their cruel disposition and readiness to be inflamed, to make an utter
desolation, as brimston: poured upon the places where they do come. For by
fire, smoke, and brimstone, is noted fearful destruction, Genes. 19. 24. Job.
18. 15. Psalm. 18. 8. and 14. The middle of the hostile power differs nothing
from the forepart; for such as sit upon the horses, that is, which be managers
of this furious raging and destroying host, are armed with breastplates of
fire, of Iacinct, and of brimstone. Iacinct is put for smoke, of which color
it is, omitting the name of smoke, as not so fit for the breast plate: for it is
meet to have in allegorical speeches, in every part, a fit proportion of one
thing with another: by naming only (of all the parts of armor) the
breast plate, which is before their breast and heart, it notes their courage
and prepared hearts, inflamed with rage to destroy all things before them, as
with fire and brimstone, that the smoke thereof like Iacinct might ascend up;
as at the overthrow of Sodom. So as the fire, smoke, and brimstone, which came
out of the horses mouths, is no other thing, but that desolation, and
merciless destruction by all warlike means, conceived in the hearts and
breasts of the Turkish commanders, and managed by them, to devour and consume
up all where they come: of, and among which may the great Ordinance be
reckoned, out of which comes forth fire, smoke, and brimstone, (gunpowder
being made of saltpeter, coals and brim-stone), which devouring Artillery,
took almost the beginning (as some avouch) with these Turks; as a means in
Gods justice, to further their hellish rage, in the destruction of men. For of
all inventions for murdering of men, and to make a speedy riddance of men's
lives, the like was never found out; which instruments of death the Turks do
use with a more furious will to kill without mercy, and to get into their hands
what places they assault, then any other nation; making them so huge and great,
as is beyond credit to report, such as 70. oxen must draw one of them, and
2000. men attend upon, as the Turkish history does show.

Verse. 19. They had power in their tails, which were like serpents, and had
heads, and with them they do hurt. By tails, is meant the things that follow
after, as tails, which here are said to have power in them, which what else
may it be, then the authority and government gotten over those places, where
this hellish army has obtained victory. It is base, therefore called tails,
for so the word is used for base and vile, Deuteronomy. 28. 13. 44. It is yet not
without order, and superiority, so heads are taken, Deuteronomy. 28. 13. 44. Esaias 9.
14. And lastly, it is tyrannical, and therefore it is said, that with them
they hurt.

These cannot be the popish clergy, which are under the fifth trumpet, noted
by the locusts: first, because of the place Euphrates, whence these come,
(verse. 14.) far from Rome. Secondly, for that these are a type of bloody,
furious, and merciless warriors, appointed to kill and slaughter men, verse.
16-18. Thirdly, these are a corporal plague, to punish Idolaters, and other
wicked men, verse. 20. 21. whereas the Romish Clergy are a spiritual plague,
and Idolaters, against whom this Turkish power came forth.

Notes upon Chap. 10.
Verse. 1. Another mighty Angel: This is a type of Christ coming forth to
comfort his Church; this appears to be so, from the place whence he came, by
his clothing, crown, face, feet, which are more glorious then can be ascribed
to any creature. This coming now of Christ shows, how about this time he
begun in more open manner to show his care for his Churches safety. The rainbow
is here mentioned fitly, after a deluge of impiety and miseries, set out in the
two former trumpets, as a general destruction to the world. As Noah's flood was
once, to show that such a destruction should no more come upon the world; for
God by Christ was reconciled to his people, who now again sent them means, to
recover them out of that darkness of Antichristian Apostasy, into which men
were plunged, and sure to be drowned, except the Lord would call them out of
the same.

Verse. 2. A little book: The type of holy Scriptures, and words of God. For
this is that which Christ's Ministers must receive, and preach unto the people
every where, to gather them unto him, verse. 10. 11. Open: to show that the
book of God should now be no more hidden, but be made known unto his
people. And he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot upon the
earth: Christ here comes as an opposite to Antichrist, to overthrow his
kingdom, who arose out of the sea, cap. 13. 1. and out of the earth, chap. 13.
verse. 11. Therefore Christ sets his feet of brass on both, to note his
invincible power, treading upon his enemies, and subduing them, and to take, by
this his book, possession of all places; for now would he reign, and take to
him the kingdoms of the world, as we may see in chap. 11. 15. in spite of
Antichrist and all his power.

Verse. 3. And cried with a loud voice, as when a Lion roreth: This shows how
Christ will have his truth published with a loud voice, and with terror, as the
roaring of a Lion. He reuealeth (by this book) his will, his voice is as the
Lions roaring, to work fear; and thus speaking, who can but prophecy, Amos 3.
7. 8? Yea thus roaring, shows how he comes with terror against his enemies,
for his Churches safety, Esa. 31. 4. for Christ here is described according to
his virtue working in his servants, whose powerful speaking will make seven
thunders utter their voices. These therefore are caused by Christ's voice, and
are effects of it, in that place of Amos, chap. 3. (to which happily may be the
allusion, for any other agreeing hereunto, in any sort, I find not) there is a
revealing of his will to his servants, verse. 7. to which this opened book
answers: then there is the roaring of the Lion, verse. 8. so is there here.
Lastly, upon that roaring there is a prophesying, and here the voices of
thunders, or thunders uttering voices; which type out prophesying, and
revealing of those things written in this book open in the Angels hand, which
was to be received, to enable the Prophets to prophecy to peoples, nations,
tongues, and Kings, as is said in verse. 11. The number of seven, answerable to
the seven trumpets is noted, to show, that now the Lord would begin to send out
a plentiful means of instruction, to recover again his people from under
Antichrist; and the times from thence till now, show us, that he has so done.
This ministry of the Gospel, published by his faithful servants, is compared
to the voice of thunder. First, for that it shall be made to be heard above
all voices, as being the loudest, as the degrees of sound of voices set out,
cap. 19. 6. show. No voice of multitudes, no voice of many waters, is so loud
as the voice of thunde. As such a voice was needful at the giving of the Law,
Exodus 19. to cast down all humane reason, and to cause men to submit
themselves to the Lords will: so was it now, to beat down man's carnal reason,
now pearked up in the Antichristian state, prescribing rules of religion, and
making a mere will worship of service unto God. Secondly, because of the power
of Gods word, being powerful as thunder, as Job speaks, (chap. 26. 14.) to
strike terror and fear into men's hearts: hence John and James were Boanerges,
sons of thunder, Mark. 3. 17. So was Paul to Felix, when he made him to
tremble, Act. 24. 26. as man's heart does at the thunder, Job 37. 1. Thirdly,
because as the thunder of Gods power is not to be understood, Job 26. 14: so
the power of Gods word passes all men's understanding, they cannot comprehend
the reason of such a mighty and terrifying a power, as thunder, to be in so
weak means, in all outward appearance.

Verse. 4. Scale up these things: The Church here is told of seven thunders, of
which we are to take notice, for these are made known to us, but now what they
uttered, that is not written; John heard what was by them delivered, for that
he was about to write, as he received a commandment, chap. 1. 19. But here he
was forbidden to write, and commanded to seal up these things, that is, not to
reveal them. Now why such thunders should be, and the things uttered by them,
not written and made known, may be, for that peradventure, as in Dan. 8. 26.
and 12. 9. the things were not now to be done: or for that they were not
necessary; or not fit for man's reason to be uttered; as S. Paul speaks of
some things revealed to him in the third heaven. 2. Cor. 12. 4: or to show that
the things uttered, were only to be known immediately by the voices of the
thunders themselves; God reserving the opening of men's hearts, and enlightening
of men's minds by the word preached, unto himself; even to make the things
uttered, then to be known, when the thundering power of the word was to be
sounded out, lest it should be despised: or for that here is set out the
secrets of God, Amos 3. 7. and of his kingdom, Matthew. 13. which is to be
revealed only to them, to whom it is given to understand the same; for albeit
powerful preaching, and the Preachers be as thunder, even unto al, yet the
things uttered are sealed up, except to those, whom God shall please to make
them known unto.

Verse. 6. There should be time no longer: that is, there shall be no more
delay, or deferring off of time to finish the mystery foretold by the
Prophets; the next verse joined to this, plainly gives this exposition. It is
not said, that there shall be no more time (as if here he spoke of the worlds
end, as many do suppose); but time shall be no longer, so speaking, rather of
shortening some time, then of a consummation of all time. In the next place it
is to be noted, how solemnly he swears, which had bin needless, if it were
to be taken for the end of the world, which was both a known truth already,
and sufficiently confirmed in the hearts of all Gods people, for whose comfort
he takes this oath. Thirdly, here is not a word of the last judgment, but of
the finishing the mystery of God, cap. 10. 7. for the fulfilling whereof the
time shall no longer be deferred. Fourthly, in the time of the sounding of the
seventh Angel, great and mighty matters must come to pass before the worlds
end, as a great part of this book, from chap. 14. ver. 14. to the end of the
prophecy, foresheweth.

Verse. 7. The mystery of God: This mystery is taken commonly for the day of
judgment, albeit we hardly find the last judgment day to be called a mystery,
though our change and alteration then so suddenly be so called, 1. Cor. 15. 51.
But here is spoken of such a mystery, as has a beginning, a progress, and a
finishing: yea such a mystery, as by the means of this little book, comes
to be finished. The mentioning of this mystery is here inserted between the
Angels bringing forth of this book, and John's receiving of it, verse. 10. and
therefore may seem not to be understood of the last judgment. It is taken by
some for the conversion of the Jews, which is called a mystery, Romans 11. 25.
and may so well be, both for the hidden secrecy thereof, and the unlikelihood
thereof in all men's reason, so obstinate are they. By it may be understood,
all and every thing concerning Christ's Church here upon earth, of which the
Prophets have spoken, Christ himself, and the Apostles taught, and this very
prophetical history declares unto us; which Church and state thereof is a
mystery from the very beginning, to the perfecting up of the body of Christ,
and so called, Ephesians. 3. 3. 4. 6. which place well noted, will tell us, that
the calling of the Gentiles is a mystery, and so also the place in the Romans,
chap. 11. verse. 21. that the calling of the Jews again is a mystery, so as
Christ his Church and kingdom is nothing but a mystery in the calling of the
Gentiles, and recalling of the Jews.

Verse. 11. Thou must prophecy again before many people, and nations, and
tongues, and Kings: John our Prophet here bears upon him the person of all
faithful Preachers of Gods word, sent out by Christ, to preach. For these
words cannot be understood to be performed in the very person of John, but of
such as should be raised up by Christ, to prophecy, that is, to preach the
holy word of God, To people, nations, tongues, and Kings: Which words show,
that the fallen Star, chap. 9. 1. that Angel of the bottomless pit, (verse.
11.) and false prophet, (chap. 13. 11. 14.) and whore of Babylon, (chap. 17. 3.
15.) had now gotten these under his power, and hellish jurisdiction; from under
which to recover his own, such as were ordained to life, Christ Jesus sends
his servants, and that only by preaching to regaine them; the effect and power
whereof, we have found upon people, nations, tongues, and Kings, who in Gods
mercy have embraced the Gospel, and have renounced that Antichrist the Pope of
Rome, with all his usurped power, blessed be God.

Notes upon Chap. 11.
Verse. 1. Given me a reed: The allusion is from Ezech. 40. 3. That Prophet,
living in the captivity of Babylon, after that the Temple and Jerusalem was
destroyed, was foretold of the reedifying and building thereof again, by taking
measure of all and every part thereof; so now the Church of Christ being in
spiritual Babylon at this time (not when John wrote, but when the Lord raised
up now his faithful teachers, and commanded to measure the Temple), here is
prophesied and foretold how God would restore again his people, and bring them
out of Babylon, in which they were by the fall of the star, and the power of
that Angel of the bottomless pit, chap. 9. 1. 11.

A reed: It is the truth of Gods word, received and learned out of that little
book, the holy Scriptures; for before John had eaten it, he could not measure
this Temple, altar, and worshippers, neither can there be either other rule or
line but it, to measure heavenly things by. This Reed here, is also a line, in
Ezech. 40. and that line is the faithful and Apostolical preaching of Gods
word; so is a line taken (Psalm. 19. 4.) by Saint Paul's exposition, Romans 10.
18. It is called a golden Reed, (chap. 21. 15.) used about the measuring of
the Temple, Altar, worshippers and City of God, ca. 21. 15. which can be
nothing else but Gods word, for only by it know we Gods Church, his worship
and people. It is the only Canon to walk by, Philip. 3. 15. 16. Galath. 6.
16. by it only do we truly know, the length, height, and breadth of these
spiritual things, as Moses knew by God, his own prescribed pattern, how to
set up the measure of the Tabernacle, Exodus 25. 9.

Like unto a rod: Rod in Scripture, is a note of sovereignty, which is a
scepter, Ester 4. 11. so is Christ's word called a rod, Psalm. 110. 2. and is his
Scepter, Psalm. 45. 6. noting that Christ will rule with this Reed, as with a
Rod.

And measure: This is the use to which the Reed is to be put; now measuring,
in Ezech. 40. and Zach. 1. 16. and in Ierem. 31. 39. shows a re-edifying and
building of that which was destroyed, in a sure and certain proportion, Zach.
1. 16. where the stretching out of a line, and building, are put for one; and
upon the having of a measuring line, to go to measure Jerusalem, the Lord does
promise that Jerusalem shall be inhabited, Zach. 2. 1. 2. 4. So here is
prophesied, that the true Church and people of God, captiuated in spiritual
Babylon, shall certainly be restored to their liberty.

The Temple of God: Here is not meant the Jews Temple, now destroyed before
this time, but here is set out the true Christian Church, alluding to the
Temple of the Jews, the place wherein the Lord is worshipped, cap. 7. 15. Into
that place, where the Altar was in the Jewish Temple, came only the Priests to
do their service, and to worship God, Luke 1. 9. Now all true Christians are
the Lords Priests, chap. 1. 6. and his Temple, 1. Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 6. Ephesians. 2.
The Altar typeth out the worship of God, a part for the whole; for so it is
taken for the worship exhibited there, 1. Cor. 10. 18. Matthew. 5. 23. 24. This
cannot type out Christ, for this is to be measured as well as the Temple, by
the Reed. Now in that John has the Reed given to measure the Temple, Altar,
and them that worship therein, it is to foretell that God would raise up
John's, that is, faithful Preachers, endued with knowledge of the heavenly
truth of Gods word; to measure, that is, to describe and set out thereby, as by
the only true rule, the true Church of Christ, his true worship, and his
sincere worshippers therein, whom the Lord took care of and sealed, (chapter 7.)
and here measures out for his own peculiar people from all other.

Verse. 2. The Court: Esaias 1. 12. This is the place, into which the multitude
came to pray in the time of the Law; this is the place without the Temple, Luke
1. 10. and Ezech. 44. 19. This is that which is called the great Court, 2.
Chron. 4. 9. where Solomon and all the people were, 2. Chro. 6. 13. called
Salomons porch, Act. 3. 11. and 5. 12. and the Temple, Matthew. 21. 12. In this
were the buyers and sellers, which were cast out by Christ. Hereby is typed out
the visible Church of common Christians, such as bore the name of Christians,
but were cast out as excommunicated of God, and not measured; the Lord would
not take it for his own Church, it was none of his building, the Reed of his
word squared it not out, neither were the servants of God to esteem of it, by
measuring to bring it into any holy account with (the Temple) the true Church.

Given to the Gentiles: An allusion to the Babylonians treading down the holy
City for a certain time, or to the place of Daniel, concerning Antiochus
Epiphanes, Dan. 7. 21. Gentiles are such Christians, which become as Gentiles.
Here cannot be meant Gentiles properly: but as by Jews and Jerusalem the holy
City, are understood true faithful Christians and the Church of Christ: so by
the out-Court, Babylon, and Gentiles, false Christians or Antichristians. These
Gentiles are not the persecuting Heathen, for John speaks here of things to
come to pass after his time, chap. 4. 1, and after the fall of the star,
chap. 9. 1. Yea he speaks of such Gentiles, as here have the out-court given
them, and such as live the whole time of the beast, for he shall continue 42
months a blasphemous Enemy, and bloody adversary to Gods Church, chap. 13.
5: and these Gentiles, as here we see, shall so long tread the holy City under
foot. These Gentiles are therefore the worldly sort of Christians, mentioned
in chap. 13. 5, following the beast, and rejoicing at the killing of Christ's
servants, as here is noted, verse. 9, being angry at the success of the
Gospel. The word is in verse. 18, translated Nations, but better Gentiles, for
the word is in both places one. These then be the Papists, (as the Beast is
the Pope and Papacy) which are called Gentiles, by an allusion to the state of
Gods Church Ribera the Jesuit expounds these of Antichrist and his army in
his Comment* on this place.
under the Law, in which the Lords people were called Jews, and all other
Gentiles, which were not Gods people; also for that they are like Gentiles in
leading (like Babylonians) Gods people into Captivity; in treading under foot
(as wicked Antiochus did and his company) the holy City certain years, so
these the true Church for a certain time; and because in their service,
worship, and other their abominable ways they be as the Gentiles, of whom S.
Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 10. 20, and such are these Antichristian Gentiles, chap.
9. 20.

Forty and two months: Of the times in this Revelation, see before in this
book, 4. part, chap. 5, Consideration 7. This number is one and the same with
1260 days, for so many months are somany days, and so these 1260 days make
the number of the months. An allusion unto Antiochus in Daniel so long
treading down Jerusalem, Dan. 7. 25.

Verse. 3. Two witnesses: These be not Enoch and Eliah, (see this Popish opinion
overthrown by our most learned Sovereign in his Highness Apol. page 62. 72)
but the true Preachers of Gods word sent to preach throughout the kingdom of
Antichrist; for as he had power over kindreds, tongues and nations (chap. 13.
7, and 17. 3. 15.) which took part with him, (verse. 9.) so to the^ must these
preach, chap. 10. 11, and 14. 6.) to regaine Christ's own from among them. Here
is set down the execution of the commandment given in the former cap. verse.
11. Two, is a certain number put for an uncertain, so in 1. King. 17. 12, and
is here an allusion to Zachary and Haggai the Prophets, prophesying when God
raised up Iehosus and Zorobabel, returning with the Jews to Jerusalem from
Babylon, to comfort and encourage the people in the Lords work, as also to set
them forward to the same: or Two, because of the fewness of such faithful
Teachers at the first; or Two, because two witnesses are a competent number to
justify a truth, Deuteronomy. 17. 6. Therefore the Lord sends two, Moses and Aaron to
bring Israel out of Egypt; and Christ sends his Disciples out by two and by
two, Mark. 6. 7. Here cannot be meant properly two; for how could peoples,
kindreds, tongues and nations see their bodies? By two then are all those,
which God raised up to preach in all the Popes jurisdiction and dominion, as
far as the authority of that great City under Antichrist extended.

Verse. 4. Two Olive trees, and the two Candlestickes: An allusion to Zach. 4.
3. 11. 14: Olive trees afford oil out of themselves; oil under the Law was
to be brought of the people to the Priests for the continuing of the lights,
Exodus 27. 20: but now here is not oil, but Olive trees themselves, which have
oil (by Gods blessing) in themselves; to show unto us, in this extraordinary
time, the Lords giving of the graces of his Spirit supernaturally: for Oil is
put for the holy Spirit and the gifts thereof, Psalm. 45. 7, and 89. 20. Act.
10. 38. Olive trees show, how the Lord furnishes these his Prophets and
Teachers, not by the help of others, but by his own hand, to be full of his
spirit and graces thereof, to cause light in the Temple of God to be ever
shining, in the darkness of the Antichristian state. In Zachary are but two
branches emptying golden oil out of themselves, chap. 4. 12; but here be
whole trees; so much greater grace the Lord gives to restore the purity of
Religion, and his true worship from under Antichrist and spiritual Babylon,
then for the reedifying the Temple, and setting up of the worship at Jerusalem,
after the Jews return from Babylon. They be also Candlestickes, a name given
to Churches, chap. 1. 20, Ministers are candles, Matthew. 5. 25, and not
Candlestickes, yet here so called, because they were as Candlestickes bearing
forth the light; for in the beginning of reformation, the Candlestickes were
to be found out by the lights; where the Lord raised up faithful Preachers,
there was both the candles and the Candlestick, by them were the Churches to
be discovered. So then they were Candlestickes by bearing forth the light, as
also that by them the Churches were to be found, and the joining unto them was
an adjoining of men's selves unto the Churches of God.

God of the earth: Thus the Lord himself is entitled, Zach. 4. 14. and 6. 5,
who is the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, Genes. 24. 3. And this
title was most fit for the Churches comfort, to show, that howsoever Antichrist
swaied, and the world wondered after him on earth, chap. 13. 3: yet the Church
should know, that God ruled the whole earth.

Verse. 5. Fire proceeded out of their mouth: In this and the next verse is an
allusion unto two Prophets, Moses and Elias; the one bringing the children of
Israel out of bondage in Egypt, the other restoring the Law, and destroying the
idolatrous priests; by both came great plagues and vengeance upon their
enemies. The words are not to be expounded after the letter, for such wonders
were never done by any against Antichrist; but hereby is to be understood the
great power of the Ministry, the contempt whereof the Lord would no more
suffer, then he did the contempt of the ministry of those former Prophets;
but that vengeance should be taken of the adversaries of these, as was before
of their enemies, as we may see Exodus 7 20. 2. King. 1. 10.

Verse. 7. The beast: Who this is, is before showed in chap. 4. -- of this
preparatiue, and is one and the same with the beast in chap. 13. 1; an allusion
to Dan. 7. 21.

Verse. 8. Great City: Chap. 17. 18. and 18. 2. 16. Hereby is meant not only a
City within walls, but the dominion thereof; this is Rome with her rule and
dominion. It is called Babylon for captiuating Gods people; Sodoma, for her
filthiness, Genes. 19. and Ezech. 16. 49, vexing the righteous hearts of holy.
Lots; and Egypt for her cruelty, and desire to keep in bondage Gods people;
such is the whole kingdom of the Papists.

Where also our Lord was crucified: These words show, that by great City, must
be meant not a walled place, but the whole dominion thereof, for else Christ
could not be said to be crucified there: this also shows plainly what City
here is to be understood, even Rome: for under Pontius Pilate the Roman
Deputy was Christ our Lord (for a Roman quarrel pretended by Scribes and
Pharisees, Ioh. 19. 12.) crucified; so here Rome is made guilty of the blood of
Christ, and of the blood of all his servants and Saints slain upon the earth,
chap. 18. 24.

Verse. 9. Three days and a half: The space and time of the Antichristian
cruelty from the beginning of his open murdering of Christ's servants, unto
the time that God raised up such, as he would take special protection of, to
deliver them from the bloody hands of their enemies: for here the beast warreth
and overcomes the Saints, which is, when he has gotten his great authority
over people, nations and tongues. as this verse and cap. 13. 3. 7 do show.
These Prophets lie dead till the spirit of life enter into them, that is, till
God raise up other to defend the truth; which is here called the space of three
days and a half, the whole time of bloody persecution, till there came to be
a visible separation from Antichrist. For these three days and a half, is not
the time of their prophesying; but of the furious rage of the beast, and the
triumph of his subjects over the servants of Christ, until God had stirred up
other like them, ascending up in the sight of their enemies, making a visible
separation from them, the words in the text from verse 7 to the 12, show this.

Verse. 12. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud: That is, now these
Prophets raised up were by Gods power exempted from the power of Antichrist.
Now the Lord erecteth up a visible Church, his true service and worship; but
yet as in a cloud. This word is used either to set out the Prophets honor, or
their imperfect knowledge (as yet) of those things which belonged to the
heavenly congregation and Church of Christ. The words cannot be understood
literally of the same parties before murdered, such a bodily rising is not
till the last day; and for the ascending of their souls, the wicked could not
see. John speaks of things to be done, chap. 4. 1. Heaven is here the true
Church, their ascending is Gods raising up of others, (endued with the same
spirit of life from God) to bring his people from Babylon by preaching the
truth, as we see in chap. 14. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11; which the enemies took
notice of with rage and sorrow, as the stories in Luthers time, and after do
show.

Verse. 13. The effect of this their ascending, even a great Earthquake: That
is, a great commotion; for upon a more clear light of the truth, and some
visible separation made by the Lords servants, there was great stirs,
troubles and wars, as histories tell us. And the tenth part of the City
fell: By the City (as before) is meant the popish dominion, which now (by the
preaching of the Gospel, and the great troubles that rose thereabout) came to
be diminished, and there was a decay of the same Antichristian jurisdiction;
God begun now to ruin that state, which had so tyrannically ruled over the
world. In a tenth part: That is, a great part. This number is mentioned to
show, wherein this rain was, to wit, in the means of their Churches
maintenance. Because a tenth was appointed under the Law for the Priests
service, which these claim for their service; or for that there is the number
of Ten giving their power to that Beast, (chap. 17. 12.) of which a tenth now
fell away. Slain 7000: A destruction of the adversaries, a certain number for
the uncertain, (as 1. King. 19. 18. Romans 11. 4.) the Spirit being pleased to
use this number more often then any other, even 37 times in this book. The
words are in the original, were slain the names of men 7000: It may be for
that this destruction lighted upon men of note, losing their dignities,
honors, and revenues, by which they did before live.

Verse. 19. The Temple: Here is that which was called the Oracle, the most holy
place, where the Arc was put, (1. King. 6. 19. and 8. 6.) into the which none
went but the high Priest once a year. This notes to us, that at this time the
mysteries of salvation (shut up before by the Antichristian darkness) should now
be made known and become common to all Gods people, as they were before to
the learned ecclesiastical persons. And therefore the 24 Elders (without
me^tioning the four beasts) a type of all faithful Christians, do praise
God, (ver. 16.) as being now to be in riched with heavenly graces, to know the
holy things of God hid before. The allusion is to the Temple at Jerusalem. The
Court, that is, the mixed multitude had now possessed a long time; the Prophets
and faithful witnesses had gotten the reed to measure the Temple; some of the
Clergymen God had raised up to teach the people: the most holy place, that
is, the more secret and hidden things of God, were little known; only as it
were the high Priest was admitted to enter therein, that is, a few of chosen
instruments made acquainted therewith, and had wisdom to see those heavenly
mysteries; but now at this time were they to be laid open, and made known unto
all. Of Lightening, Voices, and Thunders, see chap. 4. 5. Earthquake and Hail,
set out Gods terrible judgments irresistable, Esaias 29. 6. Exodus 9. 25. Esaias
28. 2. Hail, in chap. 16. 21. is called a plague.

Notes upon. Chap. 12.
Verse. 1. A woman: The true Church of Christ is here set out by a woman; so
also compared to a chaste virgin, 2. Cor. 11. 2. espoused, Cant. 1. 8. and 4. 1.
10. to a bride, chap. 19. 7. and 21. 9. to a married wife, Esa. 54. 1. 5. 6. to
a widow, Lam. 1. 1. The Church here described, is not the Jewish Church, the
last words in the 17. verse show; nor the Church in the Apostles times, when
they were on the earth, though the same in succession. For John tells us of
things to be done after his transe in Patmos; and the things here prophesied
of, bring us down to the times long after the Apostles days; to the times of
the bloody rage of the Heathen Emperors, and the time of Antichrist, when the
out-Court was given to the Gentiles, and when the two Prophets prophesied in
sackcloth, with whose doctrine this woman was fed in the wilderness, verse. 6.
where the time of her being there, and the Prophets prophesying, chap. 11. 2.
are all one; neither is here the Church triumphant figured: for this woman is
in travel with pain, verse. 2. the Dragon makes her fly, she needs food,
and is nourished in the wilderness, verse. 6. 14. which cannot agree to the
Church triumphant, but to the Church militant, of which only John indeed here
speaks.

Clothed: The Church is set out here most gloriously, in chap. 19. 8, there is
she clothed after another fashion, though the Church be found naked, yet the
Lord puts upon her clothing, Ezech. 16. and that most heavenly and glorious, as
the particulars following do show. Her crown of 12. stars shows her to
have obtained victory, and by what means, even by her faithful Pastors, which
are called stars, chap. 1. 20. the number of twelve, is noted with a relation
to the twelve Apostles, whose doctrine they did teach. The Sun and Moon are
lights, Genes. 1. 16. Esa. 60. 19. Ier. 31. 35. So are the stars to give
light, Genesis 1. 17. Ier. 31. 35. these are upon her head, the Moon under her
feet; and the Sun, as in the midst between the stars and the Moon, is
her clothing; all to set out her heavenly illumination, or glorious state
shining bright, in every part enlightened, and bringing light as the Sun, and
treading likewise in lightsome paths, in the very night of ignorance to
others. By these she reigns, and is crowned as a conqueror, hereby she
shows light to others, and does tread down al changeable and transitory
things of this life.

Verse. 2. And she being with child: What she was with child with, is noted in
verse. 5. for what she brought forth that was she with child with, in this
place. This cannot be meant of the Churches general travel in this place, to
bring forth people unto Christ; for of these had she been fruitful before, as
verse. 17. shows; yea to an exceeding increase almost all the world over, at
this time, before the tyrannical rage of the Heathen Emperors, and their last
fury against the Church, of which he speaks in this Chapter: but of some
more special and particular childbirth, which now she was ready to bring
forth, as the words taken from a woman in travel show; for she is here set
down to be in the very act of bringing forth. Cried: that is, made ardent
prayers, as cries in the ears of the Lord. Traveled in birth: That is, used
all means for the effecting her desire, to have that child which she
traveled with: and pained to be delivered: that is, feeling the want of this
child, through cruel persecutions which she suffered, did in anguish of spirit
seek to bring forth.

Verse. 3. A great red Dragon: This is expounded to be the old Serpent, the
Devil, and Satan, verse. 9. by an allusion to Genes. 3; but yet so
understanding him, as hereby be understood also the special Ministers of his
fury, the Heathen persecuting Emperors of Rome; for this prophecy is of
things to be done here on earth by men; also the woman notes out a company
here in this world; and so must the Dragon note out in like sort such here, as
be her adversaries. Again, the description of this Dragon cannot agree
properly to the devil himself, but is indeed the Arms of Rome when it was
Heathen, and had Heathen Emperors ruling there, who worshipped the devil, 1.
Cor. 10. 20. and were led by him, as all the wicked be, Ephesians, 2. 2. he
persecuting Christians for the very name of Christ, so as the battle was
directly against Christ Jesus himself, as the battle set out verse. 7. and 8.
do show. No marvel then that they be called the Dragon, that is, the Devil,
who is put for his instruments, chap. 2. 10. as here his instruments for him.
The Heathen Emperors are called a Dragon, as Pharaoh King of Egypt was, Ezech.
29. 3. Red, for the bloodinesse of those Emperors: great; for that they
reigned in that great City, which reigned over the Kings of the earth, cap. 17.
18. and so the greatest in the world for rule and dominion. All set out by one
Dragon, for that they all worshipped in their Idolatry, the devil; one in
their cruel nature against Christians; one in place succeeding another; one in
government, and therefore are all but one head in chap. 17. 10. Seven heads,
expounded chap. 17. 9. 10. Ten horns, chap. 17. 12. And seven crowns upon his
heads, for that Rome had the sovereign authority, and that there were seven
kinds of government. For the heads either note out the City with seven hills,
or the seven kinds of their kingly governments.

Verse. 4. His tail: Dragons have more force in their tails, then in their
jaws, so this figurative speech is kept, fitting to the nature of a Dragon,
for the signification of tail, and third part, see cap. 9. 18. 19. stars of
heaven; that is, Ministers of the Church; and cast them down to the earth; an
allusion to Dan. 8. 10. that is, were made to leave their standing, and to
forsake their profession, by the rage of persecution, and weakness of their
own hearts, and to become earthly, like other men of the earth.

The Dragon stood before the woman, etc. This notes how the devil, in, and by
these Heathen Roman Emperors diligently observes the Churches travel; (as
Pharaoh, the Dragon of Egypt, Exodus 1. to which is the allusion) that albeit
her conceiving, her travel, and bringing forth, could not be prevented by him,
yet he hoped to devour that which should be borne.

Verse. 5. A man child: As Moses was borne in spite of Pharaoh, to deliver Gods
people out of Egypt; so now the Christian Church got a deliverer, a man-child;
the like phrase in Esa. 66. 7. This commonly is understood of Christ; but we
must remember, that John writes in this place a prophetical history of that,
which the Christian Church obtained for her outward help and succor; and
likewise of things to come to pass after his time, and not of any common thing
before already done. Further must be observed, that nothing, whose original
John saw, could be past, but was to come. But if this birth was either of
Christ personally, or of Christ mystically, that is, of the begetting of him in
men's hearts, by the preaching of the Gospel, then it was of that which was
already, and not of that which was to come to pass afterward. Moreover, we do
not say the Church trauelleth with Christ to bring him forth, as a son to her,
which is her head and Sovereign. S. Paul indeed says, Galath. 4. 19. that he
(the Apostle) traveled of the Galatians; but it is not said that he traveled
of Christ, but of them; to form Christ in them by his ministry: and yet
unadvisedly is this place fetched in hither, to make the Church to travel of
Christ. This man-child then is some potent Prince, as the next words following
declare, who was to rule over all nations, with great power for the Churches
good, whose son indeed he was.

Who was to rule all nations, etc. An allusion to Psalm. 2. 9. truly and most
properly spoken of Christ; and therefore the reader here most commonly
conceiueth Christ to be meant, not considering that Christ bestows this his
power upon his chosen servants, chap. 2. 27. And her child was caught up unto
God, and to his throne: These words (which seem to some, to make much to take
this child for Christ) do show by circumstances well observed, that it cannot
be meant of him. For John saw Christ Jesus before, chap. 1. and in the midst
of the throne, chap. 5; he had written in his Gospel of Christ's ascension,
and he then had seen no wonder. Yea the so soon taking of him up from the
woman to God immediately upon his birth, without mentioning of his deeds, will
not admit the meaning to be of Christ, of whose birth and ascension John
speaks not one word in his prophecy: the very words themselves are against
it. Her son: Christ is no where called the Churches son, and so caught up,
an unfit word to set out Christ's ascension, who is said to go up Act. 1. 9.
and to ascend, as doing it of his own power, and not as we, to be caught up,
1. These. 4. 17. Lastly, here is no naming of heaven, (usually mentioned where
Christ's ascension is spoken of) but of God and his throne, which as they are in
heaven, whereinto Christ ascended; so are they in this Revelation to be
understood to be here in Gods Church, where, as in heaven, he sets his
throne, chap. 4. 2. Caught up unto God and his throne, may thus be interpreted,
that now one of the sons of the Church, a Christian professing Christ, was
maruellously preserved of God from the rage of Heathen tyrants, and exalted
unto Gods throne, that is, to be next the Lord in the highest place in his
Church, the Prophets in the former chapter, chap. 11. 12. ascended up to
heaven; but this child is taken up to the throne in heaven, to rule next under
God himself, over the nations, that is, the enemies of the Church, with a rod
of iron.

Verse. 6. The reason of her flying is verse. 13. an allusion to the Israelites
in the wilderness, who escaped from Pharaoh that Dragon. They should feed her;
this relative they, has relation to some persons before, and that is to the
two Prophets, chap. 11. 3. their time and hers agree, where days are put for
years.

Verse. 7. In heaven: That is, in the Church; for in heaven properly taken,
there could be no such fighting; neither was the devil and his angels seen
of John in heaven, from whence they were cast out from the worlds beginning.
This war followed upon the birth of this child in the Church, that is, where
Christ was publicly professed; Michael, an allusion to Dan. 10. 13. and 12. 1.
He is Jesus Christ, for he is our Prince, as Daniel calls him, chap. 10. 21.
The child (as is before said) cannot be Christ; for here we see is Christ
fighting for his Church. But as the Dragon (the devil) is not to be taken
properly and alone for himself, but by him must be understood the chief
adversaries of the Church, the Roman Empire; and so by his angels, such as be
instruments at their command to fight against Christ: so by Michael, must be so
understood Christ, as also such as be principal helps for the Church; and by
his Angels, those that are with them in defense of religion, and enemies to the
Dragon.

Verse. 8. Neither was their place any more in heaven: They did now bear no
more sway in the Church.

Verse. 9. The reason is here given, because the Dragon and his angels were cast
out; so as it was not want of will, but want of power to withstand Michael, and
his servants, that their place was no more in heaven.

Verse. 12. Earth and sea: The Dragon was cast from heaven; therefore earth and
sea are here named, as places of his walking now without restraint: heaven is
the true Church; Earth and sea, the bounds out of the true Church. For earth
and sea cannot be taken properly, for the godly are inhabiters thereof, as well
as the wicked, and they are the workmanship of God: and now the heaven being
taken for the Church, out of which the devil is now said to be cast, the earth
and sea must be the places not accounted the true Church; but the places where
the devil has power, and bears sway. The inhabiters of the earth and sea,
are in opposition to the dwellers in heaven, which are true professors of
Christ, and are his Church, of an heavenly conversation; and therefore those
which are not of the true Church, are said to be of the earth and sea, being
mere natural men, savoring nothing of heavenly things; whether they be
Gentiles, or such as only in name are Christians, but indeed and truth,
earthly Antichristians.

Verse. 14. Two wings of a great Eagle: Hereby is meant means of protection to
escape peril, Exodus 19. 4. and by a great Eagle, some mighty personage is
designed, Ezech. 17. 3. 7. Wilderness: this is opposed to popularity,
visibility, and outward glory; being a note of a retired, hidden and poor
condition, like to the state of the teachers clothed in sackcloth, chap. 11, 3.
Into her place: so called, because it was prepared for her of God. verse. 6. A
time, and times, and half a time: an allusion to Dan. 7. 25. this is all one
with 1260. days, verse. 6. for here, and there, is spoken of one and the same
person, and of one and the same time. From the face of the Serpent: This
shows, that she was hidden in the wilderness, and by her flight lost her
visibility before her enemies, as the phrase shows, 1. Sam. 17. 24. and 19.
10.

Verse. 15. The Churches hidden condition made the Dragon, that he could not
now set upon her as before by persecution; therefore now he casts out of his
mouth water as a flood, this is his wrath spoken of, verse. 12. Waters: are
peoples, multitudes, nations and tongues, chap. 17. 15. A flood of water, is
the sudden out-breaking of such, and their violence mercilesly destroying all
before Esa. 59. 19. Amos 8. 8.
them, as a flood; so as howsoever this was intended against the Church, yet
the inhabiters of the earth felt the woe thereof. This devouring people is said
to be cast out of his mouth, as being by his devilish suggestion, words, and
counsel from him forcibly sent forth.

Verse. 16. And the earth helped the woman: The Churches preservation by the
earth, unto the which the devil was cast, verse. 9. 12. his own bounds a
safety to Gods people. Opened her mouth and swallowed: an allusion to Numb. 16.
32. to show, that there was a speedy riddance of this flood, within Satan's
own dominion.

Verse. 17. And went to make war with the remnant of her seed: What this seed
is, is showed in the next words, even faithful and obedient Christians; which
plainly declare that the woman was the Christian Church, whose children have
the testimony of Jesus Christ. The remnant of her seed: Thus are all the
godly called, in which a respect is had to that her man-child, verse. 5. the
principal of her children at this time, the rest a remnant. Or here is a
respect to the whole Church hidden, and these remnant such of the godly, as
were seen here and there, as a remnant left of her, against whom Satan, in,
and by his instruments exercised his power. Whether this war be some other,
or that which is mentioned in ca. 13. 7. I leave to the godly learned to judge
of. It may seem not to be any war of the Heathen against Christ and his
Church, as the war between Michael and the Dragon was; but the war of the
beast, chap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. for this war is after the woman is fled into the
wilderness, and so in the time of the two Prophets prophesying; in which time
is the beast warring against, not the Church in name, (for he and his Gentiles
had the out-court, chap. 11. 2. and so would be reputed to be of the Church
themselves), but against those that here are called the remnant of her seed,
and in chap. 13. 7. the Saints, such as be true Christians, here described;
and so in chap. 14. 12. whom the beast and his Gentiles, the counterfeit
Christians, do hate as deadly, as the Dragon did Christ and his Church. It may
be noted, that it is said, he went to make war: as now taking this war in
hand, not against those that professed themselves Christians, which were at
this present every where at hand, to have set upon them, as he did by Heathen
tyrants, till he was cast from Heaven; but against faithful and true
Christians (of which there was now no visible assembly) wheresoever he could
find them, by the beast his substitute; of which in the next chapter, where is
showed how he went here to war against these the remnant, and against the
Saints therein, verse. 7.

Notes upon Chap. 13.
Verse. 1. And I stood upon the sand of the sea: These words show, that John was
in a convenient place, and there stood prepared, to behold what was next to be
showed unto him. To stand on the sea sand, is to be in a fit place, to see
what comes out of the sea; places are given (as a convenient help) to see
what is to be seen, chap. 17. 1. 3. and 21. 10.

A beast rise out of the sea: Allusion to Dan. 7. 3. Sea and earth, are in the
former chapter the places granted to the devil to walk in, (being cast out of
heaven, chap. 12. 9. 12.) from whence this beast, and the other, verse. 11. do
arise, both from Satan; though sea be given to this, and earth to the other,
which in Daniel are made the original to the self same four beasts. For in
Dan. 7. they are said to arise out of the sea, verse. 3. and the same are said
to arise also out of the earth, verse. 17. By which we may see, one and the
same may in one respect be said to come out of the sea, and in another respect
to arise out of the earth; so it is in this place, keeping the allusion to
Daniell.

A beast: A state and kingdom is so called, Dan. 7. and 8: what state I take
this to be is largely before showed. Rise up: As by the help of others, so not
without his own endeavor, he is not said to be raised, but to rise up; for
this beast sought supremacy with might and maine. Out of the sea: This beast
is the same that is mentioned, chap. 11. 7. and 17. 8, ascending out of the
bottomless pit, as bred and brought up of the devil in a most secret and
hidden manner, as out of a bottomless pit, past finding out his first
conception: but now here arises out of the sea, which is also called a depth,
Genes. 1. 1. Psalm. 104. 6. Antichristianisme is a deep mystery in the
conception, and in the growing, both in depths; the one as in the bottomless
pit, the other as in the deep of the sea, not seen, nor discerned by men's
eyes or understanding: of the interpretation of the sea, see chap. 8. 9. Or
perhaps by sea, here may be meant a troubled or unquiet condition of people
and nations, great commotions and alterations, out of which, as out of a
troubled sea, the Popedom arose; so the four beasts in Dan. chap. 7. 2. 3.
Having seven heads, and ten horns, as the Dragon had, chap. 12. 3: for the
seat and dignity is Roman, being hills and Kings, chap. 17. 9. And upon his
horns ten Crowns: Here is a difference from the Dragon; the Crowns were upon
his heads; but here on the horns, which are Kings at one hour with this
state, chap. 17. 11: but not any with the Dragon. And upon his heads Of
blasphemy see Mr. Sheldon of Antichrists miracles. page 171.
the name of blasphemy. The Dragon had no crowns on his horns, but crowns on
his heads; this has crowns on his horns, and blasphemy on his heads, wherein
he is worse then the Dragon; which shows, that the Dragon made Rome great in
Sovereignty, but this beast makes it notable in impiety. Mark this ye
Romanists.
So much worse is the Popedom, then the Heathen Empire.

Verse. 2. The beast, a very monster like diverse terrible beasts, of which also
I have before delivered my mind. He is the Dragons substitute in three
things, in power, seat, and great authority.

Ver. 3. One of his heads (as it were) wounded to death: This was by war, as
verse. 14 tells us. Though by heads be understood hills or kings, chap. 17. 9;
yet here cannot be understood by this head a hill, but a king or kingly
government, for this is capable of a wound; which wound was given by the
barbarous Nations, Goths, Vandals and Hunnes, by whom Rome came almost to
utter destruction, after the rising of this beast out of the sea, which had
received this wound, as some think, in the sixth head, that is the Caesar's;
others in the seventh head, the Popes, or Bishops of Rome, and it may seem to
be that head, which makes this beast to be that which it is; for in verse 14
this beast himself is said to have received this deadly wound, and in this
verse it is called his deadly wound; as being so upon the head, as the wound
thereof was (as it were) deadly to ye whole state, that is, to this beast
himself, which is also called the eighth, and one of the seven, chap. 17. 11.
Was healed: That is, got his power, seat and great authority in the view of
the world, which seemed before to be utterly lost; for so the words following
may strengthen this exposition: first, by the worlds wondering at so rare a
change and recovery. Secondly, at their worshipping of the Dragon for his
power, seat, and great authority given to the beast. And thirdly, by their
worshipping of the beast, whom they now saw so powerful after the healing of
the wound. All the world: An universal apostasy to Antichristianisme.
Wondered: That is, followed wondering, so as they gave themselves over wholly to
be led thereby, partly with admiration, saying, Who is like the beast? and
partly with fear, saying, Who is able to war with him? verse. 4.

Verse. 5. Allusion to Dan. 7. 25. Here is the beasts power, his blasphemy, his
deeds and dominion, set down from this verse to the end of verse. 8, well
declaring, why this state is compared to a beast, and such a monstrous one too,
as has been noted, of which this and the verses following are a Commentary.

Verse. 11. Here is the beast (the Pope) set out; or as the Papists themselves
confess, that very Antichrist, though they would have him to be another then
the Pope. But I have before showed at large, that this is that Antichrist the
Pope. Another in sort from the former, as is only the head from the body, and
the king from his kingdom; but in chap. 17. 11, they are made both one, and do
both come out of Satan's dominion, chap. 12. 12. This beast is the vpholder of
the glory and honor of the other, as is clear from verses 14. 15. 16. 17.
They practice together, chap. 16. 13, they dye together, chap. 19. 20; for this
second beast, called also the false Prophet, and the first beast are so linked
together, that indeed they do make but one whole complete and monarchical
government, to which the pontificians themselves agree: See Viega in Apo. cap.
13. sect. 6.

Coming up out of the earth: He had an earthly orignall by earthly men, and
earthly means to rule upon the earth: for as he fell from heaven, chap. 9. 1,
to the earth, so he rules over it, as the next verse shows. Two horns:
Horns are power, Psalm. 18. Dan. 8. Two horns then are a double power, over
the sea, and over the earth, for the Dragon had power so, chap. 12. 12, which
he gave to the first beast, verse. 2. and this beast took all that power,
which the first received; for the Dragon, that beast, and this here, are all as
one, chap. 16. 13: for the first beast receives power, seat, and great
authority from the Dragon, and this speaks as the Dragon. The Devil and the
Pope that Antichrist are so like, as father and son may be; for his lusts
does he, Ioh. 8, as may be seen by comparing the Pope with the Devil.

The Devil. The Pope. This fell from heaven, verse. 6. So did this Antichrist
the Pope, chap. 9. 1. This contradicts Gods word, Genesis 3. So he
contradicts the place in Heb. 13. 4. doing as in 1. Timothy, 4. 3. This
makes me^ to speak lies, 1. King. 22. 22. So he, as their Legenda aurea
shows, and their notorious equiuocatio^s. This puts into men's hearts, to
play the traitors against their Lord and master, Ioh. 13. 2. So the Pope makes
me^ to play the traitors against their Soueraigns, to poison, and to murder
them, as by experience we know. This will profess Christ, Mar. 3. 11. and yet
not obey his laws. So the Pope will profess Christ, but not live after his
laws; as his usurped power, wicked laws, idolatrous service, and bloody and
impious practices proclaim to the world. This will corrupt the Scriptures,
Matthew. 4. 6. So does he, as may appear in the vulgar Latin Bibles almost in a
hundred places, as some particularly have noted. This sets his seat where
Gods Church is, cap. 2. 13. persecuteth, puts into prison, and murthereth
the godly, chap. 2. 10. 13. chap. 12. 17. So the Pope, that man of sin, he
sits in the Temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. and persecuteth, imprisoneth, and
puts to death the servants of Christ, as this book foretells, chap. 11. 7.
and 13. 5. and histories show. This will not be put to silence, nor cease his
wicked courses, though convinced by Scripture, Mat. 4. 5. 8. but by the
powerful command of Christ, Matthew. 4. 10. 11. No more will y^ Pope, though the
word plainly condemns his impiety, false doctrine, heathenish worship, and
hellish practices to uphold his state; till the powerful command of Christ
perforce constrain him to be packing, as this prophecy foresheweth unto us.
This would be worshipped as God, Mat. 4. 9. and has obtained worship, cap. 13.
4. So the Pope sits, as God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. and has gotten to be worshipped,
chap. 13. 4. so as Kings and Emperors have kissed his toe, a worship never
assumed of any in the Christian world before. This challenges to be the
disposen of all the kingdoms of the earth, Mat. 4. 9. Luke 4. 6. So this son
of Satan has this Dragons mouth, challenging all the kingdoms of the world to
be his right, to give them to whom he will: Bellar. lib. 5. cap. 8. de pont.
Romans

And thus we see, how like the Devil the Pope is; as in these, so in many
other points, which only for brevity sake I omit to set down.

Verse. 12. Exercises all the power of the former beast: His power was the
Dragons power, verse. 2. What therefore the Dragon had, the first beast
obtained, and this puts in execution; so as this beast acts and does all,
whatsoever the other could do, and so as much as the Dragon did before. And
full like are the Popes to the Heathen Emperors.

Heathen Emperors. Roman Popes. These aspired to Imperial dignity through
pride, and did rule as tyrants, though all were not alike wicked. These have
gotten their high place by vsurpatio^, proudly domineering over the Lords
heritage, and ruling as Tyrants, though not all ever alike wicked. These
subdued kingdoms, and ruled over people, nations and tongues. These brought
under their yoke of bondage, kindreds, tongues, and nations, verse. 7. These
placed and displaced, set up and pulled down whom they pleased, according to
their lusts. These also placed and displaced, as they listed, Kings and
Emperors; the world knows it in Phocas, Pipine, and others. These could
endure no opposites, but forced all to obey upon loss of liberty, or pain of
death. These could never endure contradiction, nor opposition, but have forced
men to obedience upon loss of liberty, and by putting some to death, as here
is foretold, verse. 12. 17. 15. and as stories do record. These suppressed (as
much as they could) the preaching of the Gospel, and vpheld their Idols.
These, all know, have to the utmost hindered the preaching of Gods word, and
maintained their idolatry. These persecuted and murdered Christians most
mercilesly. These have done the like, and still endeavor to do, eagerly
pursuing their hellish quarrel against the professors of Christ's Gospel.
These (for the most part) would hardly be appeased in any sort toward
Christians, though some dealt now and then favorably. These have ever showed a
deadly hatred against Gods people, and would not be pacified, neither stay
their bloody fury at any time, further then either for fear they durst not
follow their desires, or for want of power could not effect what they purposed.

Thus we see also, how the Heathen Tyrants and these tyrannical Popes agree in
one, as led by the Devil their father unto all mischiefs against the Church
of Christ. But as the one sort are utterly perished from among men, so shall
the other in time, and their destruction hasteneth. Now when Lord! how long
Lord, holy and true! do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them, that
dwell upon the earth? chap. 6. 10.

Before him* That is, as I conceive it, in the chief seat of this his
dominion, and now Popely Empire. For the face of a state and dominion (which
this beast sets out) is that place, where all the laws and decrees are
made, and from whence they come forth into all parts of that dominion, as from
Babylon, and Susan, the chief of these Emperials, and so from Rome in this.
And we do see that Antichrist the Pope his acts and exercise of his authority
and power is at Rome, which is (as it were) before and in the face of his
Popedom. And causes the earth: He came out of the earth, that is, out of such
an earth, as he can cause to worship him; even the false and counterfeit
Church, and those that dwell therein, of whom is spoken verse. 8. there it is
said, that they worship him; here showed by whom they are brought unto it. To
worship the first beast: This beast is all for that other beast, as is evident
in all the words following; which shows that this beasts honor stood in
advancing the honor of the other to the utmost. Which therefore cannot be the
Heathen Roman Empire, but the Popedom, which the Antichrist the Pope seeks
by all means to uphold, as his glory and kingdom, which was, as the words
show, after his wound received and healed, of which in verse. 3.

Verse. 13. Here is showed how he caused worship to the beast, and honor
thereby to himself, by playing the part of a seducer, and false prophet, as he
is called, chap. 16. 13. and 19. ^0. These wonders are no true miracles; for by
(...) be deceived the earth, verse. 14. and they are called, chap. 18. 23.
sorceries, and by Saint Paul, lying wonders, the working of Satan, 2. These. 2.
9. 10. He makes fire come down: An instance of one miracle or wonder for
all. This instance is given before any other, for that fire coming from
heaven, was a miraculous act of God for confirmation of his true worship, and
of such as were true worshippers of him, Leuit. 9. 24. 1. King. 18. 38. 2.
Chron. 7. 1. 2. King. 1. 10. 12. and therefore the devil makes his vicegerent
to do this, to make men believe he is not inferior to the Prophets, and that
he has power in the heavens. Howsoever the words may be taken figuratively,
for the lightening of excommunication; yet here it shall not be amiss to
take them after the letter, for here is mention of wonders and miracles; and
Saint Paul foretells that Antichrist by the devil shall do miracles, 2.
These. 2. Saint John also tells us in this prophecy, of sorceries, chap. 18.
23. Yea Papists do brag of their miracles to this day; and we do read of
their fained miracles, and that also in this kind of wonders, done by fire,
whereof Eglinus gives particular instances from stories, in his commentary
upon this place, and so some other; see Master Sheldon, that zealous convert,
his survey of Popes miracles, cap. 10. page 229. and. 163.

Verse. 14. Saying, that they should make an Image: Here is showed whereto the
miracles of this false prophet tended. With his miracles he teaches cursed
doctrine, to make an Image to the beast. This cannot be properly understood of
an Image or picture, as we commonly take the word Image; for this is an Image,
which the inhabitants of the earth must make; this is then no caruers or
ingrauers work: such an Image it must be, as should live and speak, and
cause men to be put to death that would not worship it. I have before said of
this somewhat, in the third chapter, of this preparatiue. The Beast, verse. 1.
is the Popedom, this other beast is the Pope and head in this Popedom, to
which, by false doctrine and miracles he obtains of them that dwell on the
earth, an Image to be made, not an Image of him; for that beast being alive,
and cured of the wound received, and this beast being in his presence, ver. 12.
it was needless to make an Image of him, whom all the world so beheld and
followed after, verse. 3. but an Image to him, that is, some representation of
high state to uphold this Popedom: which Image all should worship, in honor
of the Popedom, having power to make and ordain laws by the Popes authority,
(for he must give life and speech thereunto, else it is to be a dumb Idol,
and may neither move nor speak without him, as the next verse shows) to all
this new Roman state. Let here the wise and learned judge of this Image, that
are acquainted with the stories of the Popes, and Romish Church. First, The
Pope had not power to make it of himself, but he must get others to make it.
Secondly, he must cause it to be made, not by force, but by sorceries, and
deceitful miracles. Thirdly, this he chiefly sought to bring to pass, as
without which he could do nothing, and this by his wonders, and by his words,
as the text shows. Fourthly, he obtained it at the hands of those earthly
Christians. Fifthly, being made, it receives life and speech from him that
could not make it, and they that made it, had yet no power to make it breathe,
or speak at all. Sixthly, this Image he vpheld, and the worship and honor
thereof with all his might, causing it to speak, and to make as many as would
not worship it, to be slain. Seventhly. This the faithful oppose and prevail
against, chap. 15. 2. and 20. 4. which the wicked worldlings are overcome with,
and so perish under Gods horrible plagues, cap. 14. 9-11.

Verse. 15. Caused as many as would not worship the Image of the beast, should
be slain: An allusion to Nabuchadnezzars tyranny, Dan. 3. 6. 20. That which
before was said to be the Image to the beast, (because it was for the honor of
that state to uphold it, without which it could not have been continued) is
here said to be the Image of the beast; for that the Popedom now by the making
of it, and the power thereof was (as it were) represented to all, adored and
worshipped, as Idolaters do the Image of their God.

Verse. 16. The Pope having gotten this Image made, and thereby established
strongly his Popedom, now he usurps authority over all, and brandeth them
for his own, as being their Lord and master: for it is said, that now he
causes all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond that is, all
sorts, of all orders and degrees, from the Emperor to the pesant, (so large
and ample a dominion has he gotten) to receive a mark; which was by this
beast, or his instruments put upon them, and they made as his subjects to
receive, for to distinguish them from others, and to be known to belong unto
(the beast) the Popes kingdom. A mark: the word is taken for a carved or a
graven work, Act. 17. 29. but cannot so be here, for the Popes subjects
receive no visible or corporal imprinted mark upon them. This mark is called
the mark of the beast, chap. 16. 2. that is, the mark of the Popes, and
Antichrists dominion, that Romish state; it is also called the mark of his
name, chap. 14. 11. so that this mark is such a thing, as makes him that
receives it, to be one of that body and state, for it is the mark of the
beast. And the same person also thereby is caused to carry the name of that
beast and state upon him, for it is the mark of his name. So then this mark
does make him truly the Popes, in name and subjection; it is (we may see from
the text) a mark of the whole state; a mark bearing the name of that state; a
mark so necessary, and so generally fit for all, as the Pope causes all sorts
to receive it; a mark which Christ's flock escapes, chap. 15. 2. and refuses
to receive. chap. 20. 4; a mark which who so willingly and wittingly
receives, and not casts off, shall perish, ca. 14. 11. Now this being a
mark of the whole state, and a mark of the name thereof; it is necessary
before we can know the mark, to know the beast and his name first. The beast
is not this second beast, in verse. 11. which is the very Antichrist; but is the
other first beast, verse. 1. which is the Roman state under the Pope, as is
already declared: therefore this character is not the mark of the person of
Antichrist, the second beast; but of his kingdom and state, the first beast:
neither therefore is the name a man's name, but the name of this state; and not
a name given of other men, as they shall please to call it, but what Antichrist
the Pope, this second beast, shall like and allow of; yea and so allow of, as
they that refuse it, or the character of it, or the number of it, shall be
restrained of their liberty in common traffic, verse. 16. Now then this beasts
name, the Romish Antichristian dominion under the Pope, is (as they would have
it called and esteemed) the Apostolic Church, or the Roman Catholi^e Church.
The Beasts name.
This is the name of the Popedom, which the Pope (that Antichrist) of Rome
would have given to it, and chalengeth as proper to his hierarchicall
jurisdiction, and to his imperial state; thus I suppose we have the name. Now
the mark of that Roman Catholic Church, or the mark of the name of the
beast, of which all sorts are capable, small and great, rich and poor, free
and bond; and therefore a common mark to any of them, which is Saint Peter's
keys, branching out it self in every The Beasts mark.
maine Antichristian doctrine, every counterfeit sacrament, idolatrous
practice, superstitious invention, canon, or decree, contrary to Gods word,
made and confirmed by the general consent and authority of that see, called
Roman Catholic Church; and received by that only authority: for in all and
every of these is a mark of the name and authority of that beast, which his
subjects do receive in their right hand, when they do practice the same in
subjection to that state; and in their foreheads, when they do make open
profession thereof. Let none except against this, for that here many
particulars are noted, when in text a mark singularly is mentioned; for they
are all but branches of Peter's keys, that one mark of that absolute and
unlimited power of the beast, and every one a mark of that state, with these
circumstances concurring; that is, that it be a general tenent of that Church;
that it be contrary to Gods word; that it be imposed by the authority of that
Romish Church; that in subjection to the same it be received, professed, and
practiced. He that receives so any one of the particulars, following withal
the beast, and worshipping his Image; (for that is to be presupposed before he
receive the mark, as being imposed by Antichrist (as we here see) only on
such), he has the mark of his name, is held by him one of his; and so we
also account every such a one to be a Papist, Romanist, or Roman Catholic.

Verse. 17. No man might buy or sell: (Rome, or Roman dition, a trading place;
all there, for money) save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or
the number of his name. The mark of his name is first, as being indeed the
chief, and only (as it were), makes the proper subjects of that kingdom;
therefore it is said, that he causes them to receive the mark, but not so
the name and number (though such as have not these cannot traffic amongst
them) and they that receive the mark are threatened with damnation, chap. 14.
9. 11. as being of those, whose names are not written in the Lambs book of
life, verse. 8. Yo have the name of the beast, is to be accounted a Roman
Catholic, after the name of the beast, as before is noted; which name is
better esteemed then the name of a Christian, a lover of the Gospel, a child
of God, a believer in Christ: take all the names in Gods book, and reject this
one, there is no buying or selling with them; and this is a second rank of
Papists. The number of his name: Here is the third sort of the Popes subjects,
some have the mark, some but the name, and not the mark; other some only the
number of the name, and so seem to be the utmost rank or sort of
Antichristians. This number of the beasts name, is such a number, as the Pope
likes well of; for whosoever has this number, is admitted to be among them,
as well as they that have the mark, and name: of all which he is the inuentor,
he causes the Image to be made, he inuenteth the mark, he gives the name,
and finds out a number for the name of the beast; which at least such as have
not the mark or name must needs have, or else not to come where he has to
do. What this number is, is showed in the next verse, for the number of the
beast, and the number of his name is all one; as we see before the mark of the
beast, and the mark of the name of the beast to be all one, cap. 14. 11. cap.
16. 2. both which (to wit, the mark and number) the faithful escape from,
chap. 15. 2. Therefore as in the Image and mark is impiety, so also in the
number, though the peril be not so great to have the number, as to worship the
beast and his Image and to receive his mark; because these only are severely
threatened with dreadful vengeance, chap. 14. 9. 10. 11. and not the other;
yet is there evil enough in it, seeing it is part of the praises of the
faithful, that they get victory over the number of the beasts name, chap. 15.
2. and that the Pope can like them so well, that have this number; which
therefore must also needs be a thing known to him, and that which withal
makes those openly known to him that have it, that they thereby may be
admitted to buy and sell, as well as they that have received the mark of the
beast, and his name.

Verse. 17. Here is wisdom: that is, heavenly wisdom, for this is the
wisdom which the holy spirit commends, and here is required to the
unfolding of this point in hand. Let him that has understanding count: Here
men of understanding and endued with wisdom, are stirred up to reckon and
count the number of the beast, or the number of his name, which is all one. The
beast is the first beast, and therefore the number of the beast is the number of
that Roman state under the Pope, or the number of the name of that state, that
is, the number of the Roman Catholic Church, if that may be the name of the
beast. For it is the number of a man: that is, which a man may number, coming
within the understanding of a man endued with wisdom; for these words may be
put for encouraging of him that has understanding, to fall to make the count:
or, it is the number of a man, that is, of man's devising, even of Antichrists,
as also the Image and mark, and name of the beast were; and therefore there is
great subtilty in the number, which needs a wise man, and of understanding to
count and reckon the number. This being the exposition, the words are brought
in as a reason why it should be said, that here is wisdom, and why a man of
understanding is needfully required to count the number; even because of
Antichrist, that man of sin, his subtelty, in devising of the beasts number,
or his names number, and this number of the beast, being the subtillyinuented
number of a man, is six hundred threescore and six; which being a bare
propounded number to a state, and to the name thereof, without mentioning of
times, persons, or things, which by this might be numbered, (as to say 666.
days, months, or years, as we see in all the numbers noted, in chap. 11.
3. and 9. 5. and chap. 12. 6. and chap. 20. 3; Or to say 666. persons, as in
cap. 5. 11. and ^^ 16; Or to say 666. things, as in chap. 21. 14. 17.)
declares a full deep mystery herein, from all other numbers mentioned in
this prophecy.

Diverse are the minds of men concerning this number of the beast, which the
subjects of Antichrist must have, as John prophetically foretells in the former
verse; and here plainly tells us what that number is, if we had wisdom to
count* it. There are to be read many and sundry interpretations; and of these,
one says, it is a military number of the ancient Roman legion; so Doctor
Simonds, in his pisgah. euang. page 120. 121. Another, that it is the profound
wisdom of the canon law, in the book of Decretals, as Iunius upon this
place: a third makes it the time of Antichrist, as Eglinus commenting on this
verse; when one should take upon him, first the title of universal Bishop,
which is the style of Antichrist; and this was Boniface the third, as our
learned Sovereign shows in his Highness Apology, page 93. which title was
fully settled upon the Pope, about the year 666. A fourth, that hereby is
pointed out a name in the old Testament, setting out by it, Antichrist; for by
a posterity of 666. we may find Esdr. 2. 13. Adonikam, that is, a Lord
standing up; so Master Broughton, in both his short, and now also in his last
and large Commentary on this book. A fifth, that it is a name of number, the
letters, of which it is made being numerall, containing in them this number,
666. Of this opinion are the most, yet differ even to an astonishment in me.
Some will have an Hebrew name, as Romagnosh, (Romanus, a He Pope) or Romiiith,
( Romana, perhaps a she Pope): some a Greek name, and this one word, as
(...), or two words, as (...), or three words, as (...), and such like, of
which are many other in commentaries, both of Protestants and Papists to be
found, especially of the Jesuits, Ribera and Bla. Viegas. Some a Latin name,
as Diclux, generalis dei vicarius in terris, all which words must contain by
the letters of number in them 666. as for plainness sake, thus:

^ 200. ^ 200. l 30. ^ 5. ^ 10. ^ ^. ^ 20. ^ 40. ^ 6. ^ 1. ^ 20. t 300. ^ ^^. ^
20. ^ 1. ^ 70. ^ 40. t 300. ^ 20. ^ 1. ^ 40. ^ 20. ^ 9. ^ 50. ^ 10. ^ 5. l 30.
l 3^* ^ 1. l 30. ^ 70. ^ 6. ^ 10. ^ 10. ^ 8. ^ ^0. ^ 8. l 30. ^ 300. ^ 400. ^
50. 200. ^ 20. ^ 200. ^ 10. ^ 70. ^ 10. ^ 1. ^ 10. ^ 20. 200. ^ ^. a 1. a 1.
666 666 666 666 666

And so of all the rest, which men have supposed to be the beasts name, whether
the names be Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, they contain letters expressing this
number of 666. A sixth, that this number sets out the comely proportion of
the whole frame, structure and building of that beast the Popedom, the
kingdom of that Antichrist, (the man of sin his invention) in all the parts
well agreeing and compacted together, each part answering and fitly agreeing,
as this number does within it self.

Now which of all these come nighest unto the truth of this point, and the
meaning of the holy Ghost, I dare not set down, all of them being the opinions
of learned men; only I will freely tell, to which of them all I incline, with
my reasons, leaving every man to Gods guiding to like, as he shall be
enlightened, by well weighing some certain observations out of the text, most
necessary to be prefixed, and for every one to be acquainted with, for guiding
of his judgment, either to find out some other thing, or rightly to discern
of these opinions already set down. The observations are th^se* I. That the
number is the number of the (...) (...) of the second; and therefore is (...)
number of the state, and nor of the person ruling (...) state. II. That the
second beast greatly (...), for it gets them that bear it* freedom to buy
and sell within that state, and exem^^^ ^^em from the displeasure of
Antichrist. III. That this must be a known number, both to Antichrist to
discern his favorites by, to give them leave to buy and sell, (as well as
they that have the mark and name), as also to Christ's servants, who must
strive against it, and get also the victory over it, cap. 15. 2. IV. That the
beasts name, and the number of his name are plainly distinguished. So that,
albeit the beasts number, and the number of his name be one, yet not so his
name, and the number of his name; for the text clearly makes the mark, tee
name, and the number to differ; and therefore it is said the mark, or the name,
or the number of the name; so as some may have the mark of his name; some his
name, and some only the number of his name, as before is noted. V. That there
is great wisdom required here. VI. That this wisdom and understanding stand
(...) counting the number of the beast, which is 666. and not in finding the
first beast his name, or number, which many shall have, verse. 17. nor in
finding a man's name, that is (as some expound it) Antichrists name, and so this
number of 666. in that name; for first, neither in this propheci^, nor
elsewhere in the Scriptures, has Antichrist any proper name given unto him.
Secondly* the text here says, that the number of the beast is the number of a
man; it says not either a man's name, or a number in his name. Thirdly, by
seeking out a man's name, viz. Antichrists name; such leave the name of the
first beast and state, of which only the text speaks, and seek the name of
the second beast, of which there is not one word in the text. Fourthly and
lastly, we may as well seek a mark in his name, as a number in it, for that
it is as well said, the mark of his name, chap. 14. 11. as here in verse. 17.
the number of his name* now none have endeavored to seek a mark in his name,
and yet the ground is as good for it, as to seek a number in his name. These
are the observations to be taken for our direction in this point of wisdom;
all, and every of which, the words of the text, in the 17, and 18. verses do
clearly afford unto us without any wresting.

Now touching mine own mind, it leads me to approve of the sixth and last
opinion set down; not of any love of no^eltie (though it be the opinion of one
man, and the first that I read of, so taking this place, albeit (perhaps)
occasioned from Iunius his words upon this verse), but for that it is (in my
poor apprehensi^ (...) likeliest truth. It may be, upon these for^^r (...)
observations laid down, that other shall concei^^ (...) what else; yet let
none be offended, that of all these, I make my choice for the present of this
upon probable conjectures. The whole body and frame of Antichrists kingdom is
set out in this number 666. the beasts number. This number runs all on six
every way; six in unities, in tens, and in hundreds. Now this number of six,
has it perfection (of which Iunius has written upon this verse at large) and
is the first perfect number, of which Boniface the eighth speaks, in the
preface of the sixth book of the Decretals; which book he calls the sixth,
because it is a perfect number, and for that being added to the five other
before, makes the perfect volume, containing (as he says) a perfect platform
for the government of affairs, and a perfect discipline, for the rule of good
manners. Thus we see the Popes high account of this number of six, of which
this number of 666. consists, notably setting out this Antichristian
kingdom. I. This number is a number of perfection, so that state in their
account, a most perfect structure and building. II. This number, though it
differ in degrees from 6. to 60. and from 60. to 600. yet it holds in the
perfect unity, keeping the number of six; so that state has degrees one
greater then another, as much as 60. is a greater number then 6. and 600.
greater then 60; yet keep they all the number of six, that is, as they call
it, their unity both to their perfect head, their Pope, who, as they hold,
cannot err, and to his perfect decrees, without any sects or schisms among
them. III. The decrees in this number arise without any disproportion, by a
like fit proportion in every part of the number, from one degree to another.
For look what is between 6. and 60. the same, in the rule of multiplication,
is between 60. and 600. So (as they make the world believe) in that state in
all the frame thereof, there is such a comely order, and fair proportion, as
might allure all men thereunto; if the parts be considered from the lowest to
the highest, from their unities to their tens, and from their tens to their
hundreds. IV. This number in the degrees is raised by tens, from six of
unities, to six of hundreds, without which, this number so proportionally
could not be raised. Ten is Gods number in giving of his Laws, Exodus 20. and
Ten is his number, for the upholding of his worship and service, performed by
his servants the Priests and Levites, for their maintenance, Leuitic. 27. 30.
31. 32. So this Roman state has been raised up from the six of unities, that
is, from their small beginnings, under pretense of perfection (even their number
of six) to their sixties, and six hundreds, by tenths claimed on Gods behalf
(but most unjustly) for the service and worship, which those Antichristian
Priests would seem to perform unto him. Thus we see, how this number is the
number of the beast, setting out the whole frame and body of that state; this
is the number which that second beast (the Pope) likes of; this is a known
number to all that have any knowledge of that Roman state; here also is
wisdom required: and by this which is said, it may appear, that this wisdom
stands in the well counting of this number, which is to find it (for all this
goodly accord, order, proportion, and pretense of piety (all which are in this
number) to be only the number of a man, that is, a platform of a state
devised by man, even that man of sin. This is the number which the godly get
victory over, chap. 15. 2, and by counting the same, find it a number without
valuing of any thing; and so to be rejected as a number of nothing, altogether
differing from Gods number set down in the next chapter, which is 144000,
which at the first view may not seem so proportionable a number as 666, in
which yet there is no comparison, this differing from that in three things.
First in the framing up of the building, Gods number rises on twelues, for
this number 144000 is the number of twelve times twelve in chap. 7, to show,
that the Church and kingdom of Christ is raised upon the doctrine of the
twelve Apostles: therefore is every part of the number at the first raised
above twelve, declaring that nothing comes into his Church to be of account
with God, till it come above twelve, that is, till it be laid upon the true
foundation. The beasts number begins before it come at twelve, of which
number it cannot be raised; that kingdom has not the doctrine of the twelve
Apostles to begin it with, or to raise it upon; but indeed the inventions of
men and humane traditions. Yet here note, that twelve may be found in this
number, but neither the number in the foundation which is but six, nor in the
raising up of the number by tens, but only in the number multiplied; as ten
times six, and ten times sixty, so is twelve to be often found, but this is
secret and hidden; to show, that albeit that state be neither built nor raised
upon the twelve Apostles doctrine, yet is it hidden for the elect sake within
that state for their edification; or else it may be found in the number by
addition, as 6 and 6 do make 12; where 12 is outward so and apparent, and yet
but so once neither, to be found in the whole number, and that by breaking of
the order through addition, when otherwise there is only numeration and
multiplication. Teaching hereby this, that as in three 666 is outwardly but 12
once, and that by addition too; so that state, though it have within it often
the number of twelve, that is, the doctrine of the Apostles hidden for the
elect sake; yet outwardly it has it but once, that is, that doctrine is the
least part of the building of that state, and also not to be found, but upon
the disordering of the same, setting it out of the proper frame of it own
number and count. Secondly this number differs from Gods number in the
figure, for 144000 makes by twelues a square number of equal sides, such is
the figure of the new Jerusalem, chap. 21. 16, to show the stable and
immovable state of the Church of Christ, holding in the building, and also in
the figure and whole frame thereof, the Apostles doctrine; the number of ten is
Gods number for the maintenance of his Church, but only the number of 12 to
found it, proportion the parts, and to rear it up. Now the beasts number
cannot be made in full proportion square, it is but a tottering state, a
kingdom that shall be shaken, and perish for ever. It is a state that
howsoever it has a number, yet can it not endure the reed of Gods word to
measure it by, as the Lords building will, chap. 11. 1. and 21. 15; for they
well know, that it has not the Apostles doctrine written in holy Scriptures for
the foundation thereof. I hirdly, the beasts number differs in this, that Gods
number begins the first figure of valuation in the fourth place, the square
number, chap. 21. 16, and not at mere unities, nor at tens, or hundreds; but
at thousands, and multiplieth into thousands, showing, that Gods Church
begins in a solid communion and fellowship of many not to be diminished; and
so increases with the increasing of God into thousands of tens, and thousands
of hundreds, though not into ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands (the Angels number, chap. 5. 11.) here in this life; for that is the
perfection of their number with the Angels in the life to come. The Beasts
number begins at mere unities, and ascends to tens and hundreds; but
never attaineth to the fourth place, the square number, nor to the number of a
thousand, in this number here of 666, which is the figurative number of that
state, (though otherwise the world follow after the Beast), to show, that the
unity of that Church arises not from the communion of many primarily, but by
simple unities or ones, that is, by the vprising of the Popes one after
another; not in the fourth place of thousands, a solid increase, but by little
and little to the certain height, after which it shall also by little and
little be diminished, till it come down again unto nothing. This is the
wisdom given to count the beasts number, which whosoever can rightly count,
will not at all make any account of that Antichristian state, and Dragon-like
dominion.

But here it may be asked, what reason there is of this, to set out this state
by a mere number applied to nothing that is numbered? This is not without
reason, to all that have the wisdom of God. It is set out first by a number,
because one day God will number it, for he has written Mean over it, as he
did over Balshazzars kingdom, and now has begun to finish it, chap. 10. 7,
and will finish it, chap. 18; and it is (secondly) set out by a number without
naming any thing that is numbered, to show, that as such a number is to no use,
but to reckon, to see an order, to see a form and a fashion of a number, but
without substance; so this Romish state is unuseful to Christianity, and
stands only in a fair show of order, in mere forms and fashions, without
substance of piety. And indeed who sees not, how that Antichristian
Hierarchy stands more in form and fashion; in number of days, in number of
prayers, in number of orders, in number of years, for their antiquity; in
number of Councels, Fathers and others, for their consent; in number of
countries and kingdoms, people, nations and tongues subiecting themselves
thereto, for their universality; then in any solid substance of true religion,
holy and sincere worship, and faithful teaching of the Apostles doctrine? But
here again may some demand, why this number of 666 must be the Beasts number
rather then any other? Ans. The reasons may be these: I. For that the Pope
himself approves of this number as perfect, as before is showed. II. For that
it excellently sets out that state fully (as we see), yea so, as this number
may be found in such names and terms, as do rightly every way set him out in
diverse languages; for the country, in Hebrew, Romagnosh (Romanus) 666, in
Greek (...) ( Latinus) 666: for his supremacy and glory as the Sun above
other stars, (...) 666; for the name of his Popedom, (...), 666; for the
title, that is, to be Christ's Vicar, which he claims generalis Dei Vicarius
in terris, 666, in English, By virtue of Peter's seat Gods general Vic^r on the
earth, 666; for his being substituted in the room of the Emperors, chap. 13.
3. in our tongue, according also to the truth of the text, The Pope by
superiority is the Devils Leiftenant, which is 666: yea one of their own men
Benedictus a Benedictis, in his book De Antich. contra Whitacerum, gives this
to the Pope, Paulo quinto vice Deo, which in numerall letters is 666: so as his
own chosen and approved number sets him out most lively in his colors. III.
To give us judgment to discern them, and to know what kind of Christians
they be, even Christians by halfes; the true Church arises on 12, this false
Church only on 6 throughout; some word of God, some word of their own; some
one Sacrament of God, some of their own; some part of Christ's discipline, the
rest their own; in some sort allowing the Scriptures, in some sort not; so in
their prayers and ordinances partly of God, partly of men; their nighest accord
to the truth, wherein they hold any truth, is but as 6 to 12, half way,
further they come not: for their whole number stands all of sixes, 666; which
number the servants of Christ by wise counting get victory over, but others
embrace, approving of that state for outward beauty, order, accord, show of
piety, and I know not what, and so are friends to that beast; and stepping on
a little further will receive his name, and also take his mark upon them, as
our late Apostates do to their damnation, unless they repent. Fourthly and
lastly, for that here is in a sort an allusion to Nebuchadnezzars Image, Dan.
3. 1, which was six cubits in breadth, and three score in height, which he
would have to be worshipped. This state is a framed Idol of that proud
Nebuchad. of mystical Babylon, which the Princes and people on the earth fall
down and do reverence unto; but Shedrach, Meshach and Abednego will rather be
burnt in the fire, for they have wisdom to count the number of the beast.

Notes upon Chap. 14.
Verse. 1. Here the true Lamb Jesus Christ is set against the counterfeit Lamb,
chap. 13. 12. that the Lamb here is the Son of God, is clear from these
words his Father. A lamb so called by allusion to the Lamb, his type in the
Law; also for that he patiently endured hitherto the Dragons substitute the
Beast, and false Prophets wickedness and rage. Stand, as now one ready prepared
against his enemies. Or understanding this of the time of the Churches hidden
estate, it notes, that Christ stood up, and by him and with him his people,
when all the rest of the world fell down and worshipped the Beast. On mount
Sion: An allusion to the place where the Temple was built, here meant, the
Church of God, Heb. 12. 22. 23. 24, even the same which was called before, the
Temple, cap. 11. 1. and the Woman in the wilderness, chap. 12. 6. 14. and
144000 the same in chap. 7. the number of twelve times twelve. Of which before
in the seventh chapter, and in the former chapter. His fathers name, called
also the name of his God, chap. 3. 12. This no doubt was the mark they were
sealed with in chap. 7: his fathers name is to be their God, and to have this
written in their foreheads, (an allusion to Exodus 28. 38.) is either to make a
constant outward profession of their faith in God thorough Christ, as that full
notice might be taken thereof: or it is their spiritual sonship and adoption,
which they had as certain, as a thing written, and as evident testimony
thereof, as a mark in the foreheads, for children bear the fathers name: and
this exposition seems the better, for the name written in their foreheads is
rather the act of another on them, as is showed by the sealing, chap. 7, then
any act of their own, as the former exposition implies. In this verse, is the
Lamb with his number also, and name and mark or seal, chap. 7. opposed to
the Beasts number, name and mark.

Verse. 2. From heaven: That is, the true Church of God, the same in chap. 4. as
appears here by the mentioning of the four Beasts, and four and twenty
Elders, which are said to be in heaven, that is, the true Church here upon
earth, chap. 4. 3. A voice: This is the sound of Gods word, for the voice from
the true Church is no other but Gods voice, for the true Church sounds out
only Gods word, as Christ commanded, Matthew. 28. 18, and as the history in the
Acts does show, and S. Paul in his Epistles: now how comes this voice and
word of God from the Church, but by the Ministers of Christ? Therefore here is
the sound of Gods word preached by the messengers of Christ going out into the
earth, set out in a threefold degree thereof in the hearts of the hearers. The
first is as the sound of many waters, which is a mighty great voice, but being
a confused voice teaches nothing distinctly to the minds of the hearers; it
only works a wonder and admiration at the present, as Christ's preaching did
in many, Mar. 1. 22. 27. Matthew. 7. 28. Luke 4. 32. Ioh. 7. 46; but for want of
distinct apprehension, it is only as a noise of many waters to them, they do
learn nothing, yea the ears of such become deaf many times with hearing at
the length. Some expound these words ( many waters) for the sundry sorts of
people, as in chap. 17. 15, but they consider not the plain difference: Here
it is said, the woman sitt^th upon many waters, verse. 1, without any word of
similitude, which here is with a word of similitude, as the voice of many
waters; and therefore waters must be here taken properly as the word thunder
after, else it were not a plainly expressed similitude to illustrate the voice
by. Let the speech of a plain similitude, and without such a similitude, be
well observed in this book of the Reader. The second degree is, as the voice
of a great thunder, which is strong and loud in the hearts of men, like the
terror of Gods voice in giving of his Law; which in the consciences of
unregenerate men is so fearful, as it makes them to tremble as Felix, (Act.
24.) and to fly from the word, as not being able to hear the same. The third
and last is, the voice of harpers harping with their harpes, an allusion to the
sweet melody in the Temple at Jerusalem. This is the effect of the word in
the godly, which makes them to take as it were harpes, instruments of praises,
to become Harpers, spiritual Musicians filled with sweet peace and joy of the
holy Ghost, by the word of the Gospel; in which the Saints accord, and with
full concord of heart strings, as harp-strings, from the comfortable promises
of God, do praise him melodiously.

Verse. 3. And they sung as it were a new song: These words do show, that the
former verse is not to be understood of the voice of the Church hidden in the
Temple, and fled into the wilderness; for the state thereof affoorded not this
new song, neither in that state is the Church called Heaven, but when it
comes forth to be, in some sort at least, visible; so is heaven taken,
chap. 12. 7. It is therefore to be understood of the Church breaking out, when
the two Prophets before slain did ascend up, cap. 11. 12. Then sang this
Church this new song; for in David's Psalms a new song, is of new occasions
offered, and new matter of rejoicing. Before the throne, etc. See for this the
Elders and beasts, in the fourth chapter. And no man could learn that songue
but the 144000. that is, none but the chosen number sealed of God, and were his
people, cap. 7. Which were redeemed from the earth: that is, from the false
Church, and earthly state of Antichrist.

Verse. 4. Defiled with women: This speech cannot be meant of marriage, as
Papists would have it; for marriage is honorable among all, and the bed
undefiled, Heb. 13. 4. and no where by Gods word called a defilement. If it
were so, how could it be a Sacrament, as our enemies would have it? The words
may be an allusion to the Israelites, whereof many were enticed by the
Midianitish women to Idolatry, Numb. 25. but many were kept from them, and from
that sin against God: so this 144000; that is, all the faithful and elect of
Christ, when the Locusts with women's hair, (ca. 9. 8.) those effeminate
instruments and spiritual adulteresses for Antichrist, enticed the world to
worship the beast, and his Image, these were not defiled by them. These women
then are these Locusts of Antichrist, and to be defiled with them, is to be
corrupted by their doctrine, and idolatrous service, that which is plagued by
the Turks army, chap. 9. 20. for the text says, these were not defiled with
women: as speaking of that now which they had escaped, and were before in
danger of; neither is it noted of one, or some of them, but that they all had
escaped the pollution of these women of the earthly Church, from which they
were redeemed, when the four Angels stood upon the four corners thereof,
holding the winds from blowing thereupon, chap. 7. 1. These be women of that
earthly state, from which was withheld the inspiration of Gods spirit, and to
which the star fell, chap. 9. 1. The king of these womanish Locusts, with
whom these 144000. have not been defiled, in the words (cap. 7.) is to be
understood a spiritual preservation; and so here ver. 3. a spiritual
redemption from the earth; for otherwise the 144000. were living upon the
earth, but in a spiritual safety in the Temple, chap. 11. 1. in the
wilderness, chap. 12. and on mount Sion here with Christ, verse. 1. Therefore
also here must be understood a preservation from spiritual defilement. For if
women be here taken in the proper sense, then must they be either honest women,
or dishonest; but to say that they were not defiled with honest women, is to
imply an absurdety and falsehood, that by honest women they might be defiled;
and that either they enticed honest women to uncleanness, or honest women
them, which cannot be, if these be holy, and the women honest. To say they were
not defiled by dishonest women, is too mean a praise for these holy Saints
with Christ on mount Sion; for here must be understood a singular praise of
them in this particular, but it were no rare praise in this, so understood; for
that many Heathen, and mere civil men among Christians, who never ascended
upon mount Sion, neither were sealed for Gods elect by the spirit of adoption,
may have this praise, that they were never defiled with dishonest women, whores
and harlots. Lastly, note that this is the praise of the whole 144000. even all
the people of God, women as well as men; unless we will say, that Gods number
consists only of men, and these also of the Clergy only, as they must needs
be, if the Papists foolish conceit were true; and so all the laity excluded out
of Christ's flock, which to think is most false, and a merciless conceit, to
be abhorred. For they are virgins: Pure worshippers of God, and not having
committed Idolatry, or declined to crooked paths, to be corrupted in mind by
Antichrist or his instruments, but have stuck unto Christ in the simplicity of
the Gospel of truth, in the general Apostasy. In this case the Church is a
chaste virgin to Christ, 2.* Cor. 11. 2. and the whole company of the faithful
are called virgins, Psalm. 45. 14. These are they which follow the Lamb, etc.
The world follows after the beast, and worshippeth him, acknowledges none
but him for their head and guide. These are redeemed from among men: before
from the earth, now from among men. This expounds the former; earth, being
men in an earthly state, from which Christ took out his, and from which he yet
calls them, chap. 18. 4. The first fruits, etc. An allusion to the words of
the Law; Deuteronomy. 18. 4. the high Priests due, so are these his elect, the Lords
portion.

Verse. 5. No guile: So like Nathanael true Israelites, not like the
equiuocating Antichristian Locusts, Priests, Jesuits, and our Church-papists,
in whose mouths guile enough is found. Without fault: They being accepted in
Christ, and walking as Zachary and Elizabeth, in all the Lords ways
blamelesly, Luke 1. 6.

Verse. 6. Here is the breaking out of the light of the truth set out, in three
degrees, in three Angels; three several types of so many sorts in the
Ministry at that time, contesting against the Roman beast. Another, in
respect of that in cap. 8. 13. this being the next following, and not the same,
though both fly in the midst of heaven, chap. 8. 13. that foretelling the
evils to come upon the earth, and this the comforts now to the Church. Angel,
the type of the first sort of Preachers, messengers of Christ called Angels,
Mal. 4. chap. 1. 20. and 2. 1. One represents all of the same sort. Fly,
noting the readiness and earnestness of the teachers, and the speed they made
in setting forth the truth, after God raised them up, for it went abroad very
swiftly at the first breaking forth of the light. In the midst of heaven, see
chap. 8. 13. Here also noting, that now it was not to be hindered by humane
power upon the earth; having the everlasting Gospel: This shows that the
Angel was Christ's Ministers, for they preach the Gospel, called everlasting,
because it was said, cap. 11. 15. that Christ now was to reign and to subdue
his enemies, and that by his word, which now shall for ever prevail more and
more against that man of sin, consuming his kingdom, and increasing the
power and kingdom of Christ. The Gospel (in the time of Antichristian
darkness) did seem to be lost, but now again preached, should be no more
eclipsed. The everlasting Gospel, not an everlasting Gospel, as showing it to
be no new Gospel, but the same that was before, the enduring word for ever, 1.
Pet. 1. 25. That dwell on the earth, and to every nation* etc. Here begins
that which was given John in charge, chap. 10. 11. not to perform the charge
in his person, as here we may see, but as a type of the Ministers of the
Gospel, receiving the charge which they here now put in execution. This so
large a commission to preach, shows the Gospel was to be again spread over
the dominion of Antichrist, who had brought under him nations, etc. chap. 13.
7. and 17. 1. 15. and the people of God, by the only preaching of the Gospel
to be recovered from under his power.

Verse. 7. The Sermon which he preached, or the sum of that which was taught
by these faithful men, raised up at the first to undermine the beasts
kingdom; they only sought to bring the people to the true knowledge of God,
and his worship, which was almost clean put out by Antichrist. The true
knowledge of God then, while he wholly reigned, was blotted out of men's minds
almost, and his true worship trodden utterly under foot. These two things are
these first Ministers sent to repair in the first place, as the only means
indeed to undermine Babylon, and to make it fall. The words are plain and
easy, as the common truths in other Scriptures; only note this in them, that
what here men are exhorted unto, that had been neglected, and the contrary
done; no fear of God, but of men; no glory to God, but to the works and merits
of men; no worship to him, but to stocks, stones, Angels, men departed, and so
to devils, chap. 9. 20.

Verse. 8. Another Angel: A type of a second sort following upon the rest, by
whose ministry (the sum whereof is here set down) it appears, that they
saw the Popes kingdom by the other Angels ministry, sore shaken, and to begin
to totter; therefore these plainly and certainly, by the doubling of the words,
foretell the fall thereof. Babylon is here spoken of, as a known thing by
these Preachers, and yet no mention before, but of the beast, chap. 11. 7. and
13. 1. 7. It seems, that by the truth taught by the other Angel, Rome was
discovered to be no more the Church of Christ, but Babylon, which in chap. 17.
1. 2. etc. is fully described; the words here following, giving the reason of
her fall, lead us thither, see that 17. chapt. verse. 2.

Verse. 9. The third Angel: The third type of Christ's Ministers setting
themselves against the Roman Beast, and his miserable subjects. Saying with a
loud voice: The degrees in proceeding is worthy noting; and withal, the
manner of handling the business. The first teach plain doctrine, and most
necessary truths, undeniable of either side; and therefore do it with a loud
voice. The second sort (after the truth taught) begin to speak directly and
plainly against the state of the beast, calling it Babylon, and foretelling the
destruction thereof; but here is no mention of any loud voice, they do their
duty faithfully, but yet more warily, for awaking too much the bloody beast.
This third (as the first sort) dare be stout with a loud voice, to denounce
plagues against the subjects of Antichrist for following of him. The
denunciation is most terrible, as the words sufficiently declare, in the 10.
and 11. verses: but yet note, that eternal vengeance is so severely threatened
only against them that worship the beast, and his Image, and receive his
mark, omitting them that have his name, and the number of his name; not that
they are not in danger, (ca. 18. 4.) but for that these are not so imbowelled
(as I may say) in that state as the other be, which know the deepnesse of
Satan, and are Antichrists darlings. The judgments threatened are after, and
according to the sin of that state. They made others to drink, so shall they
be made to drink; others have they burnt, so shall they be; others have found
no mercy at their hands, no more shall they at Gods hand.

Verse. 12. There be here two sentences in this verse, which are uttered upon
the consideration of the troubles and great persecutions, which (upon the
forenamed Angels ministry) the beast shall raise up against the Saints, set
out in chap. 11. 7. and 17. 7. For these words here, and in the next verse,
are to be referred to the troubles of those times. Here is the patience of the
Saints (understood) to be tried: as if he had said, so furiously shall the
beast rage, as it will try the faith and patience of all the true servants of
Christ. Here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of
Jesus (understand) to be known, for by such fiery persecution the chafe and
wheat shall be severed, the dross from the pure gold.

Verse. 13. A consolation to such as shall be killed and overcome of the beast,
as it is said, chap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. They shall be blessed. Henceforth, that
is, as well in dying in this quarrel of Christ's against the beast, as formerly
they were blessed in dying against the Dragon; this is the meaning of
henceforth. And this sentence of comfort now was more necessary to be uttered
then before; for men were put to death under the Dragon for professing Christ's
name by the Heathen Tyrants, and therefore was there no doubt to be made of
their happy and just suffering and blessedness after death: but now under the
beast, though men die for the truth, yet should they be condemned generally as
Heretics, by such as should bear the name of Christians; yea and would also
be held the best Christians too, the only Apostolic, the only Catholic
Christians, which might shake the faith of many, and make them forsake their
place and standing.

Verse. 14. At the sound of the seventh trumpet, chap. 11. 15. great joy was
foretold to be in the Church, for that Christ took upon him then so to rule,
and to subdue the beast and his subjects in that manner, as they should thereat
be wroth, verse. 18. and therefore here in this verse, which is to be annexed
to that there, is Christ set out triumphantly, through whose sovereign power,
is brought to pass by his instruments that which the second Angel, verse. 8.
proclaimed, to wit, the ruin of Babylon, of the destruction whereof, and the
vengeance now ready to be executed, is a brief sum laid down from the
beginning of this present verse, to the end of this chapter. A white cloud: the
speech is from Esa. 19. 1. In the chap. 20. and 11. verse of this Prophecy, is
a white throne; white, notes cleernesse and purity, cloud, eminency and
majesty, as a throne, on which sat, as Judge, or rather as a kingly
Sovereign, one like the son of man, which is Jesus Christ, chap. 1. 13. on
his head a golden crown: this shows, how he was now installed, and did take
upon him to rule, as in chap. 11. 15. is foreshewed; for hitherto was he not
set out with a crown, whilst he suffered others to rule and reign. And in
his hand a sharp sickle. A sickle among the Jews (to whose customs in this
prophecy every where the spirit alludeth) was an instrument to cut down
corn, Deuteronomy. 16. 9. and 23. 25. and the branches of the grapes, Esa. 18. 5. The
Hebrew word there, is the same that is translated sickle here. It is here
figuratively put for the means of ready and sharp vengeance, which Christ
will use to cut off the wicked with, as the reapers do the corn, off from the
earth with a sickle.

Verse. 15. Christ being ready prepared to take vengeance, which he had (chap.
6. 11.) hitherto deferred, but now the time being come, here another Angel,
besides the three former in verse. 6. 8. 9. -- Comes out of the Temple, of
which in chap. 11. 1, those in the Temple were the true Saints and servants of
Christ, as appears chap. 7. 15. and those also that were the hidden sealed
number with the Lamb on Mount Sion in verse. 1 of this Chapter. Therefore this
Angel is a type of the faithful ones, renewing the suite of the souls under
the Altar, (chap. 16. 11.) that God would execute vengeance upon the earth. And
is said to come out of the Temple, as being now by the ministry of the other
Angels imboldened to come abroad, and openly to make prayers and earnest
request unto Christ to proceed against that Antichristian state. Thrust in thy
sickle: The words are from Joel. 3. 13. Reaping, is here put for cutting off
the wicked. The harvest of the earth is ripe: The harvest ripe, is the fit time
of vengeance not to be deferred, Ier. 51. 33. Of the earth: That is, of the
false Church or Antichristian state; for of this here is spoken, as all that
before from the beginning of the 13 chapt. hitherto, and the chapters following
show. The Earth is the place where the beast rules, chap. 13. 8, out of which
the counterfeit Lamb comes, in the same chap. 13. verse. 11: and they that
dwell on the earth now to be reaped, are the Antichristians, the worshippers of
the beast and makers of his image, verse. 14. of that 13. chapter.

Verse. 16. The request granted, and by the thing successively executed, a
riddance was made of the false Church.

Verse. 17. The words in this chapter from verse. 14 to the end, setting forth
summarily the judgment executed upon the false Church, the Spirit does it by a
double similitude* the one, by reaping of the harvest; the other, by the
gathering of the Vintage. In the former, Christ himself at the earnest
supplication and prayers of the Church is made the Actor, showing (as I
conceive) that there shall be two degrees of this vengeance; the one (like the
reaping of ye harvest) more easily done by men, yea the destruction shall come
upon the beast and his state with so little violence and force on man's behalf,
as all may behold the immediate hand of Christ himself, obtained by the
prayers of his people. And indeed so has it been hitherto in the downfall of
the Popedom by the power of Christ, and almost no power of man at al, but done
as easily as a sickle cuts down corn. And therefore we see the plagues and
judgments upon the beast to be ascribed unto the Lord, chap. 16. 5. 7. and
the enemies took it to be his very hand (ver. 9) in the first sorts of plagues.
In the latter set out by the vintage. Another Angel, that is, a type of the
instruments of Christ's coming from among the faithful out of the Temple in
heaven, that is, from those of the hidden number constantly faithful now in
the visible assembly, having also a sharp sickle, that is, being appointed in
Christ's stead to avenge his quarrel, into whose hands he had put the sickle,
that is, effectual means, to execute his wrath upon the Antichristian state;
so as now he will work the destruction thereof by men in a more apparent and
forcible manner, then before had been done, that is, by sword, war, and blood,
typed out by the figurative speeches here drawn from the Wine Press, this is
the second degree of his vengeance. The first of the harvest being set out in
the five first vials, chap. 16. 1. 11. and this of war and bloodshed, set out
in the sixth and seventh vial, chap. 16. 12. 17. and 17. 16. and chap. 18. and
chap. 19. In all which what is meant by this wine press, and by this blood
running out thereof, is fully explaned.

Verse. 18. The former Angel is a type of those instruments, which the Lord
will prepare to this his business, which shall perform the same, as verse. 19
-- shows; but yet must first some be moved by the Lord to encourage them
thereunto. Another Angel, a type of faithful Pastors, who is said to come out
from the Altar, for that they were stirred up in the cause of the Saints slain
and lying under the Altar, (chap. 6. 9.) to stir up others to avenge their
quarrel; as also to show that they came with authority from Christ, who had
obtained by his sacrifice upon the Altar peace with God for his elected ones,
and that now their cause might be revenged. Which had power over fire: To have
power over any thing what is it else, but to be able to restrain that thing,
and to have it at command? Fire is put for vehement contention, Judge. 9. 20.
Over this had this Angel great power, that is, God by his ministry wrought
so, as peace was among Protestant Princes, and such as were to rise up against
the beast; God was reconciled to them, and they among themselves. This Angel
is the type of those faithful Pastors, who now therefore cried with a loud
cry, that is, with all vehemency of spirit and boldly without fear; and
exhorted the Angel with the sharp sickle, that is, those that they saw made
fit instruments by Christ, to fall to the execution, which is the thrusting in
of the sickle or hook. Vine is a Church: of the earth, the false Church:
Clusters, the distinct orders, societies, and brotherhoods of the same: to
gather them, is to take them away: grapes, the fruits of that Church; fully
ripe, is (as it was said of the Amorites) their sins come to the height, and
may now no longer be forborne and passed over.

Verse. 19. The execution, according to the word of exhortation and prosperous
success thereof; gathered the vine, not only the clusters and branches, but
Babylon her self is destroyed, chap. 18. Cast into the great wine press of
the wrath of God. The words taken from the Jews custom, who had a wine press
ready, when they had gathered the grapes to cast them into. These words show
this Angel to be the type of the instrument of Gods wrath against the
Antichristians.

Verse. 20. The similitude is followed; for when grapes are cast into the
wine press, then are they trodden, Judge. 9. 27, and the juice of them runs
out of the same, Nehem. 13. 15. Esai. 63. 3. 4: The wine press is the place,
where the Antichristians are trodden down: without the City, as did the Jews
tread their wine-presses without Jerusalem. This notes the true Church to be
without danger, when this slaughter shall be made of the enemies. And blood
came out of the wine press even unto the horse-bridles: These words and the
other following, are to express the greatness of the slaughter of an exceeding
multitude of enemies, as chap. 16. 14, and 19. 18 show: for I suppose here to
be understood that battle, which should make such a slaughter of them, as that
Christ is said to wear a garment, after the overthrow of these enemies, dipped
in blood, chap. 19. 13. By a thousand and six hundred furlongs, Thus far the
blood must run: as the vine, the wine press, and manner of treading out the
grapes, is an allusion to the custom of the Jews, and the City to Jerusalem;
so these words are an allusion to the length of the land of Canaan, which, as
some write, is 1600 furlongs; which was, as it were spread over with blood,
being made the Lords wine press of his wrath once by the hand of the enemy,
whether we understand the destruction of that nation by the Chaldeans, or after
by the Romans.

Notes upon Chap. 15.
Verse. 1. Another sign, besides that mentioned in chap. 12. 1. Sign, so this
representation of future things to John is called. In heaven, so chap. 12. 1.
Great and marvelous, in respect of the effects thereof, so great and
wonderful a change brought to pass thereby, in verse. 3. The whole Church
acknowledges this to be such a work of God, great and marvelous. Seven
Angels: So are the instruments appointed by God to execute his will called
before, chap. 8. 7. 8. 10. 12. and 9. 1. 14. and 11. 15. Having the seven last
plagues: Of whom they had these, and what they were, is expounded verse. 7,
called here the last, for that by them shall be filled up the wrath of God, and
so the thing done, (as is said, cap. 16. 17.) which God has decreed, upon the
Antichristian state, as before he swear for the fulfilling of the mystery of
God, (chap. 10. 7.) when the seventh trumpet should blow, of which these seven
plagues are the distinct parts.

Verse. 2. These words show, in what state the Church was now at this present
come unto, before the pouring out of those vials, upon the preaching of the
three Angels, in chap. 14. 6. 8. 9. The word had wrought effectually, so as
many had gotten the victory over Antichrist and his power, and prevailed, and
were now standing on the sea of glass. For this, see chap. 4. 6. But this is
at this time mingled with fire, even the fire, which Christ desirerh to be
kindled, Luke 12. 49. for now it inflameth with heat and feruencie all godly
professors, which at this time were grown to be many, having shaken off the
yoke of Antichrist, now standing as upon safe shore, on the sea of glass, as
the Israelites on the sea shore when they escaped from the Egyptians; to which
here is the allusion, Exodus 14. 30. 31. Having the harps of God: That is, most
excellent harps, or rather which are of Gods gift. Harps or musical
instruments for praises; so then figuratively it is this; they had gifts and
graces from God to set out his praises, which they with conioynt affections and
well tuned hearts performed, as the two next verses show.

Verse. 5. After this showing of the Churches state, he begins to go on
with that which was begun in verse. 1: but withal calls us back to remember
where he left off, to prosecute the matter and parts of the seventh trumpet,
chap. 11. 19. For by considering what is there said, and here repeated again
after so long an interruption, all may see, that here is a falling-in unto the
same matter there left to be spoken of, till this place. By which will appear
most plainly, how the seventh seal has the seven trumpets, and the seventh
trumpet these seven vials. The Temple of the tabernacle of the testimony:
Words of allusion usual and common to the time of the Law. The Temple, the
inmost place of the tabernacle, as has been showed, chap. 11. 19, where (as
there is declared) was the Arc, 1. King. 8. 6, and in it the two tables of
stone, which are the testimony; because of the Law written in them, which
testified the will of God: so the two tables are called the testimony, Exodus
25. 21: and because they were put in the Arc, it is called the Arc of the
testimony, verse. 22, and for that the Arc was in the inmost part of the
tabernacle, that part is called the tabernacle of witness, Numb. 17. 7. After
the two Prophets were ascended up, chap. 11. 12, and that now the Church became
visible, the Temple, that is, the hidden things of God formerly unknown,
became now to be manifest by those Angels, (cap. 14. 6. 8. 9.) who taught what
this true testimony of God was unto the people. In heaven, that is, in the
true visible Church of Christ.

Verse. 6. The seven Angels (mentioned before in verse. 1.) came out of the
Temple; the Temple, that is, that part of it where the Arc was, the place
where God gave answer to Moses and Aaron of all things he would have done,
Exodus 25. 22. Leuit. 7. 89. Numb. 17. 4. This shows, that these had their
authority and command from God to come forth, and were of his chosen ones
raised up to execute vengeance upon the Pope, upon the Papists, and upon their
Romish state, as chap. 16. verse. 1. shows plainly. Having the seven plagues:
How they had them, the next verse tells us. Clothed in pure and white liuen,
and having their breasts girded with a golden girdle, as Christ was, chap. 1.
13. An allusion to the Priests habit ministering in the Tabernacle, Exodus 28.
40. 42. Leuit. 16. 2. This is to show, what manner of persons they were, and
how qualified, whom God thus appointed to execute his will. They were of those
that were of the true society and temple of the holy Ghost, Priests by Christ,
having pure and white linen, the righteousness of the Saints, (chap. 19. 8.)
ready prepared to do their office: girding notes care and diligence bent to
perform what is imposed, and they resolved to do without impediment, Exodus
12. 11. 1. King. 18. 46. Luke 12. 35. A girdle of gold, (which was also about
Christ) is righteousness and faithfulness, Esai. 11. 5. By the way then (for this
one time) here note, that they which are lewd and vicious, though never so
wise, politic, rich, and valiant, shall not be Gods instruments to plague
Antichrist and his kingdom. This their Priestly apparel shows also how that
these Angels come forth in the Churches cause, and for her sake, without any
other by and sinister respect.

Verse. 7. Here is showed, by whom they were furnished with these seven last
plagues, that is, the seven vials, and of whom they did receive them: And one
of the four beasts: What the beasts be, is showed (chap. 4. 6.) even
Ecclesiastical persons, which of the four it is, is not here noted, as being
a conioynt act of them all, the deed of one, as well as of another. Gave unto
the seven Angels, seven golden vials. The instruments containing the plagues
are here compared to cups, or bowls, holy vessels of the Tabernacle made of
pure gold, Exodus 25. 29. and 37. 16. Ier. 52. 19. A vial is a cup with a big
belly, and a narrow mouth, so as that which it contains, is poured out by
leisure, and not all (as it were) at once, as out of cups with wide mouths.
That which is in them is Gods wrath, of which they are full; for as the grapes
were full ripe, (chap. 14. 18.) so here be the cups full of wrath. Which is
said to be in vials; first, for that Gods judgments are prepared, unseen to
the Antichristian state, and not discerned till they fall upon them: also,
because these plagues are executed by the servants of Christ upon the enemies
with no difficulty, even as easily as licour is poured out of a vessel, and
that without noise, tumultuous stirs, and hurli-burlies on their part. Of gold
they be, for that Gods wrath is just, pure, and vncorrupt. And given of one of
the beasts: To show, that these Angels, that is, men, appointed by God, were
furnished hereunto from the Ministers of Christ, by doctrine and instruction,
for other vials have they none to give. God himself calls out these Angels;
that is, qualifieth them with gifts, power, and place to execute his will. The
Ministers of God they teach the truth of religion, the doctrine and discipline
of Christ, the insufferable state of Antichrist, his Idolatry, false worship,
heretical doctrine, tyrannical government, his proud usurped power over
Kings, his trecheries and treasons to uphold the same; and so do urge these
Angels by the word of exhortation, the commandment of God, the safety of his
Church, and welfare to themselves and all Gods people, to set themselves for
the Lord, and against that Antichristian state: which ministry the Lord
blessing, and putting thereby into the hearts of these Angels to do such
things, as may annoy, and at length ruinate that state, they hereby may be
said to give these vials of Gods wrath into their hands. This is my guess of
this, how true this interpretation is, I leave it to be judged; the ground of
my conjecture is, that these words cannot be taken literally: Ministers have
not any material cups full of Gods wrath, and the effects of pouring out the
vials, show, that the plagues are not any way to be understood after the
letter; for we read not of any such thing done in any story in the Christian
world. When men give any thing, we know it is that which they have, and terms
of such things must be interpreted according to the nature, condition, and
place of the giver, as it may be most likely to that which such a one can give.

Verse. 8. And the Temple was filled with smoke: An allusion to Exodus 40. 34.
35. 1. King. 8. 10. Numb. 9. 15.
showing, the Lords approbation and sanctifying of the Tabernacle finished; so
here now at this time the Lord having erected up again a visible assembly, a
temple of true Christians, from among the Antichristians, he shows his glory
and power, approving and sanctifying it with his presence, both for comfort to
his people, as also for terror, as then under the law, to the wicked and
rebellious, Numb. 16. 19. 42. No man was able, etc. This is the following of
the allusion in Exodus before mentioned, and is only to show, what a
hinderance to the encrcase of true Christians the Romish Antichristian state
is, which therefore the Lord will see destroyed, and then shall every cloud of
darkness be removed, and the most holy things of God be revealed, yea the
gate Jerusalem shall then stand open for all to enter in, cap. 21. 25.

Notes upon Chap. 16.
Verse. 1. Here John shows, how the Angels prepared, were now commanded to
execute their charge. A great voice out of the Temple: Either the Lords voice,
as chap. 9. 13. or the important urging of the faithful, who being now inflamed
with the zeal of God, desired the destruction of that Antichristian kingdom;
for in, and from the Temple, neither is, nor comes any voice, but the Lords
voice, and the voice of his faithful servants. Saying to the seven Angels:
those before in chap. 15. 1. 6. The vials of the wrath of God: of which in
chap. 15. 7. they are also called the plagues of God, chap. 15. 1. being the
tokens and effects of Gods wrath: herein is an allusion from the plagues in
Egypt, as in the former chap. verse. 3. was an allusion of the Churches
deliverance from Egypt. Upon the earth: that is, upon the false Church, the
Antichristian kingdom, as the words following tell us. For the plagues fall
upon the marked ones, verse. 2. and upon the beasts throne, verse. 10. also the
Dragon, beast, and false prophet take it grievously, verse. 13. 14. and seek to
revenge their wrongs by war. The word Earth, here comprehends the whole
state of Antichrist, and contains under the same, all those particulars
following, because all the seven Angels are commanded to pour out their vials
upon the earth, and yet only the first pours his vial upon the earth, the
other upon the other things; which must therefore needs belong unto this earthly
kingdom of Antichrist, as the particulars of that state. The plagues of these
vials by degrees do answer the trumpets, that look how Antichrist by his
rising, was a plague to the Christian world; so in like manner these plagues
light upon him, from the lowest to the highest, as in the following verses
shall be showed.

Verse. 2. All commanded to pour out their vials, but yet do execute the same
by degrees. For the first went and poured his vial upon the earth. By this
first Angel is meant all instruments raised up of God to execute this plague,
and so understand by the 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Angel, not one only instrument,
but all and every one used and employed to bring that plague upon the
Antichristian state, in the several particulars, in order here set down.
Earth was before taken generally for Antichrists earthly state; here earth is
put for one part and degree thereof, and answers to the commodities of that
state, by which it rose and was vpheld, and now begun to decay. For after the
Gospel became to be published, and the wickedness of that state discovered,
the earthly profits and the wealth thereof began to be lessened; this is the
vial poured out upon the earth; this is the evil which befell their wealth,
riches, and earthly possessions, even gotten from Princes and people, only to
wax proud, to lord it, and to tyrannize over them, and to live after their
own lusts, in all pleasurable fullness of earthly things. And there fell a
noisome and grievous sore: The effect of this evil: It is an allusion to one
of the plagues upon the Egyptians, Exodus 9. 10. here a noisome and grievous
sore in the mind of the men, which had the mark of the beast. It vexed these
marked men, and them that worship the Image, at the very heart, as a sore
plague, and as a painful boil upon them, to see this mischief to befall
them; their conscience also accusing them for their devouring and insatiable
avarice. The words cannot be taken after the letter; for who ever heard yet of
any taking a cup, having such licour in it, as the same poured out on the very
earth, should fill men's bodies with grievous sores? And when has any man read
and seen the prime servants of Antichrist to be full of scabs and sores?
Neither have the 4. beasts ca. 4. 7. any such cups, with any such licour, to
give to any, as they do these vials, ca. 15. 7. Such instruments we read not
of, nor of such marked members of the Roman Clergy, and prime persons of that
state to be so, all of them plagued with botches. To avoid therefore absurdities
and falsehood, the text enforces a taking of the words figuratively, and to
understand hereby a spiritual sore of the mind, for their earthly losses. And
as this is spiritual, so understand the rest, which the very text will make us
of necessity to grant.

Ver. 3. The 2. Angel: that is, the 2. sort of instruments raised up of God,
having their vial from one of the beasts, ca. 16. 3. They pour it upon the
sea: This 2. degree of the Popes downfall, answers to the 2. degree of his
rising, in ca. 8. 8. where the word sea, and turning into blood, are expounded.
An allusion to Exo. 7. 20. 21. Here from the instruments of the true Church, a
mischief befalls their common worship and service; it is made to be
abhorred, and as loathsome as the blood of a dead man, and becomes mortal and
deadly. The words cannot be understood of the sea properly, that it became
blood, and that every fish died in it; as the Jesuit Ribera will have. This
literal exposition is full of absurdities; for here the overthrow of the
Antichristian state is foretold, and that by the true Christians: now what
great harm had that state particularly received by this vial more, then all
the world besides, if it were after the letter? And how can this be a revenge
from God for his Churches sake, (which is in all these plagues intended) if it
be taken literally? How should not this also be a mischief to the Church?
Here must be a plague upon the Roman and Antichristian kingdom, effected by
such as the Lord raises, coming out of the Temple, and it must be an
answerable revenge for the evil, which y^ Antichrist in his rising brought
upon the Christian world, noted in cap. 8. 8. Now what evil has ye sea (taken
literally) done to Gods people, by the Popes means, in his creeping up? and
what revenge is it in ye Churches behalf to plague the sea? It is a most
absurd apprehension to take it literally, and most false. For never such a
thing ever was: who ever heard that the sea has bin as the blood of a dead
man, and that all the fishes died therein? Or who can imagine ever any such
thing here foretold to come to pass hereafter? Neither can it be understood of
battles fought by sea. This is a sea, which must become as the blood of a dead
man, thick, black, and loathsome; and here is no speaking of men dead upon the
sea, but of every living thing in the sea; that is, even every soul maintained
by the sea to live, as the fishes naturally be in the waters of the sea. To
take up the true sense and meaning of this plague, three things are to be well
weighed. I. What is meant here by the sea? II. How by any of the true Church
of Christ, (such as come out of the Temple) it can be made like the blood of a
dead man? III. How every living thing hereupon dies in that Sea? My conjecture
is this, that as earth sets out the wealth, riches, revenues, and possessions
of that state, upon which the first vial was poured; so by Sea, (another thing
of that state, and the next unto the earth to be considered of) is meant the
Popes ecclesiastical laws, Church-seruice, and common worship; a sea of
evils, of a salt and brinish taste to all Gods people, in which none can live,
which have drunk soundly of the sweet and lively waters of life. A sea, more
for trade and traffic to these ecclesiastical merchants, then to be drunk
of any, to quench the thirst of the soul* It became as the blood of a dead
man: by such as are of the Temple receiving true doctrine and instruction from
the faithful messengers of Christ, when they that come out of the Temple,
being potent persons, do justly (by wholesome laws) condemn the same for
Antichristian, Idolatrous and Heretical; and when such living souls, that is,
such Ecclesiastical persons, and others, as do stand for the same, (seducing
Christian subjects from their true allegiance), be by their laws made worthy
of death, and by due execution thereof are made to die in this their sea; else
how are they made to drink blood, verse. 6? And this they do in the righteous
and just judgment of God, verse. 5. 7. for the blood of the Saints which they
shead: by which words we may se^, what by living souls in this third verse is
meant; such living souls, as could shead the blood of the Saints; these be
the fishes (...) should have seen, and himself among them; but they will not
see themselves by any means in this prophecy.

Verse. 4. The third Ang^ll: that is, the third sort of instruments raised up of
God, for his Church against the Roman state: Poured ^ut his vial: that is,
did execute that vengeance by the power given them of God: Upon the rivers and
fountains of waters: This is the third degree of Romes ruin, and Antichrists
destruction, answering to the plague of his rising, in chap. 8. 10. 11. and it
is an allusion to Exodus 7. 20. Rivers and fountains come from the sea, and
return thither again, so the Antichristian, idolatrous, heretical traitors,
and rebellious doctrines do flow from that sea, and are put in practice to
return to the upholding of that sea again; which justly being condemned by
true Christian Princes, (these Angels pouring out the vials) and such likewise
as do bring them, and the receivers also of them being judged to be worthy of
death, they so become blood to them.

Verse. 5. And I heard the Angel of the waters say: That is, the Angel before
mentioned; for the word the Angel, and not an Angel, shows it a known
Angel before; now before was no other Angel of waters, but only this, that
had the vial to pour it on the rivers and fountains; who in the execution of
the judgment, and the effect thereof approves of Gods righteous judgment, as
did Iehu, the auenger of Gods quarrel upon ^^ (...) house, at the destruction
of (...), (...) 9. 36.

Verse. 6. For they have shea^, etc. This shows still plainly, that these
plagues concern the Antichristian christian state of Rome; for the beast and
his Image is mentioned in the second verse. and here his murdering of the
Saints, before showed in chap. 13. 7. and 11. 7. and 17. 6. and 18. 24. And
again in this chapter is spoken of his seat, verse. 10. and of Antichrist that
false prophet, verse. 13. The degrees show the downfall of the Pope and his
kingdom, by step and step, and that agreeable to his rising up; which,
according to the former expositio^s in these three, may appear to every one to
be fulfilled; and unto us particularly in this nation, who before all other
have given them blood to drink, by wholesome laws enacted against their
traitorous Priests and Jesuits, and the receivers of them.

Verse. 7. The consent of another, affirming the Lord herein to be just and true
in his judgments poured out of the vials of these Angels, upon the
Antichristian state, in the forenamed degrees thereof, but especially in giving
them blood for blood.

Verse. 8. The 4. Angel: That is, the 4. sort of Gods instruments types out in
this one, poured out his vial we have heard, in chap. 15. 7. was full of Gods
wrath, which is poured here upon the Sun. This is the 4. degree of the
destruction of Antichrist, answering to the like degree in rising, set down in
cap. 8. 12. This Sun is a part of the Antichristian Kingdom, as the rest
before were. This point must be well marked, that here the Antichristian state
is overthrown by degrees, in the parts thereof beginning with the earth of it,
then with the sea of it, next with the Rivers and fountains of it, and now
with the Sun of it, that is, with that part or portion of it, which is as the
sun in that state. This cannot be the sun properly, as some would have it;
for what man can smite the sun, or pour a vial upon it? And again, how can
the Church (if any one thereof could do it) make the sun in the firmament
hurtful to the Papists, and not also to themselves? It cannot be the light of
the Gospel, and holy Scriptures, as other conceive it; for they are no part of
the Antichristian Kingdom, as this sun is. And it is too gross to say, that
the vial, that is, the plague of God is poured by the friends of the Gospel,
upon the light of the Gospel, or upon the holy Scriptures, therewith to plague
the enemies of the Gospel, as this vial poured upon this sun must. Here the
true Church of God, in the instruments thereof appointed by God, is to pour
out a vial, (not throw up a vial, as it should have bin said, if it were the
sun properly) upon the sun of that state; such a sun, as the appointed
instruments for the Church may reach unto, and in some sort be over, to pour
the vial upon it. Now in that state, what is so like the sun for glory and
for brightness, to cause that false Church so to shine, (as the sun in the
firmament lighteneth the world) but only the Popes supremacy? which in that
earthly orb supplieth the office of the sun, to that state, as the glorious
light of heaven does to this earth we tread upon. The pouring of the vial
received from one of the beasts, (chap. 15. 7.) upon this sun, what can it
be else, but Princes receiving this doctrine of truth, that that supremacy is
an Antichristian usurpation, and so thereupon begin to enact laws upon extreme
peril against it; and also to set up the lawful supremacy of Kings, Gods
vicegerents in their own dominions, to make men to swear thereunto; and in
detestation of that Antichristian pride of the Pope (lifting up himself above
all that is called God) to proclaim him openly to be herein that Antichrist?
By which this Angel, that is, these Princes and Potentates have scorched the
Pope and his men with fire; that is, made them burn with the rage of
impatiencie so, as they blaspheme even God himself, as the next words in the
verse following do show.

Verse. 9. And they were scorched with great heat: That is, they were enraged
in their hearts with rancour and malice, as with a burning fire. And blasphemed
the name of God: even as the beast does, ca. 13. 6. For that state of Rome now
under Antichrist and his subjects, are blasphemers of God. And do not we here
in England find this true in their writings and speeches? They spare not the
works of God, his immediate hand for us, (in destroying their Spanish Armado,
in discovering their Gunpowder plot, and overthrowing them in all their
treacherous, treasonable, and rebellious attempts) saying, that it is by the
help of the devil; a hellish blasphemy! they spare not to blaspheme his holy
word, his worship, doctrine, and sacraments with us; so inflamed with fury are
they, when their Pope is challenged for that Antichrist, in his proud and
tyrannical supremacy. Behold their heart scorched with heat, in their fiery
malice against our Sovereign, for his most rare and admirable Apology; sent
out to the Emperors, Kings, Princes, and States of all Christendom, touching
this particular point. Thus far I suppose the Lord has executed his wrath in
all these four degrees, upon the present Antichristian Romish state; the
events seem fully to prove the same.

Verse. 10. The fifth Angel: That is, the fifth sort of chosen instruments
typed out by this, poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast. This is the
fifth degree of his ruin, answering the fifth trumpet, and to the Popes
earthly vprising, in his falling from heaven, and becoming the king of the
Locusts; for there is he called a king, chap. 9. 11. and here is attributed to
him a kingdom; and as there was darkness, so here; and as the Locusts did
torment men, so here now are they again tormented. His seat is Rome, chapt.
13. 2. upon this must wrath come by the Angels out of the Temple, and then that
Popedom shall be full of darkness, that is, full of misery; whereupon shall
follow their desperate sorrow, expressed in these terms, they shall gnaw their
tongues for pain; and yet continue obstinate, blaspheming without repentance,
verse. 11. This vial is not yet poured forth, but is next in order, and not
long to; let Rome see to it, and Gods people come out of her.

Verse. 12. And the sixth Angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates: This answers to the sixth trumpet, chap. 9. 14, where out of the
river came four Angels to plague the world; this is now here to be dried up
for a plague to Antichrist, and is an allusion to the drying up of the river,
before the winning and destruction of Babylon, of which Jeremy speaks, chap.
51. 32. From this verse to the end of the chapter, it is of things to come; and
prophecies are best known when they are fulfilled. I will therefore entreat
the Reader, if he be desirous to know what men conjecture here, to look upon
the labors of others, especially those that have written the very latest, who
declare their mind to the full, and perhaps truly too; the event which we
must expect will show it in time; I for my part will only set down, according
as in the text is delivered, what we are to observe and look for to come to
pass. By Euphrates, an allusion to the river of Babylon, is meant lets
withholding to come at that mystical Babylon, mentioned in verse. 19, upon
which, the vial, that is, a judgment, is poured; which is here called the
drying up of the waters thereof, that is, the removing of the impediment, and
so making a way for the Kings of the East.

Verse. 13. The bestirring of the instruments of the Romish Church foretell us,
that the drying of Euphrates, and the prepared way for the Kings, is against
that state, and for the good of Gods Church. The Dragon not spoken of,
hitherto, but in chap. 12, is now one with his substitute the Beast, and with
the false prophet; they all join in one, and send out their messengers.

Verse. 14. Here is showed, what these frogs be, what they do, to whom they
go, and wherefore. Though they be likened to frogs, and are called unclean
spirits, and spirits of Devils, yet are they men, as wicked as Devils, stirring
up to battle the Kings of the earth, that is, all their fauourits generally
from al parts of the world.

Verse. 15. The certainty of these things is here set down, and a watchfulnes
commanded in godly purity upon a consideration of these days, so full of
calamity. The inserting of the words here, and interrupting of the course of
the prophecy (as in Genes. 49. 18.) show the greatness of the danger, and the
necessity of this admonition to take heed before hand, as in a desperate
peril.

Verse. 16. Mention is made in verse. 14 of God Almighty, and here is said
(alluding to Esai. 24. 21. 22.) he gathered them, whom the three unclean
spirits went to gather; so as the whole matter is at the Lords guiding, his
providence rules, and his counsel shall stand. The place of this great
battle is called Armageddon in Hebrew; not that there is such a place, but so
according to the interpretation of the word, har, being a mountain, and
Megaddo the place of Bar^c his victory; that is, a place as a mountain of
defense to the godly, but to the enemies destruction: as it came to pass, at
the waters of Megeddo, when the Lord gathered the Army of Sisera together to
overthrow them, for his Churches full deliverance, Judge. 5. 19, to which here
is the allusion.

Verse. 17. And the seventh Angel poured out his vial on the air: The last
degree of destruction bringing an end to all the attempts of the adversary, as
chap. 15. 1: and also the last words ( it is done) does show. The words, it is
done, (alluding to Ezech. 39. 8.) have reference to chap. 10. 7, by which is
noted, that a final end shall be made of the enemies, (of which in chap. 19.
20. and 20. 10.) and also the Church of God shall be gloriously exalted to a
most graceful and peaceable estate for ever, chap. 21. 6.

Verse. 18. Here is foretold the judgment of God, and of a great Earthquake,
such a commotion and alteration, and as it were a shaking of all things, the
like was never before; such a speech in Dan. 12. 1. Of the words in particular,
see chap. 4. 5. and 11. 13. 19.

Verse. 19. The effect of these judgments and this Earthquake upon whom it
shall fall, and who shall feel the same. The great City and Babylon here is
one, for these words, and great Babylon came in remembrance, etc. is put
expositiuely, showing what is meant by the great City, (of which see chap. 17.
18.) and why such a destruction now befell the same, which had so long
continued in great pomp and glory. And the cities of the Nations: What is
meant by nations, see chap. 11. 2, for the same there and here is all one.
There is summarily set down, what shall come to pass under the seventh
trumpet; of which here this, and the rest of the seven vials are the parts,
fully explaining what is there briefly noted. So then the cities of the
nations, are all the places depending upon, and containing the subjects of the
great City; the destruction whereof is their overthrow; it was divided and
they fell therewith, through that great Earthquake; these Nations and
Antichristian Gentiles tread under foot the holy City, chap. 11. 2, but now
are they themselves trodden down, and rewarded for their wickedness.

Verse. 20. And every Island fled away, and the mountains were not found: In the
destruction of the Heathen Empire, they are said to be moved out of their
places, in chap. 6. 14: but here, to be no more at all. Hereby no other thing
is meant, but as the great City perishes, and the Cities of the nations; so
also the Isles and mountains, that is, the most defenced places, and the
strongest places; in a word, all the whole dominion of Antichrist shall utterly
perish. There shall no where be any more footing upon earth for the same; there
shall not be an Island to receive it, nor mountain to defend it. Thus shall the
whole earth be purged clean (one day) of this Pope and Papacy, and no where
be found.

Verse. 21. Having spoken of the places, now he shows what shall become of
the men. And there fell upon men a great hail, an allusion to Joshua 10. 11,
out of heaven; showing hereby, that it is the Lord himself that shall destroy
these men, and fight for his people, as he did for Joshua and the Israelites:
Every stone about the weight of a talent. In Joshua, chap. 10, they are called
great stones; but here is noted an incredible weight, only to show, that, most
deadly vengeance in a most incredible manner (yet as certain as John tells
the weight of these stones) shall light upon these men to destroy them. This
plague, says the text, shall be exceeding great; yet will obdurate hearts still
blaspheme. The Popish generation are so bewitched in their way, as they become
obdurat and obstinatly hardhearted against all Gods plagues, continuing in rage
and blasphemy.

Notes upon Chap. 17.
This Chapter, so likewise do the 18, and 19, and 20 Chapters show more at
large, the things foretold to come to pass under the sixth and seventh vials.
For in the sixth vial is mentioned a gathering together to battle; but John
breaks off the discourse, not showing there fully the issue: And in the
seventh vial is laid down such horrible destruction, as may work an
astonishment in men's hearts; except a larger explanation were made thereof, to
show how it shall come about and why that City and these men should so
strangely be plagued of God, and yet remain so hellishly obstinate.

Verse. 1. And there came one of the (...) Angels, (...). Which of the^ it was
is not named but hereby is ^o^ed that, ^ow in the (...) of these vials (...)
^^, Rome should be known to be Babylon, and that Roman Catholic Church to be
a common (...); and that not only of the (...), (...) Bishops and faithful
Pastors of the Church, (which gave the seven vials into the hands of the
Angels), but also of these Angels themselves, who shall well understand why
they pour out their vials upon that state, even for that it is a damned whore,
which they should be desirous and ready to make known; which is noted by this,
that this Angel informs John hereof. The judgment, that is, this plague and
utter destruction, which is briefly foretold to be executed in the pouring out
the last vial, and at large showed to come to pass in chap. 18. and in chap.
19. verse. 2. Of the great whore: This is not named in this term before, and
yet is spoken to John as a known thing. which must needs be that great City
in chap. 16. 19. That sits, that is, which reigns (verse. 18) upon many
waters, that is, over peoples and multitudes, and nations, and tongues, verse.
15, this is the power also and dominion of the Beast, chap. 13. 7.

Verse. 2. Committed fornication: That is, entertained her false worship and
idolatrous service, which is spiritual adultery, as appears by the words of
the Prophets every where, Judge. 8. Esai. 1. Iere. 2. and 3. Ezech. 16. Osea. 1.
and 2. and 3. made drunk, as Esai. chap. 29. 9. and 51. 21, speaks, which is
a spiritual drunkenness. With the wine, that is, with the doctrine, which as
wine they have drunk down, to uphold her spiritual fornication: or by wine
may be understood all means, which that Church uses to bewitch and deceive
the minds of people with; to draw them unto her false worship and service, and
to be in love with her, called in the next verse abominations and filthiness
of her fornication.

Verse. 3. Into the wilderness: A solitary place, there was the true Church,
chap. 12. of which they must be, that can learn to know the Romish Church to
be a whore, condemned of God. A woman, that is, the great City, verse. 18. Sit:
But note, without holding bit or bridle, even showing, how that state will be
lawless, and she therewith contented; the Beast is expounded verse. 8. Scarlet
colored, of the Dragons color, chap. 12. 3. but of a deeper die; this color
the Beast got by murdering the Saints, chap. 13. 7. Full of names of
blasphemy: The Beast and Popedom was now (the Whore sitting thereupon) full,
all over bespotted, with the names of blasphemy. Of the seven heads and ten
horns see chap. 13. 1.

Verse. 4. The outward glorious state of that Church, is here set out by
apparel and rich ornaments, as a Queen; for so also she esteems of her
self, chap. 18. 7. Having a golden cup in her hand: Before was mention made of
wine, here is the cup to drink it out of. This cup in her hand is all the
means, which by her power she can devise to convey into their minds this her
wine; which is here called abominations and filthiness of her fornication, of
which her cup is full.

Verse. 5. And upon her forehead: That is, openly was a name written Mystery.
This word is in the Popes Myter. Brocard, a Venetian, commenting upon this
place avouches it; who was at Trent at one of the Sessions of that damnable
Council there, as himself affirms upon the first verse of this Chapter. His
relation of the proceedings of the Pope in that Council, would make that
Antichrist to be abhorred, and his Council too, with all the hellish, I cannot
say holy, fathers thereof: concerning this word mystery, written in the Popes
Myter, many besides have been at Rome, and profess to have seen it: see for
this, D. James, the keeper of the Library in Oxford, his dedicatorie Epistle,
in his treatise of the corruption of the Scriptures, etc. The Church may be
said to have it, when the Pope the head thereof wears it. By this word
mystery, the Prophet would have us to know, that Rome by a mystery is Babylon
the great, the mother of harlots, etc. This name she her self boasts not
of, but the spirit of God teaches us to take her so; what other goodly title
soever she assumeth to her self.

Verse. 6. She made other drunk with her fornication, but she her self is
drunk with the blood of Saints and Martyrs.

Verse. 7. Here the Angel promises to give John (representing in this the
common type of the faithful) satisfaction touching that, which he so greatly
wondreth at.

Verse. 8. The beast: This he begins with first, and after, verse. 18. tells
what the woman is; this is the beast (the Popedom) in chap. 13. 1. To
understand the words following, was, is not, and yet is, we must not conceive
them as spoken of the beast, either before John's time, or in his days: this
vision seen of John, was not as yet when John wrote, nor in the time of the
Heathen Emperors, which is that one (when he lived) mentioned in verse. 10. but
should be afterward; and being come, should continue but a short space, by
reason of the deadly wound received, by which being as dead, yet living and
recovering again, then should these words, was, is not, and yet is, be spoken
of him; was, to wit, in the government Ecclesiastical, by Bishops upon the
translation of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople: and is not, by coming
in of the Goths and Vandals, bereauing Rome of inhabitants, overthrowing for a
time, that ecclesiastical government of Bishops at Rome: And yet is, not being
utterly by the Goths fury extinguished, the wound being finely healed by the
second beast, (cap. 13. 11. 13. 14.) who cunningly crept up from Episcopal
jurisdiction, into a monarchical state and Empire, by his obtained supremacy;
and so obtaining great power and authority, was wondered at of them that dwelt
on the earth, by beholding him, the beast that was, and is not, and yet is: And
shall ascend out of the bottomless pit: This is the beast, chap. 11. 7. which
beginning is given unto him, as he is in his recovered estate, and now exalted
to the height, to an Antichristian government; for so considered is he said to
ascend out of the bottomless pit: and shall go into perdition: that is, it
shall not be a permanent state ever, but be destroyed and utterly come to
nothing with him, as we see chap. 19. 20. and they that dwell on the earth
shall wonder, as is also said in chap. 13. 3. whose names, etc. These are the
reprobates, which so shall wonder and worship the beast, cap. 13. 8. When they
behold the beast that was, to wit, substituted by the Dragon; Rome being left
by the Emperors, chap. 13. 3. and is not: being wounded to death, chap. 13. 3.
and yet is, to wit, the beast ascended up, (cap. 11. 7.) that is so mighty, as
none is like him, none able to war with him, having power over kindreds,
tongues, and nations, chap. 13. 4. 7.

Verse. 9. Having expounded the beast, showing what he is; here he tells us,
what is meant by the seven heads which this beast has: and of these heads he
gives a double interpretation; the one is here, that they signify seven
hills, on which Rome stood, as I have before showed at large.

Verse. 10. The other interpretation is, and there are seven Kings, so the beast
is the whole state, and the heads are the Prime governors of it, called heree
Kings, for their sovereignty and kingly regencie in that City; they are not
the seven ages of the world, as the Jesuit Ribera dreameth. five are fallen,
that is, the five heads that had already been. 1. Kings, 2. Consuls, 3.
Dictators, 4. Decemuiri, 5. Tribuni militum: for the heads are so many
differing kinds of governors in the Roman government, and not so many singular
persons governing; for then had this beast perished long ago, and not now have
been troublesome to the Christian world. Andone is, that is, the sixth head,
the Heathen Roman Emperors. And the other: that is, the seventh, called an
other, for his so much differing from all the rest before him, when he shall
come. Neither is it said an other, as if the Apostle spoke of one uncertain,
who he should be; but the other (as it is well translated), as if he said, the
beast already seen in the vision, and showed unto me, in verse. 3. Is not yet
come: John saw not this other the seventh, but only in vision. And when he
comes, he must continue a short space. It is not said by way of limitation,
he must continue but a short space, as if the time of this other the seventh,
should be only for a short space, and so perish utterly; which has made some
(so conceiving of the words) to understand hereby the rule of the Goths and
Vandals at Rome, who had but a short reign, and perished utterly. But there is
a great difference of these speeches, he must continue but a short space, and
he must continue a short space; the former implies necessarily a cutting off,
after a short space, and to be no more; the latter not so, but shows that he
has a grant to be, and that he must have a short space allotted unto him to
be; but not therefore enforcing us to think, that therefore after that short
time, he should have no being at all. It is therefore, as if the Angel had
said unto John, the other, this seventh head, which makes the beast, which
thou see, which yet is not come, but certainly will come in his time; and
when he is come in the succeeding Ecclesiastical government, upon the
translation of the Empire from Rome, to Constantinople, (as our Sovereign in
his most learned Apology speaks) he must continue a short space so, till he
receive the deadly wound; and be then as it were not, till the same again be
healed by the beast rising out of the earth, and exercising all the power of
the first beast before him, cap. 13. 11. 12.

Verse. 11. And (So upon this recovery and second beasts great power) the beast
that was, and is not, by this his so strange rising from Episcopal government,
by which he was the seventh head, into so high and supreme power, as
altogether varying from it, he seemed to become an other then before he was
seen to be: even he, (now in man's account) is the eighth King; for so the word
eighth agrees in gender with the word King, and not with the word beast. And
is, (yet in deed and truth) of the seven, that is, the seventh; of which before
more at large in the first part of this preparatiue, chap. 3. in the answer to
the third objection. And goes into perdition, as is before said, verse. 8. this
is his end, chap. 19. 20. Note here, that the seventh head, and eighth King in
account, is that very Antichrist, chapt. 13. 11. obtaining only of all the
heads, to be called the beast, and so the first and second beast, chap. 13. 1.
11. do here become both one. So then the Popedom (the first beast) bears
up Rome; the woman and the Pope that Antichrist (the second beast) makes the
Popedom, whose destruction shall be the utter ruin of all the Roman state.

Verse. 12. The Angel having showed, what the beast is and his heads; now he
comes to his horns, and tells us that they are ten Kings, but such as in
John's days had received no kingdom: but afterward when this Beast should
come, they then should receive power as Kings, that is, have sovereign and
kingly regencie. For the horns were crowned, chapt. 13. 1. Hereby therefore
is meant absolute and free Princes, and not subordinate powers, and
Leiftenants, or Presidents of Provinces, as were under the sixth head, the
Dragon, who would wear the crowns upon his own head, and not admit the horns
(as here) to have crowns, One hour, that is, in the space of an hour, that
is, in a very little short time. With the beast, that is, with the state of
Rome under Antichrist.

Verse. 13, Whereupon these Kings shall be so united to the Beast, as all they
can do, they will do for the same, and that with full consent.

Verse. 14. Of the beasts war with the Saints, we have heard before, chap. 11.
7. and 13. 7. Here we see by whom he does it, even by these horns, but
(blessed be God) they lose the victory.

Verse. 15. The waters: on which it is said, verse. 1. that the woman sits,
are expounded to be peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues; for
Antichrists dominion shall largely extend it self, cap. 13. 7. and 11. 9.

Verse. 16. As the rising up, and prosperity of the Beast has bin noted; so now
the ruin and downfall. And the ten horns: the very same which before, with
one mind gave their power and strength to the Beast, and which horns John saw
upon the Beast. These shall hate the whore: that is, the woman sitting upon the
Beast (verse. 3.) and the whore sitting upon many waters, (verse. 1.) with whom
these Kings committed fornication, which made also others drunk with the wine
of her fornication, verse. 2. but her self became drunk with the blood of
Saints. verse. 6. Their hate at length, conceived justly against her, shall
bring Rome to utter ruin.

Verse. 17. A reason here is given, both of the strange alteration of the minds
of these Kings against the whore; as also how it was, and wherefore they
affected so much the beast before. A hand of God was in both, until that which
he had spoken should be fulfilled.

Verse. 18. The Angel interprets the mystery of the woman, and plainly
shows who she is. The woman is the great City: mystically called Babylon
verse. 5. but in deed and truth, Rome; which in John's days reigned over the
Kings of the earth, as as I have before proved out of the Evangelists and Acts
of the Apostles in part, 1. chap. 3. and in the answer to the first objection.

Notes upon Chap. 18.
Verse. 1. And after these things: These words show the order of the vision, one
thing after another. I saw another Angel: that is, another from the seven
before mentioned; came down from heaven: to show, that he comes with the
truth of God, and no dream of his own: having great power: to show, his
furnishing with strength to effect what is here spoken, touching the fall of
Babylon. And the earth was lightened with his glory: to show, that now the acts
of this Angel shall make him glorious and apparent every where.

Verse. 2. And he cried mightily with a strong voice: hereby showing, that now
by this Angel all should be made to take knowledge of that, which here is
spoken. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen: The doubling notes certainty;
the words be the same with the words of the Angel, chap. 14. 8. which was a
foretelling of this long before it should fall out, but here, upon a present
accomplishment, or very nigh at hand to be fulfilled, as the words in verse. 4.
imply; even as Moses warned the Israelites to depart from the tents of the
wicked men, immediately before their destruction, Numb. 16. 26. Here is an
allusion to Esa. 21. 9. Ier. 51. 8. Babylon here is Rome, (whereof that other
old Babylon in Chaldea was a type) which is the woman, that great City, verse.
10. chap. 17. 18. and 19. 2. And is become the habitation of devils, etc. An
allusion to Esa. 13. 21. 22. and 34. 11. 13. 14. 15. Ier. 51. 37. to note her
utter desolation, and a place not to be inhabited any more, as the 21. verse of
this chapter does plainly tell us. Viegas the Jesuit, understands the words
of the Idolatry, and execrable wickednesses of that City, only he thinks it
shall hereafter so come to be; but it is true in his sense at this present, if
he and his like had eyes to see it, and grace to come out from it.

Verse. 3. The reason of her destruction, partly mentioned before, chap. 17. 2.
The wine of the wrath of her fornication: that is, which has procured this
wrath against her by her idolatrous doctrine, which the Kings of the earth:
that is, those of her false Church have drunk up with her. And the merchants
of the earth: Here by Merchants, cannot be properly meant such as we account to
be merchants; for these mourning merchants are not among the Saints, who as
they are commanded, so do they rejoice at Babylons destruction, chap. 19. 1-6.
These be such Merchants, as after her destruction have no more traffic for
their merchandise, verse. 11. and yet gold, silver, and the other things
mentioned in verse. 12. 13.. will not cease to be in use among Merchants, as we
call them; neither can her fall stay the common use of such things. These
Merchants be Merchants of men's souls, verse. 13. such be spoken of, 2. Pet. 2.
3. What is meant by Merchants, is expounded, verse. 23. The great men of the
earth: That is, of the earthly Antichristian state, such as trade in the sea of
that state, of which in chap. 16. 3. of these Merchants and their merchandises
speaks, Mantuan, Saint Bernard, sermon. 1. de conuers. Pauli, Budaeus in his
Pandects, Lodo^icus Viues, upon St. Aug. book, called the City of God, lib.
18. cap. 22.

Verse. 4. A charge to all Gods, people to get out of that Antichristian state,
and from that Babylonish City; the exhortation is from Ier. 51. 6. 46. and 50.
8. and Esa. 52. 11.

Verse. 5. The greatness of her wickedness, alluding to Ier. 51. 9. and to the
sins of Sodom, Genesis 18. 20. 21. and 19. 13. Ion. 1. 2. the time of her
judgment being at hand, God now remembers her iniquities to plague her, as is
also showed in cap. 16. 19.

Verse. 6. An exhortation stirring up to revenge the cause of God upon her: the
words are from Ier. 50. 15. 29.

Verse. 7. I sit a Queen, etc. An allusion to Esaias, 47-7-8.

Verse. 8. In one day: That is, speedily, for her destruction is said to be in
one hour, in verse. 10. 17. 19. The plagues which shall be upon this City are
death, sorrow, famine (which argues a besieging of it before it be taken),
then the utter consuming of it by fire, as is showed before, chap. 17. 16,
where they that shall do this, are foretold us. The reason is like to that in
Ierem. 50. 34, The work is Gods, and his power only shall bring this to pass.

Verse. 9. The Kings of the earth: These are they in chap. 17. 2, as the next
words following do show; and not the ten horns in chap. 17. 16.

Verse. 12. The merchandise are reckoned up; An allusion to that rich City
Tyrus, Ezech. 27: these are said in the former verse, not to be bought any
more, upon Romes destruction. Therefore by these things must be figuratively
meant al precious and pleasant spiritual things of esteem in that state: for
it is not like that these things, taken after the letter in their proper
signification, shall lose their estimation by Romes fall, which are of great
account among those, that both have shaken off Rome, and with others, which
never had to do with it.

Verse. 17. The other sort of Mourners for Babylon, after the Kings and
Merchants here, are, Every ship-master, and all the company in ships, and
sailers, and as many as trade by sea. An allusion still to the destruction of
Tyrus, Ezech. 27. 29. 30. 31. 32. As the Merchants have a figurative meaning,
so must these be understood figuratively. A ship-master is one that has an
ecclesiastical office, which is his ship, with which he does traffike for the
great men the Merchants: The company in ships, all that depend upon such
offices at the command of the ship-master. As many as trade by sea, that is,
which get their living by the Church service.

Verse. 18. The like complaint for Tyrus, Ezech. 37. 32, so for Babylon, Iere.
50. 46. The smoke of her burning: An allusion to Esai. 34. 10.

Verse. 19. Cast dust: The like is said in Ezech. 27. 30. The manner of heavy
and downe-cast spirits, Job. 2. 12, and the crying, weeping and wailing show
deep and most passionate sorrow of heart. All that had ships in the sea: That
is, offices and dignities in that ecclesiastical state.

Verse. 20. The duty of the godly (Psalm. 58. 11) is here urged upon them, that
they should rejoice, as the other did mourn. Heaven is put for the faithful
people and Saints on earth, that is, the true visible Church, as may appear in
chap. 19. verses 1. 6, where this exhortation is performed by the Saints of God
in heaven. Holy Apostles and Prophets: In these are to be understood all true
Ministers of Christ, the Apostles successors, who are termed Apostles, because
they were ordained by them, do succeed them, and teach their doctrine: we see
before, how the ordinary Ministers are called witnesses, and their ministry
prophesying, chap. 11. 3, and themselves Prophets, here in verse. 24, so 1.
Cor. 14. 32. Or, the words may be taken, as spoken figuratively, after a
prophetical manner, as in Esai. 1. 2, and in Deuteronomy. 32. 1, and as it is
foretold of the joy over the destruction of Babylon, Iere. 51. 48, to set out a
cause of exceeding joy to the whole Church of God in heaven and in earth.

Verse. 21. In this verse and the rest is foreshewed the final and utter ruin
of Rome, never to be inhabited again, which is here expressed by an act of a
strong Angel. An allusion to Iere. 51. 63. 64. Found no more: That is, shall
never be any more inhabited, as is said of typical Babylon, Esai. 13. 20.
Iere. 50. 40, and as the next verses, 22. 23, plainly declare by particulars,
and as do the words of the Prophet, to which these do allude, Iere. 7. 34.
and 25. 10. 11.

Verse. 22. There shall be no more pleasurable delights, no more men of trade to
live there, no sound of a millstone, that is, no use thereof for food, for that
there shall be none dwelling in that place.

Verse. 23. He still shows by particulars, that all inhabitants shall thence
be removed, and no more there the increase of posterity, nor solemnizing of
any marriages. For thy Merchants, etc. These be one cause of Romes final
destruction, and therefore cannot be (as before is said) understood of
Merchants properly, such as live upon honest trafique and trading, which
(though they become rich) yet are not the great men of the earth, as these be.
Sorseries: Another cause of her destruction, hereby is to be understood that
wine of her fornication, chap. 17. 2. 4, and the deceitful miracles of the
second beast, chap. 13. 14, and false Prophet, chap. 19. 20.

Verse. 24. The third cause of her ruin, her murdering and shedding the blood
of the Prophets and Saints, that is, the blood of the Ministers and people of
God. And of all that were slain upon the earth: To the like effect speaks
Christ of the bloody Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23. 35: for the last
murderers of the Saints fill up the measure of the bloodshed of all before
them, as Christ there says (verse. 32), and so become guilty of all the blood
shed before them.

Notes upon Chap. 19.
Verse. 1. After these things: To wit, before in the former chapter of Babylons
utter ruin, which first must be, ere this joy here expressed befall the
Church of Christ. I heard a great voice of much people in heaven: The true
Church here rejoices now at the destruction of Babylon, grown into a great
multitude, as is said verse. 6, of which also in chap. 7. 9, who there, as these
here, give praise unto God, verse. 12.

Verse. 2. The reason of their joy here expressed, for he has judged. These
words show what, is meant by judgment in chap. 17. 1, even Babylons
destructions, set out in cap. 18. The great whore: Thus he calls Babylon so
judged, as is showed, in the former chapter. And it is evident by this, that
the great City Rome is the woman, chap. 17. 18, the woman is the whore, chap.
17. 1. 4, this whore is Babylon, for upon Babylons destruction the whore here
is said to be judged.

Verse. 3. A doubling of their joy again, crying, Halleluiah, praise God. And
her smoke rose up for ever and ever: Her eternal vengeance. The like words
are in Esai. 34. 10. An allusion to the destruction of Zodome and Gomorrhe,
Genesis 19.

Verse. 4. The former rejoicing may seem to be of all true Christians, here
and there dispersed abroad, when they shall hear of this destruction of Rome;
but this verse is of the public assembly lauding and worshipping God. Of the
four and twenty Elders and four beasts, see chap. 4.

Verse. 5. And a voice came out of the throne: The throne is Gods seat, here
verse. 4. and chap. 4. 2. The voice is therefore from God, yet uttered by some
of the Church, because he says, Praise our God, etc. It may be some one of
the beasts (who are in the midst of the throne, chap. 4. 6.) which exhorts
all of all sorts to praise God.

Verse. 6. The effect of this exhortation, God was praised. And John heard (as
it were) the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters:
because this, great multitude was of people, nations, and tongues, chap. 17. 1.
15. chap. 7. 9. and as the voice of a mighty thunder: Because as thunder it
was heard a far of, and men made to attend thereunto.

Verse. 7. The Godly exhort one another to joy, and to give honor to God, for
the now gladsome state of the Church after the destruction of the Whore; For
the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready*
Christ is here set out as an husband; and the Church as a wife; the time after
the burning of that common whore, to be the marriage day of Christ with his
Church, which was all the time before, as only espoused, but now is solemnly,
as it were, to be married; which joyful time the cursed Pope and Papists in
their Antichristian glory at Rome yet do hinder. It is hence clear, that
there shall be as great difference between the state of Gods Church now, and
that which is to come after Romes ruin, as between the time of honorable
persons only betrothed, and the high joyful and glorious day of their public
marrying; and as between the time of a King coming on to his kingdom, and
his actual and powerful reigning as King in deed.

Verse. 8. The Brides raiment fit for her pure and holy husband, the apparel is
named, and the signification given.

Verse. 9. The Angel who received these things from Christ to show unto John,
chap. 1. 1, and who^ in the next verse John would have worshipped, here wills
him to write; so was he also commanded, chap. 14. 13. This is for the
certainty of the things which are to be written, as the last words of this
verse show, being added as a reason of the commandment to write; not that
there is any mistaking of any other thing of all the rest, either done or said
to John before; or, that there is any more or greater truth in this here
commanded to be written, then in all the rest: but for the incrediblenes of
the so glorious and most joyful estate of the Church, and their happiness
also which shall be partakers thereof.

Verse. 10. John's readiness to fall down to worship this Angel (which he ought
not to have done) at these words, more then at all the rest, does implie
necessarily, that he was exceedingly lifted up with some sudden joy of some
strange and happy matter foretold here unto him; which moved his heart to an
extraordinary gladness, and himself thus to fall down, as Abraham did upon
his joy conceived of that, which was foretold him touching the birth of Isaac,
Genesis 17. 17. Now what matter could so greatly ravish the heart of John, as to
hear of the calling of the Jews? which in all probability is the thing
foretold; whose obstinacy made S. Paul to have great heaviness and continual
sorrow of heart; and that he could have wished himself accursed from Christ
for their sakes, Romans 9. 2. 3. That have the testimony of Jesus: That is,
which be preachers and witnesses of Christ having the spirit, that is, the gift
of the spirit to prophecy and to bear witness of Christ; for here the having
of the testimony of Jesus is (in chap. 22. 9.) expounded by the word Prophets.

Verse. 11. And I saw heaven opened. Before the Apostle can follow on, to tell
us further of this Bride thus arraied, and of the Churches happy estate, he
must first show us the maine lets yet hindering, and wholly to be taken out of
the way; the lets are two, Antichrist and the Dragon, both which are utterly to
be confounded, before the perfection of the Churches graceful state. Of the
first and his utter damnation he speaks in this chapter; of the other in the
next. For we must know, that when Rome is destroyed, the Pope and his aiders
shall live for a while after, until the great battle spoken of, chap. 16. 16,
and the event here (in verses 18. 19. 20.) be ended: of this he has a most
perfect vision, therefore it is said, he saw Heaven opened, as did Stephen,
Act. 7. 55, not a door only, as in chap. 4. 1. Or, by Heaven opened, may be
meant the open access unto the Church every where, and every way, as being now
apparent to all; in which Christ and his armies were ready to break out upon
their deadly foes, gathering themselves together against them, as is showed,
chap. 16. 14. 16, and here in ver. 19. Here is showed, in what state the Church
shall be in, upon the ruin of Rome; even as a people standing in arms under
their General Christ Jesus for a time, till the last battle be fought, and
the enemies destroyed. And behold: Spoken both for certainty and also for
matter needing attention, and our careful consideration of so great troubles,
as then shall be in the world, by open hostility and bloody battles, between
true Christians and the Antichristians. A white horse: A horse is a beast for
war; by this is to be understood the means to encounter the enemies. White
notes his righteousness in proceeding to war, and in the triumph. And he
that sat upon him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness he
does judge and make war: These last words tell us, why he has a white horse.
This Rider is Jesus Christ, as all the words here and after show: faithful,
chap. 1. 5. and true, chap. 3. 7. 14: for his righteousness in judgment, see
Psalm. 9. 8. and 96. 10. 13.

Verse. 12. His eyes were as a flame of fire, so is Christ set out, chap. 1. 14.
and 2. 18. And on his head were many crowns: in cap. 1. 14. no mention of any
crowns, then upon his head, while his Church was to live under crosses and
persecutions, he was then bare headed: when she crept from under Antichrist he
put on one crown, cap. 14. 14. but now many crowns. A crown, notes out
victory, many crowns, many victories, either gotten, or to be gotten, now
over all his enemies. Many crowns he wears, because he takes the crowns
from Kings now, whom he conquereth, verse. 19. and therefore is called King of
kings. The Beast (the Pope) now shall wear no longer his triple crown; for
he, and also his Kings shall perish together: all nations: shall now do
worship to this King of Saints, cap. 15. 4. And he had a name written: to show,
that it was sure and permanent. That no man knew but himself: such a name as
Jehovah, not known to the Israelites, till Moses came to deliver them, Exodus
6. 3. but with his deeds he declared his name; even so here, Christ, while
his people were in Egyptian bondage, his name written King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, verse. 16. was actually unknown; but in this his marvelous work of
delivering his people, in so strange an overthrow of all his and their enemies,
was made now manifest.

Verse. 13. And he was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood: A garment expressing
the exceeding great slaughter of his enemies, and the abundance of blood-shead,
in which (as it were) his vesture is dipped. The allusion is to the words of
Esa. chap. 63. 2. 3. And his name is called the word of God. Of this title we
may read, Ioh. 1. 1. and Ioh. 5. 7. but I take it, that here he is so called,
for that he does make good his fathers word, every way fulfilling it; and
obtaining grace from God to have it fulfiled, even in every thing whatsoever
was threatened against the enemies of the Church, for the Churches sake. By him
are the promises to Gods people accomplished, the mystery of God, chap. 10. 7.
finished; by him just vengeance passes upon the Churches enemies, that so he
may well be called the word of God; as also that by him (now Antichrist being
destroyed) the word of God at this time chiefly shall take place, by which he
shall be known, as by a name.

Verse. 14. Here are his soldiers, the armies in heaven, that is, of the true
Church: followed him upon white horses; clothed in fine linen, white and
clean: This their raiment is expounded in verse. 8. The spirit of God sets
them out, not as going to battle, but as in triumph having obtained the
victory; even as also their captain is set out. Hereby rather setting the end
of the battle before us, that in consideration thereof we (the Church) might
be comforted; then the warlike proceeding and bloody encounter, which without
the certain knowledge of the issue, would work nothing but fear and terror
in men's hearts, which here is prevented.

Verse. 15. Here is showed, how the righteous and stout warrior obtains the
victory: Out of his mouth goes a sharp sword: of this there is mention, ca.
1. 16. and 2. 12. 16. which is Gods word. that with it he should smite the
nations: That is, those Antichristians, against whom he goes to war. An
allusion to the words of Esa. chap. 11. 4. And he shall rule them with a rod of
iron. An allusion to Psalm. 2. 9. nothing his strong power to keep them under,
and to force them to obedience, which will be obstinate. And he treads the
wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. An allusion to Esa.
63. 2. of the wine press, see cap. 14. 20. here is the party treading it;
whence it is that his raiment is so bloody, as in verse. 13. The Grapes are the
Antichristians or nations here so called, the winepresse the place Armageddon,
chap. 16. 16. where the great battle, mentioned in the 19. verse of this
chapter, shall be fought. The treader of the wine press is Jesus Christ with
his armies, victoriously destroying their enemies, till the blood come up to
the horses bridles, cap. 14. 20. by which the fierceness and wrath of Almighty
God, here mentioned shall be made manifest; for it is called the battle of the
great day of God Almighty, cap. 16. 14.

Verse. 16. And he has on his vesture, and on his thing a name written: This is
the name before unknown, but now certainly known to all, as written on his
vesture, to wit, that which was dipped in blood, showing it to be his title
gotten victoriously in the destruction of his enemies: and on his thigh,
because now all the world should acknowledge him to be such a one, and do
homage unto him. The word is taken from the ancient custom of the Hebrews,
the thigh being put for strength and power; and the putting of the hand under
the thigh for a token of subjection and servitude, Genesis 24. 2. 9. and 47. 29.
Or, it is to show, that as he had gotten it upon his garment by victory, so
was he able by power and strength to maintain, it, for the name is written
where the sword was wont to be girded, Psalm. 45. 3. Iud. 3. 16. Cant. 3. 8.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; the honor of his victory, chap. 17. 14. now
he reigns, verse. 6. and the kingdoms of the world are Christ's, and that for
ever, cap. 11. 15. This is the time foretold by Daniel, cap. 2. 44.

Verse. 17. And I saw an Angel standing in the sun. After the description of
Christ and his glorious title, here comes forth before him his Herald, making
an open and a loud proclamation to the fowls of heaven, to come and feed upon
the bodies of the slain. He is said to stand in the sun, that there may be
an answerablenesse of one part of this prophetical speech with another. For
here he is brought in, to make proclamation to all the fowls under heaven;
therefore is the sun made his standing place, as fittest to make his voice to
be heard abroad. The drift is, to set out the evident and clear certainty of
the victory, of which the Church shall be so assured, as if in the sun one
stood to make proclamation thereof unto us. This Angel may type out such, as
by clear light of truth shall make known the certain destruction of the
enemies, before the battle be fought: the words in this 17. verse, and in the
next, verse. 18. are an allusion to Ezech. 39. 4. 17. 20. noting out the
exceeding great slaughter, which shall be made of those Antichristians of all
sorts.

Verse. 19. This is the beast in cap. 13. 1. and 17. 8. 11. which is noted to
make war with the Saints, in chap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. and his kings with the
Lamb, cap. 17. 14. but here is the last battle, and his utter overthrow for
ever, as the next verse shows. Kings of the earth; these are mentioned in
cap. 17. 2. and 18. 3. 9.

Verse. 20. The false prophet: There is only a brief mentioning of this
prophet, in chap. 16. 13. but here is plainly showed who this is, even the
beast, in chap. 13. 12. 13. 14. that very Antichrist. These both were cast
alive: An allusion to Numb. 16. 31. 32. to show, that their destruction shall
be more then ordinary, to the terror of al beholders, a vengeance for
notorious wickedness, Psalm. 55. 15. Into a lake of fire burning with
brimstone: of this lake speaks John, in ca. 20. 14. and 21. 8. and of this
plague, in ca. 14. 10. noting out fearful and most exquisite torments, Ezech.
38. 22. as in the destruction of Sodom, Genes. 19. thus shall perish the
chief enemies of Christ and his Gospel. Thus (as is said, cap. 17. 8.) shall
the beast go into destruction.

Verse. 21. And the Remnant: that is, the Kings of the earth, and their armies,
verse. 18. 19. for they are the rest or remnant left after the beast and false
prophet: were slain: These also perish, though not after that manner, as did
the Beast and false prophet. With the sword of him that sat upon the horse:
verse. 11. which sword proceeded out of his mouth: verse. 15. that is, they
perished, as the Lord had threatened in his word. For the word is said to slay
them, when the Lord makes that to come upon them which he denounces against
them; so is his word as fire, devouring the people as wood, as Jeremy
speaks, cap. 5. 14. And all the fowls were filled with their flesh. These
words are added to show, that that shall be fulfilled, which the Angel in the
sun proclaimed in verse. 18. and withal it gives us to know, what is meant
by the remnant, whose flesh is here said to be eaten by the fowls, which are
there called to the Supper.

Notes upon chap. 20.
It is not said, as in the beginning of the former chapter, after these things
I saw; but only barely, I saw, because John here calls us back to the
Dragon, of whom before, chap. 12. mention was made, but hitherto passed over
silently, except in chap. 16. 13. Here is declared, what became of him all the
time, that the beast bare a sway; and what he did upon the beasts destruction,
whom he did so much favor, chap. 13. 3. and so endeavor to help and uphold,
as is showed in cap. 16. 13. To this place is the matter reserved to be spoken
of, as most fit to give us in one view, his whole story. For after the spirit
had spoken in can. 12. of his casting out of heaven; and in ca. 13. of his
substitute the Beast, there could be no convenient place before this time, to
make again full mention of him, till all things concerning the said beast were
fully ended, but now the beasts final destruction being showed, here comes
in this last enemy, and his last attempts to be spoken of.

Verse. 1. An Angel: Not that in the ninth chapter, verse. 1. as is showed there
in verse. 11. for as in this one thing, to wit, that both have the key of the
bottomless pit, they do agree; so in many other things, the circumstances
compared together, they do greatly disagree. This Angel is a type of some one
or more, (such) instruments, as Christ did use to curb the open rage of Satan
and his instruments murdering the Saints. Came down from heaven: This tells
us of what sort this Angel is, receiving his power and authority from out of
heaven above, for, and in the behalf of the heaven, the Church of God beneath.
Having the key: Key is a sign of government, power and authority, Esaias 22.
22. which this Angel brings from heaven with him; but the star, chap. 9.
1. brought it not from heaven (from which he fell) to the earth, but it was
given to him. Of the bottomless pit: I think this bottomless pit, is that
which in cap. 12. 13. is called the earth, into which the Dragon was cast out
of heaven. For of that time is this matter which is here handled, and the same
Dragon spoken of. Of this pit see before, cap. 9. 1. 2. And a great chain in
his hand: A chain is that, with which are bound such as be kept in bondage.
Judge. 16. 21. 2. King. 25. 7. hereby is noted the means of restraining this
Dragon within this bottomless pit, and it is said to be great, for to set out
the strength of the means to hold in the great red Dragon; as he is called in
chap. 12. A great chain for a great Dragon.

Verse. 2. And he laid hold on the Dragon: The words imply a forcible strength
in apprehending of him, as in the battle between Michaell and him, chap. 12.
7. 9. The Dragon, the Serpent, the devil and Satan, four names, to set out
the head of all the power of darkness; so in chap. 12. 9. and he shows
himself powerful, to be such a one agreeable to all these in his instruments.
And bound him a thousand years: The chain is used, and therewith is he bound;
that is, the Lords means are of force holding in (as it were) bound in a
chain, this great enemy within the pit; so as he could not openly rage in
bloody persecutions, by his Ethnicke and Pagan instruments, as before he had
done: from this is he bound, in this respect is his restraint, for the space of
a thousand years. The beginning whereof is (as some think) in the year 300.
or thereabout, when Constantine the great began to bear rule, and became the
Christian Emperor; and the ending was about the 1300. year, in the time of
Pope Boniface the eighth. This binding implies a liberty before, from which he
is now restrained; now his liberty before was open rage and bloody
persecution, as is showed in chap. 6. and 12. and as may appear by his
practice, when he gets loose again, here in verse. 8. 9. returning to his
former bloody rage, and murtherous disposition toward the Saints: therefore
his binding this space of a thousand years, is a restraining of him so long
from the open slaughtering of the Saints, (for else he is not bound simply one
hour, Job 1. 1. Pet. 5. 8.) but this was not before Constantine his days.
Again, John sees the beginning of his binding in vision; therefore (according
to a rule given in this preparatiue from cap, 4. 1. That, nothing, whereof the
original is showed unto John, is to have beginning before the time of this
Revelation) this binding belongs not to the time of the beginning of the
preaching of the Gospel; nor to take beginning in the time of Heathen
Emperors, who bloodily in open fury raged against Christians, from which
only here he is now showed to be bound and restrained. The very act of this
his binding, that is, of the restraint of his open and bloody slaughtering of
the Saints was begun, when he was cast, cap. 12. 9. out of heaven, (that is)
when his instruments (the Heathen tyrants) were by Constantine thrown from the
Empire of Rome, the City then reigning over all, cap. 17. 18.

Verse. 3. And cast him into the bottomless pit: that is, into the earth, ca.
12. 9. where, and upon which, he must only exercise his fury: and therefore
is it said, cap. 12. 12. woe to the inhabitants of the earth; but with the
Church in open rage, as before, he now was not to meddle; and therefore also in
the same place the heavens are exhorted to rejoice. The Earth is the state of
the worldly sort, to which the star fell, cap. 9. 1. and where he, becoming
the beast, got by the Dragons help, dominion, cap. 13. 8. so as all the world
did follow after him, chap. 13. 3. This earth is the bottomless pit, out of
which the beast comes, chap. 13. 11. and 17. 8. and 11. 7. when this Dragon
was cast into it, cap. 12. 9. for he (in the Heathen Emperors) no sooner was
cast out of heaven into the earth, (being then not able longer openly to
persecute the Church) but began to work for his grandchild that Antichrist, to
raise him out of the earth, in which among the earthly sort, he was chained
up, as in a prison, as it is called here in this chapter, verse. 7. for it is a
prison for Satan to be restrained from public and violent rage, yea from any
degree of mischief against the Church. And shut him up: that is, he was not
suffered to go beyond his limitts, but was kept within his bounds, as in a
close prisonhouse: the phrase is in Genes. 7. 16. but to another end and
purpose. And sealed, (to wit, the door or stone) upon him: An allusion to Dan.
6. 17. to signify, as there, so here, that the purpose was not to be changed.
That he should deceive the nations no more: These words show the end of his
restraint. By nations here is not meant the nations and Gentiles, in chap. 11.
2. 18. for these he had liberty to deceive, making the Beast speak like him,
chap. 13. 11. by which he seduced the earth, verse. 14. and did help to send
out frogs, (those unclean spirits) from out of his own mouth, and out of the
mouth of the Beast and false prophet, chap. 16. 13. 14. But nations here must
be taken, as in verse. 8. here following, for the open enemies of Christ; such
as was formerly the fierce tyrants of Rome, and all such as profess not
Christ. His deceiving of them, was to move them to bloody outrages, and open
hostility against the Church, as appears in the said 8. verse. For his
deceiving here, in this time of his binding, must be understood, as his
deceiving is to be taken, at his loosing again, from which here he is bound.
So then the meaning is, that Satan should not have for his instruments the open
enemies of Christ (in all this space of a thousand years) to kill, murder,
and to make war upon the Saints, the true worshippers of God; though the
earthly sort should nevertheless be plagued, and that with bloodshed and
slaughter: for albeit he was cast out of heaven, yet with great wrath he came
unto the inhabiters of the earth, (chap. 12. 12.) and the Turkish fury (in
Gods just judgment) spared not the Antichristians, chap. 9. 18, from whom he
was not at all bound. Till the thousand years were fulfilled, and after that,
he must be loosed a little season, as is again delivered in verse 7.

Verse. 4. The Apostle tells us, what he saw after that Satan was cast into
his prison and there bound up. This vision is concerning the Church of Christ,
that hidden number sealed (chap. 7.) and standing with Christ on Mount Sion,
chap. 14. 1. And I saw: To wit, after the Dragons binding, thrones, that is,
seats for Kings reigning with Christ. And they sat upon them: who is meant by
they may be understood by considering the words following, and the last words
of this verse, even they that had judgment given unto them, that is, the
spirit of discerning between Christianity and Antichristianisme, they lived
and reigned with Christ those thousand years. And I saw the souls of them
that were beheaded: Among this reigning company, John saw, that some of them
should be found out by the Dragons substitute, the Beast that Antichrist, and
by him be put to death. First, for maintaining the truth, for the witness of
Jesus, and for the word of God. Secondly, for not worshipping him the Beast,
neither his image, etc. By which words it is clear, that the Beast in chap.
13, even that Roman Antichrist, is of great power, ruling mightily within the
space of these thousand years; putting, as we here see, some of the faithful
to death, for upholding the truth of Christ and his word, against his usurped
Antichristian power and authority. And they (that is, those that sat on the
thrones, not they that were beheaded) lived and reigned with Christ those
thousand years. It is said with Christ, showing, that this was not seen to
the world; their life and reign here was not worldly and open to men's eyes,
but spiritual and hidden. If those that were beheaded lived not again, some
may here ask; why are these words ( they lived) added after, as if they had
risen from the dead to reign with Christ here; for this life and reign is to
be understood to be here on earth? I answer, for that in some sort, though
not properly, those that were slain may be said to live and reign; first, in
respect that by their constant profession and suffering, they strengthened
others in the faith to live and reign with Christ; and secondly, for that
(when the adversaries had slain them, and so thought themselves to be rid of
them) the Lord raised up others in their stead, to witness the same truth
against those their enemies; in whom these slain ones may be said to live
again, as Eliah did in the person of John Baptist, as Christ witnesses: and
as did also the two Prophets, of which before in chap. 11. 3. 7. 8. 11.

Verse. 5. But the rest of the dead: That is, such as were without the
spiritual life of God, and so dead in the sins and trespasses of that
Antichristian state, as Ephraim was dead in Baal, Hosea. 13. 1: and as the
Church of Sardis was said to be dead, chap. 3. 1, so these left, according to
the appointed time of God, to be seduced by worshipping of the Beast and his
image, and by receiving his mark also upon their foreheads or hands, became
dead to Godward; though as Sardis they were alive in the judgment of men.
Lived not again, till the thousand years were finished: These words implie
that first they once lived, then were dead, and after a thousand years were to
live again, which cannot be understood of the selfsame persons. But thus we
must conceive of this speech, that Antichrist seducing men from the true
worship of God (in which respect men are said to be alive) unto a false worship
of Christ, (in which respect they are said to be dead) and therein holding them
for the space of a thousand years; God would at length, by his faithful
Ministers, call them out of this spiritual darkness, as out of the grave, to
live in the light of the truth, which formerly had been forsaken. And here the
text seems to speak of the same persons, (which yet cannot be) only for
that thief last do (through Gods mercy, after so long time) enter into ye
profession of that truth and true worship, which the first sort did receive,
and the seduced did forsake. This verse is a short repetition or remembrance of
that which is before spoken, concerning the power of the Gospel preached,
regaining unto Christ his people from under Antichrist, out of people, nations,
and tongues, cap. 10. 11. and 14. 6. This is the first resurrection, to wit, so
to be enlightened with the truth, as they come from popish superstition and
idolatry, to the true and sincere worship of God, showing forth the powerful
effect thereof in life and conversation.

Verse. 6. As the spirit of God gave before comfort to such, as should die for
the truth against Antichrist, chap. 14. 13; so here he foretells such as have
been deceived in that way, how happy and holy they shall be, when God gives
them grace to see the abomination of that whore, and utterly to forsake her:
Every such a one shall be held holy and blessed, on whom the second death shall
have no power, so as they shall not perish for ever; touching the second death,
what it is, see chap. 21. 8. But they, to wit, such as before are mentioned to
sit upon the thrones, verse. 4, who (before the end of the thousand years do
prevail over the Beast, his image, and mark) shall be Priests of God and of
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years: so here great comfort is
offered to all and every one, which at the length are called out from under
Antichrist; but such are most happy, which are ever preserved from him.

Verse. 7. Here we are foretold, what shall happen at the end of a thousand
years. Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, the bottomless pit before
named, verse. 3, that is, he shall have liberty to use his former power, and
to rise up in open rage against the open professors of the Gospel.

Verse. 8. This sets forth the Devils last attempt being let loose. He shall
go out to deceive, as he did before his binding, chap. 12. 9. the nations,
that is, the open enemies of Christ, which are in the four quarters of the
earth, so it shall be the greatest power that he can make. Go and Magog: So
are the nations called, which Satan has here the command of. The words are an
allusion to Ezech. chap. 38. 1. and 39. 1. 6, who speaks of these enemies of
the ancient people of God, being their last enemies before the coming of the
Messiah, Christ our Savior, among them. So John here makes mention of their
names, to show, that as they then were the last enemies of the Jews before
Christ's first coming; so these nations deceived by Satan, shall be the last
open enemies, that ever the Church shall have, to interrupt her outward peace,
till the second coming of Christ, as the final doom of the Devil in verse.
10; and next the remembrance of the last judgment, in verses 11. 15, plainly
tell us. Some here understand by Gog the Pope and his strength, by Magog, the
Turk and his power; for that the one is a covert enemy of Christ; the other
an open: but they, that thus take the name Gog, do not consider, that before
this battle be, the Pope the Beast and false Prophet are utterly destroyed,
and sent packing unto hell; as in the former chapter may be seen, verse. 20. To
gather them together in battle: The end of deceiving them, to make them to
intend the utter extirpation of the Church of God. The number of whom is as the
sand of the sea: Noting hereby the innumerable multitude of them, as in Judge.
chap. 7. 12.

Verse. 9. After the gathering of the army, the enterprise is here set down,
going and spreading themselves, as a flood upon the face of the earth, far
and wide; words of allusion to Ezech. 38. 9. 16, and endeavoring that none of
the faithful should escape them, they therefore compassed about the tents of
the Saints, as the Aramites did Dothan, 2. King. 6. 14. 15, and the Chaldeans
Jerusalem, 2. King. 25. 1. And the beloved City, the heavenly new Jerusalem,
cap. 21. 2. And fire came down from God out of heaven and devoured them: By
this is meant some inevitable devouring destruction, as it were out of heaven,
from Gods immediate power upon these enemies, who had compassed so about the
Church of God, without whose especial help, they could not have escaped the
rage and bloody intendment of their foes; fearful destruction is set out by
fire, Job. 15. 34. and 20. 26. Psalm. 21. 9. an allusion either to ye
destruction of Zodom, Genesis 19, or to the devouring up of the proud Captains
with their fifties by fire, 2. King. 1. 10. 12.

Verse. 10. The final conclusion of the last enemy here is showed, after the
destruction of his army, the Devils endless damnation, with his grandchild
Antichrist, chap. 19. 20.

Verse. 11. From this verse to the end of the chapter, is, as it were, a
description of the last judgment; first to show, that from this last battle,
in which the last enemies were overthrown, and Satan cast into hell, there
should be peace to Gods Church unto the coming of Christ unto judgment; of
which peaceable and graceful state of the Church is spoken in the next
chapter, from the beginning thereof unto the end of the fifth verse of the 22
chapter. But secondly, to give us another consideration of the end of all sorts
of enemies to Gods Church: for the Spirit having given us knowledge of two
battles, with the issue of both, and of the destruction of the grand Captains,
chap. 19. 20. and here in this chap. verse. 10; now for that it is not likely
that all and every one of their part were in the said Armies, but that there
were also many other which came not to the battles, here we are given to know,
how the Lord proceeded against them; even as a Judge in a most holy and
upright course of justice to reward them after their works; and so to remove
from before his presence, whatsoever might hinder the making of a new heaven
and a new earth, of which he speaks in the next chapter, and of the abolishing
of an earth and an heaven in this verse of this chapter. And I saw a great
white throne: An allusion to Dan. chap. 7. 9. 10. A throne is a seat of kingly
majesty; white notes purity, and so vprightnes of that seat of justice:
great, as fit for so glorious and high a potentate as Christ is, Tit. 2. 13.
Luke 1. 32. And him that sat on it* Christ the Judge of quick and dead, (Act.
10. 41.) who was brought forth here in this book first standing, in chap. 1,
and in the time of the Churches troubles, chapter 8. 3, and 14. 1: but after
the Church was somewhat recovered, and here now victoriously prevailing, he
is showed here sitting, and in chap. 14. 14. From whose face the earth and the
heaven fled away: What this flying away is, the next words show, and there was
found no place for them, because they are corrupt before him, and all shall
become new, the 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5. verses of the next Chapter do expound this
verse.

Verse. 12. And I saw the dead: These be they that be brought before the Judge,
small and great, that is, all without exception, stand before God, making now
their appearance. And the books were opened: An allusion to Dan. 7. 10. His
proceeding is by clear evidence in writing; the books here be the consciences
of men, which as open books, when men come to be judged, shall show what every
man is; these be the common books of all men, in and out of the Church, not
ordained to be saved; for there is another book for the elect, which is the
book of life; of which mention is made chap. 3. 5, and 13. 8. Luke 10. 10.
Exodus 32. 32. Phil. 4. 3. This book here is opened, that Gods elect may be
seen and known. By the way note, that all things here thus set down are
spoken according to men in judicial proceedings, not that God either has or
needs any such book. And the dead were judged out of these things, which
were written in the books, that is, according to their works. So these last
words show, what are those written things in the books, even men's works.

Verse. 13. Here is showed, whence all these dead appearing before God are
fetched; from the sea, the grave, or place where death has seized upon them.

Verse. 14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire, where the
devil, the beast and false prophets are, verse. 10. The meaning I take to be
only this, that there should be a full end of the Churches enemies* and of
all deadly means whatsoever, that might hinder her graceful and glorious
state, described in the Chapter following.

Verse. 15. And, to wit, for to know a conclusion of all reprobates, all such
inhabiters of the earth, that have worshipped the beast, chap. 13. 8. and have
helped him to tread down the holy City, cap. 11. 2. and merrily rejoiced at
the murdering of the faithful witnesses and Preachers of the truth, chap. 11.
10. Whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the
lake of fire. In this description of judgment, mention is only made of the
dead, and of the reprobates, and of Christ's proceeding to remove them, as he
did before their captains and heads; which makes me to think, that this
here is only made mention of, to give full comfort to the Church of her
perfect deliverance, from all and every enemy, small and great, and from all
means of her future hurt and ruin, as is death and hell: that so, without any
let or hindrance, she may be that holy and heavenly City, that bride adorned
for her husband, to live with him for ever.

Notes on Chap. 21.
Verse. 1. John having told of the vanishing of the earth and heaven, in the
former chapter, verse. 11. here he shows what ensued thereupon, all became
new; a new heaven and a new earth: as in Esa. chap. 65. 17. and 66. 22. for the
first heaven, and the first earth were passed away, as in cap. 20. 11. is
foretold. And there was no more sea: that is, no more unquietness and
troublesome state. The sea cannot rest, whose waters cast up dirt and mire,
Esa. 57. 20. therefore may an unquiet state be compared to the sea.

Verse. 2. And John saw the holy City: The same that was before trodden under
foot, chap. 11. 2. but now exalted on high from her former low state, and
obtains a new name, and is called the new Jerusalem, the bride, and the Lambs
wife, cap. 19. 7. and hereafter, verse. 6. So all the company of the faithful
are compared to the City Jerusalem; and to a bride to be a wife unto Christ,
coming down from God out of heaven: This new City is the very hand of God,
and his work from above out of heaven, whence she has her birth, and which
she shall possess for an everlasting inheritance. Prepared as a bride adorned
for her husband, when she is of a most heavenly condition, she is then
prepared; and when she is arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, cap. 19. 8.
she is adorned, and a wife ready for her husband, the Lamb Jesus Christ.

Verse. 3. And I heard a great voice out of heaven: as it were following this
bride, this new Jerusalem from heaven; to show, that the matter here spoken of,
was so indeed, and not a dream, how strange and incredible soever to man's
reason; and therefore a heavenly voice confirms it, saying, behold the
Tabernacle of God is with men, etc. chap. 7. 15. all the words taken out of
Ezech. 37. 27. 28.

Verse. 4. God his dwelling with his people makes all things happy to them,
and remooueth away all sorrow with the causes thereof; here is showed, when
that was to come to pass, which in the general view of the Churches state is
set down, in chap. 7. 16. 17. And God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, (as he speaks in Esa. 25. 8.) who before have wailed and lamented,
because now they see, that God is reconciled to them, and become their God, and
also come unto them, which might seem before to have been forsaken; and that
it might appear how effectually the Lord would wipe away tears, it is said,
that there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain. That is, no more such causes, means and instruments
of death, sorrow, crying, and pain, as formerly had been: of which happiness
summarily before, in chap. 7. 16. 17. And the reason of all this is given,
because the former things are passed away, that is, the first earth, and
heaven, and sea, all the Dragons Empire, the Beasts dominion, power and
practice, the deceits of the false prophet, and whatsoever was before any
annoyance to the Church, and hurtful to the quiet peace thereof: for now it
may be said of the Church, as in Esa. 54. 14. and 60. 18. and 61. 3. 7. read
the places.

Verse. 5. And for that these things here spoken seem so impossible, and so
hard to be believed, he that sat upon the throne, that is, God Almighty,
chap. 20. 11. 12. and one that cannot lie, said, behold I make all things new:
a new heaven, a new earth, all things new. And that what here he has spoken
might be taken for certain truth, John is commanded to write them, with this
reason, that these words are true and faithful; and therefore to be assuredly
fulfilled in their time, though men should hold them false, and not worthy
credit.

Verse. 6. And he said unto me, it is done: So in Ezech. 39. 8. Behold it is
come, it is done says the Lord God, this is the day whereof I have spoken. The
mystery of God spoken of, in chap. 10. 7. now was finished, and that in two
things, wherein the fulfilling did consist: The one in taking full vengeance
upon all the enemies of Christ and his Church, at the pouring out of the
seventh vial, the last of the last seven plagues; and therefore it was there
said, it is done, cap. 16. 17. The other, in bringing the Church into so
glorious and happy estate, as is here set down; and therefore now also
again it is said, it is done. I am Alpha and Omega: that is, the beginning and
the end; this here foretold and promised, is of me; I begin it, I finish it:
for of me, by me, and for me, are all things, Romans 11. 36. The Lord is the
first and the last, Esa. 44. 6. and 48. 12. he has wrought and done it, Esa.
41. 4. Now for that the Lord knew, that such happy and excellent things as
here are spoken of, and so certainly to be fulfilled, would work in the hearts
of the faithful, a vehement desire for the accomplishment thereof, he here
promises in a figurative speech to satisfy their thirst, to the full; to give
to such a one as is athirst, ardently inflamed in his affection after these
things, of the fountain of the water of life, chap. 7. 17. and that such a one
shall partake of the graces of his spirit, Ioh. 7. 38. 39. and that freely of
his sole mercy and good favor toward him.

Verse. 7. Here, lest men should think a fervent desire to be enough, to assure
them of that which is here foretold and promised, the Lord tells them of a
victory which they must get, saying, he that overcomes shall inherit all
things. Concluding with the words of the Covenant made of old with his people,
I will be his God, and he shall be my son.

Verse. 8. But (as if he had said) what here I promise concerns nothing the
ungodly, of which, for example sake, I will name some, the fearful and
unbelieving and abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers,
and idolaters, and liars, they shall not enjoy any part or portion of this new
heaven and earth, but shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire
and brimstone, the place of the devil, the beast and false prophet, chap. 19.
20. and 20. 10. which is the second death, separation from God for ever.

Verse. 9. Now that it might appear, that no such filthy persons can come into
this heavenly City, (as is noted also in verse. 27. of this chapter) and to
show the Lords servants more at large what this new Jerusalem is, before
mentioned, for whose sake he would make all things new, here is a most full
and perfect description given thereof, which John is made to behold, the same
being showed him by one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vials full of
the last plagues, the same that showed him the damnation of the great whore,
chapt. 17. 1. which is (as I take it) the discouerer of the one, and of the
other; because these Angels and instruments of God were the means of the
destruction of the one, and the furtherers of the Churches happiness and glory
here spoken of.

Verse. 10. John to see the whore, was carried in the spirit into the
wilderness, chap. 17. 3. for it was necessary to be set apart from the whorish
painting of that harlot, and with a spiritual understanding to be
enlightened, that he might truly discern her to be the whore, though beloved
of men, yet hated and condemned of God: but here John is carried away in the
spirit to a great and high mountain: (an allusion to Ezech. 40. 2.) for the
City is on high; therefore must John be on high to see it; as Moses was upon
Pisgah, to behold the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 34. 1. This City for compass is
great, many shall enter into it, verse. 24. For quality, holy, no unclean
thing shall come into it, verse. 27. Jerusalem it is called; for that, God, as
there once, so now here, will dwell in it for ever, Ezech. 48. 35. and it
descended out of heaven from God, as in verse. 2.

Verse. 11. Having the glory of God: that is, such majesty, beauty, and
excellent brightness, as God himself did put upon her; whereupon it is said,
And her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a Jasper stone:
such a one, as with which God himself is set out, cap. 4. 3. clear as
Crystal, without any dimnesse at all; for Gods glory did lighten it, verse. 23.

Verse. 12. And had a wall great and high: freed from peril of adversaries, and
now safe on every side: and had 12. gates; that is, passage into the same
every way; an allusion to Ezech. 48. 30. And at the gates twelve Angels, as
Porters to let in, not now to keep men out, as the Angel with the shaking
sword, Genes. 3. And they had names, (both for assurance and direction) written
thereon, what these be is expounded, even the names of the 12. tribes of the
children of Israel.

Verse. 13. The placing of the gates, three to every quarter, of which also
Ezechiel speaks, though not in the same order, chap. 48. 31. 34. The mystery
may be, in bringing these faithful Israelites to God.

Verse. 14. And the wall of the City had 12. foundations. As the wall had
twelve gates, and the names of the twelve tribes written upon them: so had it
twelve foundations, and in them the names of the Lambs twelve Apostles; Peter's
supremacy here is quite out of date. The Romish Synagogue lays Peter for the
foundation, or Peter's person, (for that he was at Rome, as they say, but can
not certainly prove it), rather then his true preaching, which they hate and
abhor. The Pope loves not Paul's doctrine, but he loves to be wealding his
sword; therefore has neither he, nor his, any part or portion in this new and
holy City.

Verse. 15. And he that talked with me, had a golden reed to measure the City,
and the gates thereof, and the walls thereof: An allusion to Ezech. 40. 3. 5.
The Temple was only measured before, cap. 11. 1. but here the City, gates and
walls, every thing must come exactly under rule and line now; a golden reed
shall mete out every thing to a fit and most certain proportion. Of this reed
see chap. 11. 1. which is here golden, a reed most fit to measure such a City
with.

Verse. 16. And the City lies four square: because it is most firm and stable
without any tottering and moveable state, and because it looks every way to
the four corners of the earth; by the gates to receive in unto it from all
parts of the earth. And the length is as large as the breadth: As this has
compass and is spread abroad, so has it like length and full continuance
without alteration. And he, that is, the Angel, verse. 9. 15. measured the
City with a reed: as he had a reed for the purpose, so he applies it to the
work, and finds it by true measure to he 12000. furlongs, eight furlongs
being a mile, it is 1500. miles. Now the length and the breadth, and the
height being equal, it makes this to be wonderful incredible; but all is to
set out unto us, how abundantly capable this City is to entertain the
innumerable multitude, which shall come unto it.

Verse. 17. And he measured the wall thereof, 144. cubits: which is twelve
times twelve, of which number it wholly consists, according to the 12.
foundations of the twelve Apostles, verse. 14. This measure is of the walls
breadth for the height; and length must be judged by the height and length
of the City, else it could not compass the City, nor be high enough for so
high a City; and necessity requires that there be an answerable thickness to
so long and high a wall, that it may be strong and defensible for the City;
nothing able to shake it or pierce it through. The length and spaciousness of
the City is for capablenesse of in-commers, the height is for the manifold and
goodly mansions, the thickness of the wall compassing round the same with
answerable height, gives us the invincible strength of the City, and the
security of the inhabitants. John having told us of the measuring of the wall,
he in the last place shows, unto us, what kind of measuring here is meant,
the measure of a man; that is, (says he) of an Angel, that is, so a man's
measure, as it is also the Angels measure.

Verse. 18. After the form and measure, here we are showed the matter of which
the wall, City, foundation, and gates were made of, yea and what the very
street of the City was paued with, verse. 19. 20. 21. all to point out to us the
unspeakable glory of this heavenly City, as Esaias likewise does to comfort the
afflicted, cap. 54. 11. 12.

Verse. 22. And I saw no Temple therein; no secret or hidden number, (as in
chap. 11. 1.) no separated place, as in old Jerusalem to beautify and to make
glorious this City. For now the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple
of it. To whom all have free access, and who does make his Saints in this
heavenly Jerusalem glorious, as the Temple did before time Jerusalem.

Verse. 23. And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine
in it. Words of allusion unto Esa. ca. 60. 19. 20. and borrowed from thence.
Now the Prophet meant not in comforting the Church then, that they should have
no more light of Sun and Moon: for living in the world, they so should have
lived in perpetual darkness, and not have enjoyed the common blessings of
this life; from which meaning the Prophet was far, seeing the Lord created
Sun and Moon for man's use, which therefore he would not deprive his own
people of. But the light of the Sun and Moon is put for earthly and fading
comforts of this life, as the rest of the words of the Prophet in the same
verses show; for instead of the light of Sun and Moon, which is not ever, he
opposes the Lord the everlasting light, and so concludes, that the days of
mourning shall be ended. Because this their comfort by the Lord, shall not be
like the light of the Sun and Moon, which either passes away, or is often
darkened: Therefore here by the not needing the light of Sun and Moon, (the
glory of God and the Lamb being the light of it) is meant, that such solace
and joy, such gladness of heart and heavenly comfort this City takes in the
Lord, and in his glorious presence, as all earthly comfort, though it were as
the light of the Sun by day, and as the light of the Moon by night, should
be as superfluous and needless and of no respect in comparison of it.

Verse. 24. And the nations of them that are saved, shall walk in the light of
it, and the Kings of the earth: that is, even such as before were bewitched
with the whore of Babylon, chap. 17. 2. and some (perhaps) of those that
bewailed her overthrow, cap. 18. 9. do bring their glory and honor to it, of
this speaks Esa. 60. 3.

Verse. 25. And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: and the reason
is given, for there shall be no night there: the like saying is in Esa. chap.
60. 11.

Verse. 26. And they (that is, as I take it, the Kings, verse. 24.) shall bring
the glory and honor of the nations unto it.

Verse. 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles,
etc. Here is the pure and undefiled state of this new Jerusalem, which is
therefore called holy, verse. 2. of the inhabitants here of speaks also Esa.
cap. 60. 21. Joel 3. 17. Zach. 14. 21. Esa. 52. 1.

Notes upon chap. 22.
Verse. 1. And he, that is, the Angel, chap. 21. 9. 10. showed me: as before
the excellent beauty of the City, so now the abundance of the means of life
in the same, by which the inhabitants live therein plentifully. A pure river of
water of life. Water is the spirit and heavenly graces thereof, chap. 21. 6.
Ioh. 7. 38. 39. Of life, for that it makes such as drink thereof to live for
ever, Ioh. 4. 14. Ezech. 47. 9. River, for the plenty and continuance hereof.
Pure, for the sanctity thereof in it self, and making others pure also. Clear
as Crystal: the purity is without any mixture of uncleanness. Of these waters
speak the Prophets, Ezech. 47. 1. 8. Joel 3. 18. and Zach. 14. 8. Psalm. 45. 4.
proceeding out of the throne, (that is, the head of the river) of God and of
the Lamb: for the Lamb is in the midst of the throne, chapt. 5. 6. the
waters flow out from the Temple and Altar, Ezech. 47. 1. but here being no
Temple, chap. 21. 22. and so no Altar, but God and the Lamb in the room
thereof; therefore this water comes from his throne, of which mention is
made, as in many places of this prophecy, so in cap. 4. where it is set in
heaven, verse. 2. but there proceeded out of it, lightenings, thunders, and
voices, verse. 5. but here only water of life.

Verse. 2. And in the midst of the street of it: that is, of the City which
is of pure gold, chap. 21. 21. and of either side of the river was there the
tree of life: an allusion unto Paradise, Genesis 2. 9. of which also in chap. 2.
7. of this prophecy. So it was in the open place for every one to come to, as
a tree in the midst of the street, in which all the Citizens may walk, and so
have freedom to eat of the fruit. And it is ever green and fruitful, being
planted so in the street, as also the river passed on both sides of it. Which
bare twelve manner of fruits: The number of twelve the spirit keeps
constantly, in this and the former Chapter; but here because of the faithful,
comprehended under the twelve tribes, chap. 21. 12. whom it shall be
sufficient to feed with fullness, and yet without lothing, as bringing forth
variety, twelve kinds of fruits, and that every month, so as here should be
no want at any time, Ezech. 47. 12: and the leaves of the tree were for the
healing of the nations, Ezech. 47. 12. The fruit was for life, and here are
leaves for health, so as this tree of life makes them not only to live, but
to live healthfully.

Verse. 3. And there shall be no more curse: An allusion to Zach. 14. 11. Men
(says he) shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction; and
the reason is given, because God and the Lamb shall continue in it, and his
servants shall serve him; the curse is for transgressors, and not for the
obedient.

Verse. 4. And they shall see his face: They shall have comfortable and familiar
knowledge of him; for he shall challenge them to himself, and they shall be
sufficiently known to be his people; having his name in their foreheads, as
those in chap. 14. 1.

Verse. 5. And there shall be no night there: No darkness of adversity, or
discomfort, that they should either need lesser or greater earthly means of
comfort; either devised of themselves, as the light of a candle; or otherwise
affoorded them, as the Suns light: for that the Lord himself gives them
light, as is noted before (chap. 21. 23). And they shall reign for ever and
ever: Unspeakable is the happiness of the Saints in this new Jerusalem, which
here is made up to the full, that it shall be without end. Hitherto is the
description of the most graceful and glorious estate of the Church of Christ,
which may ravish the hearts of all that read it, to say with the Lords people,
verse 20, Come Lord Jesus.

Now concerning this so holy a City and blesfull state of the Church, I find
two opinions: the one, that here is set out the Church triumphant in heaven,
after the resurrection at the last day: the other, that here so is to be
understood the Church triumphant, as yet nevertheless withal, is foreshewed
such a most happy condition, as in some sort to befall the Church of Christ
here on earth, after the happy conversion of the Jews; whose embracing of the
Gospel, shall be as life and riches to the Christian world, Romans 11. 12. 15;
and in comparison of which time we are yet, but as in a kind of liuelesse
state and poor condition. The reasons for the opinion fetched from the text
are these: I. Because this City is said to come down from God, cap. 21. verse.
2; and not to ascend up, or to be taken up unto God, as the Church triumphant,
at the last day shall be, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Christ will come to take the Church
up to himself, Ioh. 14. 3. it shall not come down after the last judgment to
remain here. II. Because she is said to be prepared as a Bride adorned for
her husband, verse. 2. Now the Church triumphant of all the elect gathered
together, is not a Bride prepared, but a wife in marriage fully accomplished.
III. Because it is called a Tabernacle, a removing state, and God also said to
be with men, and to dwell, as in a Tabernacle, with them. Concerning the Church
triumphant, the manner of speaking is to say, that it is with God. IV. Because
the holy Ghost so strongly confirms this renouatio^ of al things, auouching
it again and again, verse. 1. 5, commanding to write it, and affirming the
words to be faithful and true: which needed not in so general approved and
believed truth, touching the state of the Church triumphant. V. Because John is
made to ascend high up, to see this new City below him descending out of heaven
from God. VI. Because it is said to be measured, and that with the measure of
a man, ver. 16. 17; which shows it to be the Church militant, which is only
measurable, and to be measured, chap. 11. 1. Zach. 1. 16, but not the
triumphant. VII. Because here is said, that nations shall walk in the light of
it; and Kings of the earth bring their glory and honor unto it, verse. 24,
yea, the glory and honor of the Nations to it, verse. 26. But can any bring
earthly glory and honor (for of such glory and honor he speaks) unto
heaven above, to beautify it withal? VIII. This opinion seems not
altogether unreasonable, albeit some things spoken after the letter, carry our
thoughts to a state of full perfection, chap. 21. 4. and 22. 3. 4. 5; for that
the like speeches are uttered by the holy Prophets aforetime, to set out the
graceful and peaceable state of the Church, Esai. 65. 17. 18. 19. 25. and 60.
18. 20. and 25. 8. and 60. 21. IX. Because some such like thing is promised to
the Jews, in the books of the Prophets, not yet hitherto, as may seem,
fulfilled; but deferred till the seventh trumpet be blown, when the mystery
of God shall be finished, as has been declared to his servants the Prophets,
chap. 10. 7. By which words it is clear, that all things in the Prophets are
not accomplished, till this book of the Revelation be fulfilled; for the
Prophets formerly have spoken of this mystery to be finished under the seventh
trumpet.

Now that we may not wonder at the new Jerusalem here set forth, look unto
the prophecies of old, and mark what by them the Lord did promise unto the
Jews after their captivity. I. He tells them, they shall be brought back
again to Jerusalem, and to inhabit Judea, Zach. 8. 7. 8. and 10. 8. 9. Esai.
60. 10. 15. and 62. 10: and this shall the Lord do, who will cause
righteousness and praise before all nations, Esai. 61. 11. II. He will pour
upon them the spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall look upon him
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, etc. Zach. 12. 10. 14.
III. He will make them strong to overthrow all their enemies, and they shall
inhabit Jerusalem again, Zach. 12. 6, and build the old wastes; they shall
raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair the waste Cities, and
the desolations of many generations, Esai. 61. 4. and 58. 12. and that by the
help of strangers and their Kings, Esai. 60. 10. IV. Being so built, whereas
it had been forsaken and hated, so as no man went thorough it, he will make it
an eternal excellency, and a joy of many generations, Esai. 60. 15. For
first, violence shall no more be heard in the land, wasting nor destruction
within the borders, but her walls shall be called salvation, and her gates
praise, Esai. 60. 18: the Sun shall be no more her light by day, neither for
brightness shall the Moon give light unto her, etc. Esai. 60. 18. 19. 20.
Secondly, all the people shall be righteous, Esai. 60. 21, and no Canaanite
there, Zach. 14. 21. Thirdly, her officers shall be officers of peace, and her
Exactours, righteousness, Esai. 60. 17. Fourthly, her watchmen shall never be
silent, Esai. 62. 6, neither ever be wanting, Esai. 59. 21: but the false
prophets and unclean spirits shall be cut off, Zach. 13. 2: so as by this
glorious and graceful state she shall be called by a new name, which the mouth
of the Lord shall name, Esai. 62. 2, that is, Hephzi-bah, and the land Beulah,
for the Lord would delight in her and marry her; or Iehouah-there, shall be
the name of that City, Ezech. 48. 35. V. Hereupon they shall be known among
the Gentiles, and people, and all that see their seed and offspring, shall
acknowledge them the seed which the Lord has blessed, Esai. 61. 9, a holy
people, the redeemed of the Lord, sought out and not forsaken, Esai. 62. 12.
VI. The Gentiles and their Kings shall see her righteousness and glory, Esai.
62. 2: whereupon they shall come to her, Esai. 60. 3, and that with earnest
desire and high estimation of her, Zach. 8. 22. 23, and be joined to the Lord,
and become his people also with her, Zach. 2. 11. These Nations and Kings shall
bring to her sons and daughters, Esai. 60. 4. and 49. 22, enrich her mightily
with abundance and precious things, Esai. 60. 6. 17. she shall eat the riches
of the Gentiles, Esai. 61. 6, and suck the milk of the Gentiles, and the
breasts of Kings, Esai. 60, 16, who shall be her nursing fathers, and the
Queens her nursing mothers, Esai. 49. 23, bringing her presents and gifts,
Esai. 60. 6. and 45. 14. They shall fall down and make supplication, Esai. 45.
14: they shall worship with their faces to the earth, and lick the dust of her
feet, Esa. 49. 23. Zach. 14. 16. Strangers shall be her servants, Esai. 61. 5:
yea such as will not serve her, shall be destroyed, Esai. 60. 12. Zach. 14. 17.
She shall be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem
in the hand of her God, Esai. 62. 3. And this her excellency shall never be
changed, her days of mourning shall be ended, Esai. 60. 19. 20, her joy
everlasting, Esai. 61. 7. for ever shall her land be inherited, Esai. 60. 21.
Zach. 14. 11: for to the Lord is she married, Esai. 62. 4, who swears by his
right hand, and the arm of his strength, to give her no more over to her
enemies. Esai. 62. 8. At that day the Lord shall be King over all the earth,
and in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name One, Zach. 14. 9. Thus
we see, what glorious promises are made to that people; which, whether
already fulfilled, or yet to be expected, and in this prophecy here foretold,
I leave to the godly, wise, and learned to judge of, and to determine.
Whatsoever is hereby to be understood, (whether only the Church glorious and
triumphant after the resurrection; or a peaceable and graceful state of the
Church militant, for a time, after her enemies are destroyed, and the ancient
people of God called) the Angel which spoke unto John tells him, that these
sayings are faithful and true, verse. 6. Therefore let us believe, pray, and
expect the accomplishment of the words of this blessed prophecy: The rest of
the words from verse 6 to the end are not difficult, and therefore here I end
this preparatiue. Thou O Lord which testifiest these things, say, Surely I
come quickly, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.

THE ART OF ARITHMETICKE for Papists, to reckon the just worth of their Pope:
OR, The skill of counting the number of the Beast, which is 666 by numerall
letters in several languages, showing his full valuation, and how truly to
price him.
The Papists claim for the Pope. The Protestants grant. The Beasts mark
fitteth him. As all other heretofore, so the now present Pope Paul is in Gods
stead. PaVLo V to VICe-Deo. 666 We ought so to account of him. PaVL'ssVre a
VICeGoD 666 He is, by his seat at Rome, a Roman. (...) -- 666 He stands up
as supreme Lord justly. Adonikam -- 666 He is of the Latin church, establishing
only Latin service. (...) -- 666 He is here on Earth, Gods Vicar general.
GeneraLIs DeI VICarIVs In terrIs -- -- 666 He is a very great Commander, and
yet professes himself a servant of servants. Lo, a serVant of serVants, a
LorDLy Sovereign -- 666 He is a shining light. (...) -- -- -- 666 He is as
far above the Emperor, as the Sun above the Moon. (...) -- -- -- -- 666
He may do what he will, and none may say, why do thou so? FaCIat qVoD VVLt
-- 666 Peter's keys give him authority to dispose of kingdoms. EXtera Dant
CLaVes PetrI -- -- -- 666 He sits as Teacher of the people, in the holy
Chair of Saint Peter. In pIa CatheDra St. I PetrI InstrVens popVLI -- 666 He
cannot err, as Pope, sitting in that seat. Vt Papa neqVIt e CatheDra faLsa
statVere. -- 666 His particular Church is the Italian Church. (...) -- 666 But
Rome, or the Romans Church is the Catholic Church. (...) -- 666 He is the Head
of the only Catholic Church on Earth. CapVt soLIVs ECCLesIae CathoLICae hIs
In terrIs -- 666 He has given to him a triple crown. TrIpLeX Corona DatVr --
666 Therefore we must account him blessed. (...) -- -- 666

Behold now the account you make of the Pope (ye Papists) we do willingly agree
in the reckoning, and hereby find him to be

In his teaching a bad Guide. (...) -- -- 666 Through his pride. In hIs
sVperIorIty the Devils LeIfetenant -- 666 A Tyrant by his laws. DeCreta sVa
SVnt Leges Vere TyrannI -- -- 666

And therefore should every one say to him,

Ito Lege eXeCranDVs -- 666

THE BVILDING OF Babylon: OR, THE PORTRAITVRE OF THE Popedom, and the Church
of Rome in the Beasts number 666.
The Papists praises thereof.
As this number 666 is comely and fair to the eye: So is our Church of Rome,
very beautiful and comely. As this number 666 is outward in all parts the same
and a like, and one figure differing from an other in place only and
valuation: So our Church is at unity in it self, in the whole and every part,
and no difference but in place for order sake, and valuation, after men's
worthiness. As this number 666 arises by an orderly and just proportion, from
6 to 60, and from 60 to 600, to make this whole sum: So the degrees in our
Church, arise in a due proportion one above another, to make up this
Hierarchicall state. As this number 666 is made of six, six, and six, which is
a perfect number; yea it has such perfection in it, (as Fra. Iunius upon Reu.
13. 18, our So is our Church such a state, and so perfect a structure, squared
after the perfect platform of government and discipline in the volume of
adversary says) as no other has the like whatsoever: Decretals; especially
since Boniface the 8 added to the five books the sixth, as the like is not to
be seen. As this number 666 cannot in any figure be altered, but the whole will
thereby be changed; such a coherence is in every part to the whole, and the
whole to the parts: So our Church can admit no alteration in any part, without
a great change in the whole; so firmly and with such an agreement is the whole
with the parts, and these again with it compacted together. As this number 666
is raised upon ten, as ten times 6 make 60, and ten times 60 make 600: So our
Church by the peoples devotion giving a tenth of their labor, and the tithes
due is thus raised, and come to this glory and excellency.

THE PROTESTANTS TRVE AND right insight into this so cunningly framed Synagogue
of Satan.
I. This number of 666 how comely so ever it be, yet is it not numerus
numeratus, but only numerus numerans, as the text shows, Reu. 13. 18, and
therefore is but a mere So this Antichristian state is a mere number,
standing upon fashionable formalitie, Canonical order, places and degrees, but
teaching nothing; a state keeping number in a form and order, without any
thing numbered; and therefore teaches nothing, but forms, orders, and places.
the people in ignorance. II. This number 666 is a number of a man, Revel. 13.
18, and for the Beast; not Gods number, which is another far differing from
this, and opposite to it, Reu. 14. 1. So this Babylonish building is but the
inue^tion of man, for the beastlike Harlot: and therefore what unity soever
there be, it is contrary to God, as the state is to Christ and his Church. III.
This number 666 neither begins with 4, nor attaineth to the fourth place,
which 4 is the square number, Reu. 21. 16, for stable building. So this Romish
Hierarchy was not begun upon stable ground, neither yet has attained to an
immovable certainty; but is a tottering state, and ere long will fall down
flat, Reu. 14. 8. and 18. 2. IV. This number 666 cannot be raised upon 12 by
any means, which is Gods number; upon which he builds his heavenly
Jerusalem, and by which he numbreth his people, Reu. 21. 14, and 7. and 14. So
this Synagogue cannot be raised up by the twelve Apostles doctrine, but by the
six books of the Decretals, men's precepts, inventions and traditions; and
therefore not to be held Gods building, nor they numbered for Gods people. V.
This number 666 is raised only upon ten, and the difference in place and
valuation of the figures is only by it. So this Romans Church, abusing the true
Churches maintenance, to wit, the tenths and tithes, has raised up her self
in such degrees, orders, and places of esteem, which is an Antichristian
practice: for ten is Gods number appointed to maintain his Church, already
raised upon 12, and not for the reareing of it up, that is the abuse of the
maintenance. VI. This number 666 comes but to the third place, when Gods
number comes to the sixth place, 144000; and so is but as the half thereof,
as it is of sixes; six being the half of twelve, the number for Gods
building. So this Church of Rome, whatsoever it pretends, is in the best,
(either of all, or any part thereof) only half Apostolic, half Christian;
agreeing with the true Church in some generals, but being heretical,
idolatrous and Antichristian in particular doctrines, in discipline, and many
practices. VII. This number 666 cannot admit of 12 for the multiplier, but must
alter wholly the number. So this Pseudocatholike Church cannot admit of the
twelve Apostles doctrine, the number for multiplying the true Church; for if it
did, it would be wholly altered from the present state, and the building be
quite changed into a true Catholic Church. VIII. This number 666 has no
figure of universality, for 6 is never used in Scripture for an universal
number, as some other numbers be. So this Counterfeit Christian Church,
howsoever otherwise the Papists do boast, is not the universal Catholic
Church, but a particular Church.

Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding, count the number of the
beast; for it is the number of a man, and his number is, six hundred,
threescore and six. Reu. 13. 18. SALOMONS TEMPLE: OR, THE NEW JERUSALEM, THE
Church of Christ his building framed in the number of 144000.
144000. Christ's Church. This number is all of sealed ones, Revel. 7, such as
be ever with Christ. Revel. 14. So this company a chosen flock sealed up
unto the day of redemption, with and among whom Christ is, Revel. 5. Matthew. 18.
20. This number is raised upon only 12, and admits no other multiplier. So
this spiritual building is built upon the 12 Apostles doctrine, and admits
of no other means to raise it up. This number is not only numerus numerans,
but also numerus numeratus, showing what is numbered, Revel. 14. 1, and is
therefore for use and instruction. So this Temple of the holy Ghost, is not a
number standing only on form, fashion, places and degrees, but is for use and
edification, for teaching and instruction. This number, according to the
places, stands first of ciphers of no valuation, and then of figures of
valuation. So this Church was for a while, as the three ciphers, that is, a
time, times, and half a time, of no esteem as not being; because of the
hidden state thereof, till it became visible from under Antichrist, and then
got esteem with men, as we see at this day. This number begins the figures
in the fourth place with the figure of 4, and in the next So to set out (after
this Church became visible from under the dominion of Antichrist, for of this
place has y^ figure of 4, and in the last place the figure of one. number the
Prophet speaks, Reu. 14. 1.) her stabilitie, for 4 is the square and stable
number in Gods building, Reu. 21. Her universality, for so four is used,
chap. 7. 1. and 4. 6. and lastly her unity, for there is no greater unity,
then all in the last place to be one. This number rises to the sixth place,
but not to the seventh, which God uses to note out perfection. So this Church
of Christ arises to a kind of perfection, but not to a fullness therein, for
that is her place in heaven, when her day of marriage shall be solemnized.

This is the true Church, the Spouse of Christ, which seems outwardly to the
eye of the world and the carnally minded, to be less glorious, and nothing so
fair as the false Church; the honest Matrone and chaste wife is nothing so
outwardly decked, trimmed and painted, as the enticing Strumpet and Whore. This
number 144 gives not that show to man's sight as 666; It is nothing so fair,
nothing so desirable, there is no such outward show of unity, and formalitie
every way: yet for all this, to teach us to judge aright, and that we err
not, and mistake the one for the other, hearken to the unerring voice of Christ
and his Church.

The Church. Look not on me, because I am black: I am black, but comely.
Cant. 1. 5. 6. Christ. Behold, thou art fair (my love) behold, thou art fair,
there is no spot in thee. Cant. 4. 1. 7.

FINIS.
Faults escaped amend thus.
Page 55. line 27. for 7th, read 7: p. 70. in marg. h. cap. 16. r. 17: p. 70,
in marg. i. Ide^ lib. 5. cap. 20. r. The Rhe^. Act. 10. ad versum secundu^: p.
72. lin. 10. him. r. men: p. 72. in marg. cap. 3. r. cap. 7: p. 73. l. 8.
courts. r. court: p. 73. in marg. alleged cap. 3. r. alleged cap. 2: p. 74.
lin. 8. Hen. 3. r. Hen. 4: p. 74. lin. 14. murderers. r. murderer: p. 92. l.
9. own, r. one: p. 103. l. 20. conceal. r. unseal: p. 113. l. 30. godly. r.
goodly: p. 121. lin. 21. chapters. r. chapter: p. 125. l. 15. words. r. works:
p. 152. lin. 20. saying. r. sayings: p. 157. l. 14. consolation. r.
conversation: p. 159. lin. 22. Ezra. 1. 5. and 10. 5. r. Ezech. 1. 5. and 10.
5: page 172. l. 5. an. r. in: p. 190. l. 16. of it, in that. r. of it. In that:
p. 205. l. 31. put out, that is: p. 230. lin. 18.. And. r.; and: p. 246. l. 17.
Devils. r. Devils: p. 246. l. 20. Paulo quinto. r. Paulo Vto: p. 273. l. 17.
for 16. 3. r. 15. 7.

Gentle Reader pardon these Escapes, and amend them I pray thee: other faults
not darkning the sense, or troubling therein the reading, a^ was, is, has, and
such like, for were, are, and have, I pass by.


