MERRY CONCEITED JESTS: Of GEORGE PEELE Gentleman, sometimes a Student in
OXFORD. Wherein is showed the course of his life, how he lived: a man very well
known in the City of LONDON, and elsewhere.

Buy, read, and judge,
The price do not grudge:
It will do thee more pleasure,
Then twice so much treasure.
LONDON, Printed by G. P. for F. Faulkner, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Southwarke, near Saint Margarets Hill. 1627.

The Jests of GEORGE PEELE, with four of his Companions at BRAINFORD.
GEorge, with others of his Associates, being merry together at the Tavern,
having more store of Goyne then usually they did possess, although they were
as regardlesse of their silver, as a garden whore is of her honesty: yet they
intended for a season to become good husbands, if they knew how to be sparing
of that their pockets were the^ furnished withal: Five pounds they had amongst
them, and a plot must be cast how they might be merry with extraordinary
cheer three or four days, and keep their five pounds whole in stock:
George Peele was the man must do it, or none, and generally they coniured him
by their loves, his own credit, and the reputation that went on him, that he
would but in this show his wit: and withal he should have all the furtherance
that in them lay. George as easy as they earnest to be won to such an
exploit, consented, and gathered their money together, and gave it all to
George, who should be their Purse-bearer, and the other four should seem as
servants to George Peele; and the better to color it, they should go change
their cloakes, the one like the other, so near as they could possible: the
which at Belzebubs brother the Brokers, they might quickly do: This was soon
accomplished, and George was fnrnished with his black Satin suit, and a pair
of boots, which were as familiar to his legs, as the pillory to a Bakers or
Colliers neck, and he sufficiently possessed his friends with the whole scope
of his intent, as, gentle Reader, the sequel will show. Instantly they took a
pair of Oars, whose arms were to make a false gallop no further then
Brainford, where their fair was paid them so liberally, that each of them the
next tide to London, purchased two new wastcoates, yet should these good
benefactors come to their usual places of trade, and if they spy a better
fare then their own, that happily the Gentleman has more mind to go
withal, they will not only fall out with him that is of their own sweet
transporters, as they are, but abuse the fare they carry with foul speeches,
as a Pox or the Devil go with you* as their Godfather Caron the Ferry man of
Hell has taught them. I speak not this of all, but of some that are brought
up in the East, some in the West, some in the North, but most part in the
South: but for the rest, they are honest complete men, leaning them to come to
my honest George; who is now merry at the three Pigeons in Braineford with
Sache and Sugar, not any wine wanting, the Musicians playing, my host drinking,
my hostis dancing with the worshipful Justice, for so then he was termed,
and his mansion house in Kent, who came thither of purpose to be merry with his
men: because he could not so conveniently near home, by reason of a shrewish
wife he had: my gentle hostis gave him all the entertainment her house could
afford* for M. Peele had paid royally; for all his ^ne pounds was come to ten
groats. Now, George Peeles wit labors to bring in that five pounds there was
spent, which was soon begotten. Being set at dinner. My Host, quoth George,
how falls the Tide out for London, not till the evening, quoth mine Host, have
you any business Sir? Yes marry, quoth George, I intend not to go home this
two days* Therefore my Host saddle my man a horse for London, if you be so
well furnished, for I must send him for one bag more, quoth George, ten pounds
has seen no Sun this six months. I am ill furnished if I cannot furnish
you with that, quoth my Host, and presently sadled him a good Nag, and away
rides one of Georges men to London, attending the good hour of his Master
Peele in London, in the mean time, George bespeaks great cheer to Supper,
saying, He expected some of his friends from London: Now you must imagine there
was not a penny owing in the house, for he had paid as liberal as Caesar, as
far as Caesar's wealth went. For indeed most of the money was one Caesar's an
honest man yet living in London; but to the Catastrophe. All the day before,
had one of the other men of George Peele been a great soliciter to my Hostis,
she would beg leave of his Master he might go see a maid, a sweet heart of his
so far as Kingstone, and before his Master went to bed, he would return
again: saying, he was sure she might command it at his Masters hands. My
kind Hostis willing to pleasure the young fellow, knowing in her time what
belonged to such matters, went to Master Peel, and moved him in it: which he
angerly refused: but she was so earnest in it, that she swore he should not
deny her, protesting he went but to see an uncle of his some five miles off
Marry I thank you, quoth George, my good Hostis, would you so discredit me, or
has the knave no more wit, then at this time to go, knowing I have no horse
here, and would he base cullian go afoot? Nay, good Sir, quoth mine Hostis, be
not angry, it is not his intent to go afoot: for he shall have my Mare, and I
will assure you Sir, upon my word, he shall be here again, to have you to bed;
well, quoth George, Hostis, I Will take you at your word, let him go, his
negligence shall light upon you. So be it, quoth mine Hostis: so down goes
she* and sends away civil Thomas, for so she called him, to his sweet heart
backed upon her Mare: which Thomas instead of riding to Kingstone, took London
in his way, where meeting with my other horseman, attended the arrival of
George Peele, which was not long after: they are at London, George in his
Chamber at Brainford, accompanied with none but one Anthony Nit a Barber, who
Dined and Supt with him continually, of whom he had borrowed a Lute to pass
away the melancholy afternoon, of which he could play as well as Banks his
horse. The Barber very modestly takes his leave; George obsequiously bids him
to supper, who (God willing) would not fail. George being left alone with his
two supposed men, gave them the mean how to escape, and walking in the Court,
George found fault with the weather, saying, it was rawish and cold: which word
mine Hostis hearing, my kind Hostis fetched her Husbands holiday Gown; which
George thankfully put about him, and withal called for a cup of Sack, after
which he would walk into the Meddowes, and practice upon his Lute. It Is good
for your worship to do so, quoth mine Hostis: which walk George took directly
to Sion, where having the advantage of a pair of Oars at hand, made this
Journey for London, his two Associates behind had the plot in their heads by
Georges instruction for their escape: for they anew he was gone, my Hostis she
was in the Market buying of provision for Supper: mine Host he was at Tables,
and my two masterlesse men desired the maids to excuse them if their Master
came for, quoth they, we will go drink two pots with my Smug Smithes wife at
old Brainford. I warrant you, quoth the Maids. So away went my men to the
Smiths at old Brainford, from thence to London, where they all met, and sold
the Horse and the Mare, the Gown and the Lute, which money was as badly spent,
as it was lewdly got. How my Host and my Hostis looked when they saw the event
of this; go but to the three Pigeons at Brainford, you shall know.

The Jest of George and the Barber.
GEorge was not so merry at London with his Capons and Claret, as poor Anthony
the Barber was sorrowful at Brainford for the (...) of his Lute, and therefore
determined to come to London to seek out George Peele, which by the means of
a kinsman that Anthony Nit had in London, his name was Cuts or Feats, a Fellow
that has good skill in tricks on the Cards, and he was well acquainted with
the place where Georges common abode was: and for kindred sake he directed the
Barber where he should have him, which was at a blind (...) (...) in Sea-^ol^
Lane. There he found George in a green Ierkin, a Spanish platter fashioned
Hat, all alone at a Pecke of Oysters. The Barbers heart danced within him, for
joy he had so happily found him, he gave him the (...) of the day: George not a
little abashed at the sight of the Barber, yet went out to discover it openly,
he that at all times had a quick invention, was not now behind hand to
entertain my Barber, who knew for what his coming was* George sh^^ saluted
him, My honest Barber, quoth George, welcome to London, I partly know your
business, you come for your Lute, do you not? Indeed Sir, quoth the Barber,
for that is my coming. And believe me, quoth George, you shall not lose your
labor, I pray you stand to and eat an Oyster, and I Will go with you presently*
For a Gentleman in the City of great worship, borrowed it of me for the use of
his Daughter, that plays exceeding well, and had a great desire to have the
Lute, but Sir, if you will go along with me to the Gentleman's house, you shall
have your Lute with great satisfaction, for had not you come, I assure you I
had sent to you, for you must understand, that all that was done at Brainford
among us mad Gentlemen, was but a Jest and no otherwise. Sir I think not any
otherwise, quoth the Barber: but I would desire your worship, that as you had
it of me in lone; so in kindness you would help me to it again. Oh God what
else, quoth George, I Will go with thee presently, even as I am, for I came from
hunting this morning; and should I go by to the certain Gentleman above, I
should hardly get away, I thank you Sir, quoth the Barber, so on goes George
with him in this green Ierkin* a wand in his hand very pretty, till he came
almost at the Aldermans House, where making a sudden stay, A fore God, quoth
George, I must crave thy pardon at this instant, for I have bethought my self,
should I go as I am, it would be imagined I had had some of my Lords hounds out
this morning, therefore I Will take my leave of thee, and meet thee where thou will about one of the Clock, nay good Sir, quoth the Barber, go with me now:
for I purpose, God willing, to be at Brainford to night, say thou so, quoth
George: why then I Will tell thee what thou shall do, thou art here a stranger,
and altogether unknown, lend me thy Cloak and thy Hat, and do thou put on my
green Ierken, and I Will go with thee directly along. The Barber loath to leave
him until he had his Lute, yielded to the change. So when they came to the
Gentleman's porch be put on Georges green Ierken, and his Spanish Hat: and he
the Barbers Cloak and his Hat; either of them being thus filted, George knocks
at the door, to whom the Porter bids heartily welcome, for George was well
known, who at that time had all the oversight of the Pageants, he desires the
Porter to bid his friend welcome, for he is a good fellow and a Keeper, Master
Porter, often that at his pleasure can bestow a haunch of Uenison (...) you;
marry that can I, quoth the Barber, I thank you Sir, answered the Porter,
Master Peele my Master is in (...) Hall, pleases it you to walk in, (...) al
my heart, quoth George, in the mean time let my friend bear you company, that
he shall Master Peele, quoth the Porter, and if it please him he shall take a
simple dinner with me. The Barber gives him hearty thanks, no (...) doubting
Master or Peele any way, seeing him known and himself so welcome: fell in
Chat with the Porter, George Peele goes directly to the Alderman, who now is
came into the Court in the eye of the Barber, where George after many
complaints, draws a black paper out of his bosom, and making actio^ to the
Barber, reads to the Alderman as follows, I humbly desire your worship to
stand my friend in a slight matter, yonder-hard (...) that (...) by your
Worships Porter, has (...) me (...), and (...) means but to take your
worships house for shelter, the occasion is but triuiall, only for stealing of
a piece of flesh, my self consorted with three or four gentlemen of good
fashion, that would not willingly have our names come in question. Therefore
this is my (...), that your Worship would let one of your servants let me out
at the Garden door, and I shall think my self much indebted to your Worship*
The kind Gentleman, (...) of George Peeles deceit (...) him (...) the Par^^^,
gave him a brace of Angels, and caused one his servants to let George out at
the Garden door, which was no sooner opened, but George made way for the
Barber seeing him any more, and all the way he went could not choose but laugh
at his knauish conceit: how he had guld the simple Barber, who sat all this
while with the Porter blowing of his nails: to whom come this fellow that let
out George. You whoreson Kesperly Rascal, quoth the fellow, do you come to
arrest any honest Gentleman in my Masters house? Not I so God help me, quoth
the Barber. I pray Sir where is the Gentleman Master Peele that came along with
me? Far enough, quoth the fellow, for your coming near him, he is gone out
at the Garden door. Garden door, quoth the Barber? why have you any more
doors then one? We have sir, and get you hence or I Will set you going goodman
Keeper. Alas, quoth the Barber, sir I am no Keeper, I am quite undone: I am a
Barber dwelling at Brainford, and with weeping tears up and told him how
George had used him. The servant goes in and tells his Master: which when he
heard, he could not but laugh at the first: yet in pity of the poor Barber,
he gave him twenty shillings toward his loss. The Barber sighing took it,
and toward Brainford home he goes, and whereas he came from thence in a new
Cloak and a fair Hat, he went home weeping in an old Hat, and a green
Ierken.

How George Peele became a Physicion.
GEorge on a time being happily furnished both of horse and money, though the
horse he hired, and the money he borrowed: but no matter how he was possessed of
them: and toward Oxford he rides to make merry with his friends and fellow
students: and in his way he took up Wickham, where he soiourned that night:
Being at supper accompanied with his Hostis: among other table-talke, they fell
into discourse of Chirurgerie, of which my Hostis was a simple professor.
Ceorge Peele observing the humor of my she Surgeon, vpheld her in all, the
strange cures she talked of, and prassed her womanly endeavor; telling her, he
loved her so much the better, because it was a thing that he professed, both
Physic and Chyrurgerie: and George had a Dictionary of Physical words, that
it might set a better gloss upon that which he seemingly professed: and told his
good Hostis, at his return he would teach her something that should do her no
hurt: for (quoth he) at this instant I am going about a great Cure as far as
Warwickshire, to a Gentleman of great living, and one that has been in a
Cousumption this half year, and I hope to do him good. O God, (quoth the
Hostis) there is a Gentleman not a quarter of a Mile off, that has been a
long time sick of the same disease: Believe me, Sir, quoth the Hostis, would
it please your Worship e're your departure in the morning, but to visit the
Gentleman, and but spend your opinion of him, and I make no question but the
Gentlewoman will be very thankful to you. I faith (quoth George, happily at
my return I may; but at this time my haste is such that I cannot: and so good
night, mine Hostis. So away went George to bed; and my giddy Hostis, right of
the nature of most women, thought that night as long as ten, till she was
delivered of that burden of news which she had received from my new Doctor:
(for so he termed himself.) Morning being come, at break of the day mine
Hostis trudges to this Gentleman's house, acquainteth his wife what an excellent
man she had at her house: protesting he was the best seen in Physic, and had
done the most strangest cures that ever she heard of: saying, that if she
would but send for him, no question he would do him good. The Gentlewoman glad
to hear of any thing that might procure the health of her Husband, presently
sent one of her men, to desire the Doctor to come and visit her Husband: Which
message when George heard, he wondered: for he had no more skill in Physic
then in Music, and they were as distant both from him, as heaven from hell.
But, to conclude, George set a bold face on it, and away went he to the sick
Gentleman; where when he came, after some complement to the Gentlewoman, he
was brought to the Chamber where the ancient Gentleman say wonderful sick:
for all Physic had given him over: George begins to feel his Pulses and
his temples, saying, he was very far spent: yet, quoth he, under GOD I will
do him some good, if Nature be not quite extinct. Whereupon he demanded
whether they had ever a Garden? That I have, quoth the Gentlewoman. I pray you
direct me thither, quoth George. Where when he came, he cut a handful of
every Flower, Herb and Blossom, or whatsoever else in the Garden; and brought
them in in the lapis of his Cloak, boiled them in Ale; strained them, boiled
them again; and when he had all the juice out of them, of which he made some
pottle of drink, he caused the sick Gentleman to drink off a maudlin Cup
full, and willed his wife to give him of that same at morning, noone, and
night* protesting, if any thing in this world did him good, it must be that:
giving great charge to the Gentlewoman to keep him wonderful warm: and at my
return, quoth George, some ten days hence, I will return and see how he
fares: For, quoth he, by that time something will be done; and so I will take
my leave. Not so, quoth the Gentlewoman, your Worship must needs stay and
take a simple dinner with me to day. Indeed, quoth George, I cannot now stay;
my haste is such, I must presently to Horse. You may suppose George was in
haste until he was out of the Gentleman's house: for he knew not whether he
had poisoned the Gentleman or not, which made him so eager to be gone out of
the Gentleman's house. The Gentlewomon seeing she could by no means stay him,
gave him two brace of Angels, which never shined long in his purse, and desired
him at his return to know her house: which George promised, and with seeming
niceness took the gold, and toward Oxford went he, forty, shillings heavier
then he was, where he bravely domineered while his Physical money lasted. But
to see the strangeness of this: Whether it was the virtue of some herb which
he gathered, or the conceit the Gentleman had of George Peele, but it so
pleased GOD the Gentleman recovered, and in eight days walked abroad; and that
fortunate potion which George made at random, did him more good then many
pounds that he had spent in half a year before in Physic. George his money
being spent, he made his return toward London; and when he came within a mile
of the Gentleman's house, he enquired of a Country fellow how such a Gentleman
did. The fellow told him. God be praised, his good Landlord was well recovered
by a virtuous Gentleman that came this way by chance. Art thou sure of it,
quoth George? Yes, believe me, quoth the fellow, I saw him in the Fields but
this morning. This was no simple news to George. He presently set spurs to
his Horse, and whereas he thought to shun the Town, he went directly to
his Inn: at whose arrival, the Hostis clapped her hands, the Oastler laughed,
the Tapster leapt, the Chamberlain ran to the Gentleman's house, and told him
the Doctor was come. How joyful the Gentleman was, let them imagine that have
any after-healths. George Peele was sent for, and after a Million of thanks
from the Gentleman and his friends, George Peele had 20. pounds delivered him:
which money, how long it was a spending, let the Tauernes in London witness.

How George helped his friend to a Supper.
GEorge was invited one night by certain of his friends to supper, at the
White Horse in Friday street; and in the evening as he was going, he met with
an old friend of his, who was so ill at the stomach, hearing George tell him
of the good cheer he went to, himself being unprovided both of meat and
money, that he swore he had rather have gone a mile about, then have met him at
that instant. And believe me, quoth George, I am heartily sorry that I cannot
take thee along with me, my self being but an invited guest; besides, thou
art out of clothes, unfitting for such a company: Mary this I Will do, if thou will follow my advice, I Will help thee to thy supper. Any way, quoth he to
George, do thou but devise the means, and I Will execute it. George presently
told him what he should do; so they parted. George well entertained, with
extraordinary welcome, and seated at the upper end of the Table, Supper being
brought up, H. M. watched his time below; and when he saw that the meat was
carried up, up he follows, (as George had directed him,) who when George saw,
You whoreson Rascal, (quoth George) What make you here? Sir, quoth he, I am
come from the party you wot of. You Rogue, quoth George, have I not forewarned
you of this? I pray you, Sir, quoth he, hear my Errand. Do you prate, you
Slave, quoth George? and with that, took a Rabbet out of the Dish, and threw
it at him. Quoth he, you use me very hardly. You Dunghill, quoth George, do
you outface me? and with that, took the other Rabbet, and threw it at his
head; after that a Loaf; then drawing his Dagger, making an offer to throw it,
the Gentleman staid him: mean while H. M. got the Loaf and the two Rabbets,
and away he went: which when George saw he was gone, after a little fretting,
he sat quietly. So by that honest shift he helped his friend to his supper,
and was never suspected for it of the company.

How George Peele was shaven, and of the revenge he took.
THere was a Gentleman that dwelt in the West Country, and had staid here in
London a Tea^me longer then he intended, by reason of a Book that George had
to translate out of Greek into English: and when he wanted money, George had
it of the Gentleman: but the more he supplied him of Coin, the further off he
was from his Book, and could get no end of it, neither by fair means,
entreatie, or double payment: for George was of the Poetical disposition,
never to write so long as his money lasted; some quarter of the Book being
done, and lying in his hands at random. The Gentleman had plotted a means to
take such an order with George next time he came, that he would have his Book
finished. It was not long before he had his company; his arrival was for more
money: the Gentleman bids him welcome; causes him to stay dinner, where
falling into discourse about his Book, found that it was as near ended as he
left it two months ago. The Gentleman, meaning to be gui'd no longer, caused
two of his men to bind George hand and foot in a Chair: a folly it was for
him to ask what they meant by it: the Gentleman sent for a Barber, and George
had a beard of an indifferent size, and well grown: he made the Barber shave
him beard and head, left him as bare of hair, as he was of money: the Barber
he was well contented for his pains, who left George like an old woman in man's
apparel; and his voice became it well, for it was more woman then man. George,
quoth the Gentleman, I have always used you like a friend, my purse has been
open to you: that you have of mine to translate, you know it is a thing I
highly esteem; therefore I have used you in this fashion, that I might have an
end of my Book, which shall be as much for your profit as my pleasure. So
forthwith he commanded his men to unbind him, and putting his hand into his
pocket, gave him two brace of Angels: quoth he, Master Peele, drink this, and
by that time you have finished my book, your beard will be grown, until
which time, I know you will be ashamed to walk abroad. George patiently took
the gold, said little, and when it was dark night, took his leave of the
Gentleman, and went directly home: who when his wife saw, I omit the wonder
she made, but imagine those that shall behold their husbands in such a case.
To bed went George, and ere morning he had plotted sufficiently how to cry
quid pro quo with his politic Gentleman.

The Jest of George Peele at Bristow.
GEorge was at Bristow, and there staying somewhat longer then his coin would
last him, his Palfrey that should be his Carrier to London, his head was
grown so big, that he could not get him out of the stable: it so fortuned at
that instant, certain Players came to the Town, and lay at that Inn where
George Peele was: to whom George was well known, being in that time an
excellent Poet, and had acquaintance of most of the best Players in England:
from the triuiall sort he was but so so; of which these were, only knew George
by name, no otherwise. There was not past three of the company come with the
Carriage, the rest were behind, by reason of a long Journey they had; so that
night they could not enact; which George hearing, had presently a Stratageme in
his head to get his Horse free out of the stable, and Money in his purse to
bear his charges up to London: And thus it was: He goes directly to the
Mayor, tells him he was a Scholar and a Gentleman, and that he had a certain
History of the Knight of the Rodes; and withal, how Bristow was first
founded, and by whom, and a brief of all those that before him had succeeded
in Office in that worshipful City: desiring the Mayor, that he, with his
presence, and the rest of his Brethren, would grace his labors* The Mayor
agreed to it, gave him leave, and withal appointed him a place: but for
himself, he could not be there, being in the evening: but bade him make the
best benefit he could of the City; and very liberally gave him an Angel,
which George thankfully receives, and about his business he goes, got his
Stage made, his History cried, and hired the Players Apparel, to flourish out
his Show, promising to pay them liberally; and withal desired them they would
favor him so much, as to gather him his money at the door: (for he thought
it his best course to employ them, lest they should spy out his knauerie; for
they have perilous heads.) They willingly yield to do him any kindness that
lies in them; in brief, carry their apparel to the Hall, place themselves at
the door, where George in the mean time, with the ten shillings he had of
the Mayor, delivered his Horse out of Purgatory, and carries him to the Towns
end, and there places him, to be ready at his coming. By this time the
Audience were come, and some forty shillings gathered, which money George put
in his purse, and putting on one of the Players Silk Robes, after the Trumpet
had sounded thrice, out he comes, makes low obeisance, goes forward with his
Prologue, which was thus: A trifling Toy, a Jest of no account, pardie.
The Knight, perhaps, you think for to be I:
Think on so still: for why, you know that thought is free,
Sit still a while, I Will send the Actors to ye.


Which being said, after some fire-workes that he had made of purpose, threw
out among them, and down stayres goes he, gets to his Horse, and so with
forty shillings to London; leaves the Players to answer it; who when the Jest
was known, their innocence excused them, being as well gulled as the Mayor
and the Audience.

How George gulled a Puncke, otherwise called a Croshabell.
Coming to London, he fell in company with a Cockatrice; which pleased his
eye so well, that George fell aboording of her, and proffered her the wine:
which my Croshabell willingly accepted: to the Tavern they go, where after a
little idle talk, George fell to the question about the thing you wot of. My
she-Hobby was very dainty, which made George arre more eager; and my letcherous
animal proffered largely to obtain his purpose. To conclude, nothing she
would grant unto, except ready coin, which was forty shillings, not a farthing
less: if so he would, next night she would appoint him where he should meet
her. George saw how the game went, that she was more for lucre than for love,
thus cunningly answered her: Gentlewoman, howsoever you speak, I do not
think your heart agrees with your tongue; the money you demand is but to try
me: and indeed but a trifle to me: but because it shall not be said I bought
that Iemme of you I prize so highly, I Will give you a token to morrow, that shall
be more worth then your demand, if so you please to accept it. Sir, quoth she,
it contenteth me well: and so, if please you, at this time we will part, and to
morrow in the evening meet you where you shall appoint. The place was
determined, and they kissed and parted, she home, George into Saint Thomas
Apostles, to a friend of his, of whom he knew he could take up a Petticoat of
trust: (the first letter of his name begins with G.) A Petticoat he had of
him, at the price of five shillings; which money is owing till this day. The
next night being come, they met at the place appointed, which was a Tavern;
there they were to suppe: that ended, George was to go home with her, to end
his Yeomans plee in her common case. But Master Peele had another drift in his
mazzard: for he did so ply her with wine, that in a small time she spunne such
a thread, that she reeled homewards, and George he was feign to be her
supporter: when to her house she came, with nothing so much painting in the
inside, as her face had on the outside; with much ado her Maid had her to
bed, who was no sooner laid, but she fell fast asleep: which when George
perceived, he sent the Maid for Milk, and a quart of Sack to make a Posset;
where before her return, George made so bold as to take up his own new
Petticoate, a fair Gown of hers, two gold Kings that lay in the window, and
away he went: the Gown and the gold Kings he made a chaffer of; the
Petticoate he gave to his honest Wife, one of the best deeds he ever did to
her. How the Croshabell looked when she awaked and saw this, I was never there
to know.

How the Gentleman was gulled for shauing of George.
GEorge had a Daughter of the age of ten years, a Girl of a pretty form,
but of an excellent wit: all part of her was Father, save her middle: and she
had George so tutored all night, that although himself was the Author of it,
yet had he been transformed into his Daughters shape, he could not have done
it with more conceit. George at that time dwelt at the Banke-side, from whence
comes this she-sinnow, early in the morning, with her hair dichenalled,
wringing her hands, and making such pitiful moan with shrikes and tears,
and beating of her breast, that made the people in a maze: some stood wondering
at the Child; others plucked her, to know the occasion; but none could stay
her by any means, but on she kept her journey, crying, O, her Father, her
good Father, her dear Father, over the Bridge, through Cheap Side, and so to
the Old Bailey, where the Gentleman soiourned, there sitting her self down, a
hundred people gaping upon her, there she begins to cry out, Woe to that place,
that her Father ever saw it: she was a castaway, her Mother was undone: till
with the noise, one of the Gentleman's men coming down, looked on her, and
knew her to be George Peeles Daughter: he presently runs up, and tells his
Master, who commanded his man to bring her up. The Gentleman was in a cold
sweat, fearing that George had for the wrong that he did him the day before,
some way undone himself. When the Girl came up, he demanded the cause why
she so lamented, and called upon her Father? George his flesh and blood, after
a million of sighs, cried out upon him, he had made her Father, her good
Father, drown himself. Which words once uttered, she fell into a counterfeit
swoone, whom the Gentleman soon recovered. This news went to his heart, and
he being a man of a very mild condition, cheered up the Girl, made his men to
go buy her new clothes from top to toe, said he would be a Father to her, gave
her five pounds, bid her go home and carry it to her mother, and in the eueneng
he would visit her. At this, by little and little she began to be quiet;
desiring him to come and see her Mother. He tells her, he will not fail, bids
her go home quietly. So down stayres goes she pearily, and the wondering
people that staid at door, to hear the manner of her grief, had of her
naught but knauish answers, and home went she directly. The Gentleman was so
crossed in mind, and disturbed in thought at this unhappy accident, that his
soul could not be in quiet, till he had been with this woeful widow, as he
thought, and presently went to Black Friars, took a pair of Oars, and went
directly to George Peeles house, where he found his Wife plucking of Larkes,
my crying Crocadile turning of the spit, and George pinned up in a blanket, at
his translation. The Gentleman, more glad at the unlooked for life of George,
then the loss of his money, took part of the good cheer George had to
dinner, wondered at the cunning of the Wench, and within some few days after
had an end of his Book.

How George read a Play-booke to a Gentleman.
THere was a Gentleman, whom GOD had endued with good living to maintain his
small wit: he was not a Fool absolute, although in this world he had good
fortune: and he was in a manner an Ingle to George, one that took great
delight to have the first hearing of any work that George had done, himself
being a writer, and had a Poetical invention of his own, which when he had
with great labor finished, their fatal end was for privy purposes. This
selfe-conceited brocke had George invited to half a score sheets of paper,
whose Christianly pen had writ Finis to the famous Play of the Turkish Mahamet,
and Hyrin the fair Greek, in Italian called a Curtezan; in Spain, a
Margerite; in French, un Curtain; in England, among the barbarous, a Whore; but
among the Gentle, their usual associates, a Puncke: but now the word refined
being latest, and the authority brought from a Climate as yet unconquered, the
fruitful County of Kent, they call them Croshabell, which is a word but
lately used, and fitting with their trade, being of a lovely and courteous
condition. Leaving them: This Fantastic, whose brain was made of naught but
Cork and Sponge, came to the cold lodging of Monsieur Peele, in his black
Satin Suit, his Gown furred with Cony, in his Slippers: being in the evening,
he thought to hear Georges book, and so to return to his Inn; (this not of
the wisest, being of Saint Barnards.) George bids him welcome, told him he
would gladly have his opinion in his book. He willingly condiscended, and
George begins to read, and between every Scene he would make pauses, and
demand his opinion, how he liked the carriage of it. Quoth he, wondrous well,
the conueyance. O, but (quoth George) the end is far better: (for he meant
another conueyance e're they two departed.) George was very tedious in reading,
and the night grew old: I protest, quoth the Gentleman, I have staide ouerlong,
I fear me I shall hardly get into mine Inn. If you fear that, quoth George,
we will have a clean pair of sheets, and you shall take a simple lodging
here. This house-gull willingly embraced it, and to bed they go, where George
in the midst of the night spying his time, put on this Dormouse his clothes,
desired God to keep him in good rest, honestly takes leave of him and the
House, to whom he was indebted four Nobles. When this Drome awaked, and found
himself so left, he had not the wit to be angry, but swore scuruily at the
misfortune, and said, I thought he would not have used me so. And although it
so pleased the Fates he had another suit to put on, yet he could not get
thence, till he had paid the money George ought to the house, which for his
credit he did: and when he came to his lodging, in anger he made a Poem of it:
Peele is no Poet, but a Gull and Clown,
To take away my clothes and Gown:
I vow by love, if I can see him wear it,
I Will give him a glyg, and patiently bear it.


How George Peele served half a score Citizens.
GEorge once had invited half a score of his friends to a great Supper, where
they were passing merry, no cheer wanting, wine enough, music playing: the
night growing on, and being upon departure, they call for a reckoning. George
swears there is not a penny for them to pay. They, being men of good fashion,
by no means will yield unto it, but every man throws down his money, some
ten shillings, some five, some more: protesting something they will pay.
Well, quoth George, taking up all the money; seeing you will be so wilful, you
shall see what shall follow: he commands the music to play, and while they
were skipping and dancing, George gets his cloak, sends up two Pottles of
Hypocrist, and leaves them and the reckoning to pay. They wondering at the stay
of George, meant to be gone; but they were staide by the way, and before they
went, forced to pay the reckoning anew. This showed a mind in him, he cared not
whom he deceived, so he profited himself for the present.

A Jest of George, riding to Oxford.
THere was some half doozen of Citizens, that had oftentimes been solliciters
to George, he being a Master of Art at the University of Oxford, that he
would ride with them to the Commencement, it being at Midsomer. George, willing
to pleasure the Gentlemen his friends, rode along with them. When they had rode
the better part of the way, they baited at a Uillage called Stoken, five miles
from Wickham good cheer was bespoken for dinner; and frolic was the company,
all but George, who could not be in that pleasant vain that did ordinarily
possess him, by reason he was without money: but he had not fetched forty
turns about the Chamber, before his noddle had entertained a conceit how to
money himself with credit, and yet gleane it from some one of the company.
There was among them one excellent Ass, a fellow that did nothing but friske
up and down the Chamber, that his money might be heard chide in his pocket:
this fellow had George observed, and secretly conuay'd his gilt Rapier and
Dagger into another Chamber, and there closely hid it: that done, he called up
the Tapster, and upon his cloak borrowes 5 shillings for an hour or so, till
his man came, (as he could fashion it well enough:) so much money he had, and
then who more merry then George? Meat was brought up, they set themselves to
dinner, all full of mirth, especially my little fool, who drank not of the
conclusion of their feast: dinner ended, much prattle past, every man begins to
buckle to his furniture: among whom this Hichcock missed his Rapier: at which
all the company were in a maze; he besides his wits; for he had borrowed it of
a specaill friend of his, and swore he had rather spend twenty Nobles. This is
strange, quoth George, it should be gone in this fashion, none being here but
our selves and the fellows of the house: who were examined, but no Rapier
could be heard of: all the company much grieved; but George in a pitiful
chafe, swore it should cost him forty shillings, but he would know what was
become of it, if Art could do it: and with that he caused the Oastler to
saddle his Nag, for George would ride to a Scholar, a friend of his, that had
skill in such matters. O, good M. Peele, quoth the fellow, want no money, here
is forty shillings, see what you can do, and, if you please, I Will ride along
with you. Not so, quoth George, taking his forty shillings, I Will ride alone,
and be you as merry as you can till my return. So George left them, and rode
directly to Oxford, there he acquaints a friend of his with all the
circumstance, who presently took Horse, and rode along with him to laugh at
the Jest. When they came back, George tells them he had brought one of the
rarest men in England: whom they with much complement bid welcome. He, after a
distracted countenance, and strange words, takes this Bulfinch by the wrist,
and carried him into the privy, and there willed him to put in his head, but
while he had written his name and told forty: which he willingly did: that
done, the Scholar asked him what he saw? By my faith Sir, I smelt a villainous
sent, but I saw nothing. Then I have, quoth he; and with that directed him
where his Rapeir was: saying, It is just North-East, inclozed in wood, near
the earth: for which they all made diligent search, till George, who hid it
under a settle, found it, to the comfort of the fellow, the joy of the company,
and the eternal credit of his friend, who was entertained with Wine and Sugar;
and George redeemed his Cloak, rode merrily to Oxford, having coin in his
pocket, where this L^ach spares not for any expense, for the good fortune he
had in the happy finding of his Rapier.

How George served his Hostis.
GEorge lying at an old Widows house, and had gone so far on the Score,
that his credit would stretch no further: for she had made a vow, not to depart
with drink or victuals without ready money: Which George seeing the fury of
his froward Hostis, in grief kept his Chamber; called to his Hostis, and told
her, she should understand that he was not without money, how poorly soever he
appeared to her, and that my ^let shall testify: in the mean time, good
Hostis, quoth he, send for such a friend of mine. She did: so his friend came:
to whom George imparted his mind: the effect whereof was this, to pawn his
Cloak, Hose and Doublet, unknown to his Hostis: for, quoth George, this seven
nights do I intend to keep my bed. (Truly he spoke: for his intent was, the
bed should not keep him any longer.) Away goes he to pawn his apparel;
George bespeaks good cheer to supper, which was no shamblebutcher stuff, but
according to the place: for, his Chamber being remote from the house, at the
end of the Garden, his apparel being gone, it appeared to him as the Counter,
therefore to comfort himself, he dealt in Poultrie. His friend brought the
money, supped with him: his Hostis he very liberally paid, but cauelled with
her at her unkindness: vowing that while he lay there, none should attend him
but his friend. The Hostis replied, A Gods name, she was well contented with
it: so was George too: for none knew better then himself what he intended, but
in brief, thus he used his kind Hostis. After his Apparel and Money was
gone, he made bold with the Featherbed he lay on, which his friend slily
conuey'd away, having as villanons a Wolf in his belly as George, though not
altogether so wise; for that featherbed they devoured in two days, feathers
and all: which was no sooner digested, but away went the Couerlet, Sheets, and
the Blancket; and at the last dinner, when Georges good friend perceiving
nothing left but the bed cords, as the Devil would have it, straight came in
his mind the fashion of a halter; the foolish kind knave would needs fetch a
quart of sack for his Friend George; which Sack to this day never saw
Uintuers Cellar: and so he left George in a cold Chamber, a thin shirt, a
ravished bed, no comfort left him, but the bare bones of deceased Capons. In
this distress, George be thought him what he might do; nothing was left him;
and as his eye wandered up and down the empty Chamber, by chance he spied out
an old Armor; at which sight George was the ioyfullest man in Christendom:
for the Armor of Achilles, that Ulysses and Ajax strove for, was not more
precious to them, then this to him: for he presently claps it upon his back,
the Halbert in his hand, the Moryon on his head, and so gets out the back way,
marches from Shorditch to Clarkenwell, to the no small wonder of those
spectators that beheld him. Being arrived to the wished haven he would be, an
old acquaintance of his furnished him with an old Suit and an old Cloak for
his old Armor. How the Hostis looked, when she saw that metamorphosis in her
chamber, judge those Bombortes that live by tapping, between the age of 50 and
3 score.

How he served a Tapster.
GEorge was making merry with three or four of his friends in Pye-corner;
where the Tapster of the house was much given to Poetry: for he had engrossed
The Knight of the Sun, Venus and Adonis, and other Pamphlets which the
Stripling had collected together; and knowing George to be a Poet, he took
great delight in his company, and out of his bounty would bestow a brace of
Cannes of him. George observing the humor of the Tapster, meant presently to
work upon him. What will you say, quoth George to his friends, if out of this
spirit of the Cellar, I fetch a good Angel, that shall hid us all to supper.
We would gladly see that, quoth his friends. Content your self, quoth George.
The Tapster ascends with his two Cannes, delivers one to Master Peele, and the
other to his friends: gives them kind welcome: but George, in stead of giving
him thanks, bids him not to trouble him: and begins in these terms: I
protest, Gentlemen, I wonder you will urge me so much; I swear I have it not
about me. What is the matter, quoth the Tapster? Has any one angered you? No
faith, quoth George, I Will tell thee, it is this: There is a friend of ours in
Newgate, for nothing but only the command of the Justices, and he being now to
be released, sends to me to bring him an Angel: now the man I love dearly
well; and if he want ten Angels, he shall have them: for I know him sure:
but here is the misery; either I must go home, or I must be forced to pawn
this: and pluckes an old Harry groat out of his pocket. The Tapster looks upon
it: Why, and it please you, Sir, quoth he, this is but a groat. No, Sir, quoth
George, I know it is but a groat: but this groat will I not lose for forty
pound: for this groat had I of my mother, as a testimony of a Lease of a House
I am to possess after her decease: and it I should lose this groat, I were in
a fair case: and either I must pawn this groat, or there the fellow must lie
still. Quoth the Tapster, If it please you, I will tend you an Angel on it,
and I will assure you it shall be safe. Will thou, quoth George? as thou art
an honest man, lock it up in thy Chest, and let me have it whenever I call
for it. As I am an honest man, you shall, quoth the Tapster George delivered
him his groat: the Tapster gave him ten shillings: to the Tavern go they with
the money, and there merrily spend it. It fell out in a small time after, the
Tapster, having many of these lurches, fell to decay, and indeed was turned
out of service, having no more coin in the world then this groat; and in this
misery, he met George, as poor as himself. O Sir, quoth the Tapster, you are
happily met; I have your groat safe, though since I saw you last, I have bid
great extremity: and I protest, save that groat, I have not any one penny in
the world; therefore I pray you Sir, help me to my money, and take your pawn.
Not for the world, quoth George: thou say thou have but that groat in the
world: my bargain was, that thou should keep that groat until I did demand
it of thee: I ask thee none: I will do thee far more good: because thou art
an honest fellow, keep thou that groat still, till I call for it: and so
doing, the proudest Jack in England cannot justify that thou art not worth a
groat, otherwise they might: and so, honest Michael, farewell. So George leaves
the poor Tapster picking of his fingers, his head full of proclamations what
he might do: at last sighing, he ends with this Proverb: For the price of a
Barrel of Beer,
I have bought a groats worth or wit,
Is not that dear.


How George served a Gentlewoman.
GEorge, used often to an Ordnarie in this Town, where a kinswoman of the good
wifes in the house held a great pride and vain opinion of her own mother wit:
for her tongue was as a Jack continually wagging: and for she had heard that
George was a Scholar, the thought she would find a time to give him notice,
that she had as much in her head, as ever was in her Grandfathers: yet in some
things she differed from the women in those days; for their natural
complexion was their beauty: now this Titmouse, what she is stanted by nature,
she does replenish by Art: as her boxes of red and white daily can testify.
But to come to George, who arrived at the Ordnary among other Gallants, throws
his Cloak upon the Table, salutes the Gentlemen, and presently calls for a cup
of Canarie. George had a pair of Hose on, that for some offense durst not be
seen in that hue they were first dyed in, but from his first color, being a
youthful green, his long age turned him into a mournful black, and for his
antiquity was in print: which this busie-body perceiving, thought now to give
it him to the quick: and drawing near Master Peele, looking upon his
Breeches: By my troth, Sir, quoth she, these are exceedingly well printed. At
which word George being a little moved in his mind, that his old hose were
called in question, answered, And by my faith, Mistress, quoth George, your face
is most danmably ill painted. How mean you, Sir, quoth she? Marry thus,
Mistress, quoth George, That if it were not for printing and painting, my arse
and your face would grow out of reparations. At which she biting her lIp, in a
parat fury went down the stayres. The Gentlemen laughed at the sudden answer
of George, and being seated to dinner: the Gentlemen would needs have the
company of this witty Gentlewoman to dyne with them; who with little denying
came, in hope to cry quittance with George. When she was ascended, the
Gentlemen would needs place her by M. Peele; because they did use to dart one
at another, they thought it meet, for their more safety, they should be placed
nearest together. George kindly entertaines her: and being seated, he desires
her to reach him the Capon that stood by her, and he would be so bold as to
carue for his money: and as she put out her arm to take the Capon, George
sitting by her, yerkes me out a huge fart, which made all the company in amaze,
one looking upon the other: yet they knew it came that way. Peace, quoth
George, and iogs her on the elbow, I will say it was I. At which all the
Company fell into a huge laughter, she into a fretting fury, vowing never she
should sleep quietly, till she was revenged of George his wrong done unto her:
and so in a great chase left their company.

FINIS.

