A FRVITFVLL SERMON, ON 1 COR. 15. 18, 19.

Written By WILLIAM PEMBLE of Magdalen Hall in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed by R. Y. for John Bartlet at the sign of the gilt-Cup in
Cheapeside. 1629.

To the Reader.
We do find (Christian Reader) great opposition made against our Faith, not
only by our Affections, but chiefly by our Reason; for when our Faith is
encountered by our Affections, we do gather many times some succor from our
Reason; but when our Faith is laid at by our Reason, the tentation is not more
strong than dangerous. For if our Reason get the better of our Faith in any
particular, our Affections follow amain: And such tentations, where they once
take, do shake and stagger the strongest Christians. Men, I know, are most an
end wedded to their passions, and do live more after their Arist. Eth. l. 10.
c. 9.
perturbations, than their reason: and therefore there is little good to be
done on the mind of a man till his Arist. Phys. 7. c. 13. and. Eth. l. 10. c.
9.
perturbations be at some quiet. Now where our Reason is guided by Faith and
the Word, there it does good upon our passions: but where our Reason goes by
its own principles, and not by the Word, there our affections are the worser
for our Reason; and a man shall never come to deny all his Affections, till he
have first denied his Reason. But blessed be God, Faith is our 1 John 5. 4.
victory, and it does not only quiet the Affections, but at last it does so
triumph over Reason it self, that men are willing to become 1 Cor. 3. 18.
fools that they may be wise. The Arist de interp. c. 3. part. 6.
understanding of a man rests not till it be satisfied; and nothing can give
full and vltimate satisfaction to the intellect and mind of a man, till by
Faith it be captiuated to the obedience of Vid. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 109. a 2. ad 1.
Arist. ad Eudemum. l. 7. c. 14. text. 216.
God, and 2 Cor. 10. 5.
Christ: and when that is once done, then Reason follows the light of the
Word, and the Affections follow the light of Reason. And hence it is, that our
Faith does adhere with most firmness to those Principles and Articles of our
Creed, wherein Reason is quite at a stand. I will make my instance in the
Article of our Resurrection; a Point, by the consent of all I know (but Pac.
comment. in Arist. de anima, cap. 5. sect. 5
one) utterly above the whole element of nature, reason in it self does not
only deny it, but deride it, Art. 17. 32. Plin. l. 7. c. 55.
Philosophers hiss at it. Luke 24.
The Apostles themselves in that their greatest tentation did for a time look
somewhat strange upon it. But yet we see when their Reason was denied, and
their Faith took place, Art. 2. and passim.
they were not more willing to live and dye upon any Doctrine of Salvation,
than upon this of the Resurrection; and to believe this, is a mere Act of Faith
alone. Chrysostom. Quod Christus sit Deus. Aug. ep. 112. c. 3. Scot. in l. 3. Sent.
d. 24. q. vnica sect. ad primum principium.
One, perhaps two of the Apostles, saw his death, none his Resurrection: And
it is observed, that it was so ordered by the Providence of God, that this maine
Point of Divinity might be believed by the Apostles, and delivered over by
them to the Church of the Gentiles, as a mere act of faith, and not of sight:
Faith being the evidence of things not seen, and the just living by faith, and
not by sight. Faith then does most in those Points of Divinity, wherein reason
is most opposite. A proof whereof the Lord gave in the Author of this Sermon,
who a few days before his last sickness, preached this Sermon as touching the
Resurrection, by a sweet and secret providence of God, the better to fit
himself for his last Enemy. He was a man full of wit, learning, and strength
of reason; and yet against the worst that Satan could do, reason yielded, his
Faith wrought out all disputes, and he was so firm in this Point, that he
rejoiced that his body should not wait so long for the Resurrection as do the
bodies of the Patriarks. Reason said nothing, faith did all, and set him in
that height and strength of belief, that he believed here without doubting:
Albeit whilst we live here we do 1 Cor. 13. 9.
know but in part; yet an imperfect faith may, and does bring forth a Romans 4.
21. Col. 2. 2.
full assurance, since faith is a grace given, because and only whilst we are
imperfect, and when once we are made complete, then our faith 1 Cor. 13. vlt.
does cease. The Lib. 9. epist. fam. ep. 1.
Orator blamed himself, for that when he was in trouble he did not walk by his
own Principles: But this our Divine, what he delivered in this his last
farewell, he fully believed in his sickness. Let us pray, that as he, so we
may live by faith, and not by reason, both whilst we live, and when we dye: and
then we shall find the truth and comfort of this, That faith, when its once
made strong, doubts least of those things, against which our reason disputes
most. Blessed is he that believes, and sees not.

Thine in Christ Jesus RICH. CAPEL,

1 COR. 15. 19, 20. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all
men the most miserable.

But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them
that slept.


THe Disputes of the blessed Apostle in this whole Chapter, is to prove a
Resurrection of the dead, against the error of the Epicures and Sadduces. The
maine Argument whereby he proves it, is this. If Christ be risen, then the
dead shall rise. But Christ is risen: Therefore the dead shall arise also. The
minor, that Christ is risen, the Apostle proves from the third Verse unto the
twelth; by the Scriptures, by the witness of the Twelve Apostles, and more
than five hundred Brethren, to whom he appeared after his Resurrection, and
lastly by his own Testimony, unto whom Christ showed himself after his
ascension into heaven. The mayor, That if Christ be risen, the dead must rise
too, the Apostle begins to prove at the twelfth Verse. [Now if it be preached
that Christ is risen from the dead, how say some among you, that there is no
Resurrection of the dead?] This foul inconsequence the Apostle confutes in the
next Verse, by the absurdity that would follow thereupon, That if there be no
Resurrection of the dead, then is not Christ risen. Upon which absurdity,
other absurdities would also follow, That if Christ be not risen, then the
Apostles preaching, and testimony touching Christ's Resurrection, were false,
and that the Corinthians faith in Christ is vain. If Christ be yet in his
grave, they and all that believe in Christ, be yet in their sins, they that
are dead in the Faith of Christ are perished, and gone to hell in their sins,
they that live in the faith of Christ are of all men most unhappy, without
reward here, and sure of punishment hereafter. But Christ being raised from the
dead, these absurdities are taken away, the Apostles are true in their
preaching, and all men are happy in believing in Christ put to death for sin,
and raised from death for our justification. (If in this life only we have hope
in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. But now Christ is risen etc.) This
is in brief the dependence of the words.

The parts are, as the Verses, two:

1. An absurdity upon the denial of a truth. That Christians are of all men
in worst condition, is an absurd assertion. But yet twere true, if after this
life they had no hope of Happiness. And hopeless they must needs be, if
Christ be not risen, and themselves shall not rise. [If in this life only etc.]

2. A remouall of this absurdity, by an affirmation of the Truth; Christians
are not unhappy men, for why [Christ is risen] having overcome sin and death:
And this is not for himself, but for their sakes: He [is become the first
fruits of them that slept] that as himself by his own, so they by his power,
shall certainly arise unto immortal life and glory. Of these things in order
very plainly. The first Instruction I desire you to observe, is this, that

True Christians are more unhappy than any other men, if their happiness be
confined to this life only.

If death bring to an end their lives and their hopes both at once, they that
believe in Christ are in a worse estate, than Epicures, Atheists, and other
ungodly persons, who while they live with their fill of pleasures, Christians
inherit sorrows and troubles. No Profession in the world so discomfortable, as
that of true Religion, take once away from the godly man the hope of Heaven. If
Christ be beneficial unto him but only till he dye, as good it is to be any
thing, as a Christian. You may soon see it to be true, if you cast your eyes
upon the state of true Christians in this life.

We are of all men most miserable, says the Apostle. Whom means he? We
Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel; Or, all we Christians that believe in
Christ? He means both sorts, Ministers and People.

1. For Ministers: They are more miserable than any other Christians; of all
others they are most exposed unto troubles, and that in regard of the nature of
their Office. They by their preaching and Ministry do bid defiance to the
powers of darkness, they proclaim themselves open Enemies to Satan and his
Kingdom. If others be Soldiers, they be the Captains, and stand foremost in
the face of the Enemies, and nearest of all to danger. Whence it follows, That
what ever mischief the Prince of the darkness of this World, or his servants,
the children of disobedience, can invent against them, they shall be sure to
feel it, if force or craft can lay it on them. Satan ever aims at the
fairest: Smite the Shepherd, and twill be easy to scatter the Sheep: Slay a
King of Israel, and the rest of the Army will soon rout. [The world hates me
(says Christ) because I testify of it, that the works thereof are euill]
John 7. 7. As it hated and persecuted him, so it will ever do to his Ministers
and Ambassadors. So long as there is in the World a faithful Minister to
reprove sin, and wicked persons that love to commit sin, there will ever
be malice and despite used against them. Whence at all times so many
discontentments have bin bred against godly Ministers, by froward and
disobedient People, who, loving to do evil, and hating to be reproved, have
not spared, to the utmost of their malicious might, to heap vexations and
sorrows upon them, by whose Ministry the glad tidings of peace and good things
have bin brought unto them. When Ministers weep in secret for the sins of
their People, when they pour out prayers and tears for their salvation, when
they behold their stubbornness and disobedience against the Word with sad and
heavy hearts, when they have spent their strength and life amongst them,
wasting themselves in labor to do them good, and after in grief to see so
little good done on them, what is their recompense for all their good will, but
hatred, derision, a mock and scoff, some injury, unjust vexation, some
malicious accusation or other? Woe is me (says Jeremy in a passion, seeing
how miserably he was used by his Countrymen) [Woe is me, my mother, that thou
have borne me a contentious man, and a man that strives with the whole Earth]
Ier 15. 10. Poor Prophet, what harm had he done them? [I have neither lent on
usury, nor men have lent to me on usury, yet every one does curse me] Wronged
them he had not in civil dealings; in his Ministry he had faithfully
declared unto them the will of God, reproved them of their sinful
abominations, foretold them of Gods heavy wrath ready to fall upon the whole
state: was this that for which they curse him, rail at him, persecute him,
count him an enemy to the State, and not worthy to live? Yea this was cause
enough. Does he foretell the destruction of Jerusalem? nay then he is a
traitor presently, he weakens the hands of the men of War, he seeks not
the good, but the hurt of the People, Ier. 38. 4. Mad men that will be valiant
and victorious in spite of God: and therefore are ready to slay his Prophet for
telling them the truth, that God will not help them. Does he sharply and
boldly reprove the sins of the People? why that's not to be endured. Come,
say the People, Ier. 18. 18. [Come let us imagine some devise against Ieremiah]
let us pick a hole in his coat, let us lay a plot to bring him in trouble. Is
he so free of his tongue? nay then [Let us smite him with the tongue] revile
him, raise some slander upon him, forge some accusation to bring him in
question: and as for his talk, [Let us not give heed to any of his words]
What rage and tumult is there if Christ once be preached among the Gentiles?
what blustering and ado if a Paul come once amongst beastly Ephesians, and
learned but idolatrous Athenians? Wit nor Vice may not endure his presence. Let
a Minister that is faithful to God, and true to men's souls, plainly, yet
meekely, reprove men for their ignorance, pride, covetousness, usury, false
dealing, adultery, swearing, etc. if they can, they will even make him weary of
his life: what ever may be done by bitter speeches, unkind and injurious
dealing, he may be sure to look for it. Well may St. Paul say, We are of all
men most miserable: We Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel, are in far the
worst case of all men, who, like Beacons upon Mountains tops, stand open
continually to all tempests raised against us by wicked men and spirits. In all
this vexation lighting upon the faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus, what other
comfort in this life have they but this, that what ever ill success there be
in their Ministry, whatsoever miseries lie upon their persons, yet their Work
is with the Lord, and their Reward is with their God? Take away this hope in
Christ for the life to come, and ye leave them the most forlorn men in the
world.

2 For true Christians, they are more miserable than all other men: and that in
regard of the Nature of true Religion which they profess, which agrees not
with the good liking of the world; and therefore it cannot agree with that, nor
them that sincerely profess it. [If ye were of the world, the world would
love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out
of the world; therefore the world hates you] says Christ of all the Elect,
John 15. 19: They are men of another generation, their lives are not like other
men's: and therefore the world wonders at them as at some strange Bird or Beast.
Their courses run bias from other men's, and stand opposite to their ungodly
practices: So that when they look upon them, to their great displeasure, they
always see in their well doing, a real reproof of their own evil doing.
But if at any time they be so venturous as in words also to reprove them, then
there is no patience to be had. If Lot but once say, [Brethren, I pray you,
do not so wickedly] the Citizens of Sodom grow cholerike straight way: This
fellow will be a judge and ruler, he must carpe and find fault, [Nay we
will deal worse with thee, than with them] say those Beasts in the shape of
men, Genesis 19. 9. So now, these precise men mar all: a man cannot sweat, or
drink drunk, or talk filthily, or in any thing do otherwise than he should
do, but straight way they are reproving, admonishing, exhotting: so that a man
cannot live quietly by them, nor displease God, but they will take offense at it.
Hence are all malicious devises and practices against the godly: they be the
men whom the world has accused as the worst of malefactors, disgraced as
persons most contemptible, persecuted as worthy to be driven from the society
of men.

In the times of the Primitive Church, if any thing were amiss in the Roman
State, the Christians presently are cried out upon, they must smart as the
cause of it; If it rain not at all, or too much, if lightning and thunder do
any harm, if the Legions mis-carry, then away with the Christians, to the
rack, the fire, the sword, the Lions, etc. So now in the Christian world, all
the blame of the trouble must lie on the reformed Churches; albeit what is
their fault? except it be that they are innocent. But were the Churches of God
rooted up out of the world, and all the Synagogues of God destroyed in the
Land, why then twere well, the world would be at peace and unity: although the
world stand but for the Churches sake. In short [Euery one that will live godly
must suffer persecution] 2 Timothy 3. 12. What, must? Yea: and that in a peaceable
Church as well as a troubled. He must suffer persecution of the heart, of the
tongue, or of the hand. He shall be hated if not reviled, reviled if not
smitten, smitten if not slain.

Besides all which molestations from the world, infinite are those troubles
wherewith every godly soul is assaulted by Satan, and its own corruption: a
hard and continual task it has in fighting against the spiritual
wickednesses in high places, in striving against so many lusts, and disordered
affections that cannot be easily governed. Many bitter storms it feels of
temptations, sorrows, and fears; which makes them often cry out for grief of
heart, and causes their bones to wax dry, and the powers of their body to
fail.

This now is the [Generation of Gods children] as David speaks, Psalm. 73. 15.
this their lot to be daily punished, and chastened every morning, when others
live at ease and prosperity. So that if ye take from these the hope of future
blessedness by Christ, the heart will soon break, when there is left them
nothing but misery. Alas, what is the temporal reward of Piety, if after
death a man must suffer eternal misery? Poor is the contentment that can be
found in Virtue and Religion, if it stretch no further than to the end of this
life; if after death there be nothing, or nothing but misery. Cut from a man
his hope in Christ for her^ after, and then the Epicures counsel will seem
good, [Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall dye.] Let us take our
pleasure while we may. If we dye as Beasts, and come to nothing, then lets
live as Beasts too: Or if we must dye worse than Beasts, and our souls go
into misery, as we must, if Christ do us good no longer than we live; why then
what auailes it to joy in Virtue and Religion, to follow an empty name of
goodness, when nothing is got by it after death, and for the present nothing
worth the desiring? Lets restrain our eyes and our hearts from no pleasures
that may be procured. Let Virtue be only our stals to win honor, where
men out of error esteem highly of it: among others, love we Vice where
virtue is banished. All comes to one then, be vicious, and be but miserable
hereafter; be virtuous, and be no less. Such wild and desperate
resolutions, that notwithstanding our Christian Faith, do yet take place in
too many men's hearts, might then be reckoned of all to be good wholesome
counsel, if the day of our death were the utmost period of time, beyond which
no happiness were to be enjoyed. We see then the Point to be plain enough,
That true Christians, barrd of their hope in Christ for the life to come, are
more miserable than other men: because all are alike hereafter; and for this
life the godly miss of those contentments which the wicked enjoy. Nay more
miserable, not only than men, but than Beasts also: seeing Beasts dye, but are
not judged after death; they come to nothing, but not to misery, as men out of
Christ do.

The Uses of this Instruction shall be two:

Use 1. To lesson us how to judge of the State of the Church, and also of
private Christians: namely, That we judge not of them according to outward
appearance, but that we judge righteous judgment. He that looks on them
with a carnal eye, considering them in their present condition, without
relation to Christ, and their future happiness by him, shall see no great
matter to win his desire toward them. For the Church her glory is not of this
World. She is comely, but sunne-burnt with afflictions and persecutions, she
lies among the pots in poor and despicable estate, when the Synagogue of
Satan ruffles in all pride and pleasure. The whore of Rome is clothed with
scarlet and all gallantry, Re. 17. 4. She lives in abundance of pleasures, Romans
18. 3. She dares say, I sit as Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
mourning. She laughes, when other Churches weep in tears of blood. Therefore
do many judge her blessed, and these miserable: and many turn in thither.
Indeed were her hope only in this life, their choice were good: miserable were
she if always Militant and never Triumphant. But we have learned of our
Apostle, not to judge of the Church of God by her miserable outside that
appears to us in this life. Let her be poor and persecuted, driven into
wildernesses, and caves of the earth, it was so of old, when Idolatrous
Gentilisme swagered it in glorious Temples by Law and force of sword. Be she a
few to many, mean to mighty; it was so ever. What if she seem to be now driven
into a corner of this western World, so that the Adversary may conceive hope,
that now there needs but one push more to thrust her into another Coast, or to
sink her in the Sea? let us not for all that judge the worse of her, nor leave
the Temple of God, to run over to the Temples of Idols and Idolaters.

For private Christians, the same Rule must be followed, for them also not to
judge them by their state in this life. Indeed if we look upon them while they
are here disgraced as the offscouring of the world, scorned by great men,
iniurd by all men, driven into obscurity, and trodden under foot from rising up
in the world; if we see Daniel lodgd among Lions, Paul and Silas in the
Stocks, and at the whipping Post, the Martyrs bodies melting in the flames, if
we behold them tried by mockings and scourgings, by bonds and impris^nment;
when we see them stoned, he wen asunder, tempted, slain with the sword,
wandering up and down in sheepe-skinnes, and in goates-skins, being destitute,
afflicted and tormented, wandering in Wildernesses, and Mountains, and Dens,
and Caves of the Earth, as in Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38. in this case, who but would
judge them to be miserable men? Again, when we see a poor Christian
frequent in prayer and hearing, strict in his life, fearful to take liberty,
where others sin with boldness, often in fasting to humble his soul, and
beat down his body, see his heart full of grief, his eyes run down with
tears for his own sins, and for the sins of the Land wherein he lives,
behold him toyling under the burden of sin, wearied out with spiritual
conflicts in his encounters with Satan, and that sin that still dwells in him:
And now, seems not such a one in thy eyes to be a contemptible and miserable
wretch? Well, judge not by the sight of thine eyes, be not thou a fool to
esteem such a one mad: though for the present it appear not what such a one
shall be, yet know, that when Christ shall appear, he shall appear with him
in glory; and therefore whateuer his estate in this life be, yet his end shall
be with honor.

Use 2. This teaches us in general, that no man is a happy man, who looks
for no other happiness but in this life. If in this life only there be hope,
Christians be of all most miserable; but yet all others also be miserable too.
For why? their happiness which here they have, is but for a few years, and
after that comes death, then judgment and everlasting misery. Ah my Brethren!
it is a woeful estate for one to be [A man of this world, whose portion is in
this life] as it is Psalm. 17. 14. When all the happiness a man cares for or
looks after, is this, that he has money enough, friends enough, store of lands
and livings, great honors, much ease, variety of pleasures, with such other
things as serve only to the filling of our bellies, and satisfying of a few
base and earthly affections: Yet this is all which most men desire, and
whereafter their hearts do run all days of their lives; they never look
higher than these lower parts of the world. What pity is it to see a man, so
noble a Creature, borne unto immortality, and an everlasting being, yet to
spend a fifty or sixty years in this life, and yet scarce ever think
seriously of another world, till there be no remedy, but that he must go out
of this? Brethren, take we notice of this fault, and know we that this world
is not our resting place: let us now forsake it in our affections, and let our
lives testify, that we be such as seek after a Country, not earthly, but
heavenly, where we shall have a more enduring substance than all the treasures
of this world. Thus much of the first point, from the 19. Verse.

I come unto the next words, wherein the Apostle confutes the former
absurdity, showing that godly Christians are not to be accounted more
miserable than all others, forasmuch as their hope in Christ is for the life to
come, as well as this life. But now, says he, Christ is risen. Yea, might
they say, but what is that to us? Very much; for he rose that we might rise,
[He is become the first fruits of them that slept] He is the first that rose
from the dead, and is the cause to raise all others up.

The Instruction that briefly we learn from hence, is this, that

The Resurrection of Christ is the cause of our Resurrection to life and glory.

This the Apostle intends, when he says jointly together, Christ is risen and
become the first fruits of such as sleep, i. e. are dead. Christ may be
called the first fruits of them that rise from death, in a double respect:

1. Because Christ was the first that rose from death. which we must understand
with some limitation: for it is certain, that others were raised from the dead
before Christ's Resurrection, as we read of diverse in the Old and New
Testament: but here is the difference between them and Christ;

1. They rose by the power of Christ, Christ by his own power. He had power,
as to lay down, so to take it to himself again. Being God as well as man,
of himself he was able to quicken his own body. So could not they.

2. Christ rose, but dyed no more: the others rose unto life, but dyed again;
as Lazarus, etc. who tasted twice of temporal death. So then Christ was the
first of all the dead, that raised himself unto an everlasting life.

2. Because Christ is the cause why all men else rise from the dead. This is
chiefly intended by the Apostle, when he says, Christ is the first fruits of
them that sleep. The first fruits were by the Law, Deuteronomy. 26. 1. and seq. to be
offered unto the Lord, before such time as the Jews might eat of the rest of
their harvest. By that oblation the whole harvest was sanctified unto their
lawful use; as it is Leuit. 23. 14. And therefore the Apostle says, Romans 1.
16. [If the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lumpe] namely, after the
consecrating of the first fruits all the remainder might lawfully be used in a
good and holy manner. From this custom the Apostle draws the Metaphor,
calling Christ the first fruits of the dead. Namely, that as by them all the
rest of the store was consecrated; so in and by the body of Christ rising out
of his grave, the bodies of all the Elect shall receive this power and
privilege, to break asunder the bands of death, and return to life and
blessed immortality. Which comes to pass in a twofold regard:

1. Because of the inseparable Union which is between Christ and the Church.
The first fruits are a part of the whole lump, and of the same nature with the
whole: So is Christ and the Church; he is the head, they are the members of the
same body; he is the stock and root, they the branches of the same Vine. And
therefore the Life, which is in Christ the Head, is diffused into the Members;
the juice which is in the root, flows forth into the branches. A living head
will not be coupled with a dead body, nor will that true Vine bear any
withered branches. Whence in verse 45. of this 15. chapter, Christ the second
Adam is called [A quickening spirit] because of that divine power which is in
him, to make alive both souls dead in sin, and bodies rotten in their graves.

2 Because Christ's Resurrection has taken away all impediments of our glorious
Resurrection. If Christ had bin held in the grave, the reason had been because
he could not overcome death, and make full payment of the price of our
Redemption. But now Christ, having broken in sunder the bars of the grave by
his Resurrection, he has manifestly declared, that our Ransom is fully made,
Hell and Death and the Grave overcome, Gods Wrath appeased: and therefore that
now there is nothing that should hinder our Resurrection to life and glory.
Even as after the consecration of the first fruits, the Jews might lawfully
use their other store without impediment: So Christ having dyed and rose again
for this very end, to take out of the way whatsoever thing might hold us in
death and destruction, there is now nothing can have dominion over us to throw
our souls to hell, or detain our bodies in the grave.

But here a Question arises, touching the Resurrection of the wicked at the
last day: Shall not they arise also, and that by the power of Christ? I answer,
They shall arise by the power of Christ. But here we must observe, that Christ
is to be considered in a double respect: 1. As he is head of the Church, 2. As
he is judge of the whole world. The godly are raised by the power of Christ as
Head of the Church, from whom descends into his members that quickening power,
which gives life unto the bodies of the Saints, joining righteous souls unto
glorious bodies, in a blissful Union for ever Col. 1. 18. He is the head of
the body, the Church, who is the beginning and first borne etc.
The wicked arise by the power of Christ, as he is Judge of the world, who
having all power and judgment committed to him, by his sovereign command
brings together those damned souls unto their miserable bodies, that so he may
execute upon both to the full, the judgment of eternal vengeance. Now even in
respect of these, Christ may be said to be the first fruits of the dead; namely
thus, That if the Judge be risen, they must also be made to rise that are to
be judged. This is most excellently expressed by Christ himself, John 5. 26,
27. [As the father has life in himself, so likewise has he given to the son
to have life in himselfe] namely, to quicken by virtue thereof the souls of
his Elect in Regeneration, and the bodies of his Elect in the Resurrection. It
follows, [And he has given him power also to execute judgment, in that he
is the son of man] Thus he has also to do with the reprobate and wicked, by
his power to pull them out of their graves, like roads out of their holes, and
after to throw their bodies with their souls into the pit of perdition. For
then it follows, Verse, 28, 29. [Maruell not at this, for the houreshall come,
in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice. And they shall come
forth that have done good unto the Resurrection of life, and they that have
done evil unto the Resurrection of condemnation.] Let thus much suffice for
opening of this Point. I come to some Application.

Use 1. To strengthen our Faith in the Article of the Resurrection from the
dead. This is a point which is hardly believed, and to natural Reason it
seems incredible. But let us not dispute, where God plainly affirms the
matter: rest we our selves upon his power and promise, never doubting, but what
has bin done in the first fruits, shall be done to the whole lump. The grave
has lost her Victory over the body of Christ; and she shall not recover it
against our bodies.

Use 2. To teach us whence to fetch true Consolation unto our hearts, in regard
of the hard estate we are to endure in this present world. Christ is risen,
and we by him shall rise to glory; and therefore be our condition never so
miserable in this life, yet happy men we are, that are heirs to so much
blessedness hereafter. Upon this nail hangs all comfort; and, Brethren, know
that it is fastened in a sure place, and will not deceive us in time of need.
Are we Ministers? why let us (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 6. 4.) approve our
selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses; in stripes, in prisons, in tumults, in labors; by
watchings, by fastings, by purity, by knowledge, by long suffering, by
kindness, by the holy Ghost, by love unfeigned; by the Word of Truth, by the
power of God, by the armor of Righteousness on the right hand and on the
left; by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, etc. as the
Apostle there goes on. In all this travel and painfulnesse, let this rejoice
our souls, We serve a Master will see us well rewarded. Christ in whom our
hope is, he is risen: and with him shall we arise also, who in that day shall
give unto us the crown of Righteousness, which is laid up for us: as the
Apostle comforts himself, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Art thou a private Christian, walking
in thine integrity, and faithfully endeavoring to fear God and keep his
commandments? and do thou for this suffer contempt? is thy soul filled
full with the mocking of the wealthy, and despitefulnesse of the proud? is thy
name put out as an evil doer? art thou at all hands disquieted by unjust
vexations? Faint not, forsake not thy profession for this, but rather glorify
God in this behalf. Look unto the recompense of reward, and hold fast the
hope of eternal life in Christ Jesus. Art thou trauayled under the burden of
sins and afflictions, assaulted with continual temptations and fears? yet
lift up thy heart, and wait, there is a day of refreshing that comes shortly
from the presence of God. Grieve not to see thy self in pain, when others
wallow in pleasures; choose rather to rejoice in that sorrow which will end in
joy, than to desire those pleasures whose issue is destruction. Think it not
much to part with thy country, thy children, thy possessions, thy life, if the
world will take them from thee for Christ and his Gospel sake: all these and
much better than these shall be restored to thee in the resurrection of the
just. When Christ requires it, spare not to give that body of thine to the
fire, which in a short time by sickness will fall to the ground: know, it is as
easy for Christ to give it thee back again out of the flames, as out of the
dust. In banishment, in prison, in poverty, in temptation, in death, comfort
thy heart with the meditation of Jesus Christ risen from the dead, and of thy
Resurrection by him. Say with thy self, Yet I am not miserable, so long as my
Redeemer is happy; he lives, and I shall live with him; these tears will one
day be wiped away: though all fail, yet Christ will not fail me; my hope in
him shall never be cut off, no not in death. Men may take from me my goods,
they cannot rob me of my grace; banish me from my country, but not from
heaven; take from me my life, but not my happiness. No, my faith, my heaven,
my happiness, all is in his keeping that will safely preserve them for me, and
me to them.

My beloved Brethren, I beseech you let our hearts be employed in these
thoughts, and make we this use of the present Solemnity. Such Meditations fit
this day, this season, all seasons. To end, grow hence into a firm Resolution
to be faithful in doing Gods will, there is a certain reward for this: to
be patient in suffering adversity, there is a sure remedy and ease for it. No
evil shall hurt thee, now death, and the grave, and sin, are vanquished for
thee: no good thing shall be wanting unto thee, now that Christ by rising from
the dead has brought life and immortality unto thee. Wherefore in nothing be
dismayed, but be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, for as much as you know, that your labor is not in vain in the LORD.

FINIS.

