A TREATISE WHEREIN IS MANIFESTLY PROVED, THAT REFORMATION AND THOSE that
sincerely favor the same, are unjustly charged to be enemies, unto her
Majesty, and the state.

WRITTEN BOTH FOR THE clearing of those that stand in that cause: and the
stopping of the sclaunderous mouths of all the enemies thereof.

ZEPHANIAH 3.18.19. After a certain time will I gather the afflicted, that were
of thee, and them that bear the reproach for it: behold at that time will I
bruise all that afflict thee, and I will save her that halteth, and gather her
that was cast out, and I will get them praise in all the land of their shame. At
that time will I bring you again, and then will I gather you, for I will give you
a name, and a praise among all the people of the earth, when I turn back your
captivity before your eyes says the Lord.

1590.

To all those that sincerely love the Lord Jesus, and seek the (...) estate
of his kingdoms, and namely, in the brethren throughout England, Wales, and
Ireland: JOHN (...) knowledge, (...) and (...) with all other (...).
THE Cluds of England, (beloved in the Lord) to wit, Peace and prosperity,
have now of a long time to be (...) all estates among us for the most part,
that in stead of our thankfulness unto God, for his great and undeserved
blessings: they have caused our land to bring forth most strange effects, unto
the dishonor of the Lords name, the hinderance of his truth, the lykelie ruin
of his Church, and the general grief and discouragement of all his children.
We know well enough, what kyndnesse the Lord has generally showed unto our
kingdom at such time as we little deserved the same, and what thankfulness
we have repayed him again, our practice does evidentlie testify.

It is not yet many years above 30. since we were matched, yea, King Philips
marriage.
and ouermatched with strangers, ready day and night to have the same
cruelty shevved upon us, which that proud and bloody nation the Spainyard,
does now the second time purpose to execute. But our God delivered us from that
imminent bondage. The blessing is to be remembered, especially seeing the
kindenes was then showed unto our state, when not only the whole kingdom
being most shamefullie fallen from God to the worship of devils, was
ouergrowne with the weeds of Idolatrous popery and superstition: but even
those plants graffed among us by the devils own hand, were so highly
accounted off, that rather the^ they should not have their full growth in
England, they were watered with the blood of the saints of God. Behold here, O
England, thy deliverance from bondage, in the day wherein thou did deserve
captitutie, and look for an heavier yoke, if thou continuest to be unthankful.
But what do I speak of this outward liberty, seeing the other freedom of the
soul bestowed upon us at the same instant, does utterly obscure this
blessing, and make it seem nothing in comparison. The Lord therefore, that all the glory of his kindness toward a rebellious nation might indeed be his
own, and that he might justly require the fruit of thankfulness at our
hands, together with the government of her right excellent Majesty, brought
unto us the inestimable treasure of his Gospel, which to this day he has
continued contrary unto our deserts. How this gospel was at that time, and
now is received among us, it shall be partly declared afterward.

Since the enjoying thereof (how unthankfully soever our state has
entertained the same) it is well known that in regard of outward peace and
prosperity, this land has been in our days the miracle of all the kingdoms
in the earth. For the Lord has from heaven commanded the blessing of outward
plenty to be with us in all that we have set our hands unto: Deu. 28.11.12
and as for our peace, it has been such as other nations have been glad to
borrow the same from us, which also we have been able to lend unto them. And
although the Lord to testify his wrath against the abuse of his blessings has
sometimes chastened us with some taste of famine, and threatened diverse times to
take away our peace, yet whenever we have had but one dear year in all
our quarters, he fully recompensed the dearth thereof, with the unexpected
abundance and plenty of the next. And if you look unto our enemies that have
risen up, either at home or abroad to disturb our quietness, they may be
truly said to come against us one way, and to have fallen before us seven.
So that if within the circuit of heaven, you would see a kingdom
wonderfully blessed with outward peace and prosperity, England must be the
pattern thereof. And I would to God that this were the only president that
England does afforde unto us and our posterities? But alas, it is far other
wise. For as the Lords blessings have been multiplied upon us, so has our
unthankfulness augmented it sense out of measure. Consider the state of
religion at this day, and see what a grateful cuntrie England has been unto
her God. The Lord by the mouths of his servants, and by his forenamed
blessings, has these 31. years besought and earnestly entreated, yea wooed as
it were al estates among us, to look unto their own souls to day, wrile it
is called to day, and to lay a sure hold upon him while he may be found, by a
through receiving of the Gospel: together with the ministers thereof: and by
showing kindenes unto his desolate house. But what has England answered?
Surely with an impudent forehead The has said: I will not come near the
holy one. Englands reformation.
And as for the building of his house, I will not so much as lift up a finger
toward that work, nay I will continue the desolations thereof. And if any man
speaks a word in the behalf of this house, or bewaileth the misery of it:
I will accounte him an enemy to my state. As for the gospel, and the
ministeries of it, I have already received all the Gospels, and all the
ministeries that I mean to receive. I have received a reading Gospel, and a
reading ministry, a pompous Gospel, and a pompous ministry: a Gospel and a
ministry that strentheneth the hands of the wicked in his iniquity, a gospel
and a ministry that will stoop unto me and be at my beek either to speak or
to be mute when I shall think good. Briefly I have received a gospel and a
ministry that will never trouble my conscience with the sight of my sins
which is all the gospels and all the ministeries that I mean to receive: and I
will make a sure hand, that the Lords house it I can choose, shall be no
otherwise aedified, than by the hands of such men, as bring unto me the
foresaid gospel and the foresaid ministry. Lo here Englands thankfulness
(beloved) foral the mercies and kindness which her God has vouchsaued unto
her. And tell me in thy conscience whether thou think that she has rendered
according unto the reward bestowed upon her, 2. Chro. 32.25
who in so great a desolation of Gods service, has not once showed her self to
be moved with any compassion that way. And I do apeale unto thy conscience,
whether I have not truly set down the affection which all estates among us
generally considered do bear unto the Lords pure worship and service. In so
much as if he should send some Jeremy to stand in our high ways, and inquire
whatsort of men he could find within our land, who had in any thankful manner
remembered the Lords goodenes, by regarding his wast and ruinous sanctuary, well
he might meet with some one here and there, as a cluster of grapes after the
vintage, that in some grateful sort, acknowledged the Lords hand toward us:
but as for the general state either of the magistracy, of the ministerye or of
the common people, beheld nothing else, but a multitude of conspirators against
God, against his truth, against the building of his house, against his Saints
and children: and consequently against the wealth of their own souls, and
the public peace and tranquillity of this whole kingdom. Our common people.
Concerning the common people, their profannesse, impiety, contempt of God and
his religion, and their hatred unto his children, with all other their
wickedness, may seem to deserve some excuse, Ier. 5.3.4.
because they never as yet had any means to know God aright, for the holy
ghost may truly say of them They are poor, they are foolish, for they have not
known the way of the Lord, nor the judgments of their God. And therefore what
mervell is it, though they have made their faces harder than a stone, and
refused to return.

But these that would be accounted our Prophets, Our supposed Ministry.
and the ministers of the Sanctuary, have had better means to know the will of
their master, and therefore just and righteous shall he be, whenever he
rewards them with the fruits of their own hands, if they have broken the
yoke: of their obedience, and cast from them the bonds of that carefulnes,
whereby it behooved them to bind themselves, that they should not forget the
house of their God. VVil you then come unto them, and see what they are? Alas,
you can behold here no other sight but a multitude of desperate and forlorn
Athiests, that have put the evil day far from them, and endeavored to persuade
their own hearts, that gods holy ministry, and the saving health of men's
souls, are matters not to be regarded. You shall find among this crew, nothing
else, but a troup of bloody soul murderers, sacriligious church robbers, and
such as have made them selves fat with the blood of men's souls, and the
utter ruin of the Church. The whole endeavor of which cursed generation, ever
since the beginning of her Majesty's reign, has tended no otherway, then to
make a sure hand to keep the church in bondage, that being bound in their
hands, it should not dare for fear of being murdered to seek for liberty.
Of these men, contained within the number of proud and ambitious prelates, our
Lord Archbishops and Bishops, godless and murdering Non-residentes, profane
and ignorant idol shepherds, or dumb dogs, I will say no more in this place
but this. Revel. 6.10. Psalm. 65.2.
How long Lord * just and true do thou suffer thine inheritance to be
polluted and laid waste, by this uncircumcised generation. O * thou that
hear the prayer, let the supplications which thy children have made before
thee day and night (for the removing of this our plague,) be at the length
effectual in thine ears, and with speed thrust these caterpillars as one man
out of our Church, and let the memory of them be forgotten in Isean^ for ever.
Sobeit Lord for thy son Christ's sake.

Now if they who would be accounted the ministers of the holy Sanctuary,
Magistracy.
are found so unanswerable, both unto the callings, which they would claim
unto them selves, and also unto the Lords kyndnes snewed unto our Land: it were
but folly to demand what thankfulness our Magistrates and such as deal in the
execusion of justice, have repayed unto their God. For they having suffered
themselves, to be led by the forenamed blind guides must needs stumble at
that stone, which is offensive unto their leaders. And therefore hand in
hand, have our magistracye and ministerye walked in the contempt of true
Religion. And the one of these having uncircumcised ears, have made that the
other cannot hearken, and unto both the word of the Lord, (in which they have
no delight) is made a reproach: Insomuch as among those who deal in the cause
of justice, there are found wicked persons, Ier. 5.26.27.
as the prophet says, even wicked lawyers and judges (who seem to know of
no other God, but their own gain,) that lay wait for the blood of Gods
saints, as he that sets snares, and mark whether they can hear of any that
go further in the cause of God, than the corruption of our state does permit.
And if they find any such, they know how to wrest against them, a clawse of
some statute, contrary not only to the meaning thereof, but even contrary
unto all justice and aequity, yea common reason it self, and the very grounds
of al good Laws, and statutes. So that it is now grown, and has been of a
long time a common practice of these godles men, to make of the statutes
ordained for the maintenance of Religion and common quietness a pit wherein to
catch the peaceable of the land. The common enditementes of the Lords true and
faithful ministers for matters of trifles, as the omission of the surplise,
Churching of women, Cross in baptism etc. does manifestlye witness the
iniquity of these Atheistes. Whereby though as the Prophet also complains
they are become great, waxe^ rich, and grown into favor with our counsel, and
such as bear chief authority under her Majesty: yet let them be assured they
procure unto their souls, swift and heavy damnation, without speedye and
earneste repentance. And because our counsel may be truly said to delight in
this injury and violent oppression of Gods saints and ministers, therefore
whenever the Lord shall come to search for the sins of England with lights,
Zeph. 1.12.
as Zephaniah says, he will surely evisite our counsel with an heavy plague.
Because undoubtedly they are froze^ in their dregs, and persuade their own
hearts that the Lord will do neither good nor evil in the defense of his
messengers and children. And then shall they feel what it is to wink at (much
more to procure) the oppression of the Church of Christ. I will not in this
place charge our counsel with that which follows in Jeremy, Ier. 5.28.
upon the place before aledged, namely that they execute no judgment, no not
the judgment of the Fatherles. But this I will say, that they cannot possibly
deal truly in the matter of justice between man and man, inso much as they
bend al their forces to beceaue Christ Jesus of that right, which he has to
the government of his Church. Their Honors.
The which ungodly and wicked course as they have held on ever since the
beginning of her Majesty's (...), so at this day they have taken greater
boldne, and grown more rebellious against the Lord and his cause then ever
they were. Insomuch as their Honors in token of their thankfulness to him, that
has exalted them, dare now charge the cause of reformation to be an enemy unto
our state, and such as favor the same, to be unquiet and factious men
disturbers of the common peace and quietness, and sowers of sedition among the
subjects. This evil dealing of their Honors with the Lords truth, and us that
profes the same within England, have enforced me to take some pains in the
writing of this treatise. The which in regard of mine own weakness, and the
weight of the matter, I would have left most willingly, unto the handling of
some that had been of greater guiftes than my self, it the cause being more
depelye charged with the former crimes in my person, then in any other that I
can hear off at this present, did not require my weak labors and endeavors for
the clearing of the same, from so godless and untrue an accusation.

For the farther vnderstanidng of this particular occasion moving me to write,
thou art to understand (beloved in the Lord) that within these few months, a
warrant under six counselors hands, has been given out from their Honors,
and sent by public messengers unto al such places of the Land, as there was any
lykelihood of mine abode. The effect whereof was this. So Amasiah ^^ew Amos to
be a traitor.
That if men have not hitherto known so much, their Honors whose names were
hereunto adioined: do assure them of their own knowledge, that one John
Penry, is an enemy to the state, and if they have not taken him for such
heretofore, they should now take knowledge and information thereof from them,
and so henceforth account of him. In which regard they should be so far from
aiding, consorting, or releuing of him, that if they can by any means
apprehend or lay hold of him, they shall therein do her Majesty good service.

The names of their Honors, who have by these letters proclaimed themselves to
be of their number that shall lend their shoulders to uphold the kingdom of
darkness, I do for the reverence which I owe unto her Majesty's government
conceal, save only John Cant. (as he writes himself) whom both in respect
of his Antichristian Prelacve over Gods Church, and for the notable hatred
which he has ever bewrayed toward the Lord and his truth, I think one of
the dishe norablest creatures under he auen, and accordingly do account of
him. Desiring the Lord, if it be his will, to convert both him and al other the
detected enemies of Sion, that their souls may be saved: or if he has
appointed them to damnation, and means not otherwise to be glorified by them,
speedelye to disburden the earth of such reprobate cast-awayes.

But to return again unto our purpose, if the accusation wherewith I am
unjustly charged in the former warrant, reached no farther then my own person,
it were my duty in regard of the quietness of our state, to put it up: But
seeing that it does not touch me at al, any further then I have been an
instrument to promote the cause of Christ's government and wholly strikes at
that truth, in the defense whereof it pleased the Lord to use my weak and
polluted hands: I do make it known unto the world. First that I am accounted
an enemy unto our state, for no other suspicion and color, but only because
I have by public writing, labored to defend and induce in our church, that
uniform order of church regiment, which our Savior Christ has ordained in
his word, to continue perpetually therein: and also have endeavored to seek the
utter ruin and overthrow of that wicked hierarchye of lord Bishops, together
with whatsoever corruption depends thereupon. Now that I cannot be charged
of enmitye to our state, for any other cause than this which I have expressed:
I make it clear, in that my bringing up having been all the days of my life at
my studies, I never as yet dealt in any cause more or less, that any ways
concerns the civil state and government. And as for attempting any thing
against her majesty's person, I know the devil himself dares not be so shameless
as to intend any accusation against me in that point. The case then being thus
manifest and clear, that I am thought an enemy to the state, not for
intermedling with any civil action, but only for seeking the wealth of Sion.
I do in the second place make it known by this present treatise, that the
sincere handling of this cause is so far from being an enemy unto our state:
that they do notably detect their impiety against God, and their enmity to the
kingdom of his son Christ, Our persecuters are enemies to the state of
Christ's kingdom.
whosoever they be that dare presume to burden, either the cause or the sincere
professors thereof, with so palpable and manifest a sclaunder, And as for the
injury, that herein they offer unto her Majesty, who would by these
sclaunders enforce her to lay down her peaceable scepter, and to take up a
bloody sword against her best subjects: our blood (though they never have power
to spill it) which they thirst after, shall in the day of judgment testify the
same to their condemnation, except they repent. And her Majesty, if she give
ear unto such counselors is to fear, least in the Lords just judgment the
day may come upon her and her Land, (which in thy mercies Lord remove far
from her) wherein she shall full bitterly lament and bewail, Enemies to her
Majesty.
that in time she took not greater trial of our loyaity, who now are reckened
within the number of her most dangerous subjects, So that the injury by the
former unjust accusation, offered unto Gods cause and us his people, stryketh
also at her Maiessies own estate And the Lord vouchafe her an heart to
consider thereof, before it be too late. For assuredly those that are our
enemies for the profession of the truth, cannot be her sure fiends, whatsoever
they may pretend.

And because I see that we be fallen into those times, wherein Satan works
the defacing of the way of truth, and supporteth his own kingdom by
instruments of no mean countenance: and also perceive that base man begins
to take strength unto himself against his maker: I have purposely framed my
self to make it known unto Satan and his accomplices that all their might and
power in oppugning us for this cause is spent in vain. For although the cause
be stood unto by weak and sinful men, if respect be had to that which we
are in ourselves, I yet let man know that in the strength of our God, we are so
far from being dismayed with the wisdom, countenance, or power of whatsoever
is made of flesh, that for mine own part, I cannot sufficiently wonder, that
any creature dares be so bold, as to proclaim war against us for this cause.
And therefore whatsoever enemies the Lord bath raised up against me (a
contemptible worm,) for the maintenance of his truth, be they noble or
unnoble, counselors or inferior men, I am so far from fearing their power,
that the more I see them rage, the greater strength I see reached unto me by
the Lords free mercies to stand to that truth, which they rave against. And by
how much the more I see them banded against the son of God, by so much the
greater hope do I conceive, that the case wherein I stand, shall get the upper
hand over them, whether they will or not. I believe, and therefore I am forced
to speak these things. In the uttering whereof, as I thank my God, I have a
feeling of mine own great wants and imperfections: so I am not with out some
comfortable assurance of his hand with me in this cause, to seal whatsoever
truth I shall utter heerin, according to his word. In respect whereof, I do warn
and admonish those counselors with whom and against whom, especially I deal
in this treatise, to repent them of their great insolency, whereby they have
been puffed up with Senacharib to magnify and oppose themselves against the
cause and people of the Lord of Hosts: 2. Chron. 32.19. Zeph. 2.8.9 10.
as against the religion and people of some of the gods of the earth.
Otherwise they are to fear, least the Lord having raised up many of them, out
of mean places into the throne of justice, means to show his power and great
name, by making them examples of his fearful wrath as he did Pharaoh, who
wrought his own overthrow as the * text expressly notes: Exodus 9.17.
by exalting him self against the people of the Lord. For assuredly the Lord
will not forget his church for ever, but at the * appointed time, psalm.
75.3.8.11
he will break the horn of the wicked and the righteous shall be exalted. If men
will wonder that we being so contemptible in the sight of the world, dare yet
be so bold, as to control great states and mighty men, and to challenge them
of injustice against the son of God and his members, who will not stick to
brag with Pilate, that they have power to crucify Christ, John. 19.10.
and to absolve him they are to understand, that we know of no power, but from
above: and therefore of no power, that is able to bear out injustice and
wrong: the hills of the robbers we grant to be high, Job. 5.3.
and vnassaileable in the sight of an eye of flesh: but we have learned of the
holy man, to account the habitation of the wicked to be accursed even when he
seems to be best rooted: for we know that the steps of his strength shall be
restrained, Job. 18.7.
and that his own counsel shall cast him down. And as for our selves, we
confess that we are but base worms, (and we would to God that we were lower in
our own eyes,) such as live not according unto outward appearance, because our
life is hid with Christ in God. Col. 3.3.
But yet least me should take occasion to persecute us, because they know not
with whom they deal, because they are ignorant, whence we are, or whether we
intend: seeing by our walking they may truly judge us to be descended of some
other race than themselves are, and to look for an other dwelling place than
any we can enjoy here. They are to understand that we are borne not of mortal
but of immortal seed, 1. Pet. 1.23.
by the liuelye word of God, and that we are the servants of that Lord, who is
not ashamed to be called our God. Heb. 11.16.
And we are so far from hunting after the wages of unrighteousness with them,
that we freely confess our selves to be but pilgrims and strangers upon
earth: and therefore travel toward that heavenly city which our God has
prepared for us. To be brief, we are the law full successors of those men, who
through faith quenched the violence of fire, Heb. 11.34, 36
escaped the edge of the sword. Of weak, were made strong, who were tried by
mockings and scornings, yea moreover, by bonds and improsonments, who were
stoned, hewn a sunder, slain with the sword, wandered up and down in sheep
skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented, and yet in all these
distresses were more then conquerers through the power of their God. VVherrwith
also we hope to be assisted, whenever it shall please the Lord to give our
enemies leave to try our patience. To conclude, we are those unto whom the Lord
made this promise, Heb. 13 5.6.
I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, the lord is
mine helper, neither will I fear what man can do unto me.

If then our counselors and great men will not provoke this God against their
own souls, they are to be exhorted before they deal any farther against the
procurers of reformation, to betake them unto their second thoughts, and
acknowledge their temeritye in lifting up their hands against God and those
whom he accounts of, as the apple of his own eye. Zachar. 2.
For in fighting against us they labor very strongly we grant, to aggrauat and
hasten their own damnation, but their purposes are they never able to effect.

To come unto you beloved, for whose strengthening and comforting I have
especially taken pains in this treatise, if God has called any of you to
suffer for this cause, think it an exceeding preferment that he has vouchsaued
you to be partakers of the afflictions of the gospel, 2. Tim. 1.8.
and in any case be not dismayed at your trobles. The cause is proved to be
such, as for the which you may not only suffer with a good conscience: but
such as in the defense whereof, you may expect for the affista^ce of Gods
comforting spirit: and such, as wherein al christians are bound to suffer, when
they are thereunto called. I have also showed it to be that cause, which is
compassed about with a cloud of wi nesses, and made commendable and bewtiful
unto al christians, with the blood of the holy Martyrs of Christ. The same
spirit which assisted them unto the end, will not leave you in any of your
temptations. So that by your prayers you seek unto the Lord for strength,
Obedience.
and be careful to learn obedience by the things which you suffer. As we are
taught by his example, who by sufferings was made unto us the author of
aeternal salvation. Be therefore humbled under the hand of your God, Heb. 5.8.9.
and know that you stand neither by your own strength, nor by the goodness of
that cause wherein you suffer: Heb. 12.28.29
but only by the assistance of his spirit, who requires a great care in all
his children to please him in reverence and fear: for even our God is a
consuming fire.

Concerning such of you as the Lord has not tried with any affliction for this
cause, I beseech you be not ashamed of the chain of your brethren, mourn with
those that lament for the cause of God. When they are imprisoned, think your
selves to be in bonds. And I do especially and above al things beseech those
that favor the reformation, to labor more and more in the reforming of
themselves and such as be long unto them. We know that considering the season,
it is now time to rest from sleep. Romans 13.12.
For now is our salvation nearer than when we first beleved. It might have
been something tolerable in times past for a sincere professor, to have an
ignorant, an vntaughte, and a unreformed family: but in this clear light,
Phil. 1.27. 1. cor. 13.5.13 Zeph. 1.8. Ephesians. 5.11. Col. 1.6.
and in a profession of so great sincerity to continue in these sins, is
altogether unbeseeming the gospel of Christ. Long hair, great ruffes, laying
out of wemens hair, and strange attire, is a participating with the unfruitful
works of darkness and a token that the gospel has not been faithfully
received. And therefore let it be no longer toll rated among the reformed
professors of England. Vow and perform with the holy man David, Psalm. 111.12.
that you will sing mercy and judgment, and walk in the vprightnes of your
hearts in the midst of your families, Job. 22.22.23.
and if you will make peace indeed with the Lord, follow the counsel of the
holy ghost in removing iniquitye far, not only from yourselues, but also from
your tabernacles and hou ses. Show what reformation can do in a whole kingdom,
by the practice thereof in your own persons and families. And that will be the
best argument both to confute the adversary, and to draw the indifferent to
like the cause. And as the Lord shall give unto any of you access either unto
her Majesty, or any of their Honors, so be careful to promote this truth. We
have al of us (we must confess,) be ne so careless and secure in these points,
and therefore it is, that by the just judgment of God, our Bishops are at
this day so insolent against the truth. And unless we labor more strongly to
have these Cananits rooted out we may write upon it, that they will be pricks in
our eyes, Nomb. 33.55.56.
and thorns in our sides, and still vex us as they do at this day. Where I
say that professors should labor strongly, to have our hierarchy and
contemptible Idols rooted out of our Church, my meaning is not that any
private strength should so much as lift up a hand, much less use any violence
against these caterpillars: but I mean that we should more vehemently labor
with the Lord by prayers, and by the reforming ourselves and our families, and
deal earnestly with her Majesty and their Honors that our cause may be
aequally heard.

My meaning in the former point I thought needful to express, because I know
what sclanders would otherwise be raised against me, to the hurt of the cause
by those that are enemies thereunto: whose madness (I doubt not) will shortly
appear unto all men. And I trust in the Lord, that he will one day give her
Majesty a descerning ey, to judge aright between them and us, and then shall it
appear, whether we or they do seek the peace and quietness of her kingdom. In
the mean time we will content our selves with the eye of our God. Yet one thing
I would wish to be considered of by her right excellent Majesty, namely whether
it be not an inconvenient season when our fortaine enemies are at the doors,
publikly to traduce her best and most trusty snbiects as enemies to her state.
For if the Spainyard shall hear, that (besides the popish faction) the
fore-wardest professors of the gospel in England are but her Majesty's half
friends, Mark the issue.
what will not the hope of a threfold discord in our state move him to attempt?
I do therefore fear that many of the forwardest enemies of reformation, are
not the backwardest friends that the King of Spain has in England at this
day. But least the enemy should deceive himself, with a golden dream: I am to
make it known unto al Spaniards and Spanish practisers, that we are such
enemies unto Queen Elizabeth, The enmity which the favorers of reformation
bear unto her Majesty and the state.
as we do not only pray day and night for the state of her Kingdom and her
person: but also we are ready to stand in the defense of her royal person
and right, to the loss not only of our goods and blood, but even of our
lives, and that against men and Angels, even al creatures without exception.
Thus much my good brethren, I may boldly set down in the name of you al,
because I know by what spirit you are guided. And as for your sakes, next unto
the defense of the truth, I have taken this labor in hand: So I do with the
Apostle humbly entreat the Lord, Romans 15.31.
that my service herein may be acceptable unto the Saints throughout England,
Wales and Ireland: whom together with my self: and all the Lords elect, I
commit unto his hand, who is able to reserve us unto the day of redemption.

TO THE READER.
M.D. Anno 12. or 13 Elizab.
Haddon delivered in Parliament a Latin book concerning church discipline,
written in the days of king Ed. 6. by M. Cranmer, and Sir John Cheek knight
etc. This book was committed by the house to be translated unto the said M.
Hadon, M. George Bromely, M. Norton, etc. If thou can good reader help me, or
any other that labor in the cause unto the said book: I hope (though I never
saw it,) that in so doing thou shall do good service unto the Lord and his
Church

REFORMATION NO enemy to her Majesty and the State.
ALthough it be most true, that our Savior Christ Jesus does vouchesafe unto
nations and kingdoms, All Kingdoms are bound to fram a the^^ st^tes according
to the doctrine of the gospel. Match. 10.34. Luke 12.51 52
the fruition and use of his holy word and gospel upon no other condition,
the^ that all men of all degrees and callings, as well high as low, will be
content to have their states altered and changed, at the pleasure, appointment,
and determination of his will and word: yet notwithstanding it is as true, that
the said word and gospel of his, brings nothing with it that can possible be
an enemy to any state, either private or public whatsoever. The which point
I take to be so clear and manifest that no state-men can deny it, save only
those who have made a leagne with the devil and a covenant with hell; by
virtue whereof, they stand bound to account the Lord and al his holy ways to be
enemies unto them and their cursed proceedings. For no man can pretend the
gospel and word of God to be his enemy, but he must needs also confess, that
he has bidden defyance unto the Lord of heaven and earth, who accounts
himself to be loved and hated of men, according unto the affection which they
bear unto his Luke 12 26. John 14.23.15 1. John. 2.5.
word. This hatred of God and his word, because th'aduersaries of reformation
in England dare not avowe, therefore as a foundation of the whole treatize
following I lay down this ground, which they themselves will not call in
question. Namely: That the reformation which at this day we endeavor to
bring into our Church, is most unjustly and wrongfully accounted an enemy
unto our state, if it can be prooved to be a matter approved off, and
maintained by the word and gospel of JESUS CHRIST. Where I would gladly
know two things of them. First whether they judge that which we labor for to
be according to to the word or no? They must answer, that they cannot so
think of it: for if they did, they would not stand against us as they do.
Secondly, if they thought our cause to be good, that is, if they thought it to
be according unto Gods word: I demand of them, whether notwithstanding the
goodness of our cause, they would yet think us that labor in the same, to be
enemies unto the state or no? We make no question but they have a better
opinion of us. For whatsoever they say of the cause, they can report no
otherwise of the favorers thereof, the^ of those that have always showed
themselves most faithful and trusty toward their prince and cuntrie. For
although within these 31. years, there have bin many seditious and treasonable
attempts, undertaken against her Majesty and the state, by men of all sorts
and degrees: yet by the goodness of God it cannot be showed, that any one has
had a hand in any of these practices and conspiracies, who ever opened his
mouth for reformation, or any wise favored the same. And as for attempting any
undutiful or disloyal action in the promoting of the cause it self: we have
been so far from being guiltye in that point, D. Bancroft.
that one of ye most shameless and most impudent slanderers that are amongst
al our adversaries (intending of set purpose to stain the cause and the
favorers of reformation, with sedition and treason) was enforced to pass by
us, and to suffer the venime of his lying and slanderous tongue to light upon
our brethren in the kingdom of Scotland, which he would never have done, if
with any color he could have fastened his slanderous untruths upon us the
professors of his own cuntrie. So that if we could discharge our hands of the
cause we defend, we doubt not but our adversaries themselves would pronounce us
guiltles of all disloyalty against our prince and cuntrie.

Seeing then it is clear, that reformation is therefore accounted an enemy
unto our state, because it is supposed to have no ground in the word of God:
and seeing the favorers thereof are thought to be turbulent men, not for any
thing that in a good matter they have seditiously attempted; but inasmuch as
they labor to promote a cause, that of it self is an enterprise dangerous
unto her Majesty's crown and dignity: we are for the clearing of the one and
the other, to see whether the endeavors of those, who desire to have the Church
of England otherwise reformed then hither to it has been, be such, as they
require nothing in that whole work, but only that which the word of God
commands to be put in execution. The which course if they be found to take,
then also does it follow, that neither they, nor the cause maintained by them,
can with any color be accounted enmity unto the kingdom wherein they live.

And here if I should demand of the most that condemn both us and the cause
wherein we stand, what that is, which is sought to be reformed in our Church,
What equal judges our adversaries are.
I dare be bold to say, that there is not one amongst ten of them, that
knows whether it be black or white that we would have. Wherein they do not
only show themselves, to weigh the most precious and weighty jewel under
the sun with a most vn-eauen hand: but also (if we believe the holy Apostle)
to claim inheritance in ye wages of unrighteousness, 2. Pet. 2.12.
inasmuch as they speak evil of those things which they know not. The which
course if they still hold on, the same Apostle tells them, ye they shall
perish through their own corruption.

To the end then it may appear what that reformation is which we seek for,
and which these men do account the enemy of our state; it is to be understood,
What we mean by reformation
that by reformation we mean nothing else, but the removing of all those
unlawful callings which are maintained in our Church and ministry, contrary
unto the revealed will and written word of the Lord our God, and the restoring
thereunto of all such offices and ministeries, as the same God under the pain
of his heavy displeasure, requires to be planted in his church, when or
whersoeuer he raises fit men for those functions. To speak more plainly, by
reformation we mean, first the rooting out of our Church, of al dumb and
unpreaching ministers, all nonresidents, Lord Archbishops and bishops,
commissaries, officials, chancellors, and all the rest of the wicked offices
that depend upon that ungodly and tyrannous hierarchy of Lord Bishops,
together with their government, and whatsoever maim, deformity or want there
is in our Church by means of them and their plaees. Secondly, by reformation
we mean the placing in every congregation within England (as far as possibly
able men can be provided) of preaching pastors and Doctors, governing elders,
and ministering Deacons, with whatsoever health, comeliness and good order, the
Lord by the faithful labors of these officers would have brought into his
church. And these are the only matters that we mean by the reformation of our
Church. The which cause in both the parts thereof, is made so just and aequall
by the word of God, that the promoting of it, can be accounted the disturbing
of no state that has not determined with it self to maintain the kingdom of
Satan and his prerogative. For the word of God makes it out of controversy,
that neither the expelling of dumb ministers and L. Bishops, etc. out of the
Church, nor the inducing of Pastors, Doctors. Elders and Deacons into the
same, can be burdened with any thing contrary unto the welfare of princes and
commonwealths, unless they will also charge the Majesty of God with the same
accusation. And here we appeal from our adversaries to the word, and are
content either to be condemned or acquitted by the judgment thereof, upon whose
judgment also, they dare not but profess themselves to rely.

First then we hold it intolerable, that the holy ministry of the word and
Sacraments, and the charge of souls, The desire of remoouing the dumb
ministry no undutiful attempt.
should in our Church be committed unto such men, as are no more able to teach
us what belongs to the pure worshipp of god, then can many a child of six
years old. And we would know whether by the word we may be accounted for this
position, to be enemies either unto our most dear prince, or unto our most
loving cuntry? What does it determine in this matter, are we thereby acquitted
or condemned for this our assertion? Surely acquitted: And that by the voice of
the Son of God himself, who openly declares that the misery of that people
is unspeakably pitiful, where the Math. 15.14. Iuk. 6.69.
blind leads the blind, who also by his own Matthew. 9.36. mark. 6.34.
example, has taught us what compassion we ought to have of our brethren, that
are scattered as sheep without a shepherd, having none to lead them, nor
feed them in the way of aeternall life. And therefore is so far from disliking
this care of ours toward the salvation of our brethren and cuntrimen, that he
has enjoined us, when we see our brethren thick and threefold to fall into
the ditch of blindness and ignorance, and so into the pit of aeternall woe and
destruction, Matthew. 9.34.
to pray unto the Lord that he would raise up meet guides, who may lead his
people in the true and upright way that leads unto life. Before we go any
farther, behold here how the case stands between us and our adversaries, and
judge uprightly. Our Savior Christ JESUS teaches us to be moved with pity
and compassion, when we see the blind lead the blind, and our own flesh
perish for want of the true knowledge of God. We see this lamentable sight in
our land every where, and we may hear the blood of ignorant souls cry day
and night in the ears of the Lord, for just vengeance to be powered upon
their blind leaders, and such as maintain them. What shall we do in this case?
shall we not be touched with any remorse at all? Far be it but we should. We
are therefore moved therewith, and as christian duty binds us: we do
endevor both by our prayers unto the Lord, and by our petitions and suits unto
our Majestrates, and every other way that become Christians, to have these
murderers removed, and to have those placed in their rooms, who bring with
them, and faithfully execute this great and high commission, whereof the Apostle
speaks in the person of al true ministers. Now then are we Ambassadors for
Christ, 2. Cor. 5.20.
as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that
you be reconciled unto God. But what say the adversaries unto us, for the
performing of so necessary a duty. Verily their censure is, that in so doing
we are enemies unto the state. We reply upon them again, that the word of God
does clear us, of their unjust accusation, which does not so much light upon
us, as upon the word and docttine of the son of God. For they that condemn
the disciples of sedition, for practizing that which their master enjoined
them, must needs pass sentence against the master, as a teacher of seditious
doctrine. And therefore we are so far from being moved with the unequal
dealing, that we wish them whosoever they be, to give ear unto the indictment
which the Psalmiste frames against them in these words. psalm. 15.19.20.
[You have given your mouths to evil, and with your tongs you forge deceit.
You sit and speak against your brethren, and you have slaundered the sons of
your mother. psalm. 54, 5.
You have encouraged your selves in a wicked purpose, and common together how
to lay snares privily, and say, who shall see. You have taken crafty counsel
against the people of ye Lord, and consulted against his secret ones.] psalm.
83.3.
And because they must needs confess themselves guilty of this accusation in
every point, therefore we do also advise them, by true and speedy repentance
to betake them unto the Lord, least as it is in the Psalm [He tear them in
pieces, and there be none that can deliver them.] psalm. 50.12
And we entreat them that are in authority, to weigh the state of the people
of this land with the word of God, and then we doubt not but they shall see
the motion of remoouing the dumb ministry out of our Church, and the planting
of careful teachers, to be the best piece of service one of them, that ever was
attempted under their government. If to redress the wantes of the pure
worshipp of God, and to remove the condemnation both of the bodies and the
souls of men, be thought a service worthy to be undertaken. For alas, by
means of the false and loytering guides, which have kept out the true and
painful watche-men, the service of God has now for the space of 31. years,
continued at that miserable stay in our kingdom, that in the most
congregarions, not of miserable Wales and Ireland only, but even of England it
self: The lamentab'e state of religion in England.
we want not some necessary member, but even all the vital parts, as the
heart, lyfeblood, yea and soul of true religion: namely, the word preached,
even the very seed, without which men can neither be begotten unto, nor
nourished in the hope of aeternall bliss and happiness. Again, by reason of
this desolation of our Church, the most of our people within all our
provinces, wandering as blind men in the dark, know no means either how to
yield the Lord any part of his true worshipp, or how they shall be saved in
the day of wrath. Here your Hh. of her Majesty's privy counsel, who profess
your selves adversaries unto reformation, and therefore vpholders of our
ignorant ministry, are cited before the tribunal seat of God, and required
in his name, to consider the injury that you offer unto his Majesty, both in
the maintenance of these blind guides, and also in your proceedings herein;
for both which, you are sure one day to be called to a reckoning. First by
maintayning these idols, you countenance and mayntaine the ruins, defectes
and profanation of Gods true service, together with the damnation of men's
souls. Secondly, your proceedings in the maintenance of the blooddie cause, is
such, as under the profession of true religion, I think the like has bin
seldom seen. For you think it a small matter for you, thus to bereave the
Lord of his true honor, and to lend your authority, might and power unto
Satan, to uphold ignorance and blindness, unless also as a testimony of your
perseverance in this damnable way, you do account of them that seek to bring
you into a better course, as of the professed enemies of your state. These
accusations I know, are grievous to be laid to the charge of these
Counselors, who through Europe have the name to be furtherers of Gods glory
and the salvation of men's souls: But they are such as if I prove them not
most true, let my blood wipe away the slander which I have undutifully raised
upon the rulers of my people: Here the word of God is to be approached unto,
out of the which we are to learn, what true worship and service they can yield
unto God, and what hope of salvation they can have, who never enjoyed the word
preached.

Concerning the true worship of God, we are to know, that the word who alone
is to instruct us therein makes two sorts thereof. The true worship or God
twofold.
The one inward and the other outward. The inward worship, is the worship of
the spirit, when the heart and the soul is by Gods spirit so directed, that in
truth and sincerity it yields to the Lord, the worship which he requires
according unto his word. Of this worship our Savior Christ speaks unto the
woman of Samariah, John 4.23 24. [The hour comes says he, and already is,
when the true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and truth, for
the father requires eue^ such to worship him. God is a spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth.] the inward worship.
Without this inward worship it is impossible to be saved, and without it no
service can be acceptable unto God. But although this inward worship be the
fountain whence the outward that is in truth does flow and proceed: yet is
the inward no otherwise ordinarily wrought in men, then by means of the
outward. So that even as the outward is never truly acceptable unto God but
when it proceeds from the inward, even so is the inward ordinarily found in
none, save only in those wherein it has bin begotten by the ministry of the
outward. But this inward worship in spirit and truth, is not in the power of
man to give or to take away at his pleasure, but the Lord must and does work
it, when and where he pleases, yet never ordinarily but by means of the
outward,

The true outward worship of God then, the outward worship.
is that alone, whereby as by the ordinary instrument or means the Lord has
appointed to beget, nourish increase and continue the inward worship of the
soul and the spirit, by the which the Lord is to be served in spirit and
truth. This outward worship is such by the ordinance of God, as men may be
truly said, either to hinder or to promote the same, and by the hindering or
promoting hereof, they may be judged to hinder or promote both the salvation of
themselves and others, and also the inward worship of the spirit either in
themselves or in others. And by the affection that men bear hereunto, the Lord
does try their love and also their hatred toward him and his glory. This
worship although it be outward, yet is it of that nature, as they who are
partakers hereof, may according unto the word expect for the presence of Gods
spirit, whenever they approach unto the Lord thereby. Otherwise if it has not
this promise of the spirit annexed unto it, it is but a rudiment of the world
or of the flesh, and therefore cannot be any thing for the furthering of men in
the worship of God.

This outward worship, or this outward means to serve God truly and
sincerely, consists of two parts or ordinances, according unto the twofolde
end for the which the Lord has appointed the said outward worship of his. The
first part hereof, is that ordinance whereby the Lord has appointed, not only
to beget faith in men, or to engraffe them into Christ, but being engraffed to
build and aedifie them forward as lively stones of that holy temple, whereof
Christ Jesus is both the head and the foundation. This ordinance of God,
appointed both to beget and to aedifie faith, is only the word preached The
second ordinance wherein the outward worship of God consists, is contained
in those exercises of religion, which the Lord ordained only for aedification,
and were never appointed to begett faith. By aedification I mean whatsoever
concerns our furthering in the work of our salvation, begun in us through
faith by the word preached. Unto this second part, we are to refer public
prayers, singing of Psalms, reading of the scriptures, receiving of the
sacraments, and administering of the Church censures, Many things are ordained
to aedifie, which were never appointed to beget says. 1. cor. 14.17. ephef.
4.29.
etc. All which are effectual to aedification, but not to the begetting of
faith: For that is only wrought by the word preached, without which also,
public prayers, singing of psalms, etc, are so frustrated of the end, vz. the
aedification, for the which the Lord has ordained them, as they cannot
possibly aedifie any aright, save only these who have learned the right use of
them by the preaching of the word, and in whose hearts faith which is the
groundwork, whereupon the whole building of gods service must be planted,
has bin begotten by the same word ordinarily. And these holy ordinances of
god, to wit, prayers, receiving of the Sacraments, are so far from aedifying
these people, who have not been instructed in the right use of them by the
word preached, that unto such they are nothing else but a sealed book, and
proceeding from such, they are nothing else but pollution in the Lords sight.
For no service can be acceptable unto god, but that which proceeds from
faith. For without faith it is impossible to please God.

Now then according unto that which hitherto has been spoken, let your Hb.
weye what service your people throughout all her Majesty's dominions for the
most part, can yeald unto the Lord, and how they stand in the hope of
saiuation, and consequently how careful you have been of the glory of god and
the salvation of his Church. Your people you will say every where, have had
these 31. years the use of public prayers, singing of Psalms, reading of the
Scriptures in their own tongue, they have further enjoyed the sacraments of
baptim and the Lords supper. Be it so, but what is all this? Can these things
going alone without the word preached, be any thing effectual to that worship
in spirit and truth, which is the only service that the Lord regards, and
without which, all exercises of true religion are but swines-blood before his
Majesty? Or can they be any thing forcible to work the salvation of your
people. Questionless you see that they cannot. For they are ordained of god,
not to lay the foandation of the spiritual worshipp, but as means to aedifie
and build upon, the foundation being laid. They are ordained you see also, not
to go alone, but to accompany the word, without the which they are fruitles and
to no purpose. Nay though it were possible that without the word they could
work some aedification in men, yet notwithstanding they were never appointed
to beget men into the hope of aeternall life. For regenerate flesh and blood
they cannot, because they were only appointed to edify those whom the word
should beget. So that men may all their life time enjoy these exercises of true
religion, and yet be far from the outward means whereby the Lord requires
himself to be worshipped in spirit and truth, and whereby the salvation of
their souls should be wrought. And though your Honors show your selves
never so great favorers of reading the word, public prayers, etc. which in
themselves are acceptable to God; but among our people for the most part,
abominablie profaned: yet because you maintain those to outcountenance the
preaching of the word, and to be polluted by such men as ought not to deal
with the holy things of the Lord: You are no otherwise accounted of in his
sight, then the professed enemies of that pure worship in spirit and truth
(wherein alone he delights) the maintainers of the profanation of his
service, and adversaries unto the salvation of his Church. And what other
account I beseech you can he make of you, which dare presume to platte him out
the perfection of his service, and appoint him a way to save his people
according unto your own pleasure. He has set down in his word, that without
faith it is impossible to please him, and so that without faith it is
impossible for men to worship him in spirit and truth, and come to aeternall
life. In this point I hope you will not gainesay his Majesty. He goes
farther, and manifests the ordinary means to beget faith and salvation, to
be only the word preached. And therefore requires the forwardnes of all those
that would not be guilty of neglecting his honor, to promote the said
preaching of his word. Herein you oppose your selves unto him, and reply
again, that he must needs provide himself of new ordinances, or else he can
neither in this life be worshipped in truth of your people, nor glorified with
their salvation in the life to come. For unless reading of the word, public
prayers, the profanation of his sacraments by the polluted fingers of most
ignorantmen, can work all that he requires, he can have no means in the most
congregations within the dominions of England to be purely worshipped, and to
gain himself a name, by the saving of the distressed souls of men. And you are
so resolute with the Lord in this point that you proclaim all them to be
enemies unto your state, whosoever dare open their mouths in his cause against
your unadvised resolutions. So that whatsoever favor your Honors pretend unto
some part of the true outward service of his Majesty: yet inasmuch as you
lend your whole force to maintain and keep in the Church, the reading idol
ministry, which you may know well enough, can neither beget faith, nor any
true aedification in your people, and by whom the Lord accounts himself
and his ordinances to be profaned: the very truth is this, that you stand at
this day guilty in his sight, of the defects, ruins and profanations of his
worship, and also of the utter undoing of many a thousand soul within England.
And I do not see what you can allege for your defense, except you will join
with that notable seducer of your people, D. Whitgift.
the Arch. of Cant. and affirm, either that salvation may be wrought in your
people by hearing the word read, or that reading is preaching. But alas these
fig leaves, are so far from standing you in any stead, when the Lord shall
enter into areckoning with our land, for the small care that our governors
have had in furthering his service, that his wrath will be kindled against our
state, almost for nothing more, then because that both these errors of this
wicked deceiuer have been uncondemned therein, and also as a token I think of
our hatred unto the Lord and his gospel, such a detected enemy unto the
gospel as he is, has been promoted unto one of the highest rooms at the
counsel table, to the end, as the maintaining of his proceedings do witness,
that he might be a scourge unto Gods Church within her Majesty's dominions.

Well, he says that men may be saved by hearing the word read, as by the
ordinary means. If it be not so, woe be to him that ever he was borne, whose
practices these 20. years almost have tended to no other end, then to
maintain this damnable error of his. For if men cannot be saved by reading,
where shall he stand, which has brought upon himself the guiltines of so
many souls, by silencing so many faithful preachers, and planting readers in
their stead. And therefore I do not so much blame him for framing his corrupt
judgment according unto the rule of his ungodly practices. For if his practice
were contrary unto the light of his knowledge, then has he a more fearful
account to make, who has quenched the light of his understanding to the end
he might with less remorse, rave against the Majesty of God. But his blindness
cannot make others inexcusable, that willingly follow after such a leader, and
therefore let us see what the word says unto this assertion.

The Apostle Paul affirms, 1. Cor. 1.24. Reading not the ordinary means to
salvation.
that seeing the world by wisdom knew not god in the wisdom of god, it
pleased god by the foolishness of preaching, to save as many as believe: Will
you then have a salnation that is by faith which you must have, or none at
all. Surely the Apostle tells you, that it pleases the Lord to work this no
otherwise in the hearts of men then by preaching, which unto the worldly wise
men is but foolishnes, but unto us that are saved, it is the wisdom of god,
and the power of god. Even as the^ we can expect no salvation but that which is
apprehended by faith, so can we not hope to have this saving faith wrought in
us by any other means then by preaching. For the Apostle sets down in
express words, that as many as believe, Romans 10.14.
are saved by the means of preaching. Again, how shall they call upon him,
says the same Apostle in another place, in whom they have not belecued? How
shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? How shall they hear
without a preacher. Behold then, if we will so hear as we may believe, the
Apostle tells us that this must be the hearing, not of a reader but of a
preacher. If then this seducing prelate, cannot make good a salvation which is
to be obtained without faith, as heaven and earth know he cannot: or if
believing to salvation be conuaied unto men's souls by no other hearing, then by
the hearing of a preacher, as the Apostle tells: then also it follows, to
the shame and confusion of all erroneous deceivers, that he cannot justify a
salvation wrought in men's hearts by any other ordinary means, then by the
word preached. But he will here object, that the Lord may if it please him,
work faith in men's hearts without preaching. That is as if he should say,
that the Lord is so powerful, as when man will not instruct by means, he can
teach his elect without means. Who ever denied this? Or what is this to prove
his wicked assertion. The question is not what the Lord can do, especially
where means is not to be found. For in such cases we do not use, to tie the
omnipotent power of the Lord, within the bounds, no not of his own ordinances,
but the point in controversy is, what that way and ordinary means is,
whereby the Lord has decreed to work a saving faith in the hearts of his
people, whether that ordinary means be the word preached, or the word read.
The spirit of God you see teaches us, that that ordinary way and means is
preaching. The Archb. of Cant. teaches it to be reading. Now whether of the
two, shall her Majesty's people believe? Surely let the Lord be true, and let
shame and confusion cover the faces of all his encmies, and namely of this
wicked prelate, who is not afraid in express terms, to give the lie unto the
Majesty of God. For the which madness of his, how great soeueuer he may be in
our kingdom, I am sure that the sentence, without his unfeigned repentance, is
long since decreed against him, that he Math. 5.19.
shall be the least in the kingdom of heaven. And if God had not blinded his
right eye, as a token of a farther judgment which is like to fall upon him, he
might have seen long since, that ye Apostle Peter attributes the work of men's
regeneration or new birth, and so faith and salvation unto the word preached
and not read. For so he writes. 1. Pet. 1.23.25.
Being borneagaine (says the Apostle) not of mortal, but of immortal seed by
the word of God, which lives and endures for ever, and this is the word
(says he) which is preached among you.

But what can he see, who has voluntarily so blinded himself (and laboreth to
wrapp others in the same darkness) as he will make men believe that he is of
judgment, that the meaning of the Apostle in saying, How can they believe
without a preacher, is as if he said, how can they believe without a reader?
For what else does he affirm then this, in holding reading to be preaching. For
he that avouches reading to be preaching, cannot deny readers Reading
engenders faith says he page 570. yea, and sometimes prevavleth more than
preaching. page 574.
to be prechers. And here is all the light which the Lord has left in that
dark understanding of his, which is justly made bruitishe, inasmuch as it has
blinded it self, to the end (as I said) he might with the less compunction,
or gnawing of his conscience fight against God. But let him and all his
maintainers know from me, that he who spared not the Angels, that had sinned,
but cast them down into hell, and delivered them unto chains of darkness, to
be kept unto the damnation of the great day, is able to make this brutish man
an example unto all those that hereafter shall tread in his ungodly steps,
especial seeing in these things, which naturally he might know, he (as lude
says) has corrupted himself. For if there had been no scripture to have
instructed him, yet very natural reason might have taught him, that reading and
preaching are of that diverse nature, that in common reason, the one of them
cannot be the other. For I pray you, who is so simple but knows by the light
of nature, that the preching that carries salvation with it, which he affirms
to be reding, is another manner of work the^ can be learned by the industry of
man in a months labor. And yet behold, such is the preaching which this man
has framed unto us in his writings, whereby the Church of England should be
saved, that an unlettered man coming from the plough, might in one months
study be made an able preacher, and so an able minister of the doctrine of
salvation. For if reading be preaching (as he says) yea and such a preaching
as is able to beget men to salvation, which also he affirms, then also does
it follow, both that an able reader is an able preacher, and also that any man
enjoying the benefit of his senses, may in one month, be made an able
minister of that great and admirable work of men's souls. The conceit whereof,
is such an indignity unto the Majesty of God, and to the mysteries of true
religion, as a greater cannot be offered. And is this all the thanks, that we in
England give unto the Lord, for the fruition of his gospel? Or is this all the
commendation that true religion has deserved at our hands? to be made fair
baser then any of the common crafts of the world. Well, the Lord sees this
vile injury offered unto his gospel, and the ministry thereof, and in his
time will recompense it. Concerning this absurd and senseless error, I will
say no more at this time: But first, that if the father hereof, to wit, the
Archb. of Cant, had lived in some of the former ages that embraced the truth,
he had been commended unto posterity, as a detestable forger of errors,
amongst the number of these pernicious heretics, that have endeavored to
obscure the light of the truth. Secondly, that it makes the ministers prayer
for the spirit of utterance, and his care in his study, to be altogether
needles and superfluous matters. And so this man has found out such a
methodicall kind of preaching, as the spirit of God never thought off. The
Apostle Paul desires the brethren to pray for him, that utterance might be
given unto him, to the end he might bold ly open his mouth, to publish the
secrets of the gospel: and he further charge Timothy, to take heed unto
learning and to continue therein, for in so doing he should both save
himself and those that heard him. But this godless man, that indeed he
might show himself not unlike that son of perdition, of whose body and
kingdom, by virtue of his Antichristian prelacie, he is also a limb and a
member, presumes to enter into the Lords chair, and to create new ordinances
for ministers to be guided by, in publishing the mysteries of the gospel. But
though he be like to continue as he is, vz. a deceiuer that waxes worse and
worse, 2. Tim. 3.14.
deceiving and being deceived, as the holy ghost says: yet it concerns your
Hh. to turn over a new leaf, Seeing your consciences must needs tell you,
that if you follow his damnable errors, you are also to fear lest you be
pertakers of the judgments, that are likely to be fastened upon him, and al
those that delight to hide the truth in ungodliness. And seeing the service of
the Lord, together with the salvation of men's souls, is by means of this dumb
ministry, at such a miserable stay among us, (as has been set down) it will
be your duties to take these things more to heart then as yet you have done,
and to seek the redress of them.

For our own parts, the defectes of Gods religion being thus lamentable in our
land, and the souls of our brethren with pitiful cries requiring our aid and
assistance, we cannot in conscience deny them the remedy that we are able to
minister: namely, the painting out of their misery, and the means how to be
delivered therefrom. And assuredly, if we should hold our peace and wink at
these calamities, the stones in the streate, would rise up in judgment
against us. Wherefore also, your Hh. may accuse us to be dangerous subjects as
well, because we are not without christian affections, as for that you see us
moved with pity at the ruins of Gods house, and the likely damnation of our
cuntrimen. For such is the opperation of Gods spirit in his children, that
they are altogether void of the assurance of aeternall life, yea without God
in the world, whosoever are not moved with grief and sorrow, when they see
either the service of their God, or ye salvation of those with whom they live
not to be regarded. Unless then you of her Majesty's counsel, would go about
to quench the motions of Gods spirit in the hearts of her Majesty's people,
you cannot charge them with any evil practice against the state, for laboring
the rooting out of this dumb and ignorant ministry, whereby as you see the
Lords service is most wretchedly profaned, and the salvation of his Church
most cruelly hindered and withstood. Nay as your Hh. would show your selves to
have any spark of Gods spirit in your hearts: so you must be careful to
join with us in this work, wherein indeed you ought to be our foreleaders.
For otherwise (never deceue your own hearts) there is not a man of you that can
possibly be saved. Weye the speech my Ll. for it concerns you as much as the
price of your souls is worth. I say then, No salvation unto them that are not
careful of the Lords pure worship and the salvation of their brethren.
that the enmity which in this point we bear unto the state of England is
such, as unless you that are of her Majesty's privy Counsel join with us in
the same, you cannot possibly see the face of Christ to your comforts. The
reason hereof is, that there is no salvation unto that soul, wherein Christ
Jesus does not remain and dwell by his spirit, as the Apostle teaches us in
these words, 2. Cor. 13.5.
Prove your selves (says he) whether you are in the faith, examine your
selves, know you not that Jesus christ is in you, except you be reprobates.
Either then a reprobate heart, or an heart possessing Christ Jesus. Now my Ll.
I appeal unto your consciences, whether you think that Christ can possibly
dwell in those hearts, who are not both grieved at the damnation of their
brethren, and the miserable deformities of the service of God among the^, and
are with all ready every way that lies in them, to prevent the one, and to
set forward the other. What? can Christ be there where there is not a desire,
and a readiness to labor, that the glory of God may shine upon earth, by the
saving of perishing souls, and the setting up of the sincere honor of the
Lord? Your consciences I am sure, must needs bear witness to the contrary.
For to deny this, were nothing else, but to make the spirit of Christ in his
children to be pitiles of the woeful estate of such souls, as for any thing
they know, were ordained to life, and careless in seeking the glory of God,
in his pure worship.

What is the conclusion then, surely that your Hh. must either manifest
yourselues, to be of their number, for whom the blacknes and terror of the
great day is prepared, or else you must join with the rest of the saints of
God within her Majesty's dominions, not only in mourning for the wantes of
true religion among our people, and the misery that ensues thereof, but also
in laboring most earnestly to find speedy means for the curing of so
deadlye a wound. You see then how the case stands between the Lord, nay,
between your felues, and your own souls. The day will come, when all those
whose sins are not forgeuen, and iniquities covered by Christ Jesus, shall
drink of the deadly wine of Gods wrath. And you see that Christ will be a
covering unto none, save only unto those, in whom he dwells by his spirit:
and more-ouer, that his spirit cannot be in them, who are not moved with the
dishonor of his name, and the destruction of men. The Lord warns you of these
things, and requires of you, that although for the love of his Majesty, and
the mercies both outward and inward which he has and does offer to heap upon
you, you cannot be moved to regard his ruinous Church, and woeful people:
yet, that you would be styrred forewarde hereunto by the care which you are to
have of your own souls. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hand of the
living God. Vengeance is his, and he will recompense it. Wherefore as you
would not drink of the dreggs of that bitter cup of his indignation, declare
unto the world, by the speedy removing of this dumb ministry, and apoynting
faithful teachers in their stead, that the Lord has not in this age placed
over England, a counsel of men that are careless of his glory, cruel
toward the people committed unto their charge, and consequenthe, a counsel of
men that are without God in the world, fed with honor and promotion against the
day of slaughter. Men that are so far from respecting the honor of their God,
and the aeternall salvation of men, that they are altogether without natural
affection toward the good of their own souls. For assuredly my Ll.
whatsoever good opinion you may have of your selves, and yourowne proceedings:
the Lord and his Church both in this age, and also among posterity, ca^ make
no other reckoning of you, than of those that lived without the true God in
this world, as long as you shall be found vpholders of the ignorance which
raygneth among your people. Whereupon also you shall one day by experience
find it to be true, that because the saving spirit of God never came near
your hearts, to work a sorrow and a mourning therein, for the spiritual
aniserie of your brethren and counuiemen: you made no other use of your being
here upon earth, the^ to provide for your selves, an exceeding measure of
plagues and torments, that may endure upon you for ever and ever. You see it
cannot be otherwise: for, to be without compassion toward the miserable
dispersion of poor sheep that wander without a guide, is to be void of Christ
Jesus and his fanctifying spirit, unto the want whereof there is joined no
thing else, but final damnation both of body and soul.

Wherefore good my Ll. suffer the words of exhortation to enter into your
souls. The Lord is my witness that I speak not unto you, without the
consideration and reverence due unto your places. It pityeth me to see the case
wherein ye stand before the Lord: for surely ye cannot (as I have said)
posiblie be saved, so long as you hold on your course in consenting unto
ignorance and blindness. There is nothing but judgment merciles unto those that
defer their turning unto him. Deceive not your selves the^, for as I shall
answer before the Lord, in the fearful day of judgeme^t, I have set before
you the way of life, and the way of death. Choose life therefore that you may
live, which you shall never do, except you do rid your hands of the defense
of this pestilent ministry, and consecrate the^ to make up the breaches of
Gods sanctuary. Where you see, how little beholding ye are unto those wicked
men ye are your Chaplains, who have never made your estates known unto you.
You may justly acconut those ungodly flatterers, to be the greatest enemies you
can have. For they are guilty of your blood, and serve you almost for no
other use, than to hasten Gods judgments upon you. But their guilte and
punishment shall not deliver you in the day of wrath, for the soul that
sins shall dye the death And therefore now that the light is made known
unto you, let it not be your condemnation, that John 3.19.
light coming among you, yet you loved darkness more than light.

Well hitherto it appears how wrongfullie the favorers of reformation are
charged with enmitye unto our state, for laboring to have the dumb ministry
rooted out.

The next bane of our Church are nonre sidents, Non-residency.
whereof all our Ll. Bb. are guilty: the which corruption is so great, that I
do marvel with what face it can be tolerated in a Christian state. And
therefore I make no question whether the word of God makes it lawful for us
to endeavor that no such vilanie be heard off in Israel any more. Romans 10.14.
The dumb Minister though intolerable, has yet some color of his sin,
because under the name of feeding he starueth the poor sheep. But the bloody
non-resident has no cloak to hyde his vilanie: for he is so out of measure
become impudent in his sin, that he dares make an open profession of murder
This sin whereof the Papists themselves have long ago been ashamed, has so
kindled the wrath of God against our kingdom, that I fear he will be no
otherwise pacified toward us, than by sending a sword through our land, which
may revenge the blood of innocent souls, which these 31. years has benespilt
like water upon the earth, by means of these professed murderers, and that
under the profession of the gospel.

Though I preach, 1. Cor. 9.16.
says the blessed Apostle, I have nothing to rejoice of: for necessity is
laid upon me, yea and woe is unto me if I preach not the gospel. This is spoken
in the person of all true ministers. But our non-residents have dispensed with
this necessity, by means of their degrees of their Chaplain-shipes, and of
their faculties. And as for the woe denounced against them, they have a
distinction at hand wherewith to delude that curse: which is, that although
they cannot be continually resident at every one of their charges, yet they
are not all the year lightlye absent from all of them. And although they do
not continually preach at neither, yet they are not always idle, but at
somtymes they do preach, either upon their own charges, or else abroad, where
occasion is offered. Now in their absence they do not provide so evil for
their people, but that contrary to the express will of the Lord, Ezekiel. 44 1.
they place others in their stead to take the oversight of the Sanctuary. And
whenever they are absent from all their benefices, it is not without some
reasonable cause: for at all such times they attend either in the Court, in
the University, or are otherwise necessarily bestowed in their private or
public affairs. Look T.C. admo. page 28 29
And as for the liberty that one man should have many benefices, it is
necessary for the encouraging of stadents, and the increase of able men to
withstand the common adversary. By all which speches of theirs, we see to our
grief, the words of the holy Apostles to be verified in our woeful times, viz.
Ier. 18.1. Tim. 4.2.
That in the Church of God there should be mockers in the last times, which
should walk after their own ungodly lusts, having their consciences burned
with an hot iron men of corruptminds, destitute of the truth, 1. Tim. 6.5.
which think that gain is godliness. 2. These. 3.10.
But I marvel what these mockers will answer unto the holy Ghost, who
commands that they who labor not, 1. Cor. 4.12.
must not ear, and shows that it is required of the ministers of Christ that
they be found faithful. 1. Pet. 5.2, 3.
And I marvel what they will answer unto the Apostle Peter, by whom they are
enjoined, as they would receive the incorruptible crown of glory, when the
great shepherd of the sheep shall appear, to feed the flock of God, that
depends upon the^ caring for it, not by co^straint, but willingly, not for
filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, not as though they were lords over Gods
herrtage, but that they may be ensamples to the flock. And I do wonder, what
they will answer unto the diligence which the apostle Paul used in teaching
the people with who^ he was conversant, whose example all the ministers of
Christ ar bound to follow. 1. These. 2.10.
You are witnesses, and God also (says the Apostle) how holilie and
unblameably we behaved our selves among you that believe, as you know, how that
we exhorted you and comforted, and besought every one of you as a father his
children, that you would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his
kingdom and glory. A^t. 20.18.19.
And again in an other place: You know (says he) from the first day that I
came unto Asia, after what manner I have been with you, at all seasons serving
the Lord with all modesty, and with many tears, and temptations: which came
unto me by the lying await of the jews, and how that I kept nothing back,
that was profitable, but have showed you and taught you openly, and throughout
every house. Well, whether these cursed mockers will scorn at these godly
examples and labors of the blessed Apostles, or no: and go about to answer
the matter by their childishe unlearned distinctions, it is not greatly
material. Of this I am assured, that as unto al those places they have not a
word to answer according unto truth: so especially will they be dumb, Math.
25.26. If they have no talents they are Idols, and no Ministers.
when the right use of their talents (if they have any) are required at their
hands. And let all non residents, and especially these tyrannous atheists or
Prelates (I mean) understand, that if they will needs be rulers over gods
household, they are bund to give the Lords family their meat in due season:
yea, Mat. 24.48.49
and to continue in feeding of them until the coming of their master, that
when he comes he may find them so doing. Otherwise if like evil servants
they shall still continue to say in their hearts, that their master does
defer his coming, and still continue to smite their fellow servants, much
more to pyne and starve them, their master will come in a day, when they look
not for him, and in an hour, when they are not aware off, and because in that
day he finds them not so doing, as the holy Ghost speaks, that is,
because like faithful servants he finds them not distributing unto their
fellows their meat in due season, he will cut them off, and give them their
part with hypocrites, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. And this
will be their reward.

As for you my Ll. who wink at all the abominations of these tyrannous
murderers, and show not your selves moved with the dishonor wherewith they
stain true religion, and the misery which they have brought upon our Church,
the Lord be merciful unto you. For I see no way for you, but as you allow the
wicked course of these me^, so you shall be partakers of their heavy
damnation. And as you cannot wash your hands from any of the blood that is
spilte in our Church, because your eyes have seen it, and either show no
dislyke thereof, or maintain the same: so of all other the murders committed
upon the souls of men within England, you are most guilty of this, whereof the
non-resident is the butcher: because a great part of this cruelty is committed
in our Church by your means: Chaplainships.
for this is the sin whereunto you give a commission, and unless ye
delivered the sword into the hands of these bloody tyrants, their slaughter
would not be so in use among us. For whereas many could not otherwise be
qualified (as they call it) to have more benefices than one: you know that to be
Chaplayne unto a noble man, or to the most of our Counselors, if not unto all,
gives a full liberty unto this cruel and unnatural slaughter. Insomuch as
you bring this blood unto your houses, and are not only accessaries
thereunto, but principal offenders therein. Whatsoever then your Hh. will do
in other points of the reformation of our Church, it is plain, that you can no
longer suffer your places to be a couerture unto this sin in your godless
Chaplains, except you would have the Lord and his Church to bear witness
against you, that you have conspired against the blood of your countrymen and
people.

And as your Hh. are bound in the sight of God, to wash your hands from the
maintenance of this sin in your fore named servants, that in a good
conscience you may testify before the Lord and say, Deuteronomy. 21.7.
Our hands have not spilt this blood where of our Chaplains are guilty,
neither have our eyis seen it: So also are you bound to detest both the same,
and all other the impieties, that raygne in our Church, by means of these
wicked Prelates, and their government. Whose very callings are so directly
against the word of God, that possibly they cannot stand in the Church of
Christ, without the intolerable oppression thereof: and the impeaching of
whatsoever liberty almost, the Lord has left unto the same in his word. And
when I consider the great injury that is offered unto the Lord and his Church
by means of this wicked Hierarchy, and whatsoever depends thereupon: I
cannot but think it a strange matter, that the oppugning of so intolerable a
corruption should be hardlye thought off, much less accounted insufferable in
a Christian state. For these corruptions of Ll. Archbishops, and Bishops,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, Chancelors, etc. were altogether unknown in the
Church of God, until the kingdom of Christ fell in the ages by past to decay,
and Satan in the ruins thereof, began to lay the foundation, of that
monarchy of his, wherein Antichriste at this day does bear rule. That these
things may be the better understood, and that it may be made known whether
the offices of Archb. and Bb. with the rest of that stamp: belong unto, and
had their beginning from the kingdom of Christ: or else, sprang up when Satan
began to lift his hand for the erecting of Antichrists throne, and so
appertain unto his government: we are to consider what is meant by the
kingdom of Christ, in the decay whereof we affirmed these offices of Archb.
and Bb. to have had their original and beginning. By the kingdom of Christ then
generally taken, we understand that regiment and superiority, which the Lord
Jesus has above all principalities, that are either in heaven or in earth, not
simply as he is the second person in trinity, God above all, blessed for
evermore, but as he is the son manifested in the flesh, Christ god and man,
and so the head of his Church. In respect of this regiment of his, the word of
God speaks of his kingdom 2. manner of ways: first it makes the same to be
everlasting: secondly it considers of it as it is temporary and to remain
for a time. In the former respect it cannot possible any ways decay. Of this
aeternall kingdom of his the Angel Gabriell spoke unto the holy Virgin
Marie, after this sort: Luke. 1.31.32.
Thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a son, and shall call his name
Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the most high, and
the Lord God shall give unto him the thron of his father David, and he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be none
end. Concerning the latter regard of his kingdom, the holy Apostle Paul
writes in these words. 1. Cor. 25.24.
Then shall be the end, when he has delivered the kingdom unto God, even the
Father, when he has put down all rule and authority, and power: for he must
reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet. Where the Apostle
speaks of the kingdom of Christ as it is temporary, and to continue only
unto the day of judgment and no longer. Now this temporary regiment of his,
is also of 2. several considerations. For the word speaks of our savior
Christ and his government, either as he has all power in heaven and earth
committed unto him, Mat. 28.19. Revel. 19.16. and 17.14. and ^.5.
and so he is called the Lord of Lords, the king of kings, and the prince of
the kings of the earth, because he is Lord of all kingdoms and common
wealths, to dispose and rule them at his pleasure, even as he is man, or else it
considers his government as he which is the head rules his body which is
the Church here upon earth, by ceratine offices and ministeries, which he
has appointed to be in his body, to wit the Church, for the gathering
together of his Saints, for the work of his ministry, and the aedification
of his body. Ephesians. 4.12.
In both these regards, he is said in the day of judgment to deliver the
kingdom unto his father. For whereas now, as he is Lord of kingdoms and
co^mon-vealthes he rules by the civil Magistrate, and otherwise by his
power, even in the midest of his enemies: he shall in the day of judgment put
an end unto this regiment, when all his enemies are put under his feet and so
deliver the kingdom unto his Father. Again, because in the day of judgment
when we are all met together, we shall not stand in need of any
aedification, and so the means thereof by the preaching of the word, the
administration of the sacraments, etc. shall cease, the government of Christ
also, as far as it is performed by these means shall cease. And so in this
respect he is said to deliver the kingdom unto his father. For after that
day, he will no longer govern and rule us which are the members of his body
by means as he now does: but he which is the Lamb, Look Reu. 7.1^. and
21.22.23. and 22, ^.
being in the midst of the throne of God, shall immediately govern us by
himself, and bring us to the lively fountains of waters.

Now the kingdom of Christ being taken in this latter sense, for that
government of the Church ordained under the new testament, whereby he which is
the son being manifested in the flesh, to take upon him the regiment of his
own house, does now from heaven by the operation of his spirit, guide and
govern his Church, is such: as no part thereof must be administered by any
offices, or officers, save only by those, whom in his word he has appointed
thereunto. The which case stands upon such manifest grounds of aequitie and
justice that their madness is apparantlie wicked, who go about to attempt the
contrary. For seeing no office can have any place in the kingdom and body
of Christ, viz. the Church, which is not a Romans 12.6. 1. Cor. 12.^.14.27.28.
member thereof: and seeing our Savior Christ has not left his Church
imperfect, but absolute and complete of all her members (otherwise he should
be an imperfect builder of his house, and far more imperfect than Moses is
said to be, Heb. 3.3.6.
the contrary whereof is testified of him in ye word) the enterprise is
intolerable, that any man should add of his own invention unto that which
is most perfect: and whereunto that which is added being impertine^t, must
needs be altogether a burden unprofitable and noisome unto the body. Because
our Savior who is the head of his body gives life only unto the members of
his own appointment and making: insomuch as if you go about to bring into his
kingdom and body, those officers which were not ordained and appointed in the
word of God to be therein: you bring in these things that appertain not unto
the kingdom of Christ.

Now according unto these grounds, Archbard ^b. do not belong unto the
kingdom of Christ
let us see unto what regiment these offices of Archb. and Bb. do belong,
whether unto the government of christ or unto the kingdom of the beast. You
see, if they apertaine unto the Church of Christ, that they were ordained
members thereof, in the written word and will of God. Here then we will not
be the judges, let our adversaries speak the^ selves: whether their offices be
appointed in the new testament or not, for therein must they be mentioned, if
they belong unto the kingdom of Christ, and are the members of his body. What
will their answer be in this point? Surely they must confess, that from the
beginning of the new testament unto the latter end of it, there is not a word
spoken of Ll. Arch b. and Bb. So that whenever, or by whomesoeuer they had
their original, they have it not from our Savior Christ and his word.
Because he has ordained no members of his body, and no offices of his
Kingdom, since the written word of the new testament was penned. Whereupon we
must needs conclude, that they belong not unto his kingdom. Nay, we go
further and say, that Ll. Archb. and Bb. are so far from having their
callings warranted by the word, that their very names, much more their
offices, are by the same made detestable and odious unto the church, as shall
presently appear. As for their callings the corruption thereof is so great,
that they and the purity of the gospel together with the liberty of the
church, cannot stand together.

Concerning the purity of the Gospel, their callings pollute the same 2.
manner of ways, and infringe the liberty of the church by as many. First they
will be Ministers, and civil magistrates too, that is, they wilbee ministers
of the kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of the world all at once. Whereby
they declare unto us, that they think it not sufficient to be as their Mat.
10.24.25. John 18.36.
master was, who affirmed his king dome not to be of this world: that is,
that he was not manifested in the flesh, to intermedle with the execution of
civil functions: but to be ruler of a kingdom, that consists in an other
manner of government and dominion than the kingdoms of the world do. Whose
example in this point, all his true ministers must needs follow, unless
they will make a shameful defection from their master, unto whom (being
here upon earth) though he were the lord of all his creatures, it had been
unlawful, to have taken upon him the function of the civil magistrate. And
therefore we read that when the multitude would have made him king, John.
6.15.
he withdrew himself out of the way, because that he was not sent hither to
deal in any thing, but in the work of man's redemption: and so if as a
Magistrate he had intermedled with the dispensation of civil things, be had
not contained himself within the limits of that calling, whereunto he was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. Not that the calling of
the Magistrate being Gods ordinanceis a thing unlawful in it self, but that the
Lord has so appointed, that he which is to be the minister of the glad
tidinges of the gospel, cannot be the minister of civil justice and
execution. By reason that these two ordinances of the magistracy and
ministry, though proceeding both of them from the Lord, do yet flow from him
in a diverse consideration and respect. For the civil magistrate is the Lords
liuetennant and messenger, in respect that the Lord is governor and ruler of
all his creatures, and especially of men: and therefore has appointed the
civil magistracy, to keep them in that outward obedience, which he requires
at their hands. Now the minister is the Lords messenger in an other regard.
viz. In respect that the Lord offers peace and reconciliation unto men, if
they 2. These. 1.9.
believe and obey his gospel. Unless therefore we would make the Lord, to be
the Redeemer of mankind, in that respect that he is the Creator and the
governor thereof, and so confound thedecree of the government of the creatures,
with the decree and ordinance of man's redemption, we cannot without the breach
of the Lords holy will, confound these two callings together. And surely by
how much the work of man's redemption from the aeternall wrath of God, is more
excellent, than the work of the creation and government of the creatures: by
so much the more detestable and odious do they manifest themselves: who being
as they would be accounted ministers of that reconciliation made between God
and man, do either utterly reject their ministry, because they think it to
base, and gainlesse a calling: or else as a farther countenance unto the most
glorious vocation under the funne, do add the civil magistracy thereunto.
Whereby they show themselves indeed to have made a shameful apostacy from
the doctrine and practice of our savior Christ and his Apostles. The weapons
of whose warfare were not carnal, 2. Cor. 10.4.5.
that is, not such as wherewith men by an arm of flesh, as by civil authority,
improsonme^t, etc. brin g their matters to pass, but mighty in God to cast
down holds, casting down the imaginations, and every high thing that is
exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought
unto the obedience of Christ. Here are the only weapons that our Savior
Christ and his Apostles used, and the only weapons that are granted unto
ministers, to overthrow the gayn-sayer. And as for the civil punishment of the
obstinat, they must commit that unto the magistrate, who bears not the sword
in vain. Romans 13.3.4.
For it is he and not the minister of the word, whom the Lord has appointed
to take revenge of him that does evil. Now compare the dealings and practices
of our bishops, and what weapons they use to encounter with those that stand
against them, and you shall perceive that they have not only abused the force
of that sword (which violently and wrong fullye their predecessors wrested out
of the maiestrats hand) to keep the church in bondage: but also that this
confusion of the magistracy and ministry in one person (though the
furtherance of the truth were intended thereby) cannot stand together with the
sincerity of the gospel: the purity whereof also they have corrupted, in the
tyrannous superiority, which they usurp both over their fellow Ministers,
and also over the rest of the church, with no less breach of the ordinance
of God, than the impeaching of the liberty of the church,

For the first point, to wit, of the superiority which they as ministers claim
over the church and messe^gers of Christ, it is intolerable tyrannous, and
directly against a plain moral act set down in the canon of the new testament
by our Savior Christ himself. The place is commonly known, and has been
cited for this purpose, I think by all those that ever dealte in this cause.
Luk.: 2.24.^.
And there arose also a strife among them (that is, among the disciples says
the text) which of them might seem to be the greatest, but he said unto
them, the kings of the nations reign over them, and they that bear rule over
them, are called gracious lords, but ye shall not be so. In which place we see
the spirit of God by the mouth of the aeternal himself, to have plainly
forbidden al his ministers, either to have any superiority and dominion over
the church and their brethren to rule any wise as Lords and princes do, or yet
to be so called. Where also three especial and monstrous corruptions raingning
in our Ll. Archb. and Bb. are expressly inhibited and forbidden. First, they will
be ministers of the gospel, and yet be greater then their brethren, and rule
over the church. Secondly, they will be ministers of the gospel, and yet bear
rule like lords. Thridlie, they will be ministers of the gospel, and yet
called lords. How stands this with the ommandement of our Savior christ,
You shall not be so? That is, you my disciples shall be so far from having any
superiority one over an other after my departure, and so far from bearing rule
as civil Magistrates, Princes and Lords do: that you shall not be so called
by any names or tytles, that do carry with them the honor and the pre-eminence
due unto princes and lords. They that bear rule over the nations says our
Savior, are called Fuergetai a title wherewith the kings of Egypt were honored.
gracious lords, but ye shall not be so. Here we see plainly that he
forbids his disciples to bear the name whereunto pre-eminence is joined
which may further appear, if we consider that in forbidding them to
[kurieuein] that is, to rule like lords, he forbids them also to be
[kurious] viz. lords, as far as that name [kurios] is a title of worldly
honor, pre-eminence and government, and no farther. And no farther I say,
because the word [kurios] in the greek tongue, (as also the word Compare the
1. San^^, 15. and 2 Kin. 5.25. with 2. king 6.12.
[adhon] in the hebrew, and [dominus] in latin,) signifies a master, or Sir,
as well as a Lord, which is proved, John 12.21 and 20.5. where Philip the
apostle, and our Savior Christ (supposed by Maric to be the gardener) are
called [kurici] sirs, or masters. In which sense it is not forbidden unto
ministers to be called [kurioi.] Which I add to stop theynlearned and
foolish cavils of our adversaries, who go about to prove it as lawful for our
bishops to be called lords in the English tongue, which always are names of
worldly honor and promotio^, in our common speech, as it were for them, to have
the former greek, hebrew, and latin names, attributed unto them. Which by the
places before quoted, and to any man of understanding in the tongues appears
to be a cavil unworthy the answer. And that our Savior Christ forbidding
his ministers to [kurieuein] viz, to rule like lords, forbids them also to
be called Lords, it is most clear in that otherwise he should open a wide
door unto the ambition and pride, of proud and ambitious men. For it is a
far greater token of pride and ambition for a man who cannot by any right
have the dignitye of a lord, to desire the name and title thereof: than for
him to be so called that is a Lord indeed. So that in forbidding his disciples
to (kurieuein) bear rule as the lords of the nations do, he forbids them
also to be called and termed by their titles. I know what has been objected
by the Archb. unto these things, and will again be said, if it be not
prevented: namely, that our Savior forbids tyrannous lordship and tyrannous
bearing of rule in the former place, and not just, upright, and lawful
government. Where I beseech your Hh. to lend me your attention, and you shall
see the intolerable boldness of this man in perverting the truth, who is not
ashamed (whensoever it may be for his behoof) to teach points of doctrine
mere directly against the words and mind of the Lord Jesus. I demand then of
him, whether our Savior Christ did not in the place before cited, so answer
his disciples in the point whereof they doubted, as he did fully resolve
them? He dares not deny it I am sure. For in points that are needful to be
known and revealed, our Savior being demanded one thing does not frame his
answer unto that whereof no question is made, and so leave his church
vnsarisfied. What was the question then? Was it whether any of them should rule
like a tyrant? was it whether any of them should gape after promotion? no such
thing. For they knew well enough, that it was very gainlesse for them to
demand of our savior which of them should be a tyrant? which of them should
abuse his lawful superiority, or which of them should be an ambitious
prelate? they knew well enough that he would allow no such dominion and
pre-eminence. Besides, the apostles (we may well think,) were not so blind, as
to demand any such question of their master. Now then they demanding no such
thing at his hands, to what end should he tell them, that they should not be
tyrannous rulers? They made no question of any such matter, and therefore a
resolution of that which they called not into controuersye, was nothing to the
purpose, but left them as doubtful as they were before. Wherefore we are to
conclude, that as the question was concerning lawful pre-eminence and bearing
of rule, his negative answer being frained unto their question, denies unto
them, not only a tyrannous and an ambitious prelacie, whereof they made no
question, but even that dominion and pre-eminence which of it self is lawful
in the^, who by the ordinance of God are capable of it: to wit, in the civil
magistrate. And whereas the Apostles dreaming of a worldly kingdom, might
allege for themselves, that their demand was not altogether without ground,
because they contended for no other superiority then was allowed off, in the
rulers of worldly kingdoms: our master Christ answers that objection, and
tells them, that although it be lawful for civil governors to bear rule
over their fellow officers and colleagues, that is, over civil magistrates, and
although it be lawful for them to bear lordly rule and authority, and to
have high styles and titles, yet among you that are Ministers of the Gospel,
it shall not be so says he. And to persuade them hereunto, Luke 22.27.28
he brings in his own example, who came to serve and not to bear rule in
the ministry of the new testament. Making it also known unto them, and to all
his true ministers, that although they were according unto his example to
serve, and not to exercise dominion all the time of their being upon earth in
publishing the gospel, Verse 29.30.
yet there was a kingdom prepared for them wherein they should have an
especial pre-eminence. But as for any dominion here upon earth, if they would
be his true disciples, they were to look for none, but to be as he was, and to
take the Ministerye upon them on the same condition that he did. viz. to serve
and not to bear rule therein.

Of all these things then we do conclude, that this threefold corruption of
our Archb. and Bb. First, in usurping upon the government of the civil
magistrate: secondly, in claming unto themselves those high names and titles,
which belong unto worldly honors and promotions: lastly in the lordly
pre-eminence and superiority, which they usurp over the whole body of the
Church, within their diocese in general, and over their fellow ministers in
particular, is altogether a matter to be detested of all true christians, as
abominable and odious in the presence of the Lord. And seeing our head Christ
Jesus grants unto his body this libertle, that all the members thereof should
be servants and not lords therein, (as he himself did serve and not bear rule
in the kingdom of the gospel) and has given all true ministers this
privilege, that none of them should rule over the other, it must needs be
that this lordlyke government which our bishops arrogate unto themselves over
the church of God and the Ministers of it, cannot in it self, though it were
never abused, but be prejudicial unto the liberties of the church, and the
ministers thereof.

Therefore my Ll. maintain the Hierarchy of Bb. as long as you will, you
uphold thereby nothing else, but the tyranny and bondage of the church,
together with a chief and an especial portion of the kingdom of Antichrist.
For as this pestilent Hierarchy has been proved, not to appertain unto the
kingdom of Christ: so your Hh. are to know, that the same belongs unto no
other body, then unto that regiment whereof the son of perdition is the head.
For unto the kingdom of Christ as you see, it does not belong, to the kingdom
of the world, that is, unto the civil magistracy it cannot appertain, for it
would be accounted an ecclesiastical constitution, and not any civil
regiment. To Mahometisme, or to any other heathnish Idolatry, it cannot belong,
because it is only retained among those that pretend the name of Christ, and
are either the true church in deed, or at the least do wrongfully retain
the name of the true church. Now unto the true church it does not belong, as
we have already proved, because it is a government consisting of those offices,
which the head never ordained to be in the body, and consists of such
members, as would bear rule and not serve in the ministry of the Gospel. We
must then place them in deed where of right they ought to be, that is in the
false sinagogue, which unjustly arrogateth unto it self, the name of the true
church of God, and that is in the kingdom of Antichriste, the Pope: Whose
kingdom must begin in the church of god and not among the heathen, as it was
expressly fore told by the apostle Paul. 2. These. 2.5.
Satan therefore being to lay the foundation of this antichristian kingdom
within the church and temple of God, that he might with more color
afterward pretend the name of the church, began by little and little to
poison the ministers of the gospel with worldly promotion and superiority,
and so from small beginnings brought the Hierarchye unto that height of pride
wherein we see it at this day, not only in his own kingdom where he rules by
his vicaz the Pope, but eue^ among us in the persons of our wicked Prelates.
And although Satan was enforced to watch a long time, for his opportunity,
ere he could bring the ministers of the gospel unto lordship and dominion, A
bout the year 320.
(for unto the time of Pope Silvester Rome it self was without any lordship
atal) yet notwithstanding he was driven to work that in the Church, before ever
he could advance the man of sin unto the chair of iniquity. So that by means
of this superioritye and worldly dominion of the ministers of the word, he
began at the first to make the way for the in bringing of the my sterie of
iniquity. which as the holy ghost testifies, 2. These. 2.7.
began to manifest it self in the age of the apostles. And going on forward by
degrees, he so strengthened these plants of his own graffing, that he made
the^ to be the instrnmentes by the strength and power whereof, he convaied the
whole body (whereof they were the members) head and al, into the temple of
God. For in these wicked offices of Archb. and Ll.Bb. the man of sin first
began to manifest him self, Cardinals were brought into the Romish church,
since it fell clean away from Christ, and they are rather the pomp then the
strength of that kingdom.
and now he is especially vpheld through no other power, but through their
means, by whom also the whole kingdom of Idolatry and darkness under him is
especially governed. For the inward parts of that kingdom, to wit, the
pestilent errors whereby he poysoneth the world, would easily wyther and decay,
were it not that they are fostered and nourished by these ruling members of
Archb. and Bb Who although when they were first brought into the church (being
therein ordained for good purposes as flesh and blood did imagine) they were
not nor could not be discerned to be members of the Antichristian kingdom,
because that mystery was not then made fully visible, yet ever since that body
has appeared, we know them to be members thereof in such sort, as wheresoever
they are maintained, there the limbs and members of Antichrist are countenanced
and vpheld.

But we are not to think that Satan, by whom these offices of Archbishops
and L. Bishops, were first invented, does at all times and places use them to
the one and self same purpose, he knows full well, that he cannot always
effect what he would do with them, and therefore he is content, until
conveniencye be offered, to bestow them as he may. But always this is a
ground, he has some service for them in all ages. At the first planting of
them, and long after that, he did not vohold open Idolatry, and manifest
apostasy from Christ by their means, he could not do it, the times would
not suffer him, who though otherwise very corrupt, were yet far from that
vile dishonor of God. Example hereof you may see in Pope Gregory the first of
that name, Anno ^04.
and especially in all his predecessors, whose superioritye and dominion he
could not so have at commandment, as he had the prelacy of all those that
followed after him unto this day. And yet had he his turns to bring to pass
by their superiority, though the most of them were undoubtedly Gods dear
children. For he used their places, as steps and degrees to advance Antichrist
into his throne. Now in that kingdom of the man of sin, since Rome became
the cage of every unclean beast, and the very receptacle of Devils, he has
the Hierarchy at his own commandment, to accomplish his own will by it unto
the full. So can he not have it in England at this day. The time will not
suffer it, her Majesty and our state will not bear it, and yet notwithstanding
he works by these Antichristian offices very mightily as we see, in staying
the course of the gospel, and the establishing of the kingdom of darkness:
though not by means of any public Idolatry, yet by the maintenance of
ignorance and blindness, and by the oppression of the church.

And in earth, not simply as he is the second person in trinity, God above
all, blessed for evermore, but as he is the son manifested in the flesh,
Christ god and man, and so the head of his Church. In respect of this regiment
of his, the word of God speaks of his kingdom 2. manner of ways: first it
makes the same to be everlasting: secondly it considers of it as it is
temporary and to remain for a time. In the former respect it cannot possible
any ways decay. Of this aeternall kingdom of his the Angel Gabriell spoke
unto the holy Virgin Marie, after this sort: Luke. 1.31.32.
Thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a son, and shall call his name
Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the most high, and
the Lord God shall give unto him the thron of his father David, and he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be none
end. Concerning the latter regard of his kingdom, the holy Apostle Paul
writes in these words. 1. Cot. 25.24.
Then shall be the end, when he has delivered the kingdom unto God, even the
Father, when he has put down all rule and authority, and power: for he must
reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet. Where the Apostle
speaks of the kingdom of Christ as it is temporary, and to continue only
unto the day of judgment and no longer. Now this temporary regiment of his,
is also of 2. several considerations. For the word speaks of our savior
Christ and his government, either as he has all power in heaven and earth
committed unto him, Mat. 28.19. Revel. 19.16. and 17.14. and ^.5.
and so he is called the Lord of Lords, the king of kings, and the prince of
the kings of the earth, because he is Lord of all kingdoms and common
wealths, to dispose and rule them at his pleasure, even as he is man, or else it
considers his government as he which is the head rules his body which is
the Church here upon earth, by certain offices and ministeries, which he
has appointed to be in his body, to wit the Church, for the gathering
together of his Saints, for the work of his ministry, and the aedification
of his body. Ephesians. 4.11.
In both these regards, he is said in the day of judgment to deliver the
kingdom unto his father. For whereas now, as he is Lord of kingdoms and
common vealthes he rules by the civil Magistrate, and otherwise by his
power, even in the midest of his enemies: he shall in the day of judgment put
an end unto this regiment, when all his enemies are put under his feet and so
deliver the kingdom unto his Father. Again, because in the day of judgment
when we are all met together, we shall not stand in need of any
aedification, and so the means thereof by the preaching of the word, the
administration of the sacraments, etc. shall cease, the government of Christ
also, as far as it is performed by these means shall cease. And so in this
respect he is said to deliver the kingdom unto his father. For after that
day, he will no longer govern and rule us which are the members of his body
by means as he now does: but he which is the Lamb, Lonke Reu. 7.17. and
21.22.23. and ^2, 5.
being in the midst of the throne of God, shall immediately govern us by
himself, and bring us to the lively fountains of waters.

Now the kingdom of Christ being taken in this latter sense, for that
government of the Church ordained under the new testament, whereby he which is
the son being manifested in the flesh, to take upon him the regiment of his
own house, does now from heaven by the operation of his spirit, guide and
govern his Church, is such: as no part thereof must be administered by any
offices, or officers, save only by those, whom in his word he has appointed
thereunto. The which case stands upon such manifest grounds of aequitie and
justice that their madness is apparantlie wicked, who go about to attempt the
contrary. For seeing no office can have any place in the kingdom and body
of Christ, viz. the Church, which is not a Romans 12.6. 1. Cor. 12.8.14.27.28.
member thereof: and seeing our Savior Christ has not left his Church
imperfect, but absolute and complete of all her members (otherwise he should
be an imperfect builder of his house, and far more imperfect than Moses is
said to be, Heb. 3.3.6.
the contrary whereof is testified of him in ye word) the enterprise is
intolerable, thatanie man should add of his own invention unto that which
is most perfect: and whereunto that which is added being impertine^t, must
needs be altogether a burden unprofitable and noisome unto the body. Because
our Savior who is the head of his body gives life only unto the members of
his own appointment and making: insomuch as if you go about to bring into his
kingdom and body, those officers which were not ordained and appointed in the
word of God to be therein: you bring in these things that appertain not unto
the kingdom of Christ.

Now according unto these grounds, Archb. and ^b. do not belong unto the
kingdom of Christ
let us see unto what regiment these offices of Archb. and Bb. do belong,
whether unto the government of christ or unto the kingdom of the beast. You
see, if they apertaine unto the Church of Christ, that they were ordained
members thereof, in the written word and will of God. Here then we will not
be the judges, let our adversaries speak the^ selves: whether their offices be
appointed in the new testament or not, for therein must they be mentioned, if
they belong unto the kingdom of Christ, and are the members of his body. What
will their answer be in this point? Surely they must confess, that from the
beginning of the new testament unto the latter end of it, there is not a word
spoken of Ll. Archb. and Bb. So that whenever, or by whomesoeuer they had
their original, they have it not from our Savior Christ and his word.
Because he has ordained no members of his body, and no offices of his
Kingdom, since the written word of the new testament was penned. Whereupon we
must needs conclude, that they belong not unto his kingdom. Nay, we go
further and say, that Ll. Archb. and Bb. are so far from having their
callings warranted by the word, that their very names, much more their
offices, are by the same made detestable and odious unto the church, as shall
presently appear. As for their callings the corruption thereof is so great,
that they and the purity of the gospel together with the liberty of the
church, cannot stand together.

Concerning the purity of the Gospel, their callings pollute the same 2.
manner of ways, and infringe the liberty of the church by as many. First they
will be Ministers, and civil magistrates too, that is, they wilbee ministers
of the kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of the world all at once. Whereby
they declare unto us, that they think it not sufficient to be as their Mat.
10.24.25. John 18.36.
master was, who affirmed his kingdom not to be of this world: that is, that
he was not manifested in the flesh, to intermedle with the execution of civil
functions: but to be ruler of a kingdom, that consists in an other manner of
government and dominion than the kingdoms of the world do. Whose example in
this point, all his true ministers must needs follow, unless they will make
a shameful defection from their master, unto whom (being here upon earth)
though he were the lord of all his creatures, it had been unlawful, to have
taken upon him the function of the civil magistrate. And therefore we read
that when the multitude would have made him king, John. 6.15.
he withdrew himself out of the way, because that he was not sent hither to
deal in any thing, but in the work of man's redemption: and so if as a
Magistrate he had intermedled with the dispensation of civil things, he had
not contained himself within the limits of that calling, whereunto he was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. Not that the calling of
the Magistrate being Gods ordinance is a thing unlawful in itself, but that the
Lord has so appointed, that he which is to be the minister of the glad
tidinges of the gospel, cannot be the minister of civil justice and
execution. By reason that these two ordinances of the magistracy and
ministry, though proceeding both of them from the Lord, do yet flow from him
in a diverse consideration and respect. For the civil magistrate is the Lords
liuetennant and messenger, in respect that the Lord is governor and ruler of
all his creatures, and especially of men: and therefore has appointed the
civil magistracy, to keep them in that outward obedience, which he requjreth
at their hands. Now the minister is the Lords messenger in an other regard.
viz. In respect that the Lord offers peace and reconciliation unto men, if
they 2. These. 1.9.
believe and obey his gospel. Unless therefore we would make the Lord, to be
the Redeemer of mankind, in that respect that he is the Creator and the
governor thereof, and so confound the decree of the government of the
creatures, with the decree and ordinance of man's redemption, we cannot without
the breach of the Lords holy will, confound these two callings together. And
surely by how much the work of man's redemption from the aeternall wrath of
God, is more excellent, than the work of the creation and government of the
creatures: by so much the more detestable and odious do they manifest
themselves: who being as they would be accounted ministers of that
reconciliation made between God and man, do either utterly reject their
ministry, because they think it to base, and gainlesse a calling: or else as a
farther countenance unto the most glorious vocation under the sun, dee add
the civil magistracy thereunto. Whereby they show themselves indeed to
have made a shameful apostacy from the doctrine and practice of our savior
Christ and his Apostles. The weapons of whose warfare were not carnal, 2. Cor.
10.4.5.
that is, not such as wherewith men by an arm of flesh, as by civil authority,
improsonme^t, etc. bring their matters to pass, but mighty in God to cast
down holds, casting down the imaginations, and every high thing that is
exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought
unto the obedience of Christ. Here are the only weapons that our Savior
Christ and his Apostles used, and the only weapons that are granted unto
ministers, to overthrow the gayn-sayer. And as for the civil punishment of the
obstinat, they must commit that unto the magistrate, who bears not the sword
in vain. Romans 13.3.4.
For it is he and not the minister of the word, whom the Lord has appointed
to take revenge of him that does evil. Now compare the dealings and practices
of our bishops, and what weapons they use to encounter with those that stand
against them, and you shall perceive that they have not only abused the force
of that sword (which violently and wrongfullye their predecessors wrested out
of the maiestrats hand) to keep the church in bondage: but also that this
confusion of the magistracy and ministry in one person (though the
furtherance of the truth were intended thereby) cannot stand together with the
sincerity of the gospel: the purity whereof also they have corrupted, in the
tyrannous superiority, which they usurp both over their fellow Ministers,
and also over the rest of the church, with no less breach of the ordinance
of God, than the impeaching of the liberty of the church,

For the first point, to wit, of the superiority which they as ministers claim
over the church and messe^gers of Christ, it is intolerable tyrannous, and
directly againsta plain moral act set down in the canon of the new testament by
our Savior Christ himself. The place is commonly known, and has been cited
for this purpose, I think by all those that ever dealte in this cause. Luk.:
2^.24.^.
And there arose also a strife among them (that is, among the disciples says
the text) which of them might seem to be the greatest, but he said unto
them, the kings of the nations reign over them, and they that bear rule over
them, are called gracious lords, but ye shall not be so. In which place we see
the spirit of God by the mouth of the aeternal himself, to have plainly
forbidden al his ministers, either to have any superiority and dominion over
the church and their brethren to rule any wise as Lords and princes do, or yet
to be so called. Where also three especial and monstrous corruptions raingning
in our Ll. Archb. and Bb. are expressly inhibited and forbidden. First, they will
be ministers of the gospel, and yet be greater then their brethren, and rule
over the church. Secondly, they will be ministers of the gospel, and yet bear
rule like lords. Thridlie, they will be ministers of the gospel, and yet
called lords. How stands this with the ommandement of our Sauiourchrist,
You shall not be so? That is, you my disciples shall be so far from having any
superiority one over an other after my departure, and so far from bearing rule
as civil Magistrates, Princes and Lords do: that you shall not be so called
by any names or tytles, that do carry with them the honor and the pre-eminence
due unto princes and lords. They that bear rule over the nations says our
Savior, are called Fuergetai a title wherewith the kings of Eg^pt were honored.
gracious lords, but ye shall not be so. Here we see plainly that he
forbids his disciples to bear the name whereunto pre-eminence is joined
which may further appear, if we consider that in forbidding them to
[kurieuein] that is, to rule like lords, he forbids them also to be
[kurious] viz. lords, as far as that name [kurios] is a title of worldly
honor, pre-eminence and government, and no farther. And no farther I say,
because the word [kurios] in the greek tongue, (as also the word Compare the
1. Sa^. 1, 15. and ^ Ki^. ^.25. w^^h 2. king 6.1^.
[adhon] in the hebrew, and [dominus] in latin,) signifies a master, or Sir,
as well as a Lord, which is proved, John 12.21 and 20.5. where Philip the
apostle, and our Savior Christ (supposed by Marie to be the gardener) are
called [kurici] sirs, or masters. In which sense it is not forbidden unto
ministers to be called [kurioi.] Which I add to stop the unlearned and
foolish cavils of our adversaries, who go about to prove it as lawful for our
bishops to be called lords in the English tongue, which always are names of
worldly honor and promotio^, in our common speech, as it were for them, to have
the former greek, hebrew, and latin names, attributed unto them. Which by the
places before quoted, and to any man of understanding in the tongues appears
to be a cavil unworthy the answer. And that our Savior Christ forbidding
his ministers to [kurieuein] viz, to rule like lords, forbids them also to
be called Lords, it is most clear in that otherwise he should open a wide
door unto the ambition and pride, of proud and ambitious men. For it is a
far greater token of pride and ambition for a man who cannot by any right
have the dignitye of a lord, to desire the name and title thereof: than for
him to be so called that is a Lord indeed. So that in forbidding his disciples
to (kurieuein) bear rule as the lords of the nations do, he forbids them
also to be called and termed by their titles. I know what has been objected
by the Archb. unto these things, and will again be said, if it be not
prevented: namely, that our Savior forbids tyrannous lordship and tyrannous
bearing of rule in the former place, and not just, upright, and lawful
government. Where I beseech your Hh to lend me your attention, and you shall
see the intolerable boldness of this man in perverting the truth, who is not
ashamed (whensoever it may be for his behoof) to teach points of doctrine
mere directly against the words and mind of the Lord Jesus. I demand then of
him, whether our Savior Christ did not in the place before cited, so answer
his disciples in the point whereof they doubted, as he did fully resolve
them? He dares not deny it I am sure. For in points that are needful to be
known and revealed, our Savior being demanded one thing does not frame his
answer unto that whereof no question is made, and so leave his church
unsatisfied. What was the question then? Was it whether any of them should rule
like a tyrant? was it whether any of them should gape after promotion? no such
thing. For they knew well enough, that it was very gainlesse for them to
demand of our savior which of them should be a tyrant? which of them should
abuse his lawful superiority, or which of them should be an ambitious
prelate? they knew well enough that he would allow no such dominion and
pre-eminence. Besides, the apostles (we may well think,) were not so blind, as
to demand any such question of their master. Now then they demanding no such
thing at his hands, to what end should he tell them, that they should not be
tyrannous rulers? They made no question of any such matter, and therefore a
resolution of that which they called not into controuersye, was nothing to the
purpose, but left them as doubtful as they were before. Wherefore we are to
conclude, that as the question was concerning lawful pre-eminence and bearing
of rule, his negative answer being frained unto their question, denies unto
them, not only a tyrannous and an ambitious prelacie, whereof they made no
question, but even that dominion and pre-eminence which of it self is lawful
in the^, who by the ordinance of God are capable of it: to wit, in the civil
magistrate. And whereas the Apostles dreaming of a worldly kingdom, might
allege for themselves, that their demand was not altogether without ground,
because they contended for no other superiority then was allowed off, in the
rulers of worldly kingdoms: our master Christ answers that objection, and
tells them, that although it be lawful for civil governors to bear rule
over their fellow officers and colleagues, that is, over civil magistrates, and
although it be lawful for them to bear lordly rule and authority, and to
have high styles and titles, yet among you that are Ministers of the Gospel,
it shall not be so says he. And to persuade them hereunto, Luke 22.27.28
he brings in his own example, who came to serve and not to bear rule in
the ministry of the new testament. Making it also known unto them, and to all
his true ministers, that although they were according unto his example to
serve, and not to exercise dominion all the time of their being upon earth in
publishing the gospel, Verse 29.30.
yet there was a kingdom prepared for them wherein they should have an
especial pre-eminence. But as for any dominion here upon earth, if they would
be his true disciples, they were to look for none, but to be as he was, and to
take the Ministerye upon them on the same condition that he did. viz. to serve
and not to bear rule therein.

Of all these things then we do conclude, that this threefold corruption of
our Archb. and Bb. First, in usurping upon the government of the civil
magistrate: secondly, in claiming unto themselves those high names and
titles, which belong unto worldly honors and promotions: lastly in the lordly
pre-eminence and superiority, which they usurp over the whole body of the
Church, within their diocese in general, and over their fellow ministers in
particular, is altogether a matter to be detested of all true christians, as
abominable and odious in the presence of the Lord. And seeing our head Christ
Jesus grants unto his body this libertle, that all the members thereof should
be servants and not lords therein, (as he himself did serve and not bear rule
in the kingdom of the gospel) and has given all true ministers this
privilege, that none of them should rule over the other, it must needs be
that this lordlyke government which our bishops arrogate unto themselves over
the church of God and the Ministers of it, cannot in it self, though it were
never abused, but be prejudicial unto the liberties of the church, and the
ministers thereof.

Therefore my Ll. maintain the Hierarchy of Bb. as long as you will, you
uphold thereby nothing else, but the tyranny and bondage of the church,
together with a chief and an especial portion of the kingdom of Antichrist.
For as this pestilent Hierarchy has been proved, not to appertain unto the
kingdom of Christ: so your Hh. are to know, that the same belongs unto no
other body, then unto that regiment whereof the son of perdition is the head.
For unto the kingdom of Christ as you see, it does not belong, to the kingdom
of the world, that is, unto the civil magistracy it cannot appertain, for it
would be accounted an ecclesiastical constitution, and not any civil
regiment. To Mahometisme, or to any other heathnish Idolatry, it cannot belong,
because it is only retained among those that pretend the name of Christ, and
are either the true church in deed, or at the least do wrongfully retain
the name of the true church. Now unto the true church it does not belong, as
we have already proved, because it is a government consisting of those offices,
which the head never ordained to be in the body, and consists of such
members, as would bear rule and not serve in the ministry of the Gospel. We
must then place them in deed where of right they ought to be, that is in the
false sinagogue, which unjustly arrogateth unto it self, the name of the true
church of God, and that is in the kingdom of Antichriste, the Pope: Whose
kingdom must begin in the church of god and not among the heathen, as it was
expressly fore told by the apostle Paul. 2. These. 2.5.
Satan therefore being to lay the foundation of this antichristian kingdom
within the church and temple of God, that he might with more color
afterward pretend the name of the church, began by little and little to
poison the ministers of the gospel with worldly promotion and superiority,
and so from small beginnings brought the Hierarchye unto that height of pride
wherein we see it at this day, not only in his own kingdom where he rules by
his vicar the Pope, but eue^ among us in the persons of our wicked Prelates.
And although Satan was enforced to watch a long time, for his opportunity,
ere he could bring the ministers of the gospel unto lordship and dominion,
About the year 320.
(for unto the time of Pope Silvester Rome it self was without any lordship at
al) yet notwithstanding he was driven to work that in the Church, before ever
he could advance the man of sin unto the chair of iniquity. So that by means
of this superioritye and worldly dominion of the ministers of the word, he
began at the first to make the way for the in bringing of the my sterie of
iniquity: which as the holy ghost testifies, 2. These. 2.7.
began to manifest it self in the age of the apostles. And going on forward by
degrees, he so strengthened these plants of his own graffing, that he made
the^ to be the instrnmentes by the strength and power whereof, he convaied the
whole body (whereof they were the members) head and al, into the temple of
God. For in these wicked offices of Archb. and Ll. Bb. the man of sin first
began to manifest him self, Cardinals were brought into the Romish church,
since it fell clean away from Christ, and they are rather the pomp then the
strength of that kingdom.
and now he is especially vpheld through no other power, but through their
means, by whom also the whole kingdom of Idolatry and darkness under him is
especially governed. For the inward parts of that kingdom, to wit, the
pestilent errors whereby he poysoneth the world, would easily wyther and decay,
were it not that they are fostered and nourished by these ruling members of
Archb. and Bb Who although when they were first brought into the church (being
therein ordained for good purposes as flesh and blood did imagine) they were
not nor could not be discerned to be members of the Antichristian kingdom,
because that mystery was not then made fully visible, yet ever since that body
has appeared, we know them to be members thereof in such sort, as wheresoever
they are maintained, there the limbs and members of Antichrist are countenanced
and vpheld.

But we are not to think that Satan, by whom these offices of Archbishops
and L. Bishops, were first invented, does at all times and places use them to
the one and self same purpose, he knows full well, that he cannot always
effect what he would do with them, and therefore he is content, until
conveniencye be offered, to bestow them as he may. But always this is a
ground, he has some service for them in all ages. At the first planting of
them, and long after that, he did not vohold open Idolatry, and manifest
apostasy from Christ by their means, he could not do it, the times would
not suffer him, who though otherwise very corrupt, were yet far from that
vile dishonor of God. Example hereof you may see in Pope Gregory the first of
that name, Anno 604.
and especially in all his predecessors, whose superioritye and dominion he
could not so have at commandment, as he had the prelacy of all those that
followed after him unto this day. And yet had he his turns to bring to pass
by their superiority, though the most of them were undoubtedly Gods dear
children. For he used their places, as steps and degrees to advance Antichrist
into his throne. Now in that kingdom of the man of sin, since Rome became
the cage of every unclean beast, and the very receptacle of Devils, he has
the Hierarchy at his own commandment, to accomplish his own will by it unto
the full. So can he not have it in England at this day. The time will not
suffer it, her Majesty and our state will not bear it, and yet notwithstanding
he works by these Antichristian offices very mightily as we see, in staying
the course of the gospel, and the establishing of the kingdom of darkness:
though not by means of any public Idolatry, yet by the maintenance of
ignorance and blindness, and by the oppression of the church.

And they are greatly deceived who think the members of the Antichristian
kingdom to serve the Devil in no stead, when they are not joined with their
head, and when he maintayneth not open wars against Christ Jesus by their
means: It is far otherwise. For he knows even under the profession of the
gospel, how to employ them to his singular advantage, as well as in the
kingdom of the Pope, and even to the same purposes very often. For we know
that the sway which he bears in Babylon it self, by Archb. and Ll. Bb.
consists not only in maintayning the open impicties, I dolatry and errors
which are there held, but a great part of his working power in them, shows it
self, in suppressing the truth, and in the tyrannous upholding of those poor
souls in miserable darcknesse, who would gladly be at the light, were it not
that they are kept in bondage and slavery, by means of his foresaid
instruments. The like use has he for Archb. and Ll. Bb. in England at this
day. Where he defends errors, maintains ignorance, hinders the truth,
and oppresses the church, yea and persecuteth the Saints of God to the loss
of their goods, and their liberty, and even unto the blood by their power. And
if he cannot as yet tread down the civil magistrate and erect open Idolatry by
the^, it is because his time is not yet come. For as I said, her Majesty and
our state can brook no such thing. And I do think that the men who exercise
these Antichristian offices amongst us, would be hardly gotten to afforde him
their help in these cases. But when her Majesty (whose life the Lord continue
unto his glory, the good of his church, and her own comfort) is gone the way
of all the world, and when our estate is something more infected with popery
then as yet it is, and so the favorers of that Idolatry are crept into the
seats of Archb. and Bb. see whether these members will not desire to be
joined with their head? It cannot be otherwise. For the Devil by whom they
were first instituted has this purpose in retayning them in the true church:
that by their means when he finds his opportunity he may, either bring the
church, over whom they rule, from the obedience of Christ Jesus, unto the
bondage and slavery of Antichriste, or else murder those that will not yield
unto that Idol. Compare them together.
He has always held this course. King Edward and Queen Mary's days do
testify this unto us. And we may well think, that as when these members were
first planted in the church, (though the Archb. of Rome himself a long time
maintained true religion in far better state, than the Archb. of Cant. does
now) they never ceased until they were joined with Antichrist their head, and
had carried the true church captive with them unto the same abomination: so
now being cut off from their head, they will not be quiet until again they
be engraffed into their proper and natural body.

Now that they are the members of that body and not of the kingdom of Christ
besides all that has been spoken, this reason may serve in stead of many.
Namely, that Satan never thinks himself to have fully erected Popery,
until such time as he has established the Hierarchye of Lord Bishops. For
whereas popery consists of 2. especially points, viz. the false religion, and
the false government of that sinagogue, neither of those parts can be away
where that kingdom is complete and absolute.

Entertain the false religion of the pope, and deny the receiving of the
hierarchy, ye do not fullye yield unto popery, and submit your selves fully
unto the Antichristian kingdom. On the other side, receive the religion of
Christ, together with the government by pastors, doctors, elders, and deacons,
which he has appointed in his word, and you do fullye entertain whatsoever
belongs unto the kingdom of the gospel, though you never know what the
hierarchy of Bb. does mean: which could not be true, if the hierarchye
belonged unto that kingdom of Christ. Seeing then that the kingdom of Christ,
and true religion may be absolute and perfect, though the offices of Ll.
Archb. and Bb. be not joined thereunto: and seeing that where these are not
retained, some part of Popery is wanting: it follows that L. Archb. and Bb.
do appertain unto the regiment of the beast and his Idolatry, and not unto
the religion and kingdom of Christ. The consequence whereof is, that they who
labor and strive for the maintenance of those coruptions in our church, labor
and strive for the upholding of a part of the kingdom of Antichrist the pope.
The continuance of whose members amongst us, serves to no other purpose, then
to keep possession, until the head has gotten him sufficient force, to
invade both the true church of God, and the throne of the civil Magistrate in
our kingdom. And surely if this Hierarchy, under whose wings Popery has
grown so fast within these 20 years, does stand any long time in England, I
look for no other effect to come from it but these two. First a toleration for
men to profess popish Idolatry. Tolleration of Popery.
Secondly, upon the grant hereof, I look that by little and little the state
of her Majesty's crown (which the Lord forbid,) should be brought in bondage
under the Antichristian authority of the pope. If you grant the former, the
latter must needs follow. For let it once be seen that popery has gotten such
strength among us, that after 31. years banishment, we have been violently
enforced and compelled to receive the same again into our bosoms, and you
shall then perceive, that it will be an easy matter for the Pope and his
hirelings, to bring the crown of England to stoup unto Antichrists Myter. And
as the lykly ruin of her Majesty's estate must needs ensue upon the quiet
profession of popery, within any part of her dominions: so out of question the
continuance of this Hierarchye will so increase the number of Papists among us,
that of force (whether we will or not) they will have the liberty of their
idolatrous consciences in their Idol service. They that know how their
number have augmented within these 16. years in our state, and how Satan has
framed his instruments meet for this purpose, may easily judge that there is
some reason, why this fear should be conceived. The members never think them
selves well placed, when they are not annexed unto the head. Either then
remove these members, or undoubtedly they will one day, bring whatsoever is
committed unto their government, and make the same subject and thrall unto that
head, for the service whereof they themselves were appointed.

Where it is said, that the offices of Archb. and Bb. cannot stand in the
church, without the infringing of the liberties thereof, and that they are
members of the body of Antichrist, I know it will be objected, that many good
men (even since the last revealing of the gospel) supplied these places: as M.
Cranmer, M. Hooper, M. Latimer, M. Ridley, M. Bale, etc. whom if we should
account either to be usurpers over their fellow brethren, and the rest of the
church of God in their time, or to have continued in Antichristian callings,
the matter will be thought strange, and hardly taken. Whereunto the answer is
this. That for their callings, it cannot be denied but they were the offices of
the Antichristian kingdom. And for the men themselves, they could not
possiblye any ways continue in them without the breach of Gods ordinance, and
the impeaching of the libetties of the Church in some measure. For in some
sort they did rather bear rule than serve in the ministry of the gospel. And
yet notwithstanding all these imperfections, we think these men to have been
such, as for whom we are to give the Lord hearty thanks (not that they were
Ll. Bishops, but that they faithfully labored in the ministry of the gospel,
and sealed the same with their blood. In respect whereof also we accounte
their memory to be blessed and reverend amongst posterities. But what is all
this unto the Bishops of England at this day? Are they Latimers? Are they
Cranmers, Ridleyes, Hoopers? Though for some causes I could wish they were, yet
I thank God from my heart that they are not. For then their Hierarchy would not
so soon fall to the ground, as now I hope it will. But alas it may grieve any
christian heart, to consider the differences that are between these vpstart
corrupt tyrants, that now reign over our church, and those ancient sincere
fathers. Compare them together, but only in one point, and you shall see how
lamentably they differ.

Those reverend men of God, M. Cranmer, M. Latimer, M. Hooper, etc. having by
great striving recovered our church (though a dead church) out of the hands of
tyrannous murderers, labored by all means possible to put life into it by
the preching of the word, that being alive, and made strong they might also
restore it unto liberty. Our Bb. on the other side what do they? Surely rather
then the church under their jurisdictions should recover her liberty, Judge
good Readers.
their whole care is how they may murder the same. I sclander them not. For
rather than they will suffer any to be over gods people, who does instruct
them in those things that concern the lyberty of the church, and the tyranny
of the popish government, They have stopped the mouths of so many faithful
teachers within these 6. years that the proof of this point is needless.
John 6.63.
they will violently thruste al such teachers from their flocks, and place
Idols in their stead. And what is this else, but to murder the church, rather
than it should not be in bondage unto them. For they that bereave the church
of the word preached, take away the very life thereof. The words that I have
spoken (says our Savior) are spirit and life. And I appeal in this place
unto the consciences of our Prelates: whether if all the prechers in England
sought the overthrow of their hierarchy, they would not thrust the^ al out of
their places, rather then the church should be delivered from their
antichristian jurisdiction. It is plain they would. T.C. Admon. page 28.29.
For B. Cooper makes the putting down of Ll. Bb. to be the plain overthrow of
the church. And reading is preaching says the Archb. Whitgift page 569.574.
Better then for the church to stand by these quiet reading murderers, then to
be ouerturned by seditious teachers. The case therefore is manifest, that they
love our church so well, as rather than they should not bear rule therein,
they will see the heart blood of it: that being thereby tamed, it may content it
self with any tolerable servitude. Look then what difference there may be
between desperate murderers, and the careful physicians of men's souls,
between merciles tyrants, and the pitiful fathers of the church. and the very
same difference shall you find, between our Antichristian Prelates now living
and those reverend fathers aforementioned. And that the world may see how these
our tyrants have adulterated and corrupted religion in Engl. (within these 20
years especially) from the purity, wherein it was left unto us, not only in
the writings of our Savior Christ and his apostles, but even in their
writings, whose steps our Bb. bear the world in hand that they do more nearly
follow. I mean by the favor and assistance of my God, to make it known ere it
belong in a peculiar treatise written for that special purpose.

To return unto your Hh. again: you see by this time, how detestable the
offices of L. Archb. and Bb. are in the presence of the Lord God: and you see
that he accounts a church government exercised by them to be accursed before
his Majesty, because they are the members of Antichrists body, because they
bear rule like Lords, and serve not as ministers in the church. Now, do you
think him and his word to be enemies unto our state, because they are of this
judgment? I hope you do not. How comes it then to pass, that you allow not
us to subscribe unto that truth which the Lord does maintain? Is it because
our assertions ar dangerous unto the state? that cannot be, unless you account
the Lord an enemy thereunto: for we affirm nothing, but that which he has
given us commission to utter. Or is it because we behave our selves
seditiously in our message? that cannot be proved. For the men who are most
severely punished for favoring this cause, have and do carry themselves as
peaceably, and dutifully toward her Matie and the state, as any of their
quality within the whole kingdom whosoever. Ad mit it were otherwise: is it
reason that you should reject the cause of God, for the faults of men? Will
you deal unjustly with the Lord, because we deal undutifully with the state?
If we be found any wise guilty punish our misdemenor, but grant the cause. If
you yield not thereunto, what do you else in laying hands upon us, but manifest
your hatred unto gods truth and his people, and the love you bear unto the
antichristian hierarchy. Either then my Ll. you must needs publish your enimity
unto the Lord and his kingdom, or you can no longer countenance these
murdering Antichristian prelates, and their bloody train. The case of England
is now become lamentable, when the state thereof under the Gospel, is said any
wise to consist in these pestilent corruptions, which ever since they first
sprang up in the church of God, have been unto this day, gainsaied by the most
sincere professors therein.

The government of the church by bishops, And it was long after this time ere
Bb. were Ll and civil magistrates though they began to deal in civil cases in
the time of Grego. the 1 Bal. scrip. Bryt. cent. 1. cap. 73.
began not before the year 607. as that reverend learned man M. Bale, being a
bishop himself in King Edwards dapes, has set down: his words in English ar
these: From the year 607. the Church began to be ruled by the polity and
government of Bishops. which government was especially devised and invented by
the monks, etc. The testimony of M. Bale is true. For in this age everye
particular Church, was governed by the Bishop, the elders and deacons, Mag.
cent. 6. cap. 7. col. 591.
etc. as the authors of the Centuries do witness. And although long cre this
time many bare the names of archb. and Bb. yet was not the church at their
commandment as it is now, neither could they abide this superiority which our
Bb. do exercise one over an other, Anno 674. finod Herfor. Mag cen. 7. cap 7.
col. 220.
as it appears by a synod kept here in England, where this pre-eminence was
utterly condemned. And it is here especially to be observed, that in this age
the name of B was common unto all ministers (corruptly called priests) of the
word and sacraments. For Pope Gregory Greg. in Eva^. cent. mag. 6. ca. 7. col.
392.
invaieth against ye priests of his time, who for brybes did ordain bishops:
and he advyseth Epist. 57. lib 11. look cent. ibid. col. 406.
Ianuarius to choose B. where priests were wanting. Again, Mag. cent 7. cap. 7.
col. 223. Bal scrip. Bryt. cen. 2. cap. 74.
Lawrence archb. of Cant. anno 615. together with his fellow bishops, that is,
the priests of Brytain (says Beda) wrote unto the Scots. Compare these 2.
points of the name and superiority of B. with that which D. Bancroft has
written, sermon. page 100. and 97
By these and the like places we see the name bishop to have been common unto
all the ministers of the word 300. years after the second Nicene Counsel.

Now that we know the original of these corruptions: let us briefly see how
from time to time, they have been gainsaid in the church. First of all the
ancient Brytones or Welshmen unto the year 730. did Bale can. 1. cap. 74 ex
Beda
altogether detest whatsoever Romish invention Augustine the monk planted among
the Saxons and therefore they allowed not this government of bishops. About the
year 704, Bal. cen. 1. c. 76
Whereupon Adelhelmus a learned westsaxon, but a favorer of the regiment of
Antichriste, wrote against them. Secondly a synod held Anno 742. Mag. cent.
8. cap. 7. col. 452.
in France under Carolomannus, ordained that every city should have her B. And
Carolomannus himself found fault Anno 752. Mag. cent. 8. cap. 7. col. 510
with the pope, because he sought after worldly dominion. Not long after his
time Anno 820 Mag. cent. 9. cap, 7. col. 3; 8. Bal. cent. 2. cap 15.
Claudius Taurinensis an Italian B. wrote against the primacy of ye pope, and
rebuked him for neglecting his own function. In the synod of Anno 881. Catal
test. Illir
Macer the civil and ecclesiastical callings are so distinguished, that one
person cannot be capable of both. Anno 1070. Illir ibid page 247.
Valtram B. of Noremberg, wrote against the civil jurisdiction of the
ministry: so did Sigelbert ye monk. Anselme archb. Anno 1096 upon Math. 26
Mag. cent. 11. cap. 4 col. 197.
of Cant. taught that a B. ought no more to intermedle with the civil sword,
than the king with the ecclesiastical. And he decreed in a Anno 1106. book of
mart. page 196.
synod held at London, that no spiritual person should sit in any secular
office. Whereupon Note.
M. Fox demands how Stephen Gardener could be L. Chancellor of England, and
so we upon the like ground, would know how the archb. of Cant can be president
of the counsel? To omit Otho Frisingensis who Anno 1150. Illir. cata. page 430
was of Anselmus mind, we will come to the Walde^ses. Their doctrine was, that
the book of mart page 233.235.
pope ought not to deal in civil causes, and that al ministers were of aequal
authority. The Bohemia^s confession, is the confession of the Walden ses.
Here then the reader is to understand, that we hold nothing in this cause
against the Bb. but that which ye true visible church of God, have maintained
now for the space of more then 400. years. Call. epist. 294.298, and they
continue still of this mind.
For the Waldenses (who yet remain, as it appears by their letters to M.
Calvin, and his unto them) have been a true visible church, these 430 years.
Let the B. bring but this warrant for their hrerarchy, and we will yield.

I am enforced to be short, and only to name (not al) but the chief of the
ages following that oppugned the corruptions of our B. About the year 1324.
book of mart. page 377.
VVillia^ Ockam and Marsis^, Patauinus, the greatest learned men of their time,
wrote against the civil jurisdiction of the pope. In whose time Philip the
french king held a parliament, wherein Anno 1329. The L Peter de Cugni. read the
disp. in the book of mart. 358.
one of his counselors proved out of the word against the Bishops, that they
ought not to deal in civil causes. John Hus was burned at the counsel of
Constance, because among other points he defended al Anno 1415. book of mart.
page 579.
ministers to be of aequal authority And John Claydon was burned at London the
sometime, because he defended a book, wherein Archb. were proved to be the
seats of antichrist. At the counsel of Basil the Anno 1432. book of mart. page
669.634.
Ambassadors of the Bohem. proved al civil rule to be forbidden the clearpy by
the word. M. ^uthers judgment who was borne not many years after this
counsel is sufficiently known. Our own martyrs as M. Tindall, M. Barnes, M
Hooper, have so disliked this government of Bb. as no men more. This doctrine
of theirs being according unto the word, they sealed with their blood, and is
now acknowledged the doctrine of our church.

The conclusion of al is this: that unless our state-men will reject god and his
word, and allow the spilling of the blood of his holy saints and martyrs: they
cannot pretend unto be enemies unto the state, for seeking the overthrow of
the government of L. Arch and Bb. withal the corruptions annexed the revnto.

The second; art of this book remains behind, which shall be published as
soon as the Lord will grant me opportunitye. I have been (...) forced for
some causes to end this more abruptly than I would have wished. If thou
fauorest the cause (reader) thou will bear with, (...) falt, if thou art an
adversary thereunto, thou will think too much already spoken, and so by abrupt
silence, (compared with that which I have spoken,) to be no fault at all.


