A most strange and rare example of the just judgment of God executed upon a
lewd and wicked Coniurer the.xvij. day of January.M.D.Lxxvij. In the parish
church of S. Mary Ouerie in Southwark, in the presence of diverse credible and
honest persons.



Imprinted at London, by Henry Bennyman.

REmember mortal man how time does pass,
and know likewise, al humain flesh is gras:
For time at length co^sumes the stro^gest oak,
So death at last must strike the grievous stroke:
Though lusty youth do pleasant beauty bear
Yet youth to age in tract of time does we are.
The pleasant flour that bears the freshest hue
The grass that grows so grene in so^mer tide
The pinching cold her color does subdue,
So that her beauty cannot long abide:
Even so the state of mortal man depends,
Whose life to these may well compared be,
To day the powers above our life defends:
To morrow dead full oftentimes we see*
Therefore still live as though thou should dye,
Thy soul to save from so great ieopardye.
If mortal man would weigh his state aright,
And shun the subtle snares of false delight,
Esteming them to be so frail and vain,
As nothing else may sooner bring our pain:
He would (no doubt) his course direct aright,
And have those shows no longer in his sight.
And though our nature be so weak and frail,
As any one attempt may soon avail,
No doubt but if with zeal we call for grace,
We shall eschew such lewd attempts apace.
The signs and shows that daily do appear,
In coasts abroad and in our country here,
May well a warnyng be unto us all,
To shun the sin that we be chargde withal,
Let us example take of holy writ,
Whereon each christen man should ground his wit,
How God (for sin) in his displeased ire,
Consumed Sodom and Gomorre with fire.
In these our days it may be eke regarded,
How diverse countries for sin are rewarded.
Let us therefore by them example take,
And from our sins at length let us awake,
Which God of his mercy grant for to be,
That we in joys everlasting may see
The heavenly show of his most glorious face,
Pronouncing ioys to them that call for grace,
AMEN.
AS the Sins of Man are innumerable and diverse, gentle Reader, so the
plagues and punishments of God are sundry: and he sharply scourges many,
that we the resydue might the better be warned. And though he suffer and
bear with our wicked deeds and dealings a while, yet without amendment, and
our repentance, he will stryke at last, with so heavy and grievous a stroke
that our frail bodies may not nor cannot sustayn his heavy hand. Let
therefore every true Christian enter into his own heart, and consider how
merciful God is, how he warns us, how he spares us, and gives daily
examples for our amendment, how he plageth the offe^dor, though merciful to
a great sort of sinners. If we would consider this transitory world how
tickle it stands, how uncertain the life of man is, how we can assure unto
our selves nothing certain but death, how our toils, our labors, our
cares, our inventions, our policies and subtilties pass with our mortal
bodies: undoubtedly the very horror of our consciences, would cause us to
be more careful to refrain our natural bodies from such filthy, detestable
and abominable living, as they are most prone and ready to follow and embrace:
yea it would so move our minds to devotion, that thereby the vayn industries,
lewd attemptes, and wicked imaginations of our heart might be altered and
changed to true Religion, to constantnesse of Faith, and to true and sincere
dealyng one with an other. Let us therefore search and examine our selves, and
like the lost son come home and cry Abba father, and then undoubtedly, with
spreaded arms, he will be ready to receive us to his great mercy, whereas
on the contrary he will show himself a fierce and terrible god, pronouncing
a most sharp judgment upon the offender, yea he will steal upon him on a day
when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not ware of, and shall
hew him in pieces, and give him his portion with the hipocrites, where there
shall be weepyng and gnashing of teethe. After which sort, God in his justice,
stroke the person of whom we now speak: who may well be a myrrour and
spectacle to us all, that we knowing and seeing the end of his wicked life,
may renew the old man graffed in our hearts, glorifying our heavenly Father
which is in Heaven, which God grant of his mercy. Amen.

The seventeenth day of January this present year of our Lord God a
thousand five hundred seventy and six, one Simon Pembroke dwelling in Saint
Georges parish in Southwark, being co^uented before the ordinary judge of that
place as vehemently suspected to be a Coniurer, and the process being served
upon him to appear in the Parish Church of Saint Marie Ouery, at the Court
there usually holden by the said Judge, to answer unto such objections, as
he might be charged wythal, touching his diuellishe trade, and to receive
condygne punishment if he were found culpable therein: albeit somewhat sickely
before, as it must truly be confessed, nevertheless chosing rather to come
than to use any excuse of absence, he failed not at his appointed day to
appear, showing him self ready in every respect to clear him self of all
such matters as should or might in any wise be objected against him, saying,
that he had great wrong to be troubled for any such false surmyse, Whereupon
coming to a Proctor of the Arches, and mynding to retain him to be of his
counsel touching the defense of the objections laid against him, being
refused by the said Proctor, and with his fee in his hand, the Judge coming
into the Church, he sank down suddenly amongst them stark dead, not having
space or grace to say once, the Lord have mercy upon me: to the great amaze
of all the standers by. The Judge seeing what had chanced, and that by no means
his life could be recovered, he commanded that he should be serched, to the
intent that if he had money or other chardge about him, it might not be
embeselled, but restored to his poor wife, being there present, lamenting her
late husband in most pitiful sort, which done there were found about him
certain diuelishe and wicked books of coniuration, a piece of tin with a
picture engraued, and a lttle black stick like unto Iette, about two inches
long, with other toies, instruments no doubt of his devilish art.

Wherefore let this just and sudden execution of gods judgment, be a terror
unto those, that setting apart yt cleme^cy and great mercy of our heavenly
father, have practiced this or the like wicked trade, and let al other that are
infected with any notable crime, as no doubt none of us can excuse our selves,
take example by this dead carkas, whose manner of life as it was abhomynable,
and odyous in the sight of god, so the order of his death no less fearful,
and terrible in the sight of men. I say after so many warnyngs, let us not be
senseless as brute beasts, neither let us defer our repentance until to
morrow, least at midnight, or at the daunyng of the day our time be shortened,
whereby to late, we are to call for repentance: but while we have time and
space, let us call for mercy, that we may assure our selves of his comfortable
promise, which is, that at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his
sins from the bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my
remembrance, and so glorifying him in this life, we may be partakers of the
heavenly joys, prepared for his elected, which God grant, for his son
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.


