A RELATION OF THE ROYAL Festiuities, and Juego de Can^as [A Turnament of
Darting with Reeds after the manner of Spaine] made by the King of Spain at
Madrid, the 21 of August this present year, 1623.

To Honor the Espousall Treaties of the Illustrious Prince of WALES, with the
Lady INFANTA MARIA of Austria.

Before the departure of the Prince from his Court toward the Seaside, to
take shipping for his return into ENGLAND.

Composed by Doctor Iuan Antonio de la Pen^a, native of Madrid, and faithfully
translated out of the Spanish printed Copy.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Seyle, and are to be sold at the Tigers Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1623.

TO DON PHILIPPE PACHECO, Marquess of VILLENA, Duke of ESCALONA, and Count of
SANTISTENAN, etc.
THis Relation requires your Excellency for a Mecoenas, above a thousand other
Titles, because you are a Person more interessed in the favors of his Majesty,
showed the day of Turneament to my Lady the Countess of Miranda, and to my
Lady the Marquess her Niece, when he honored her house with his Royal
presence: And that your Excellency has now recovered your health, J thought
good to honor you with this presentation in writing, of what you enjoyed with
your sight and presence, a while to entertain you, being assured to be
pardoned for those faults, which in this Treatise may occur the same, being
as secure to be freed from all Court-Censure, by such a Patron, whose life
and State Heaven ever make happy.

Doctor Iuan Antonio de la Pen^a.

A RELATION OF THE ROYAL FESTIuities made by his Catholic Majesty, to honor
the Espousall Treaties of the Illustrious PRINCE of WALES, with the LADY
INFANTA MARIA of Austria.
THE KING, our Lord and Master, not content, nor satisfied with the Festiuities
and Entertainements hitherto showed to the Highness of the Illustrious PRINCE
of WALES, Prince CHARLES, Son to the KING of Great Britain; wherein, the
Nobility, liberality, and glory of my Country of Madrid, and Caualeers of
the Court, upon sundry occasions had concurred, as by other Relations is made
manifest; his Majesty determined to conclude his Festiuities, publicly, in the
great Marketplace of the Town. A worthy Amphitheater, whereon for the Monarch
of the two worlds, to represent the memorial of most renowned Roman
Solemnities, to bury them in oblivion, which in despite of envy, new
emulation and glory has renewed. Monday, was the day appointed, being the one
and twentieth of August: for which end, the Marketplace set forth with that
order, disposition, and ornament, as is usual; allotting convenient prospect
for these rarities, in the same erections, made in the form of Scaffoldes, so
necessary for the placing of many strangers which were there, as also, being
prouidently distinguished and separated. The Councels of State, and Peers of
the Kingdom, took their places, after the accustomed manner. The Panaderia
was set forth with rich hangings, with two Canopies of crymson cloth of silver;
Chaires, and Pillowes of the same, in the two principal Scaffolds allotted to
the King and Queen, but that there was a little partition which separated
them; a respect as due to the Illustrious Prince of ENGLAND, the chosen Spouse
of her Highness, as deserved in his affection; which lighting on so superior
an object, might seem to be offended with any interposition to his eye. The
renowned Infanta Lady Maria seconded, and augmented this favor; being clothed
for this Festuitie, in the Princes colors, in white, as an unspotted Dove,
after the Majesty of England. The manes of her Coach-horses were twisted with
blue ribbands; A demise of the Noble Fleece of her future Spouse: all these
being premises, which seem to give assurance of what has been treated upon.
There accompanied the Lady Infanta, the Lord Don Fernando, her brother, clothed
in Roman Purple, that radient Sun of the Church, even as his Sister is the
resplendent beams of true beauty. The Queen, our Lady, came in a Chair of
State, supported by men's hands, with her usual state and magnificence: whom
there followed, as the Stars the greater light, the Minions and Ladies,
bringing with her the peoples benedictions. His Majesty, and their Highnesses
dined this day in public, in the spacious Halles of the Panaderia: and about
two in the afternoon, came in Coach into the Marketplace, our Lord the King,
the Prince of Wales, and the Lord Infant Don Carlos, brave with gravity, and
grave in bravery. The King came apparrelled in black, with his Brother, and
the Illustrious Prince in white: their habits divided in fashion, half after
the English, and half after the Spanish manner; they entered the Scatfoldes,
his Majesty giving the right hand, as always he did, to the Prince. Four and
twenty Charriots (being invented moveable groves, and Fountains brought to
that place) began to disperse of their liquors, after the usual manner: and
about half an hour past two, the Marquess of Rentin having dismissed it, and
Don Fernando Verdugo, with requisite gallantrie and authority, required in such
solemnities, by the Gate that issues out into the Imperial Street, causing
much delight, and awaking all men's desires, Leonardo, Sergeant Trumpet to his
Majesty, entered, richly clad, and on horseback, whom followed sixteen
Kettle-Drums, threescore Trumpets and Clarions, and four and twenty Musicians,
all his Majesty's servants, and with his Liuerie, which for this day, was of
carnation Satin, guarded with silver lace, and black welts, cut upon silver
tynsell; large Cassocks, Hats with black and carnation Plumes, Swords and
Daggers hatched with silver, with silver Hangers, twisted with black silk; all
mounted on goodly Horses, with bridles of the same: and the Trumpets and
Drums had his Majesty's Arms on their Pennons, as glorious and entire as
could be made, in the most famous triumph of the world. Then followed the Kings
Querrie, The Kings Querrie.
all the Kings Riders, his Pages, and Officers leading the way, uncovered,
before a rich Horse, on which his Majesty was to run, all exceeding brave
and gallant: there came four Grooms of the Stable, four Farriers, with
Powches of Crimosine Velvet, and in them whatsoever was requisite for the
shooing of Horses; twelve Lacqueys of note, and sixty horses of a brown bay,
white and black trappings, with muzzlers of silver, mixed white and black,
covered with horse-clothes of new and fresh Crimosin Velvet, there being
embroidred on them in cloth of Gold, the name of Philip the 4. and his Royal
Arms, with edgings of silk and gold, and frindge of the same: A Lacquey led
every Horse with the right hand, in a Liuerie of carnation Satin, hose and
iacket laid with silver and black silk lace, the forepart and bottom being
cut upon silver tynsell, black hats, silver hat-bands, carnation and black
Plumes, Sleeves of Cloth of silver, and silver Furniture. There came forth
forty Yongsters of the Stables, after the Turkish manner, open Hoses, Iackets
and Bonnets of carnation Taffata; and after all the horses, with wonderful
Majesty and Greatness, they brought along leaning on their shoulders, a
goodly Rider, with his mounting steps of fine Wood, in-laid with Lists of
Ebony, covered with carnation Taffata, with frindges of gold and silver. There
followed this glorious sight, another no less sumptuous, of twelve Mules laden
with bunches of Canes, covered over with clothes of crimson Velvet, and upon
it richly imbroidered, the Royal Arms, head-stalles of Silk, bits of Silver,
Pettrels, and Bridles of the same; on the sides and fore-parts of the Mules,
and on the tops of their heads and Saddles, were set carnation and black
plumes, stripped with silver, which seemed Mountains of feathers, cast over
with gold: with every one of them there went a Groom, or Youth, in a Livery of
the Lacqueys; all which, to the admiration of this order, and equipage, added a
pleasure and delight to the view. Presently with the same order, and equipage,
entered the horses of other troops, the show of the town following, and the
rest of the Gentlemen, as their lot fell out, as between so great Princes to
avoid discontentments of precedencie, it was agreed.

The towns show.
The honorable Town of Madrid, sent forth four Trumpets on horseback, with
caparisons of Orange-colour'd Taffata, laid with Silver Lace, and the
Trumpeters in Cassocks of the same; black Hats lined with Orange-colour'd
Taffata, Orange-colour'd Plumes, and silver furniture, and four and twenty
Horses with rich trappings, on whom were mounted four and twenty Lacqueys in a
Livery of Orange-colour'd Taffata, Hose, and Mandillions and Girdles, and
furniture of Silver; orange-colour'd Hose, and Points, Hats, furniture and
Plumes like to the Trumpets; white Targets, and orange-colour'd Bandels; and
after them came the Mayor of the Town, discharging the place of chief Rider.

There followed the town troop, four Trumpets of the Lord Don Duarte, Don
Duarte
in a Livery of tawnie Taffata, with gabbardines laid with silver Lace, and
Hats of the same, with tucks of silver, tawny Plumes, and branches of silver;
at the bottom of them, silver furniture, and tawnie hangers: They wore in
their Trumpets pennons, the Arms of Portugal, and Castile; and the
Trumpetters wore upon their shoulder plightes, and on their breasts the same
Arms; their Horses with caparisons of tawnie Satin, and furniture guarded with
Silver Lace. He brought forth six and thirty Horse in rich trappings, and
muzzelers, with white Targets, and tawnie Bandels, who were led by the right
hand with as many Lacqueyes: and besides these, there went along twelve other
Lacqueyes of note, clothed in the same colors, with tawnie Hose and Iackets,
laid with silver Lace, sleeves of tawnie Satin, buttons of Silver, tawnie
Bases, white Lists, and Roses, silver furniture, tawnie Hangers, black Hats,
with wreathes and Hat-bands of silver twist, and tawny Plumes: there went
distributed among the horses, after the Turkish manner, twenty young men, with
tawnie Ribbons and Hose, bonnets of the same, and clothes of Shag, wherewith
to wipe and smooth the horses, with their special Rider, in great gallantry,
and bravery, manifesting his Royal blood, and Portugal glory.

That the precedent show might no ways be abated, it was rcquisite the Duke
of Infantado should follow the luster and honor of the Mendozas. Infantado.
He brought with him four Trumpetters in four white Freezado Mantles, with
gabberdines of black Damask, edged with silver Lace, and the arms of the
Mendozaes on their shoulders, breasts, and pennons of their Trumpets, black
Hats, wreathes, and bands of silver, white and black Plumes, silver furnirure,
and hangers silver and black, and the edgings of the skirts of black Damask,
imbroidered with silver. He brought with him forty horses, flea-bitten, with
black and white trappings, white Turkish barbes, white tails and maynes,
white Targets, and black Bandels, with the illustrious and glorious blazon of
the Aue Maria; the which, by reason of the opposition of colors, yielded to
the sight a pleasant obied. A Lacquey led every horse with his right hand, and
there were eight and forty more, of note and respect, all in Hose and Iackets
of black Satin, guarded with broad silver Lace, silver furniture, hats with
bands and wreathes of silver, white and black Plumes, white Bases, and loopes
of silver Plate, with thirty six Grooms clad in crimson Taffata, with
downe-cut open Hose, Iacquets and Bonnets after the Turkish manner, and rubbing
clothes of Freezado on their shoulders: and after the last horse, upon another
very fair and beautiful sat the Rider.

Don Pedro de Toledo,
This Pomp of the Duke, was followed by Don Pedro de Toledo, the honor of
Castilian Knights: the Admiration, and wonder of strange Nations. Four
Trumpets led in his troop of horse themselves, upon Sorrel horses, in
gabberdines of yellow-coloured Satin, laid with gold Lace, Hats of Taffata,
with wreathes and bands of Gold, white Plumes, guilt furniture and Spurs,
with the Arms of the House of Toledo on their breasts, and the falling of their
shoulders; their horses, with caparisons of the same the Trumpets had. He
brought in with him thirty Sorrel Horses, all with caparisons of Cloth of
Gold, and Muzlers of the same, white Targets and Bandell of Gold. As many
Lacqueys led them along in their right hands, with eighteen others of respect
and note, in a Livery of hose loopt all over, cut and edged with broad gold
Lace, laid upon an inward lining of silver Tynsell; Iacquets laid with Gold
Lace, and cut upon Tynsell, guilt Furniture, white Bases, and sleeves of
Tynsell; Hats imbroidered round about with little Wind-mils of Gold, with
white Plumes, and Tucks of silver tynsell; and with them their Rider.

The Admiral.
Presently then entered the Admiral of Castiles Troop, with the same Majesty
and Greatness, as upon all occasions his Excellence is accustomed: there went
before his horse four Trumpeters, in long Coats of black Satin, guarded with
Gold Lace, with his Arms on their breasts, falling of the shoulders, and
pendants, the Horse with clothes of the same, black Hats, yellow and white
Plumes, Hat-bands and wreathes of Gold, golden furniture, and their Farrier on
foot, with a Satin Powch, and that necessary in it for the shooing of Horses,
which were thirty in number, all of a Chesse-Nut coat or color, with
trappings of white and Gold; and eight of them which were to run, had their
tails and Maynes plighted with short gold twist, and sumptuous Invention, and
that moved vvonder all over the place, black Targets, and Bandell of Gold,
Lances with two heads, and with every horse a Lacquey; they being in all with
those of note and respect, sixty two, cladde in black, Hose and Iacquets laid
With gold Lace, yellow Bases, and black Lists, with frindges of Gold, white
shoes, and gilded furniture; black Hats, with wreathes, and bands of Gold,
orange-colour, and white Plumes, and twelve stable grooms clad in Hose, and
Iacquets of black Taffata, thwarted over with Laces of Gold, bonnets of the
same, and wiping clothes of coorse cloth, and it gave no small contentment, to
see in the Marketplace a troop of them, slicking and smoothing the Admirals
Horse.

The Troop hemn'd round about the Rider, and four Trumpets of the Count de
Monterey followed, Monterey.
with long Coats of white Satin, Laces and Flowers of Gold, Hats of the same,
black Plumes, and golden furniture, with his Arms upon the Trumpets, and the
Horses that went with horse-cloathes in the same Livery. He brought with him
fifty horses of Chest-nut coat, in trappings of white and gold, white Targets
with white bandels, with Imagerie wrought in gold; the colors of the
Illustrious PRINCE of WALES, who much favors the Count. There came with them
in all an hundred Lacqueys: their Liuerie was in white, leaves of gold and
black Esses, golden furniture, black Hats, with wreathes, and bands of Gold,
black and white Plumes, and twelve young men of the Stable, after the Turkish
fashion, in the same Liuerie, black shoes and Buskins gilded, and their Rider.

There followed him the Marquess of Castel-Rodrigo his company a Portugese,
Castel-Rodrigo.
who was conducted by an Vnder-Rider, and four Trumpets on horseback, with
caparisons of green Satin, and silver Lace: the Trumpeters themselves, with
Cassocks of the same, and the Arms imbroidered on their pendons and Trumpets,
white Boots, Spurs and gilded furniture, black Hats wrought with silver,
and tawnie plumes. He showed two and forty different horses, with rich
trappings of purfle, gold and silver, white Targets, and green bandels, with
fifty Lacqueys in green, hose and Cassock laid with silver Lace, sleeves of
tawnie taffata, with bases and hose of tawnie, green points and Roses, with
little imbroidered Wind-mils of silver, gilded furniture, with tawnie hangers,
black Hats, band and wreathe of silver, and tawnie plumes, twelve
Stable-groomes with Mandillions, hose and bonnets of green taffata, with fix
caparisons of siluer-worke, and his Rid all in Portugal bravery.

To whom in emulation, succeeded the Castellan of the Cordouas, Sessa.
in the company of the famous Duke of Sesa, who showed glory and bravery,
proper to his Family. He brought four Trumpets on horseback, with Cassocks of
seawater green, waued with gold Laces, hats of the same, with green pennons,
plated furniture, and his Arms upon the Trumpets; the horses with clothes of
taffata, of the same color, and guarded with silver Lace. There followed them
four and thirty sorrel horses, with crymosine trappings, and Turkish barbes
of the same color, forty and two Lacqueys, between the leaders and those of
note, with a Livery of Seawater green, and silver hose and cassocks guarded
with lace, green hose, and blue points, plated furniture, with black hats,
wreathes and bands of silver, and green plumes, and their Rider with eight
Lacqueys.

Last of all, enclosing these magnificent shows, came in the Duke of Ceaes
horse, Cen.
Don Francisco de Sandoual y Roias, with that hereditarie Greatness be
deriues from his Grandfather: he brought with him four Trumpets in four
Freezado Coats, clad in gabberdines of blue Satin, laid with silver Lace,
black hats, wreathes and bands of silver, blue plumes, plated furniture, with
black hangers; the hose with clothes of the same Liuerie, and his Arms on the
Trumpets; about four and twenty horse, with rich trappings of Pearls,
Pouncings, Gold, Silver, and Pomegranates, and amongst them he that is called
the Seuillano, upon whom he ran his Canes: their targets were white with
blue bandels, four and twenty Lacqueys led them with the right hand, and 30
others of note, clothed in blue sackcloth, laid all over thick with many
silver laces, black hats, wreathes and bands of silver, blue plumes and bases,
points of silver thread, white shoes, plated furniture, and their Rider all in
black, with Lacqueys also in black, after a grave and modest fashion. The
Horse were all in number, five hundred twenty and three, with those of the
Trumpets, Kettle-drummes and Riders: and the Lacqueys five hundred fourscore
and six: twelve Muleters; Farriers, Horse-keepers, and Stable-groomes, an
hundred forty and one: their entry continued above an hour. And having
showed, and made their obedience, they baited but a few Bulls, to give way to
the running of the Canes.

His Catholic Majesty, and the Lord infant Don Carlos, showing their
accustomed courteous complements to the Queen, the Prince, and the Lady
Infanta, left their Scaffolds, and at a gate that goes into the street of
Atocha, took Coach, Where an infinite concourse of people attended their
entry. The street reflected upon by the Sun, was sanded, and watered, and the
entries chained up, a remedy against the cumbersome annoyance of Coaches, the
disturbance of Festiuities, which the providence of Don John de Castilla
prevented, as he uses to do. Advertisement was given some few days before,
to the Countess of Miranda, that his Majesty would honor her, by coming
thither to mask himself, and the Messengers were one day, the Marquess de
Flores Auila, and the other day del Infantado. Her Excellency entertained this
favor, proiuding her house, conformable to the short warning she had: she
whited it all over, even to the stairs of Ascent, setting forth the Court
round with new Hangings, and hanging up in all the entries or Portals of the
Kings Quarter, Curtains of white Damask, with Gold Frindge, and Walking Rods
gilded: There were beds laid for the King and the Infant, which were brought
out of the Palace, by the Duke of Infantados order, who requested the Countess
in this one thing to follow his direction, though her Excellency had provided
those that were most rich: but she followed the Dukes counsel, as a friend,
though it were against the ancient custom of her House; who, in such like
entertainments, without having any thing from the Palace, had ever plentiful
and honorable store: the Rooms were washed with sweet powders, and water of
Amber mingled, yielding an excellent and comfortable odor to the senses. Next
to his Majesty's Quarter, she provided an other for the Conde de Oliuares, with
a rich bed of Needle-worke, and the Gussets of the soft knappings of Silk, and
in the lower part of the house, a Quarter for Don Iayme de Cardenas, who was
this day one of the Guard, and appointed to cloth the King: for which purpose
he had provided Gloves, Handkerchiefes, present collation, and sundry waters
of delight. In the same manner was there provided another Quarter for the
Marquess del Carpio, who was to attend the Lord Infant, and an other hanged
with crymson Damask fringed with gold, for the Lords that would refresh
themselves, with abundance of conserues, sweet meats, and waters of all sorts,
and delightsome. She provided shirts, for his Majesty and Highness to change,
at their coming or going, as they did. She gave two Boxes for Relics, of
inestimable value, to his Majesty, with a famous relic of St Philippe the
Apostle: to the Lord Infant, and another of St Lawrence, which Pope Sixtus the
5. gave to the Countess, when she was Vice-Queene of Naples: and the Galley
wherein they came being sunk, after a years space, the Trunk wherein they
came, was seen in the water, which being known to belong to the Conde, John
Andrea Doria sent it him; a miraculous accident, and which approues the
certainty of relics, a pious and discreet present upon such an occasion, and
to such persons: she also had Gloves and handkerchiefes for them, in cabinets
of Rock-christal, wrought with gold, Pasts to be eaten, in glasses of the same:
and apples of sweet waters, all crystal, and gold, and being most wise and
discreet, to give full contentment to his Majesty, she procured that in the
Monastery of the holy Trinity, the holy Sacrament should be opened, with great
solemnity of lights and Ornaments, which his Majesty, and Highness humbly
adored, from the Countesses window, showing the devotion which the House of
Austria ever had. At the Countesses stairs, there received his Majesty the
Ladies of Zunniga, and the first that kissed his hand, was the Countess of
Monte-Rey, whom the King honored, with laying his arms upon her; the Lady of
Nieua, and the Marquisesse of Flores Dauila did the like, the Lady of
Alcannizas, and the two Countesses of Santisteuan, and de Villa-Alonso, to whom
his Majesty vouchsafed the courtesy he usually shows to Ladies; and so
passing through the midst of them all, he went directly to the Quarter of the
Countess de Miranda, where her Excellency attended; and being saluted by his
Majesty, she made suit for his hand to kiss, with a brief and modest
discourse, manifesting the favor that herein she received.

After this, his Majesty went to mask himself, into his own Quarter, where
they had placed a Royal Table, furnished with all manner of Conserues, about
forty Plates and dishes of Silver, with dried Suckets, and rose-sugar
confections of eight several sorts. The King tasted some of them, and
commanded it should still stand ready prepared till they returned from running.
All this passed in the Countesses house, which being so worthy to be imparted
to those curious to learn and know, I thought good in this description, to
make a digresson from setting down the Festiuitie. And no great wonder that
Pihlip the fourth thus honored the Countess of Miranda, knowing that wise
Philip the second, his Grandfather, did as much, when she was Vice-Queene of
Barcelona, being accompanied with the Ladies Infantaes, Lady Isabella, and Lady
Catalina, when the Count had the Duke of Sauoya for his guest, and the greatest
part of his Court, for four months in his own house and at his charges,
imitating in these favors, Philip the third, the virtuous his Father, who in
Vallodolid supped in the Countesses house, when the Duke was married, who is
Duke of Pennaranda, favors due unto his Illustrious House and Lady. The Canes
were now sorted out, the Drums, Trumpets, and his Majesty's Musicians going
before them, by the Streets of the Relators, and Atocha, even to the
Marketplace; and before their entering it, Don Augustine Mexia, and Don Fernando
Gyron, of the Council of State and War to his Majesty, being valiant
Soldiers, as all men know, made their Entries, as Patrons of the Canes, to
present them to his Majesty, and Highnesses; presently came in all the
Music, The King.
taking their places, when his Majesty, whom God preserve for many years,
entered, running against the Count de Oliuares (a deserved honor of so
faithful a Prince) mounted on two brown bay horses, with such dexterity and
force, and so justly encountering in every respect, that the earth envying so
equal a shock, remained with the immpressions and prints in it of this
Carreere, making footsteps in the sand, as a pattern and example for such as
are accustomed to that exercise, and shall hereafter follow in the same place.
At the Kings running, his Majesty and their Highnesses, with the Counselors
of the place, made a complementall Recognition. By and by, ran the Lord Infant
Don Carlos, renewing in the valor of his tender years, the memorial of his
great Grandfather, and the Marquess of Carpio ran against him, as ever he
uses to do. There followed Don Lewys de Ato, an imitator of his Father, the
Marquess, and with him ran Sant Estiuan, Don Iayme de Cardenas enclosing the
Troop, brother to the Duke of Maqueda, and the Count Portalegre. The
vestiments of his Majesty, and the Lord Infant, were rich and costly, with
Spanish Capes and Cassocks of Carnation Satin, embroidred with black silk
and gold, white frizled sleeves, and Plumes carnation and black, and answerable
to the Kings colors, was all the rest of his Squadro^. By and by ran the
Nobility of the Town of Madrid, faithful servants to his Majesty; against
whom, came Don Iuan de Castilla, their Corregidor, and Don Lorenzo de Oliuares,
Don Pedro de Torres, and Don Christoual de Medina seconding them, all three
Regidors, Antonio de Herrera, The Town.
and Don Francisco de Garnica, maintaining the courses, and Don Gaspar de
Guzman, and Don Sebastian de Contreras, ending the Squadron, al in the habit
of St. James. Their Liuerie was of orange-coloured Satin, embroidred with
leaves of Silver plates of Silver, and black silk, Bo^nets with rich setting
forth, and fairly spread with Orange-colour'd Plumes.

Presantly ran the Lord Duarte, with the Count of Villamor, the encounter was
brave, Don Antonio de Meneses, and the Count Pe^naflor maintained it, there
seconded them, Don Rodrigo Pimentel, and the Count Pu^nonrostro, and the
Marquess of Malagon, and the Duke of Veraguas, ended this Squadron. Their
Liuerie was rich and sightly, Cape and Cassocks of tawny Satin, embroidred
with silver and blue, cut upon silver tynsell, with white Pennons, and tawny
Plumes.

By and by after, ran the Count of Tendilla, and the Marquess of Mondejar his
Father, the Duke of Infantado beginning the first course of the Squadron,
Infantado.
with their accustomed spirit and valor; one honoring another, as the fruit
does the tree, and the Father assisting his Son, and giving him his right hand.
De Corunna, and Villar seconded them, and with rare equality, de Annouer, and
de la Peubla, the Marquess of Belmar, and Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza,
Corregidor of Toledo, ending this Squadron. The Duke ran not with the Canes,
both in respect of his venerable years, as also for some other indisposition
of body. Their Liuerie was very fantastical, Capes and ribbons of black
damask, embroidred with branch work of silver, cut upon Tynsell, with white
and black Plumes. Don Pedro de Toledo.
The valor of the Toledos, contested in some sort with the force of the
Mendozaes, the Marquess of Belada, and the Lord of Higares beginning the
course; the Marquess herein showing that agilitie and dexterity, which with
the applause of the people he shows upon all such occasions. In imitation of
him, followed Don Luis Ponce, Nephew to the Duke of Arcos, and Don Francisco de
Eraso; and so maintaining that which was well begun, there followed Don
Antonio de Auila and Toledo, Count of Risco, with the Lord de la Horcajada:
Risco, as at all other times, performed it bravely: Last of all, to conclude
the rest, which was good, Don Pedro de Toledo, with Don Diego de Toledo and
Guzman, ended this Squadron. Their Liuerie was, Capes of Cloth of gold, upon
the Gold embroidred with silver, Ribbons of cloth of Silver, embroidered with
gold; small wreathed hat-bands, and Bonnets with white Plumes, with black
sprigges, and open sleeves.

The last Toldeoes had scarce finished their courses, when, to continue
admiration and delight, there entered the Admiral, and the Marquess of
Alcanizas, The Admiral.
a worthy couple, to renown and celebrate the place, by the sound their horses
made, with the gold twisted in their manes and tails. De Tabarra, and Count de
Villalua seconded, with no less bravery. In emulation of these, came in the
Marquess of Toral, chief of the Guzmans, and Don Antonio Moscoso, Don Diego
de Silua, Marquess de Orani, and the Count de Villaflor ending this Squadron.
They had rich open sleeves, black Feathers stripped with gold, Ribbons and
Capes of black Satin; embroidered with Gold, and cut upon silver tynsell.

Monte-Rey gave occasion of new commendation and praise, with the Marquess of
Camarasa, Monte-Rey*
an Encounter of equal bravery; who were seconded by Don Iuan Carlos de
Guzman, and the Count of Saluatierra, de Onate, and Don Pedro de Cardenas and
Angulo, the Illustrous de Fromesta, and Don Iuan Erasco, finishing the
Squadron: all as gallant in their appearance, as ready and expert upon their
Gynnets. Their Liuerie was white Satin embossed with Gold, and black
powncings, Mylan Bonnets, and black Plumes.

There followed the Squadron of the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo, Castel-Rodrigo.
who ran with the Duke de Hijar, with such equal valor and worthiness, that
one could hardly judge, whether it were one or two that ran, Don Lorenzo de
Castro, and Don Dionis de Fare Portugals, followed, the Marquis of Orellana,
and Don Baltazar de Ribera. This Squadron ending in the Count de Ricla, and the
Marquis of Almazan. Their Livery was of green Satin, imbroidered with silver,
the lining of Cloth of Silver, and fair Bonnets, adorned with dark tawnie
Plumes.

The Duke of Sessaes Squadron followed this, who ran with Don Luys Vanegas,
Sessa.
A Posentador Mayor, both dextrous with valor, and valorous with dexterity,
who were seconded, by the Lord de Sueros, Don Francisco de Cordoua, Don Lewis
de Rojas, and Don Diego de Guzman, the Count de Cabra, and Don Iuan de Cordoua
ending the Squadron, advancing the equality of their first encounter. Their
Livery was very lustrous. Seawater green Satin, imbroidered with Silver and
black, black Plumes, stripped with white, and fair and rich sleeves.

Last of all, for the last service of such Royal beginnings, and Princely
progressions, Cea.
there ran the Duke of Cea, and the Prince of Esquilache; the Duke bare
himself bravely, and the Prince accompanied his own noble disposition, with
martial dexterity, de Pennafiel, and de Valle seconded them, a worthy
emulation of such Precedents: the Counts de Mejorada, and de Cantillana
imitated them: this Squadron ending, in Xabalquinto, and Don Christoual de
Gabiria. so special a runner, as upon any occasion he has ever manifested:
Their Liuerie was of blue Satin, Cloak and Cassocke imbroidered with drafts,
and raisings of silver, spots of black Silk and Silver, with the lining of
Cloth of Silver, blue Turbants with seeing glasses (a witty conceit, because in
the glass of every end and conclusion, we may behold the worthiness of
beginnings) their Plumes were blue, large, and lustrous, which on this day were
so many in number, as it seems incredible they could ever light upon them,
though not sufficient to write such magnificent Festiuities as this, yet enough
to blaze the Fame hereof to all the world. After they had quartered out the
place back to back, and ran along the sides thereof, they went to change
Horses, and take in hand their Targets, making their windings and divisions:
The parties being divided into five Squadrons, for each one, his Majesty
conducing some, and the Duke of Cea the rest. The Canes were run, as being
guided by such a Master: for certainly without allowing herein of any
flattery, or affection of a Subject, this Majesty ran the best of them all,
and the Lord Infant Don Carlos, showed himself to be truly his Brother. The
Duke of Cea, delivered the Canes to the King, with that observance which
becomes a Subject to his Prince. The whole place brake forth into general
acclamations: May his Majesty live long and many years, and London
questionless would now re-eccho to our sounds, seeing his Majesty made this
Triumphant Show to honor her Prince, and in a time of such vehement heat,
though this very day it was somewhat qualified. The Festiuitie ended, and his
Majesty and his Highness returned to the Countesses house, where they
refreshed and comforted themselves with those sweet meats, which before were
left standing on the Table, eating none of the hot meat which was provided,
being abundant and good; There was fresh drink allowed. This Bounty
continuing from the morning till night, with three Butteries, or Cellars,
abundantly furnished. The Queen and the Lady Infanta returned to the Court,
with the Lord Infant Cardinal; and his Majesty, and the Lord Infant Carlos,
to the Pannaderia, to bring home the PRINCE of WALES, who entertained these
favors, with the same respect, and love they deserved.

FINIS.

