Prince HENRY revived.

OR A POEM UPON THE BIRTH, AND In Honor of the Hopeful young PRINCE HENRY
FREDERICK, First Son and Heir apparent to the most Excellent Princes,
FREDERICK Count Palatine of the Rhine, And the Mirror of Ladies, Princess
ELIZABETH, his Wife, only daughter to our Sovereign JAMES King of Great
Britain, etc.

By HENRY PEACHAM.

LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for John Helm, and are to be sold at his shop
in Saint Dunstans Churchyard, under the Dial. 1615.

HENRICUS FRED: COM. PALATE: RHENI ET BAVAR. D. FILIVS ET HAERES.


Diua anima Augustos haud ementita parents
Frontis honor, decus Rheni, spes una BRITAN^VM
Cresce per immensum^ donec uirtutibus annos
CAESAR, auos titulis^ fama superaris Olympum
Henricus Peachamus
TO THE MIGHTY, AND MOST MAGNIFICENT PRINCESS ELIZABETH, PRINCESS PALATINE
OF THE RHENE, Duchess of Bauaria, etc.
Most Excellent Lady.
SIthence it has pleased your Highness, heretofore to take notice of me, and
my labors, such as they were, nothing has been oftener in my wishes then
ability to pay the debt I owe to the respect of so peerless a Prince, and
Princely a Patroness. But since the more I strive, the more I am entangled by
mine own weakness, I submit to my Fortune, and must rest Captiued in the
bands of your gracious mercy. Yet so to be bound, is sweet liberty, and
beholding the face of such a Judge, I read my pardon upon a brow of Iuorie. But
as Favor is wont to make offenders bold, so truly I confess your Favors
have drawn me into this, and your Bounty having watered some flowers, has
brought up I fear more weeds, which perhaps by their rankness will rather
give offense, then with their smell or beauty breed you delight. I now
present your Highness, with a Genethliaque or Birth Poem, done by me as well
in Latin, as English Verse, in Honor and the behalf of young Prince Henry
your sweet and dearest Son, the most part in my travails here in the Low
Countries upon the way, without other help then a bad memory, and my Table
book, and now ended under the aspect of that star of honor, and Honourer of
your Grace and all virtuous Excellence, Sir John Ogle Lord Governor of
Vtrecht, my noble friend. If any ask why it came no sooner and had not the
being with the Princes birth, I answer a Poem is a fruit that had need of a
winter to ripen it, I could say with Horace^ nine years, neither am I one of
those, who have their wits au bout des doigts, nonumque premantur in annum.
as Du Bartas says. Last of all it is a joy that can never come out of season.
Yet had these excuses, I confess bin of no force, had the way to Heidelberge
been free from danger, during either Armies lying at Rees and Wesel, for so
far I was come on my Pilgrimage with this little, less then a candle toward
your Highness the Saint and Sovereign of my deuote affection, whom since it
is papistrie to pray unto, I cannot, as I am bound, but pray for so long as I
live. I most humbly take my leave of your Grace: From Vtrecht, the of

Unto your Highne^se, the most devoted in all duty, HENRY PEACHAM.

To the same most Excellent Princess.
Dear Henry's loss, Eliza's wedding day,
The last, the first, I sorrowed and song,
When laid my reeds for evermore away,
To sleep in silence, Isis shades among:
Dead to the Muse, and many-headed throng,
Through hard constraint of fruitless Hope compelled:
And Envy rife, that kills with canckred tongue
The sacred Bay, so honored of eld,
Though left forlorn, ne now, of Phoebus self vpheld.
Where are the Summers when the righteous Maid,
With ev'nest hand the heavenly Scale did weild,
And golden Deed with golden meed repaid:
When Virtue was in price, for Virtue, held,
When Honors dainty but desert did guild,
And Poesy in graces goodly seen,
Raised her high thought, with strains that Nectar stilled?
They are ascended with that glorious Queen:
And she, alas, forgot, as she had never been.
But dearest daughter of the greatest I Will,
Sole glorious Empress of the Northren Maine.
Yet thou her glory: Since thou did erewhile,
Thy bounteous hand, and sweet supportance daigne
Unto my verse, and all unworthy vain:
As humblest Iu^e, by those arms I creep,
That gave me growth, and first my entertain,
Else lowly buried in Oblivion deep,
Who here had heard me sing thy sweetest babe a sleep?
And him again to waken with my song,
Which thousand tunes shall variously divide,
As Vahale by thy flowerie banks along,
I take my pipe at morn and euentide:
Hence may it down thy gentle bosom glide,
And going on, allay the enraged Rheine,
Where goodly Nymphs with Muses mild abide:
Who often in his surplusage of Wine,
Do teach him Temperance, in songs and lays divine.
Now while I shall beside this cradle sing,
Leave Venus Queen a time thy silver sphere,
And to mine aid thy dainty dearling bring,
With Mart appeased after death and dreare:
But from thy pure and peerless excellence,
Eliza mother, dreaddest Lady dear,
Light, life, oh, lend unto mine eine and sense,
For vigor have I none but what I draw from hence.
And Royal child, who like another Sun,
From Rosy bed arised'st in the East,
When that great light we saw extinct and done,
Ah Henry, waild of every gentle breast,
Dart one sweet smile upon me early ghest:
And that my Muse with thine owue height may fly,
A feather shed from thy fair Phoenix nest:
So may she teach thy Fame to strike the sky,
And thee a Mirror ^ake to all Posterity.
PRINCE HENRY REVIVED.
NOw iocund Muses to an higer string
We tune our Lyre, a lofty Theme to sing,
And leave a while the vale, to mounten up
With bolder wing Pernassus heavenly top:
Where holy Virgin eldest of the nine,
Whose temples with a seuen-fold crownet shine Vrani^.

And glorious mantle guildes the sable night,
With many a thousand twinkling Chrysolite:
Say, in what part we find those happy ^tars
That keep enrol'd, in golden Characters,
The Fate of Princes, and eternal sum
Of all; that was, and ever is to come.
To after times, I may arightly read,
The hopeful Harvest of this heavenly seed.
For, can the blood, derived from the veins
Of so great Princes, such imperial Reigns,
Vnhopefull be? and Impe of richest root,
Deceive our wishes in abundant fruit:
Or whether this been that same goodly tree,
That nigh the fertile Rhine must planted be:
Whose fruitful branch, should Europe ouer-spread,
And check the Heaven with her lofty-head.
Or one of those brave Worthies, joined in one
With the red Lion of old Caledon,
(Foretold by Merlin, whose one foot should press
The unshorn top of that vast wilderness,
The other graspe, with far extended power,
The Pyram of Troie-nouants highest tower)
Should as so many fatal suns appear
To chase the Crescent from our Hemispheare:
Or that strong arm expected long ago,
Should give the Byzant beast a deadly blow:
At Collen bathing (drunk with Christian blood)
His loathed limbs in Rhenus silver flood,
I may not rash aread; but this I wot
How Ianiuere, his bitter rage forgot,
For lusty green y'chang'd his frostie gray:
(As if he woed the sweet and dainty May)
For joy he brought first tidings of this birth,
And gave the goodliest New years gift on earth.
When smiling Gladness, child of heavenly Jove,
(Her dainty cordial gotten from above)
With rosy fingers now began to shed
Ambrosian dewes with kisses tempered.
And drops for joy, Loves self had wept full often,
Wherewith she wont, afflicted hearts to soften,
That all to mirth, each Creature melted now;
Yea Enuies self, though knew not why or how,
Until thy being, Fame had fully blown:
Thrice-welcome Infant, which no sooner known,
But reared wear in honor of thy name,
The goodliest sights Magnificence could frame;
When Piles bright burning, by the silent Moon
In every street, of midnight made the noone.
While silver bells, with iron tongues proclaim
A newborn Henry, to the Nymphs of Them.
Ye Nymphs of Them, whose lovely shape excels
So far the fairest of each Beauty else,
That you may boast both model and the mould
Of her perfection. What we do behold
In stranger Countries, read in antique lines,
Are pourtraies, but of sunburnt Abissines,
To you compared; that Paphos seems to me,
From Greece transported into Britannie.
And while I blazon broad this beauteous crew;
Fair Sisters, let me draw the veil from you:
Who though ye live, retired from worlds eye,
Estranged from Court, and Cities vanity,
For lovely feature do give place to none.
Whereto, your birth (as some high prized stone)
Though adds more luster, yet the goodly care
Of virtuous life, wherein ye nourtred are,
Gives freer wing abroad unto your Fame,
Then your brave Bea^ties, or great Dudleies name. The honorable and most
accomplished Gentleman Sir Robert Dudley his five daughters.

They dedicate with one accord the day,
To all disport, and merriment they may;
For thy, thy stars foretell them happy peace,
And give their half-dead Hopes a new increase,
Fair morning bud of Englands white-red Rose,
And seventh Henry in her strifes compose:
If ever (God forbid) her breast should feel,
The bitter edge of her own conquering steel:
Wherewith she wont with mighty arm to lop
The proudest head that durst her ouertop.
Who come another anchor to her state,
For it she lost by woeful wreck alate;
That hate of Hell; nor Traitor Heauen-abhor'd
Do what they may shall break our triple cord,
Who sheildest, sleeping even in Mothers arm,
Thy Grand sire, uncle Prince, more safe from harm,
Then Axes, Tasters, Grooms about the bed,
Then stronge^t holds, or gards twice doubled.
Who comet-like do suddenly amaze
The stricken foe, who standing at the gaze
Amused, reads ore what unhappy Realm,
The bloody Meteor shakes his fiery stream.
But as ore Haemus, when the morn has drawn
Her purple Curtains, after early dawne,
To lay to view her goodly golden pawn,
Her newborn son y'wrapt in Rosy lawne:
Who now awearie of his watrie bed
Off shakes the dew from his bright burnished head;
And with Ambrosian smile, and gentle cheer
Reuiues the world that wanted him whileare,
So us thine own thou gladdest with thy birth,
The welcome-welcomst stranger upon earth;
New come into thine age, where all things smile
By peace composed, (that Chaos-like erewhile
Lay rude, confused) discords indigest,
Whose formelesse form may no where be expressed.
Like as into some goodly garden plot,
That heretofore has her rude face forgot,
And lay an heap defaced with filthy soil,
Oregrowne with briars, abused by beastly spoil:
By Art and Nature now embellished
Smiles with a thousand dainty beauties spread,
Vaunting unto the greedy gazing eye
By Sunrise her perfumed embroderie.
When Mother-feared War, that long has rent
The body of our Christian continent;
And like the in-breach of a mighty flood,
Orethrowne our houses, drowned our streets with blood:
Co^s^m'd our Cities, laid our Country want,
Devoured our people, holy things defaced:
Shall prostrate at thy foot in deep disdain,
Lie raging bound in hundred double chain,
Until his heart strings break for fell despite,
Or his own arms do kill him with their weight.
Why brave Heroes ye that Eglets be,
And high-borne sons of Caesar's Monarchy,
Who have so often your puissant forces tried,
Against the common foe, do ye divide
Your selves and safeties, while ye entertain
Huge Armies in your homebred quarrels vain?
Or factious Schism that some dissentious head,
By night (his Cockle) has dissemined?
Or erst as Guicciardine.
Suizze and Burgundy begin,
An endless war about an vntoll'd skin?
While Eagle Eagle cruelly pursues,
And brother brother with his blood embru^s.
If the easefull age your active spirits yrke,
Not weeting how to set your selves a work,
Turn your keen steel against the hateful Turk.
Enough, enough, our guilt (oh gracious God)
If be thy will, has felt thy bittter rod.
Ierem. c. 47. and 29.
Oh turn that sword again into his sheath
That has so long chastised us beneath:
Let not our selves our executioners be,
While foes are fatted with the Tragedy.
As when there been in Erimanthus met
Two saluage Bores, with tuskes deadly whet,
Who either each with fiercest fury gore,
For rangership the spacious forest ore,
Until around the grassie velvet sted
With bloody filth be all discolored;
A slily lurking Lioness beneath,
When sees them weary, wounded, out of breath,
Leapes from her lare to arbitrate the fray,
With hungry teeth, and both become her pray.
What flood, the blood of Christians not infects?
What Seas have not bin covered with our wrecks?
What fields not tainted with our scattered bones?
What towers not turned to wastful heaps of stones?
That foes are filled with the piteous view,
And Discords self our Misery does rue.
But (happy Prince) thy time foretells thee peace,
And restfull days, with Honors large increase.
Now Germany, and Britain, shall be one,
In League, in Laws, in Love, Religion:
Twixt Dane, and English, English and the Scot,
Old grudge^ (see) for ever are forgot;
The Hebrid Redshanke shall not dare too rout,
Or inland Rebel double walled about:
But shaftlike all one bundle, be too strong
For mightiest foe to do the meanest wrong.
While foreign Princes from remotest shore,
Thy cradle shall by Embassies adore,
The Sun-burn'd Niger shall present thee plumes,
Sweet Arabie delicious perfumes:
Sarmatian Ister many a costly skin,
And Armenie her dainty Ermelin.
Egypt the Balm, or blood of Myrrha's wound,
And Persis, pearls within her channels found,
With Oriental Gemmes, to embosse arowne,
(In time perhaps) a Caesar's triple crown:
When Mother Earth shall to thee, incompell'd,
Her treasures, pleasures in abundance yield.
The hardy Oak shall melting honey sweat,
And bushes bend with Bacchus clusters great:
The Lion couch him by the Lamb in love,
And Eagle perch beside the gentle Dove:
The ripened grain shall yellow veil the ground,
No Serpent hurt, or harmefull herb be found.
Wood-Nymphes the shadie violets shall pull,
And bring thee Lillies by whole baskets full;
Some crop the Rose, to show thee how in grain,
That crimson, Venus bleeding hand did stain;
How from that As descended from the united Rose of Lancaster, and York.
dainty daughter of the morn,
And silken leaves, thy lovely self art borne:
Or Primrose, with the The King Cup.
King's enameled cup,
(Whose Nectar Phoebus early quaffeth up)
The Amaranth arraied in velvet still,
Sweet Rhododaphne, and the Daffadill:
Soft Marjoram, the young Virg. Aeneid. 1
Ascanius bed,
While Cupid kissed and courted in his sted:
The frail Anemon, Hyacinthus soft,
The Ladie-gloue, Coronis weeping often,
And whatsoever else the pleasant spring
Throws from her bosom foremost flourishing.
When Piety so pourtraied in the meddals of Augustus.
Piety no more with sword in hand
Shall need beside her smoakie Altar stand,
Or make her won from sight of living men
Some wastfull wood or solitary den;
But every where her holy things profess
Reside in Courts, high Heavens Embassadresse,
And as the Lilly free from cumbrous brire,
To heauenward, homeward, in her height aspire.
When arts, that now for nouriture do sterue,
Or (which is worse) as common subject serve
Of scorn or pity, to the golden Ass,
That for his Isis must adored pass,
Shall lay their rich inventions to the view,
Be mates with Majesty and reap their dew.
Had I the tongues of Angels and of men,
An endless memory, Fames golden pen,
Far I unable (Peace) were to pourtray
Thy lovely face, and down in order lay
Those blessings which from heaven thou do co^vay.
But if brave Impe, by Mars thou shall be hent
From thy soft Palace, to a warlike tent,
To undergo an honorable war,
In common, or thine own particular.
Then shine in glorious ^rmes He^uen be thy spend,
And endless F^me thy everlasting m^^d.
Go look about the spacious earth, and see
The triumphs, trophies of thine anc^strie;
(Ne let thine eye on meaner Glories f^ed,
But imitate the best, and best exceed)
What court or coast so ere thou comme^^ in,
There Grandsire, uncle or thy Cousins bin;
Even Envy, search thy fathers Pedigree,
From Charles, and she shall find allied to thee
Eleven Great Caesar's, twenty crowned Kings,
That blood contribute like so many springe^
Into thy veins: --
Great Charlemaigne, who taught his Eagle fly, See the history in French, in
Fleur de la maison du Charlemai^^.

Above the tops of lofty Pyranie:
(Bathing his plumes in stremes of Pagan blood,
From Ronceuall, to Iberos golden flood)
Subdue^d the Saxon, Italy did free,
From Longobards, and Got^ish Tyranny,
Subjected wholly, by an holy war,
The Hunne, the S^la^e, the Sor^be, and Auar.
To that brave Philip Count Palatine of the R^i^e in the ti^^ of Charles the 5.
Lord, that held Vienne so long,
Gain^t Soliman, three hundred thousand strong:
Yet all these honors, are but common, new,
To those, that by thy Mothers side a^^rew,
From warlike Britons, and that brave remain
Of ancient Troie (who once as great did reign)
Of whom descended, boldly vaunt thy birth,
Above the great'st, who ere h^ be on earth.
From Brute, to Bre^^us (and the brave Belli^e)
That ransackt Greece, and o^^ thy fertile Rhine
Victorious troops of Britons did advance,
Sacked perjured Rome, and conqu^red all France,
Unto Cassiuelan that twice did foil,
The mighty Caesar entering this I Will.
By Aruirage, that was the Roman dread,
Till Claudius Genuissa named the fair.
daughter afterward did wed
To Greatest Arthur, whose immortal name,
Bright'st Glories dampes, and even amazeth Fame.
But needs me not, in infinite extent,
Draw down these Images, or that descent
From Holy Edward, and the Saxon line,
To later Norman Ancestors of thine:
From Scottish Kings, or Denmark, sin' they stand
So dainty limned by a later hand;
I sooner (^e^e) the Lights of heaven should count,
The Ocean Sand, or if ought that surmount,
Then them or their brave deeds to view^n lay,
Or as I ought their worthiness display.
Yet note they all be drowned in Lethe quite,
Or thou deprived of some glorious ligh^,
Of later times, revealing to thy view,
Our E^gl^sh s^ar^, yet almost bleeding new:
Though known, and common to the world they be,
What th^n? Sweet Henry it is news to thee.
Imagine in some goodly Gallerie,
Such as in Hampton thou may one day see,
Who knows not Hampton? Mansion fitting Jove,
Or Phoebus self, excelling that above,
His Court of sparkie Gemme^, and Ivorie, built,
On Columns raised, and by his raions guilt:
Thou to the life, their legend did behold
On Arras, in the silk enwouen gold,
So sweetly done, by needle on the frame,
That Pallas self, nor Envy might it blame:
And saw^st here valiant Cordel^on come,
Fore Acon, marching with an English Drum,
Third Edward, there in triumph leading France,
An humble Captive to his puissance:
Forcing the fair De-luce upon her shield,
Quit the French Garden, for an English ^ield.
Here youthful Edward, his victorious son,
At Poiteirs, hand to hand encountering John King of France.
Ion,
That hail of arrows seem to cloud the sky;
While English follow, and the French do fly,
Some take that River, other yonder wood,
Which so the dainty vermill dies in blood,
Upon the silver wave, and silken green,
As if no semblance, but the thing were seen.
There Lancaster inflicts a deadly blow
On bastard Pedro, that usurped so,
Here Henry Monmouths beacon gives alarm,
At Agencourt, that makes all France to arm:
And she, there she, whom bleeding hearts inter,
Rather then those few stones at Westminster:
Whose name, eue^ now my ravished ^e^ce does pierce,
And with sweet Nectar sprinkleth my verse,
Eliza Queen, the Maiden conquer^sse,
Borne in triumphall Chariot, (I guess,
Like Thomyre, or that brave Semiramis)
From hundred handed Gerions defeat,
And his proud Castles fall in eighty eight.
But what shall need examples from a far;
Edge thy high courage to a glorious war
Some self high-priz'd Italian, Squire of France,
Instruct thee ride, and how to bear thy lance:
Or learned Lipsius, by his reading show,
The antique practice, postures long ago,
Of Greatest Caesar, or that haughty Greek,
Who other worlds bewailed he mote not se^ke;
All the^e, and far much more comprised be,
In that brave offspring, of the The Orange tree Prince Maurice hi^ emblem,
with Fit tandem surculus arb^r.
Orange tree,
Thy gallant Uncle (whose resounded name
Has filled all ears, and spent the voice of Fame)
Victorious Ma^rice, worthy be enrolled,
Mong those great worthies, and Heroes old,
Whose conquests earth has bounded, thoughts and fame,
Find no dimension but the heavenly frame.
But grow sweet Infant, grow, and grow apace,
Unto thy height, in goodness, and in grace,
For Europe on thee gins to fix her eye,
And note thy tender towardn^sse busily.
Perhaps (somewhere) consulteth with the stars,
How thou inclinest, to laborious wars,
Or restfull peace, how mild^ thy government,
How long the Fatal Sister^ in extent
Shall draw thy days, ( Ye Princ^s Mirrors are
Reflecting your impressio^s as far,
As Mountain Beacons, or like Cedars tall,
Most eminent in flourish, or your fall)
And with thy Mothers milk, from her fair breast,
Draw those sweet virtues that therein do nest,
Whereby her heart is dewed from aboue^
With gracious goodness, and all heavenly love:
True Piety; the fairest virtue Gem,
That may adorn a Princes Diadem:
Best Goodness, that Vain Glories foil reiects,
But rather shows the value by effects,
That Modesty, which Majesty allaies,
Yet Royal Type, beyond it self does raise:
Her Courtesy, wherewith she leads enchain'd,
Even foes, and friends, by millions has gained;
Her Bounty, mirror of her Royal heart,
To skill, and every generous desert:
But stay my Muse, why does our ruder quill,
Attempt a task, that craves Appelles skill?
Yet thus the Sun we view, through shadowes-light;
When cannot else behold his beams bright,
And (Pearl of Princes) thus the shore I keep,
When cannot sound thy praises Sea so deep:
Now ye who ever that shall hold in trust,
This precious jewel, and his nonage must
With tender care, and timely tendance breed,
Be virtuous guides, unto this hopeful seed:
His weaker age with all uprightness prop,
Until he has attained to goodness top:
For Infancy like unto water spilt,
Is with a finger drawn where thou will:
Or as an April Impe that late did shoot,
From the warm bosom of its Mother root:
A thousand ways by cunning hand i^ taught,
To take his course, to climb, or lie aloft,
Or clip with friendly twine the shadie bower,
That shendes true lovers, in the silver shower,
Or grow a Nymphe, that naked seems to blush,
When white and red have clad the bloosmed bush.
Then like a rampant Lion, or to been
A branch-horn'd Heart, or forrester in green,
Even so this Age we work unto our will,
Thus waxie-pliant unto good or ill.
Religion, then first ground work lay below
Which inward though it lies, and makes lea^t show,
All other Virtues it does strong sustain,
As weaker pieces resting on the maine;
This shall his life establi^h and assure,
Heigthen content, and make his seat secure.
Then as strong Colums, that must bear the weight,
And raise this Princely model to his height,
Let other Virtues take their order, place.
First Temperance, that aie with goodly grace
Does rule the mind, and with her golden bit
Curb headstrong passion, ouermaistring it:
Then Prudence, the souls eye, although she be
Daughter Afranius.
of Use, and strongest Memory,
And seldom settles in a growing brain,
Arist. Ethic. l. 1
Unapt her grauer l^sson to retain,
But borne with fancies, like a troubled Sea,
From Card and Compass makes contrary waie^
Acquaint him though betimely with her name,
How she it is must his Lives Action frame,
Direct, and end; and, like that V^g. A^neid. 6
golden spray,
Lead through this Vale of wretchedness his way,
Whose waking eyes a centinell must keep
(Like twinkling stars) while all the world does sleep:
Now Justice, that with her b^ight golden beams
Enlights the world, and calmes the state of Realms,
Preserues the Cicero in paradox. Aristot. Rhetoric. 1. cap. 3.
City, safer and more sure
Then wall of brass, or that same triple mure,
Wherewith the Assyrian Empress long agone
Encompassed her mighty Babylon.
This does adorn the Majesty of Kings
Boue every grace, and all their rarest things,
Resembling the Divine Creator right,
When borrows from Piety her light.
Next Clemency, who from the Almighties seat
Deriues her lineage, or by mild extreate
From Justice drawn, in readiness does stand,
And stretches out her sovereign helping hand;
Who rankor does of deepest wound allay,
And takes the smart of punishment away,
The Moon of Empire^ that with mild aspect
Does cooly temper, graciously affect:
And as in Heaven she; so in a Prince,
This claims the second glorious eminence.
What worldly Empire long has ever stood,
Whose Tyran-Scepter was distained with blood?
Or Prince, that long in Peace possessed his state,
Whose law was will, and whom the most did hate?
This ^rownes with Immortality his Fame,
And sheds abroad, as Ba^me, his precious name.
The lesser Vert^es let the front adorn;
And as in pleasing Pa^ergie be worn,
A rightly teach him use o^ Majesty,
The sweet effects of m^nly Modesty,
In Aristot. praesat. ad Alexandrum.
speech, apparel, painting least the rind
He kills the pithie sub^tance of the mind.
Let Pomp and Pride with those weak judgments suit,
That have no other way to win repute:
And let him hate the name of Nigardise
The rust of Greatness, with base Couetise.
Salust. Iugurth.
More Honor vanquished of a foe to be,
Then overcome in Liberality.
And that he may the better, as by line,
Run this fair course, and fowler way decline;
Oh timely teach him the abundant use
Of all good Learning, and to love the Muse,
Who gives the boundless Intellect her eye,
Conuersing with her Maker most on high,
Who meanest does to mighty Rule advance,
Still waging war with brutish Ignorance.
She safest with dead counsel will avise,
And guard his ear from living flatteries:
In after age she shall reviue his Name,
And crown with Honor his admired Fame.
Hence could the wisest Solomon dispute,
From the tall Cedar to the Hysope root.
Hence Who conquered in less then in te^ years 300 N^^i^^s to the R^^^^^
Empi^^ ^auing married his pe^ to ^is sword.
Caesar's star did gather first her f^ame;
And Philips son, the Earths sole Lord became.
E^ke those old warriors with astondement,
That made the Earth to tremble where they went,
Those fairest flowers within their girlonds worn,
Do owe to skill, that framed their minds beforne.
That goodly fount of Grecian Eloquence,
Whose Cyrus shapes us so vnmatch'd a Prince;
Themistocles that beat at Salamine
The greates^ Army that was ever see^e;
Pericles, from whose powerful accents brake
Thunder, and peircing lightning, while he spoke;
Miltiades, that Marathon did slain
With blood of hundred thousand Persians slain;
Epaminondas, in whom lived and died Cicero.

The Theban Glory; those brave spirits beside
Of antique Rome (that whilome in her pride
Even Victory held pineond, forced Mart
And drew perforce the Fates to take her part)
Were goodly learned, who will it deny?
And lived the fathers of Philosophy:
When rather skill the head-peice did adorn,
Then wanton plumes, that hold her now in scorn.
How often do I meditate upon
That of Alphonsus, King of Aragon;
Avowing it the sentence of a beast,
Who said, That Princes had small interest
In Learning: who as well may want their eyes,
Their tongues to speak, or Use to make them wise.
But nearest pattern place before thine eye,
Thy Grandsire James, our Royal Mercury:
Who with his wand all tumult caused to cease,
Fulfilled our wishes, gave our days their peace.
Without it do thou Greatness but account
That golden Calfe adored in Horeb mount,
Or Winter-Sun, whose beams do feebly glance;
Wrapped in the mists of foggie Ignorance.
Oh sacred skill whose fruit (as from that tree
Of Eden) feeds us with felicity,
And goodly branches stretch them selves so far,
That all too weak my wit and senses are
To comprehend their compass, as fought,
Exceeding measure and all mortal thought^
Thr^ce happy me the mean^st of the ^e^^,
Were I but with her only shadow blest^
Thus in the Circle that thou ha^t to run,
Display thy glory with the rising Sun:
Thus to thy Solstice, c^i^bing by degree,
Exemplar let thy life's whole pa^terne be
To such, as from thee must derive their light
By thousands, and are dimmed without thy ^ight.
The winged vessel is not by her helm
So much commanded, as a potent Realm
Is by her Princes life example lead,
To frugall course, or vile vnthri^tihead.
Edicts, nor Axes, Prison, Pyran l^w,
Do not so much the stubborn vulgar draw,
As does (the glass of Honor) Innocence,
And Virtues parts, exemplar in a Princ^.
Herein they see, love, imitate, admire,
And are enkindled from his all s^ene ^^re.
This Caesar knew, when foremost did assay
Each deepest stream, to teach his troops the way^
And that great Cato, whose command was none
By word, but his own personal action.
No engine like to that of hearty love,
Or fair example; able sooner move
The massy Earth, then that rare Instrument
The A^c^im^des.
Syracusian boasted to invent.
This is that Adamant, whose Character
Stirs up with counter-motion nigh and far
All Hearts the Cyphars, who (conioyntly me^)
Do turn or t^rrie by her Alphabet.
Thus pious N^ma over Rome did reign,
And Solomon his peaceful Thr^^^ (...)
(By where E^phr^^es with his silu^r (...)
A thousand palme^s on his shore does nu^se)
Whose Scep^ers, Swords no^ (...) d^d ^ss^^^,
But iustest Laws, with lives (...) and (...) t^^ ^onn^
When that proud Eastern Conqueror
Of Fortune, r^ther th^n of Macedon)
Together with his father, and the r^^
Of Roman Caes^rs that did most em (...)
Their Baies in blood, or else with hands vniu^^
Dealt wrong for right, or drowned lay in lust,
Out-breath'd their soule^ by poison at the board,
Or sudden fell upon a villains sword^
Thi^ end had Nero's b^astly life in fine:
Thus died Domitian, and thus M^ximine.
Unhappy Who spoiled Proserpina's Temple.
Pyrr^^s was pursued by Fate,
On Sea and Land, unto his li^^^ lost date:
By loathso^^ li^^ He defiled the Temple.
Antiochu^ did die^
And Who slew his wife, and own Mother.
(...) even s^^rn'd o^ Misery:
A Sheaperd^s^^ sent Cyrus down to hell:
Upon his own swords point Who slew his brother and sister great with child.
Ca^bys^^ fell:
And cruel He put to death his mother and brother.
Arist^^^^^^, at l^st,
His heart a^ once (...) omit (...).
Thus veng^ance tra^^s ^he^ by the blood they spilt^
Till their own mo^^hes gi^es sente^^^ (...) the (...)
Oh heauens^ to (...) no worl^ly thing
More (...) the ^^^^and pious King:
Upon whose brow (...) see
The Image of the highest Maiestie^
And sparkling graces, that do sweetly shine
With Xenopho^ i^ Cyripadia.
something (what I know not) that is diuine^
Which if themselves through filthy vice deface,
Or cursed hand attempts to c^t or race,
As Traitors Heaven adiudgeth them alike;
And last or first will in auengement strike.
Oh timely let these things engraven be
Upon the t^blet of thy m^morie:
And thus let virtues golden linked chain
A bracelet on thy tender wrist remain.
So shall thou not give thy Elector vo^ce,
And of some mighty m^ke the foremost choice;
But reign thy self more absolute and free,
An Emperor in thought and dignity,
Then if thou should with mighty arm adioine
All Persis to thy County P^latine,
The Gades with Lybia, and could claim thine own
What from the South been to the Arcti^ke known.
Oh that the Fat^s would lengthen my extent,
And let me draw so long this Element,
That I the footsteps of thy praise might press
In riper years, How should my song address
Thy Honour^ Triumphs! not the T^^^cia^ Lyre,
That death in deepest slumber could inspire,
In stately numbers should our Muse ^xcell,
While she did on thy lo^^i^ Glories dwell.
Then grow (swee^ Infant) grow and grow apace,
And live t^^ ^^^nix of thy roy^^^ ^ace,
For (...), guarded by (...) vows,
Till foes thy feet, (...) browe^,
That Caesar (...) thou maist^on^ day reign,
As good, as great, as ever (...).
FINIS.

