Polyhymnia Describing, The honorable Triumph at Tylt,before her Majesty, on
the 17. of November, last past, being the first day of the three and thirtith
year of her Highness reign.

With Sir Henry Lea, his resignation of honor at Tylt, to her Majesty, and
received by the right honorable, the Earl of Cumberland.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


Printed at London, by Richard Ihones. 1590.

Polyhimnia.

Entitled, with all duty to the Right Honorable, Lord Compton of Compton.

By George Peele, Master of Arts in Oxforde.

The names of the Lords and Gentlemen that ran, and the order of their running,
The Couples.
Sir Henry Lea, and The Earl of Cumberla^d. 2 The Lord Strange, and M. Thomas
Gerrarde. 3 The Lord Compton, and M. Henry No well. 4 The Lord Burck, and Sir
Edward Denny. 5 The Earl of Essex, and M. Foulke Greeuill. 6 Sir Charles
Blunt. M. Thomas Vauasor. 7 M. Robert Carey. and M. UUilliam Gresham. 8 Sir
William Knowles M. Anthony Cook. 9 Sir Thomas Knowles. Sir Phillip Butler. 10
M. Robert Knowles. M. Ralph Bows. 11 M. Thomas Sydney M. Robert Alexander. 12
M. John Nedham, M. Richard Acton. 13 M. Charles Dauers. M. Euerard Digby.
Polihymnia.
THerefore, when thirty two were come and gone,
Years of her reign, days of her countries peace,
Elizabeth great Empress of the world,
Britanias Atlas, Star of Englands globe,
That swaies the massy scepter of her land,
And holds the royal raynes of Albion:
Began the gladsome sunnie day to shine,
That draws in length date of her golden reign:
And thirty three she numbreth in her throne:
That long in happiness and peace (I pray)
May number many to these thirty three.
Wherefore it fares as whilom and of yore,
In armor bright and sheene, fair Englands knights
In honor of their peerless Sovereign:
High Maistresse of their service, thoughts and lives
Make to the Tylt amain: and trumpets sound,
And princely Coursers neigh, and champ the byt,
When all addressed for deeds of high deuoyre,
Preace to the sacred presence of their Prince.
The 1. couple.
Sir Henry Lea. The Earl of Cumberland.
Mighty in Arms, mounted on puissant horse,
Knight of the Crown in rich imbroderie,
And costly fair Caparison charged with Crowns,
Oreshadowed with a withered running Vine,
As who would say, My spring of youth is past:
In Corslet gylt of curious workmanship,
Sir Henry Lea, redoubted man at Arms
Leads in the troops, whom worthy Cumberland
Thrice noble Earl, aucutred as became
So great a Warrior and so good a Knight.
Encountered first, yclad in coat of steel,
And plumes and pendants al as white as Swanne,
And spear in rest, right ready to perform
What longed unto the honor of the place.
Together went these Champions, horse and man,
Thundering along the Tylt, that at the shocke
The hollow gyring vault of heaven resoundes.
Six courses spent, and spears in shiuers split,
The 2. couple
The L. Strange. M. John Gerrarde.
THE Earl of Darbies valiant son and heir,
Brave Ferdinande Lord Strange, straunglie embarkt,
Under Jove's kingly byrd, the golden Eagle,
Stanleyes old Crest and honorable badge,
As veering fore the wind, in costly ship,
And armor white and watchet buckled fast,
Presents himself, his horses and his men,
Suited in Satin to their Masters colors,
Welneere twice twenty Squires that went him by
And having by his Trounch-man pardon craved,
Vailing his Eagle to his Sovereigns eyes,
As who should say, stoop Eagle to this Sun,
Dismountes him from his pageant, and at once,
Taking his choice of lusty Tilting horse,
Covered with sumptuous rich Caparisons,
He mountes him bravely sor his friendly foe,
And at the head he aims, and in his aim
Happily thriues, and breaks his Azure staves.
Whom gentle Gerrarde, all in white and green,
Colors (belike) best serving his conceit,
Lustilie meets, mounted in seat of steel,
With flourishing plume and fair Caparison,
And then at every shocke the shiuers fly,
That recommend their honors to the sky.
The 3. couple.
The L. Compton. M. Henry Nowell.
NExt in the Virgins colors, as before
Ran Cumberland; comes lovely Compton in,
His Courser trapt in white, and plumes and staves
Of snowie hue, and Squires in fair array,
Waiting their Lords good fortune in the field.
His armor glittering like the Moons bright rays,
Or that clear silver path, the milk-white way
That in Olympus, leads to Jove's high court,
Him noble minded Nowell pricks to meet,
All armed in Sables with rich Bandalier,
That Bawdrick wise he ware, set with fair stones
And pearls of Inde, that like a silver bend
Showed on his varnish't Corslet black as Iet,
And beauteous plumes and bases suitable,
And on his styrrop waits a trusty train
Of servants, clad in tawnie liueries,
And toote they go, this Lord and lusty Knight
To do their royal mistress honors right.
The 4. couple.
The L. Burke. Sir Edward Dennye.
WHen mounted on his fieree and foming Steed,
In Riches and in Colors like his peers,
With Iuorie plumes in silver shining Arms,
His men in Crimson dight, and staves in Red
Comes in Lord Burck, a fair young Ireland Lord,
Bent chiefly to the exercise of Arms,
And bounding in his princely Mistress eye,
Charge his staff when trumpet calls away,
At noble Dennies head, brave man at Arms,
That furiously with flaming sword in hand,
(As if the God of war had sent him down,
Or if you will, to show his burning zeal
And forwardness in service to her person,
To whom those Martial deeds were consecrate)
Speedes to the Tylt amain, rich as the rest,
Himself, his horse, and pages all in green,
Green velvet fairly garnished horse and man.
The 5. couple.
The Earl of Essex. M. Foulke Greuile.
THen proudly shocks amid the Martial throng,
Of lusty Lancieres, all in Sable sad,
Drawn on with cole-blacke Steeds of duskie hue,
In stately Chariot full of deep device,
Where gloomie Time sat whipping on the teame,
Just back to back with this great Champion;
Young Essex, that thrice honorable Earl,
Yclad in mighty Arms of mourners hue,
And plume as black as is the Ravens wing,
That from his armor borrowed such a light,
As bows of Vu receives from shady stream,
His staves were such, or of such hue at least,
As are those banner staves that mourners bear,
And all his company in funeral black,
As if he mourned to think of him he mist,
Sweet Sydney, fairest shepherd of our green,
Well lettred Warrior, whose successor he
In love and Arms had ever vowed to be.
In love and Arms o may he so succeed,
As his deserts, as his desires would speed.
With this great Lord must gallant Greuill run,
Fair man at Arms, the Muses fauouret,
Lover of Learning and of Chivalry,
Sage in his sawes, sound Judge of Poesy:
That lightly mounted, makes to him amain,
In armor gilt, and basses full of cost.
Together go these friends as enemies,
As when a Lion in a thicket pent,
Spieng the Boar all bent to combat him,
Makes through the shrubs, and thunders as he goes.
The 6. couple
Sir Charles Blunt. M. John Vauasor.
ANd then as blithe, as bird of mornings light,
Inflamb'd with honor, glistering as the Sun,
What time he mountes the sweating Lions back,
Beset with glorious Sunshine of his train,
Bearing the Sun upon his armed breast,
That like a precious shining Carbunkle,
Or Phoebus eye, in heaven it self reflects,
Comes Sir Charles Blunt in Or and Azure dight,
Rich in his colors, richer in his thoughts,
Rich in his Fortune, Honor, Arms and Art:
And him the valiant Vauasor assailes
On fierce and ready horse with spear in rest,
In Orange tawnie bright and beautiful,
Himself, his men and all: and on they speed,
And have they make to meet, and meet they do,
And do the thing for which they meet in have,
Each in his Armor amiable to see,
That in their looks bare love and Chivalry.
The 7. couple.
Master Robert Carey. Master William Gresham.
BY this the Trumpe called Carey to the Tilt,
Fair bird, fair Cignet of our silver Swanne,
When like a Lord in pomp and princely show,
And like a Champion fitted for the war,
And not unlike the son of such a sire,
Under a plume of murrie and of white,
That like a Palm tree beautifullie spread,
On mighty horse of Naples mounted fair,
And horse at hand, and men and pagespight;
All with a burning heart greets he her grace,
Whose gracious countnance he his heaven esteems,
And to her sacred person it presents;
As who would say, my heart and life is hers,
To whom my loyalty this heart prefers.
And at the summons out his foe man flies,
Gresham the heir of golden Greshams land,
That beautified new Troy with royal Change,
Badge of his honor and magnificence.
Silver and Sable such his colors were,
And ready was his horse, and readier he,
To bound, and well behave him in her eye,
Upon whose looks his life and honor stood.
Then horse and man conspired to meet amain,
Along the Tylt Carey and Gresham go,
Swift as the Swallow, or that Greekish Nymph
That seemed to ouerrfly the eyles of corn:
And break they do, they miss not as I ween,
And all was done in honor of their Queen.
The 8. couple.
Sir William Knowles. M. Anthony Cook.
THen like the three Horatij in the field,
Betwixt the Roman and the Alban camp,
That triumphed in the royal right of Rome;
Or old Duke Aymons glory, Dordans pride,
Came in the noble English Nestors sons,
Brave Knowles his offspring, hardy Champions,
Each in his plumes, his colors and device,
Expressing Warriors wit and Courtiers grace.
Against Sir William ran a lusty Knight.
Fine in device he was, and full of wit,
Famous beyond the chalkie British cliffes,
And loved and honored in his country bounds.
Anthony Cook, a man of noble name,
For Arms and Courtship equal to the best:
Valor and Virtue sat upon his helm,
Whom Love and lowering wring Fortune led along.
And Life and Death he portraied in his show.
A liberal Hand, badge of nobility,
A Heart, that in his mistress honor vows
To task his hand in witness of his heart
Till age shake off rough wars abiliments.
Then with such cunning can they couch their staves
That worthily each knight himself behaues.
The 9. couple.
Sir Thomas Knowles. Sir Philip Butler.
THe youngest brother, Mars his sworn man,
That wan his knightly spurs in Belgia,
And followed dub of drum in Fortunes grace,
Well horst and armed, Sir Philip Butler greetes
The noble Essex friend and follower,
In mourning Sable dight by simpathie,
A gentle Knight, and meekely at the Tylt
He stands, as one that had no heart to hurt
His friendly foe: but at the trumpets sound
He flies along, and bravely at the face
His force he bendes: the rival of his fame
Spurs on his steed, nor shuns the shocke for fear,
And so they meet; the armor bears the skar,
Of this encounter and delightful war.
The 10. couple.
M. Robert Knowles. M. Ralph Bows.
THe last not least, of these brave brethren,
Laden with honor, and with golden boughs,
Entering the listes like Tytan, armed with fire,
When in the queackie plot Python he slew
Bows takes to task, with strong and mighty arm,
Right richly mounted: horse and man it seemed
Were well agreed to serve as roughly there,
As in the enemies reach for life they would.
And when they ran, me thought a tempest rose,
That in the storm the clattering armours sound,
As horse and man had both been borne to ground.
The 11. couple.
M. Thomas Sydney. M. Robert Alexander.
THus long has dainty Sydney sit and seen,
Honor and Fortune houer in the air,
That from the glorious beams of Englands eye,
Came streaming: Sydney, at which name I sigh,
Because I lack the Sydney that I love,
And yet I love the Sydneys that survive.
Thus long (I say) sat Sydney and beheld
The shiuers fly of many a shaken spear,
When mounted on a Courser trapt in white,
And thoroughly well appointed he and his;
Pure sparks of Virtue kindling Honors fire,
He thought he might, and for he might, he would
Reach at this glory, fair befall him still:
And to the Tylt (impatient of delay)
He comes, encountered with a threatening point
That Alexander menaced to him fast:
A valorous and a lusty Gentleman,
Well fitted with his armor and his Steed,
And him young Sydney sits: and had he chardg'd
The Macedonian Alexanders staff,
He had been answered by that valiant youth:
So well behau'd himself this fair young Knight,
As Paris had to great Achilles Lance
Applied his tender fingers and his force.
The 12. couple.
M. Nedham. M. Richard Acton.
THe next came Nedham in on lusty horse,
That angry with delay, at Trumpets sound
Would snort, and stamp, and stand upon no ground,
Unwilling of his masters tariance.
Yet tarry must his master, and with him
His prauncing steed, till trumpets sounding shrill,
Made Acton spur apace, that with applause
Of all beholders, hied him lustilie;
As who would say, Now go I to the goal,
And then they ride and run and take their chance
As death were fixed at point of eithers lance.
The 13. couple.
M. Charles Dauers. M. Euerard Digbie.
NOw drew this martial exercise to end,
And Dauers here and Digbie were the last
Of six and twenty gallant Gentlemen,
Of noble birth and princely resolution.
That ran in couplement, as you have heard,
In honor of their mistress holiday.
A gracious sport, fitting that golden time,
The day, the byrth-day of our happiness,
The blooming time, the spring of Englands peace.
Peace then my muse, yet ere thou peace, report,
Say how thou saw these Actors play their parts.
Both mounted bravely, bravely minded both,
Second to few or none for their success,
Their hie deuoyre, their deeds do say no less.
And now had Englands Queen, fair Englands life,
Beheld her Lords, and lovely Lordly Knights
Do Honors service to their Sovereign;
And heaven by this distilled down tears of joy,
In memory and honor of this day.
Sir Henry Lea resignes his place of Honor at Tylt, to the Earl of Cumberland.
ANd now as first by him intended was,
In sight of Prince and Peers, and people round,
Old Henry Lea, Knight of the Crown dismountes,
And in a fair Pauilion hard at hand,
Where holy lights burnt on the hallowed shrine
To Virtue or to Vesta consecrate,
Having unarmed his body, head and all,
To his great Mistress his petition makes,
That in regard and favor of his age,
It would so please her princely Majesty
To suffer him give up his staff and Arms,
And honorable place wherein he served,
To that thrice valiant Earl, whose Honors pledge
His life should be: with that he singled forth
The flower of English Knights, the valiant Earl
Of Cumberland, and him (before them all)
He humbly prays her Highness to accept,
And him install in place of those designs,
And to him gives his armor and his lance,
Protesting to her princely Majesty,
In sight of heaven and all her princely Lords,
He would betake him to his Oraysons:
And spend the remnant of his waining age,
(Unfit for wars and Martial exploites)
In prayers for her endless happiness.
Whereat she smiles, and sighs, and seemed to say
Good Woodman, though thy green be turned to gray,
Thy age past Aprils prime, and pleasant May:
Have thy request, we take him at thy praise,
May he succeed the honor of thy days.
Amen, said all, and hope they do no less,
No less his virtue and nobility,
His skill in Arms and practice promises,
And many Cha^pions such may England live to have
And days and years as many such, as she in heart can
(crave.
FINIS.
A Sonet.
HIS Golden locks, Time has to Silver turned,
O Time too swift, o Swiftness never ceasing:
His Youth against Time and Age has ever spurned
But spurned in vain, Youth waineth by increasing.
Beauty Strength, Youth, are flowers, but fading seen,
Duty, Faith, Love are roots, and ever green.
His Helmet now, shall make a hiue for Bees,
And Lovers Sonets, turned to holy Psalms:
A man at Arms must now serve on his knees,
And feed on prayers, which are Age his alms.
But though from Court to Cottage he depart,
His Saint is sure of his vnpotted heart.
And when he saddest sits in homely Cell.
Heel teach his Swains this Carroll for a Song,
Blessed be the hearts that wish my Sovereign well,
Cursed be the souls that think her any wrong.
Goddess, allow this aged man his right,
To be your Beads-man now, that was your Knight:

