THE DEVICE of the Pageant borne before Woolstone* Dixi LORD Mayor of the City
of London. An. 1585.

October 29.

IMPRINTED at LONDON by Edward Allde. 1585.

A Speech spoken by him that rid on a Luzarne before the Pageant apparelled
like a Moore.
FRom where ye Sun does settle in his wayn
And yoakes his Horses to his fiery Carte,
And in his way gives life to Ceres Corn,
Even from ye parching Zone behold I come
A stranger straungely mounted as you see,
Seated upon a lusty Luzerns back.
And offer, to your Honor (good my Lord)
This Emblem thus in show significant.
Lo lovely London rich and fortunate,
Famed through the World for peace and happiness:
(...) aduaunc't and set in Highest seat,
^^^wtified thoroughly as her state requires.
First, over her a Princely Trophey stands,
Of beaten gold: a rich and Royal Arms:
Wher-too this London ever more bequeathes,
Service of Honor and of Loyalty.
Her props are well advised Maiestrates,
That carefully attend her person still.
The honest Franklin and the Husbandman,
Lays down his sackes of Corn at Londons feet,
And bringes such presents as the Country yeeldes.
The pleasant Thames a sweet and daintye Nymphe,
For Londons good conuayes with gentle stream,
And safe and easy passage what she can,
And keeps her leaping Fishes in her lap.
The Soldier and the Sayler franckly both,
For Londons aid are all in readiness,
To Uenture and to fight by Land and Sea.
And this thrice reverend honorable Dame,
Science the sap of every common wealth.
Surnam^d Mechanical or Liberal
Is vowed to honor London with her skill,
And London by these friends so happy made:
First thanks her God the Author of her peace,
And next, with humble gesture as becomes,
In meek and lowly manner does she yield,
Her self her welthe with heart and willingness.
Unto the person of her gracious Queen,
Elizabeth renowned through the world,
Stall'd and anointed by the highest power,
The God of Kings that with his holy hand,
Has long defended her and her England.
This now remains right honorable Lord,
That carefully you do attend and Keep,
This lovely Lady rich and beautiful*
The Iuel wherwithall your sovereign Queen,
Has put your honor lovingly in trust:
That you may add to Londons dignity,
And Londons dignity may add to yours,
That woorthely you may be counted one,
Among the number of a many more:
Careful leeftenaunts, careful Maiestrates,
For Londons welfare and her worthiness.
Dixi.
Spoken by the Children in the Pageant viz.
London. NEw Troy I hight whom Lud my Lord surnamed*
London the glory of the western side:
Throughout the world is lovely London famed,
So far as any sea comes in with tide.
Whose peace and calm under her Royal Queen:
Has long bin such as like was never seen.
Then let me live to caroll of her name,
that she may ever live and never dye:
Her sacred shrine set in the house of fame,
consecrate to eternal memory.
My peerles mistress sovereign of my peace:
Long may she joy with honors great increase.

Magnanimity. THe Cuntry and the Thames afford their aid,
and careful Maiestrates their care attend*
All English hearts are glad, and well appaide,
in readiness their London to defend.
Defend them Lord and these fair Nimphs likewise:
that ever they may do this sacrifice.

Loyalty. THe greatest treasure that a Prince can have,
does lovely London offer to her Queen,
Such loyalty as like was never seen.
and such as any English heart can crave.

The Cuntry FOf Londons aid the Cuntry gives supply,
of needful things, and store of every grain:
London give thanks to him that sits on hie*
had never Town less cause for to complain,
And love and serve the sovereign of thy peace:
Under whose reign thou have this rich increase.

The Thames. WIth silver glide my pleasant streams do run,
where leaping fishes play betwixt the shores:
This gracious good has God and kind begun,
for Londons use with help of Sails and Ores.
London rejoice and give thy God the praise:
For her whose highness lengths thy happy days.

The Soldier. Armor of safe defense the Soldier has,
So lovely London carefully attends:
To keep her sacred sovereign from skathe,
That all this english land so well defends.
And so far London bids her soldiers go,
As well may serve to sheeld this land from woe.

The Sayler. THe Sayler that in cold and quaking tide,
the wrathful storms of Winters rage does bide
With streamers stretched, prepares his merry bark,
for cuntries wealth to set his men awark.
That Queen and Cuntry eazely may see:
The Seaman serves his Prince in his degree.

Science. FOr Londons safety and her happiness,
the Soldier and the Sayler may you see:
All well prepared and put in redines,
to do such service as may fitting be,
and Art with them do join and they with me.
London then joy and let all ages know,
What duty to thy sovereign thou do show.

The first Nymphe. THus with the morning Sun and evening star,
these holy lights shall burn, the cheerful flame
With sweetest odor that perfume as far
as India stands in honor of her name.
Whose Trophey we adore with sacred rights:
With sweetest incense and with endless lights.

The Second Nymph. SO long as Sun does lend the world his light,
or any grass does grow upon the ground:
With holy flame, our Torches shall burn bright,
and fame shall brute with golden trumpets sound
The honor of her sacred regiment:
That claims this honorable monument.

The third Nymph. OUr holy lights shall burn continually,
to signify our duties to her state:
Whose excellent and princely majesty,
approoues it self to be most fortunate.

The fourt Nymphe. Virtue shall witness of her woorthines,
and fame shall register her princely deeds:
The world shall still pray for her happiness,
from whom our peace and quietness proceeds.

Verses written under the Arms of England.

Gallia victa dedit flores inuicta Leones,
Anglia, ius Belli in flore, Leone suum:
O sic o semper ferat Anglia laeta triumphos,
Inclita gallorum Flore, Leone suo.
Done by George Peele Master of arts in Oxford.

