THE LOVE OF KING DAVID AND FAIR BETHSABE.

With the Tragedy of Absalon.

As it has been diverse times played on the stage.

Written by George Peele.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip. 1599.

The love of David and fair Bersabe, with the Tragedy of Absolon.
Prologus.
OF Isreal's sweetest singer now I sing,
His holy style and happy victories,
Whose Muse was dipped in that inspiring deaw,
Archangels stilled from the breath of Jove,
Decking her temples with the glorious flowers,
Heavens raind on tops of Syon and Mount Synai,
Upon the bosom of his yuorie Lute,
The Cherubins and Angels laid their breasts,
And when his consecrated fingers struck
The golden wiers of his rauishing harp,
He gave alarm to the host of heaven,
That winged with lightning, brake the clouds and cast
Their crystal armor, at his conquering feet.
Of this sweet Poet Jove's Musition,
And of bis beauteous son I prease to sing.
Then help divine Adonay to conduct,
Upon the wings of my well tempered verse,
The hearers minds above the towers of Heaven,
And guide them so in this thrice haughty flight,
Their mounting feathers scorch not with the fire,
That none can temper but thy holy hand:
To thee for succor flies my feeble muse,
And at thy feet her iron Pendoth use.
He draws a curtain, and discouers Bethsabe with her maid bathing over a
spring, she sings, and David sits above vewing her. HOt sun, cool fire,
temperd with sweet air,
Black shade, fair nurse, shadow my white hair
Shine sun, burn fire, breath air, and ease me,
Black shade, fair nurse, shroud me and please me
Shadow (my sweet nurse) keep me from burning
Make not my glad cause, cause of mourning.
Let not my beauties fire,
Inflame unstaid desire,
Nor pierce any bright eye,
That wandreth lightly.
Bethsabe. Come gentle Zephire trickt with those perfumes
That erst in Eden sweetened Adams love,
And stroke my bosom with the silken fan:
This shade (sun proof) is yet no proof for thee,
Thy body smoother then this wauelesse spring,
And purer then the substance of the same,
Can creep through that his lances cannot pierse.
Thou and thy sister soft and sacred air,
Goddess of life* and gouernesse of health,
Keeps every fountain fresh and arbor sweet,
No brazen gate, her passage can repulse,
Nor bushly thicket, bar thy subtle breath,
Then deck thee with thy loose delightsome robes,
And on thy wings bring delicate perfumes,
To play the wantons with us through the leaves,

Da. What tunes, what words, what looks, what wonders pierce
My soul, incensed with a sudden fire,
What tree, what shade, what spring, what paradise
Enioyes the beauty of so fair a dame?
Faite Eua placed in perfect happiness,
Lending her praise-notes to the liberal heavens,
Struck with the accents of Archangels tunes,
Wrought not more pleasure to her husbands thoughts,
Then this fair woman's words and notes to mine.
May that sweet plain that bears her pleasant weight,
Be still enameld with discolored flowers,
That precious fount, bear sand of purest gold,
And for the Peble, let the silver streams
That pierce earths bowels to maintain the sorce,
Play upon Rubies, Saphires, Chrisolites,
The brims let be embraced with golden curles
Of moss that sleeps with sound the waters make,
For joy to feed the fount with their recourse,
Let all the grass that beautifies her bower,
Bear Manna every morn in steed of dew,
Or let the dew be sweeter far then that
That hangs like chains of pearl on Hermon hill,
Or balm which trickled from old Arons beard.
Cusay, come up and serve thy lord the King. Enter Cus.

Cus. What service does my lord the King command?

David. See Cusay see, the flower of Israel,
The fairest daughter that obeies the King,
In all the land the lord subdued to me.
Fairer then Isacs lover at the well,
Brighter then inside bark of new hewn Caedar,
Sweeter then flames of fine perfumed myrrh.
And comelier then the silver clouds that dance
On Zephires wings before the king of heaven.

Cus. Is it not Bethsabe the Hethites wife
Vrias, now at Rabath siege with Ioab?

Dau. Go know, and bring her quickly to the King,
Tell her, her graces has found grace with him.

Cusay. I will my lord. Exit Cusay to Bethsabe.

David. Bright Bethsabe shall wash in David's bower,
In water mixed with purest Almond flower,
And bath her beauty in the milk of kids,
Bright Bethsabe gives earth to my desires,
Verdure to earth, and to that verdure flowers,
To flowers, sweet Odors, and to Odors wings,
That carry pleasures to the hearts of Kings.

Cusay to Bethsabe, she starting as something afright. Cusay. Fair Bethsabe,
the King of Israel
From forth his Princely tower has seen thee bath,
And thy sweet graces have found grace with him,
Come then and kneel unto him where he stands,
The King is gracious, and has liberal hands.

Beth. Ah what is Bethsabe to please the King,
Or what is David, that he should desire
For fickle beuties sake his servants wife?

Cusay. David (thou know fair dame) is wise and just,
Elected to the heart of Isreal's God,
Then do not thou expostulate with him
For any action that contents his soul.

Beth. My lord the King, elect to Gods own heart,
Should not his gracious jealousy incense,
Whose thoughts are chaste, I hate incontinence.

Cusay. Woman thou wrongst the King and doubtst his honor,
Whose truth mainteines the crown of Israel,
Making him stay, that bad me bring thee strait.

Beth. The Kings poor handmaid will obey my lord,

Cus. Then come and do thy duty to his grace,
And do what seems favor in his sight.

Exeunt. David. Now comes my lover tripping like the Roe,
And brings my longings tangled in her hair,
To joy her love I Will build a kingly bower,
Seated in hearing of a hundred streams,
That for their homage to her souereine ioies,
Shall as the serpents sold into their nests,
In oblique turnings wind the nimble waves,
About the circles of her curious walks,
And with their murmr summon easefull sleep,
To lay his golden scepter on her brows,
Open the doors, and enterteine my love,
Open I say, and as you open sing,
Welcome fair Bethsabe King David's darling.

Enter Cusay with Bethsabe. David. Welcome fair Bethsabe King David's darling,
Thy bones fair covering, erst discovered fair,
And all mine eyes with all thy beuties pierst,
As heavens bright eye burns most when most he climes
The crooked Zodiake with his fiery sphere,
And shines furthest from this earthly globe:
So since thy beauty scorcht my conquered soul,
I called thee nearer for my nearer cure.

Bethsa. Too near my lord was your unarmed heart,
When furthest off my hapless beauty pierced,
And would this drerie day had turned to night,
Or that some pitchie cloud had clok'd the Sun,
Before their lights had caused my lord to see
His name disparaged, and my chastity.

David. My love, if want of love have left thy soul,
A sharper sense of Honor then thy King,
(For love leads Princes sometimes from their seats,)
As erst my heart was hurt, displeasing thee,
So come and taste thy ease, with easing me.

Beth. One medicine cannot heal our different harms.
But rather make both ranckle at the bone,
Then let the King be cunning in his cure,
Least flattering both, both perish in his hand.

David. Leave it to me my dearest Bethsabe,
Whose skill is conversant in deeper cures,
And Cusay have thou to my servant Ioab,
Commanding him to send Vrias home
With all the speed can possibly be used.

Cusay. Cusay will fly about the Kings desire. Exeunt.

Ioab, Abisay, Vrias, and others, with drum and ensign. Ioab. Courage ye
mighty men of Israel,
And charge your fatal instruments of war
Upon the bosoms of proud Ammons sons,
That have disguisd your Kings Ambassadors,
Cut half their beards, and half their garments off,
In spite of Israel, and his daughters sons,
Ye fight the holy battles of Iehoua,
King David's God, and ours and Jacobs God
That guides your weapons to their conquering strokes,
Orders your footsteps, and directs your thoughts
To stratagems that harbor victory:
He casts his sacred eiesight from on high,
And sees your foes run seeking for their deaths,
Laughing their labors and their hopes to scorn,
While twixt your bodies, and their blunted swords,
He puts on armor of his honors proof,
And makes their weapons wound the senseless winds.

Abis. Before this city Rabath we will lie,
And shoot forth shafts as thick and dangerous
As was the hail that Moises mixed with fire,
And threw with fury round about the fields
Devouring Pharoes friends, and Egypts fruits.

Vrias. First mighty captains, Ioab and Abisay,
Let us assault and scale this kingly Tower,
Where all their conduits and their fountains are,
Then we may easily take the city too.

Ioab. Well has Vrias counseld our attempts,
And as he spoke us, so assault the Tower,
Let Hanon now the king of Ammons son,
Repulse our conquering passage if he dare.

Hanon with King Machaas and others, upon the walls. Hanon. What would the
shepherds dogs of Israel
Snatch from the mighty issue of King Ammon,
The valiant Amonnes, and haughty Syrians?
It Is not your late successiue victories,
Can make us yield, or quail our courages,
But if ye date assay to scale this Tower,
Our angry swords shall smite ye to the ground,
And venge our losses on your hateful lives.

Ioab. Hanon, thy father Nahas gave relief
To holy David in his hapless exile,
Lived his fixed date, and died in peace:
But thou in steed of reaping his reward,
Have trod it underfoot, and scornd our King,
Therefore thy days shall end with violence,
And to our swords thy vital blood shall cleave.

Match. Hence thou that bearst poor Isreal's shepherds hook,
The proud lieutenant of that base borne King,
And kep within the compass of his fold,
For if ye seek to feed on Ammons fruits,
And stray into the Syrians fruitful Medes,
The mastiues of our land, shall werry ye,
And pull the weesels from your greedy throtes.

Abis. Who can endure these Pagans blasphemies,

Vrias. My soul repines at this disparagement.

Ioab. Assault ye valiant men of David's host,
And beat these railing dastards from their doors.
Assault, and they win the Tower, and Ioab speaks above. Thus have we won the
Tower, which we will keep,
Maugre the sons of Ammon, and of Syria.

Enter Cusay beneath. Cus. Where is lord Ioab leader of the host?

Ioab. Here is lord Ioab, leader of the host.
Cusay come up, for we have won the hold. He comes.

Cusay. In happy hour then is Cusay come.

Ioab. What news then brings lord Cusay from the king.

Cusay. His majesty commands thee out of hand
To send him home Vrias from the wars,
For matter of some service he should do.

Vrias, It Is for no choler has surprised the King,
(I hope lord Cusay) against his servants truth.

Cusay. No rather to prefer Vrias truth.

Ioab. Here take him with thee then, and go in peace,
And tell my lord the King that I have fought
Against the city Rabath with success,
And skaled where the royal palace is,
The conduit heads and all their sweetest springs,
Then let him come in person to these walls,
With all the soldiers he can bring besides,
And take the city as his own exploit,
Least I surprise it, and the people give
The glory of the conquest to my name.

Cus. We will Lord Ioab, and great Isreal's God
Bless in thy hands the battles of our King.

Ioab. Earewell Vrias, have away the King.

Vrias. As sure as Ioab breaths a victor here,
Vrias will have him, and his own return. Exeunt.

Abisa. Let us descend, and open the palace gate,
Taking our soldiers in to keep the hold.

Ioab. Let us Abisay, and ye sons of Judah,
Be valiant, and maintain your victory. Exeunt.

Ammon, Ionadab, Iethray, and Ammons page. Ionad. What means my lord, the
Kings beloved son*
That wears upon his right triumphant arm,
The power of Israel for a royal favor,
That holds upon the Tables of his hands,
Banquets of honor, and all thoughts content
To suffer pale and grisely abstinence
To sit and feed upon his fainting cheeks,
And suck away the blood that cheeres his looks.

Ammo. Ah Ionadab it is my sisters looks,
On whose sweet beutie I bestow my blood,
That makes me look so amorously lean,
Her beauty having seafd upon my heart*
So merrily consecrate to her content,
Sets now such guard about his vital blood,
And viewes the passage with such piercing eyes,
That none can escape to cheer my pining cheeks,
But all is thought too little for her love.

Iona. Then from her heart thy looks shall be relieved,
And thou shall joy her as thy soul desires.

Ammon. How can it be my sweet friend Ionadab,
Since Thamar is a virgin and my sister?

Iona. Thus it shall be, lie down upon thy bed,
Faining thee fever sick, and ill at ease,
And when the king shall come to visit thee,
Desire thy sister Thamar may be sent
To dress some deinties for thy malady:
Then when thou have her solely with thy self,
Enforce some favor to thy manly love:
See where she comes, entreat her in with thee.

Enter Thamar. Thamar. What aileth Ammon with such sickly looks,
To daunt the favor of his lovely face?

Am. Sweet Thamar sick, and wish some wholesome cates
Dressed with the cunning of thy dainty hands.

Tham. That has the King commanded at my hands
Then come and rest thee, while I make thee ready
Some dainties, easefull to thy crased soul.

Am. I go sweet sister, eased with thy sight.

Exeunt. Restet Ionadab. Ion. Why should a Prince, whose power may command,
Obey the rebel passions of his love,
When they contend but against his conscience,
And may be gouernd or suppressed by will.
Now Ammon lose those loving knots of blood,
That sokte the courage from thy kingly heart,
And give it passage to thy withered cheeks:
Now Thamar ripened are the holy fruits
That grew on plants of thy virginity,
And rotten is thy name in Israel,
Poor Thamar, little did thy lovely hands
Foretell an action of such violence,
As to contend with Ammons lusty arms,
Sinnewd with vigor of his landlesse love,
Fair Thamar now dishonor hunts thy foot,
And follows thee through every covert shade,
Discovering thy shame and nakedness
Even from the valeyes of Iehosophat,
Up to the lofty mounts of Libanon,
Where Caedars stird with anger of the winds,
Sounding in storms the tale of thy disgrace,
Tremble with fury, and with murmr shake
Eearth with their feet, and with their heads the heavens,
Beating the clouds into their swiftest rack,
To bear this wonder round about the world. Exit.

Ammon thrusting out Thamar. Am. Hence from my bed, whose sight offends my soul
As does the parbreake of disgorged bears.

Thama. Unkind, unprincely, and unmanly Ammon*
To force, and then refuse thy sisters love:
Adding unto the fright of thy offense,
The banefull torment of my published shame,
O do not this dishonor to thy love,
Nor clog thy soul with such increasing sin,
This second evil far exceeds the first.

Am. Iethray come thrust this woman from my sight,
And bolt the door upon her if she strive.

Iethray. Go madame go, away, you must be gone,
My lord has done with you, I pray depart. He shuts her out.

Tham. Whether alas, ah whether shall I fly
With folded arms, and all amassed soul,
Cast as was Eua from that glorious soil
(Where al delights sat bating wingd with thoughts,
Ready to nestle in her naked breasts)
To bare and barraine vales with floods made wast,
To desert woods, and hills with lightening scorcht,
With death, with shame, with hell, with horror sit,
There will I wander from my fathers face,
There Absolon, my brother Absolon,
Sweet Absolon shall hear his sister mourn,
There will I live with my windy sighs,
Night Ravens and Owls to rend my bloody side,
Which with a rustie weapon I will wound,
And makee them passage to my panting heart:
Why talkst thon wretch, and leaust the deed undone.
Enter Absolon. Rend hair and garments as thy heart is rent,
With inward fury of a thousand greefes,
And scatter them by these unhallowed doors.
To figure Ammons resting cruelty,
And Tragic spoil of Thamars chastity.

Abs. What causes Thamar to exclaim so much?

Tham. The cause that Thamar shameth to disclose.

Absa. Say, I thy brother will revenge that cause.

Tham. Ammon our fathers son has forced me,
And thrusts me from him as the scorn of Israel.

Abs. Has Ammon forced thee? by David's hand,
And by the covenant God has made with him,
Ammon shall bear his violence to hell,
Traitor to Heaven, traitor to David's throne,
Traitor to Absolon and Israel.
This fact has Jacobs ruler seen from heaven,
And through a cloud of smoke, and tower of fire
(As he rides vaunting him upon the greenes)
Shall tear his chariot wheels with violent winds,
And throw his body in the bloody sea,
At him the thunder shall discharge his bolt,
And his fair spouse, with bright and fiery wings
Sit ever burning on his hateful bones,
My self as swift as thunder, or his spouse,
Will hunt occasion with a secret hate,
To work false Ammon an ungracious end:
Go in my sister, rest thee in my house,
And God in time shall take this shame from thee.

Tham. Nor God nor Time will do that good for me.

Exit Tham. restat Absolon. Enter David with his train. David. My Absolon,
what makst thou here alone,
And bears such coffeehouse in thy brows?

Abs. Great cause has Absolon to be displeasd,
And in his heart to shroud the wounds of wrath.

David. Against whom should Absolon be thus displeased?

Abs. Against wicked Ammon thy ungracious son,
My brother and fair Thamars by the King,
My stepbrother, by mother, and by kind,
He has dishonored David's holiness,
And fixed a blot of lightness on his throne,
Forcing my sister Thamar when he faind
A sickness, sprung from root of hemous lust.

David. Has Ammon brought this evil on my house,
And suffered sin to smite his fathers bones,
Smite David deadlier then the voice of heaven,
And let hates fire be kindled in thy heart,
Frame in the arches of thy angry brows,
Making thy forehead like a comet shine,
To force false Ammon tremble at thy looks,
Sin with his seuenfold crown and purple robe,
Begins his triumphs in my guilty throne,
There sits he watching with his hundred eyes,
Our idle minutes, and our wanton thoughts,
And with his baits made of our frail desires,
Gives us the hook that hales our souls to hell:
But with the spirit of my kingdoms God,
I Will thrust the flattering Tyran from his throne,
And scourge his bondslaues from my hallowed court
With rods of iron, and thorns of sharpened steel:
Then Absolon revenge not thou this sin,
Leave it to me, and I will chasten him.

Abs. I am content, then grant my lord the king
Himself with all his other lords would come
Up to my sheep feast on the plain of Hazor.

Da. Nay my fair son, my self with all my lords
Will bring thee too much charge, yet some shall go.

Abs. But let my lord the king himself take pains,
The time of year is pleasant for your grace,
And gladsome Summer in her shadie robes,
Crowned with Roses and with planted flowers,
With all her nimphs shall enterteine my lord*
That from the thicket of my verdant groves,
Will sprinckle honey dewes about his breast,
And cast sweet balm upon his kingly head,
Then grant thy servants boon, and go my lord.

Dau. Let it content my sweet son Absolon,
That I may stay and take my other lords.

Abs. But shall thy best beloved Ammon go?

Dau. What needs it that Ammon go with thee.

Abs. Yet do thy son and servant so much grace.

Dau. Ammon shall go, and all my other lords,
Because I will give grace to Absolon.

Enter Cusay, and Vrias, with others. Cusay. Pleases my lord the king, his
servant Ioab
Has sent Vrias from the Syrian wars.

Dau. Welcome Vrias from the Syrian wars,
Welcome to David as his dearest lord.

Vrias. Thanks be to Isreal's God, and David's grace,
Vrias finds such greeting with the king.

Dau. No other greeting shall Vrias find,
As long as David's swaies the elected seat,
And consecrated throne of Israel.
Tell me Vrias of my servant Ioab*
Fights he with truth the battles of our God,
And for the honor of the Lords anointed?

Vrias. Thy servant Ioab fights the chosen wars
With truth, with honor, and with high success,
And against the wicked King of Ammons sons,
Has by the finger of our souereines God,
Besieged the city Rabath, and atchieu'd
The court of waters, where the conduits run,
And all the (...) delight (...) springs:
Therefore he wishes David's mightiness
Should number out the host of Israel,
And come in person to the city Rabath,
That so her conquest may be made the kings,
And Ioab fight as his inferior.

David. This has dot God, and Ioabs prowess done,
Without Vrias valors, I am sure,
Who since his true conversion from a Hethite,
To an adopted son of Israel,
Has sought like one whose arms were lift by heaven,
And whose bright sword was edgd with Isreal's wrath:
Go therefore home Vrias, take thy rest,
Visit thy wife and household with the ioies
A victor and a favorite of the Kings
Should exercise with honor after arms.

Vrias. Thy servants bones are yet not half so cra^de,
Nor constitute on such a sickly mould,
That for so little service he should feign,
And seek (as cowards) refuge of his home:
Not are his thoughts so sensually stird,
To stay the arms with which the lord would smite
And fill (...) circle with his conquered foes,
For wanton bosom of a flattering wife.

Da. Vrias has a beauteous sober wife,
Yet young, and framd of tempting flesh and blood,
Then when the King has summond thee from arms,
If thou unkindly should refrain her bed,
Sin might be laid upon Vrias soul,
If Bethsabe by frailty hurt her fame:
Then go Vrias, (...) in her love,
Whom God has knit to thee, tremble to lose.

Vrias. The King is much too tender of my ease,
The arc, and Israel, and Judah dwell
In palaces, and rich pauillions,
But Ioab and his brother in the fields,
Suffering the wrath of Winter and the Sun:
And shall Vrias (of more shame then they)
Banquet and loiter, in the work of heaven?
As sure as thy soul does live my lord,
Mine ears shall never lean to such delight,
When holy labor calls me forth to fight.

David. Then be it with Vrias manly heart,
As best his fame may shine in Israel.

Vrias. Thus shall Vrias heart be best content,
Till thou dismiss me back to Ioabs hands,
This ground before the king my masters doors, He lies down.
Shall be my couch, and this unwearied arm,
The proper pillow of a soldiers head,
For never will I lodge within my house,
Till Ioab triumph in my secret vows.

David. Then fetch some flagons of our purest Wine,
That we may welcome home our hardy friend,
With full carouses to his fortunes past,
And to the honors of his future arms,
Then will I send him back to Rabath siege,
And follow with the strength of Israel.
Enter one with the flagons of Wine. Arise Vrias, come and pledge the King. He
rises.

Vrias. If David think me worthy such a grace,
I will be bold, and pledge my lord the king.

Dau. Absolon and Cusay both shall drink
To good Vrias, and his happiness.

Abs. We will my lord to please Vrias soul.

Dau. I will begin Vrias to thy self,
And all the treasure of the Ammonites,
Which here I promise to impart to thee,
And bind that promise with a full carous.

Vrias. What seems pleasant in my souereines eyes,
That shall Vrias do till he be dead

Dau. Fill him the cup, follow ye lords that love
Your souereines health, and do as he has done.

Abs. Ill may he thrive or live in Israel,
That loves not David, or denies his charge.
Vrias, Here is to Abisais health, lord Ioabs brother, and thy loving friend.

Vrias. I pledge lord Absolon and Abisais health. He drinks.

Cus. Here now Vrias, to the health of Ioab,
And to the pleasant iourny we shall have,
When we return to mighty Rabath siege.

Vrias. Cusay I pledge thee all, with all my heart,
Give me some drink ye servants of the king,
Give me my drink. He drinks.

Da. Well done my good Vrias, drink thy fill,
That in thy fullness David may rejoice.

Vrias. I will my lord.

Abs. Now lord Vrias, one carouse to me.

Vrias. No sir, I Will drink to the King,
Your father is a better man then you.

Dau. Do so Vrias, I will pledge thee straight.

Vrias. I will indeed my lord and souereine,
I once in my days be so bold.

David. Fill him his glass.

Vrias. Fill me my glass. He gives him the glass.

Dau. Quickly I say.

Vrias. Quickly I say.

Vrias. Here my lord, by your favor now I drink to you.

Dau. I pledge thee good Vrias presently. He drinks.

Abs. Here then Vrias, once again for me,
And to the health of David's children.

Vrias. David's children?

Abs. I David's children, will thou pledge me man?

Vrias. Pledge me man.

Abs. Pledge me I say, or else thou love us not.

Vrias. What do you talk, do you talk?
I Will no more, I Will lie down here.

David. Rather Vrias go thou home and sleep.

Vrias. O ho sir, would you make me break my sentence.
He lies down. Home sir, no indeed sir? I Will sleep upon mine arm,
Like a soldier, sleep like a man as long as I live in Israel.

David. If naught will serve to save his wives renown,
I Will send him with a letter unto Ioab
To put him in the forefront of the wars,
That so my purposes may take effect.
Help him in sirs. Exit David and Absolon.

Cusay. Come rise Vrias, get thee in and sleep.

Vrias. I will not go home sir, that's flat.

Cusay. Then come and rest thee upon David's bed.

Vrias. On before my lords, on before. Exeunt.
Chorus. O proud revolt of a presumptious man,
Laying his bridle in the neck of sin,
Ready to bear him past his grave to hell,
Like as the fatal Raven, that in his voice
Carries the dreadful summons of our deaths,
Flies by the fair Arabian spiceries,
Her pleasant gardens, and delightsome parkes,
Seeming to curse them with his hoarse exclaimes,
And yet does stoop with hungry violence
Upon a piece of hateful carrion:
So wretched man, displeasd with those delights,
Would yield a quickening savor to his Soul,
Pursues with eagre and vnstanched thirst,
The greedy longings of his loathsome flesh,
If holy David so shoke hands with sin,
What shall our baser spirits glory in.
This kingly giving lust her reign,
Pursues the sequel with a greater ill.
Vrias in the forefront of the wars,
Is murdered by the hateful Heathens sword,
And David ioies his too dear Bethsabe,
Suppose this past, and that the child is borne,
Whose death the Prophet solemnly does mourn.

Enter Bethsabe with her handmaid. Beth. Mourn Bethsabe, bewail thy
foolishness,
Thy sin, thy shame, the sorrow of thy soul,
Sin, shame, and sorrow swarm about thy soul,
And in the gates and entrance of my heart,
Sadness with wreathed arms hangs her complaint.
No comfort from the ten string'd instrument,
The twinkling Cymball, or the Yuorie Lute,
Nor does the sound of David's kingly Harp,
Make glad the broken heart of Bersabe.
Jerusalem is filled with thy complaint,
And in the streets of Syon fits thy grief:
The babe in sick, sick to the death I fear,
The fruit that sprung from thee to David's house,
Nor may the pot of Honny and of Oil,
Glad David or his handmaids countenance.
Vrias, woe is me to think hereon,
For who is it among the sons of men,
That says not to my soul, the King has sind,
David has done amiss, and Bersabe
Laid snares of death unto Vrias life.
My sweet Vrias, fallen into the pit
Art thou, and gone even to the gates of hell,
For Bersabe, that would not shroud her shame.
O what is it to serve the lust of Kings,
How Lyonlike thy rage when we resist,
But Bersabe in humbleness attend,
The grace that God will to his handmaid send. Exit Beth.
David in his gown walking sadly, To him Nathan. The babe is sick, and sad is
David's heart,
To see the guiltless bear the guilties pain.
David hang up thy Harp, hang down thy head,
And dash thy yuorie Lute against the stones.
The dew that on the hill of Hermon falls,
Raines not on Syons tops, and lofty towers,
And David's thoughts are spent in pensiveness,
The plains of Gath and Askaron rejoice.
The babe is sick, sweet babe, that Bersabe
With woman's pain brought forth to Israel. Enter Nathan.
But what says Nathan to his lord the king?

Nathan to David. Nathan. Thus Nathan says unto his Lord the King:
There were two men both dwellers in one town,
The one was mighty and exceeding rich
In Oxen, sheep and cattle of the field,
The other poor having nor Ox, nor Calfe,
Nor other cattle, save one little Lamb,
Which he had bought and nourisht by the hand,
And it grew up, and fed with him and his,
And eat and drank as he and his were wont,
And in his bosom slept, and was to live
As was his daughter or his dearest child.
There came a stranger to this wealthy man,
And he refused and spared to take his own,
Or of his store to dress or make him meat,
But took the poor man's sheep, partly poor man's store,
And dressed it for this strangar in his house:
What (tell me) shall be done to him for this?

Dau. Now as the lord does live, this wicked man
Is iudgd, and shall become the child of death,
Four fold to the poor man shall he restore,
That without mercy took his lamb away.

Nath. Thou art the man, and thou have iudgd thy self,
David, thus says the Lord thy God by me:
I thee anointed King in Israel,
And saved thee from the tyranny of Saul,
Thy masters house I gave thee to possess,
His Wives into thy bosom did I give,
And Judah and Jerusalem withal,
And might (thou know) if this had been too small,
Have given thee more.
Wherefore then have thou gone so far astray,
And have done evil, and sinned in my sight?
Vrias thou have killed with the sword,
Yea with the sword of the uncircumcised
Thou have him slain, wherefore from this day forth,
The sword shall never go from thee and thine:
For thou have taken this Hethites wife to thee,
Wherefore behold, I will (says Jacobs God)
In thine own house stir evil up to thee,
Yea I before thy face will take thy Wives,
And give them to thy neighbor to possess:
This shall be done to David in the day,
That Israel openly may see thy shame.

David. Nathan, I have against the Lord, I have
Sinned, O sinned grievously, and lo
From heavens throne does David throw himself,
And groan and grouell to the gates of hell. He falls down.

Nath. David stand up, Thus says the Lord by me,
David the King shall live, for he has seen
The true repentant sorrow of thy heart,
But for thou have in this misdeed of thine
Stird up the enemies of Israel
To triumph and blasphe me the God of hosts,
And say, He set a wicked man to reign,
Over his loved people and his Tribes:
The child shall surely die, that erst was borne,
His mothers sin, his kingly fathers scorn.

Exit Nathan. Da. How just is Jacobs God in all his works!
But must it die that David loves so?
O that the mighty one of Israel
Nill change his dome, and says the babe must die,
Mourn Israel and weep in Syon gates,
Wither ye Caedar trees of Libanon,
Ye sprouting Almons with your flowring tops,
Droope, drown, and drench in Hebrons fearful streams.
The babe must die that was to David borne,
His mothers sin his kingly fathers scorn.

David sits sadly. Enter Cusay to David and his train. Seruus. What tidings
brings Cusay to the King?

Cusay. To thee the servant of King David's court,
This brings Cusay, as the Prophet spoke,
The Lord has surely stricken to the death,
The child newborn by that Vrias wife,
That by the sons of Ammon erst was slain.

Seruus. Cusay be still, the King is vexed sore,
How shall he speed that brings this tidings first,
When while the child was yet alive, we spoke,
And David's heart would not be comforted?

Da. Yea David's heart will not be comforted,
What murmr ye the servants of the King,
What tidings tells Cusay to the King?
Say Cusay, lives the child, or is he dead?

Cusay. The child is dead, that of Vrias wife, David begat.

Da. Vrias wife say thou?
The child is dead, then cease David's shame,
Fetch me to eat, and give me Wine to drink,
Water to wash, and Oil to clear my looks,
Bring down your Shalmes, your Cymbals, and your Pipes,
Let David's Harp and Lute, his hand and voice,
Give laud to him that loves Israel,
And sing his praise, that shendeth David's fame,
That put away his sin from out his sight,
And sent his shame into the streets of Gath,
Bring ye to me the mother of the babe,
That I may wipe the tears from off her face,
And give her comfort with this hand of mine,
And deck fair Bersabe with ornaments,
That she may bear to me another son,
That may be loved of the Lord of hosts:
For where he is, of force must David go,
But never may he come where David is.
They bring in water, wine, and oil, Music, and a banquet. Fair Bersabe, sit
thou, and sigh no more,
And sing and play you servants of the King,
Now sleeps David's sorrow with the dead,
And Bersabe lives to Israel.

They use all solemnities together, and sing, etc. David. Now arms, and
warlike engines for assault,
Prepare at once ye men of Israel,
Ye men of Judah and Jerusalem,
That Rabba may be taken by the King,
Least it be called after Ioabs name,
Nor David's glory shine in Syon streets,
To Rabba marches David with his men
To chastise Ammon and the wicked ones. Exeunt omnes.

Enter Absolon with two or three. Abs. Set up your mules, and give them well to
ear,
And let us meet our brothers at the feast,
Accursed is the master of this feast,
Dishonor of the house of Israel,
His sisters slander, and his mothers shame.
Shame be his share that could such ill contriue,
To ravish Thamar, and without a pause
To drive her shamefully from out his house,
But may his wickedness find just reward.
Therefore does Absolon conspire with you,
That Ammon die what time he sits to eat,
For in the holy Temple have I sworn
Wreake of his villainy in Thamars rape.
And here he comes, bespeake him gently all,
Whose death is deeply graued in my heart.

Enter Ammon with Adonia and Ionadab, to Absolon and his company. Am. Our
shearers are not far from hence I wot,
And Ammon, to you all his brethren
Gives such welcome as our fathers erst
Were wonr in Judah and Jerusalem,
But specially Lord Absolon to thee,
The honor of thy house and progeny.
Sit down and dine with me King David's son,
Thou fair young men, whose hairs shine in mine eve
Like golden wyers of David's yuorie Lute.

Abs. Ammon, where be thy shearers and thy men,
That we may power in plenty of thy vines,
And eat thy goats milk, and rejoice with thee.

Am. Here comes Ammons shearers and his men,
Absolon sit and rejoice with me.

Here enter a company of sheepeheards, and dance and sing. Am. Drink Absolon
in praise of Israel,
Welcome to Ammons fields from David's court.

Abs. Die with thy draught perish and die accursed,
Dishonor to the honor of us all,
Die for the villainy to Thamar done,
Unworthy thou to be Kings David's son. Exit Absa.

Ionad. O what has Absolon for Thamar done,
Murthred his brother, great king David's son.

Adon. Run Ionadab away, and make it known,
What cruelty this Absolon has shown.
Ammon, thy brother Adonia shall
Bury thy body among the dead men's bones,
And we will make complaint to Israel
Of Ammons death, and pride of Absolon. Exeunt omnes.
Enter David with Ioab, Abyssus, Cusay, with drum and ensign against Rabba.
This is the town of the uncircumcised,
The city of the kingdom, this is it,
Rabba where wicked Hannon sits king:
Dispoile this King, this Hannon of his crown,
Unpeople Rabba, and the streets thereof,
For in their blood and slaughter of the slain,
Lies the honor of King David's line.
Ioab, Abyshai, and the rest of you,
Fight ye this day for great Jerusalem.

Ioab. And see where Hannon shows him on the walls,
Why then do we forbear to give assault,
That Israel may as it is promised,
Subdue the daughters of the Gentiles Tribes,
All this must be performd by David's hand.

Da. Hark to me Hannon, and remember well,
As sure as he does live that kept my host,
What time our young men by the poole of Gibeon,
Went forth against the strength of Isboseth,
And twelve to twelve did with their weapons play,
So sure art thou, and thy men of war
To feel the sword of Israel this day,
Because thou have defied Jacobs God,
And suffered Rabba with the Philislime
To rail upon the tribe of Benjamin.

Hannon. Hark man, as sure as Saul thy master fell,
And gord his sides upon the mountain tops
And Jonathan, Abinadab, and Melchisua
Watered the dales and deepes of Askaron
With bloody streams that from Gilboa ran
In channels through the wilderness of Ziph,
What time the sword of the vncircumsed
Was drunken with the blood of Israel:
So sure shall David perish with his men,
Under the walls of Rabba, Hannons town.

Ioab. Hannon, the God of Israel has said,
David the King shall wear that crown of thine,
That weighs a Talent of the finest gold,
And triumph in the spoil of Hannons town,
When Israel shall hale thy people hence,
And turn them to the tile-kill, man and child,
And put them under harrowes made of iron,
And hew their bones with axes, and their lims
With iron swords divide and tear in twain.
Hannon, this shall be done to thee and thine,
Because thou have defied Israel.
To arms, to arms, that Rabba feel revenge,
And Hannons town become king David's spoil.

Alarm, excursions, assault, Exeunt omnes. Then the trumpets, and David with
Hannons crown. Dau. Now clattering arms, and wrathful storms of war,
Have thundered over Rabbaes raced towers,
The wreakefull ire of great Iehouaes arm,
That for his people made the gates to rend,
And clothed the Cherubins in fiery coats,
To fight against the wicked Hannons town,
Pay thanks ye men of Judah to the King,
The God of Syon and Jerusalem,
That has exhalted Israel to this,
And crowned David with this diadem.

Ioab. Beauteous and bright is he among the Tribes,
As when the sun attird in glist'ring robe,
Comes dancing from his oriental gate,
And bride groome-like hurles through the gloomy air
His radiant beams, such does King David show,
Crowned with the honor of his enemies town,
Shining in riches like the firmament,
The starrie vault that ouerhangs the earth,
So looks David King of Israel.

Abyshai. Ioab, why does not David mount his throne,
Whom heaven has beautified with Hannons crown,
Sound Trumpets, Shalmes, and Instruments of praise
To Jacobs God for David's victory.

Enter Ionadab. Ionadab. Why does the King of Israel rejoice,
Why sits David crowned with Rabbaes rule,
Behold there has great heaviness befalne
In Ammons fields by Absolons misdeed,
And Ammons shearers, and their feast of mirth
Absalon has ouerturned with his sword,
Nor lives any of King David's sons,
To bring this bitter tidings to the King.

David. Ay me, how soon are David's triumphs dashed,
How suddenly declineth David's pride,
As does the daylight settle in the west,
So dim is David's glory, and his gite.
Die David, for to thee is left no seed,
That may revive thy name in Israel.

Iona. In Israel is left of David's seed.
Enter Adonia with other sons. Comfort your lord, you servants of the King,
Behold thy sons return in mourning weeds,
And only Ammon, Absalon has slain.

Da. Welcome my sons, deeret to me you are
Then is this golden crown, or Hannons spoil.
O tell me then, tell me my sons I say,
How comes it to pass, that Absolon
Has slain his brother Ammon with the sword?

Ado. Thy sons O King went up to Ammons fields
To feast with him, and eat his bread and oil,
And Absalon upon his mule does come,
And to his men he says, When Ammons heart
Is merry and secure, then strike him dead,
Because he forced Thamar shamefully,
And hated her, and threw her forth his doors:
And this did he, and they with him conspire,
And kill thy son in wreake of Thamars wrong.

David. How long shall Judah and Jerusalem
Complain and water Syon with their tears?
How long shall Israel lament in vain,
And not a man among the mighty ones
Will hear the sorrows of King David's heart?
Ammon thy life was pleasing to thy Lord,
As to mine ears the Music of my Lute,
Or songs that David tuneth to his Harp,
And Absalon has taken from me away
The gladness of my sad distressed soul. Exeunt omnes.

Manet David, Enter widow of Thecoa. Widow. God save King David, King of
Israel,
And bless the gates of Syon for his sake.

Dau. Woman, why mournest thou, rise from the earth,
Tell me what sorrow has befalne thy soul.

Widow. Thy servants soul O King is troubled sore,
And greenous is the anguish of her heart,
And from Thecoa does thy handmaid come.

David. Tell me, and say, thou woman of Thecoa,
What aileth thee, or what is come to pass.

Widow. Thy servant is a widow in Thecoa,
Two sons thy handmaid had, and they (my lord)
Fought in the field, where no man went betwixt,
And so the one did smite and slay the other.
And lo behold the kindred does arise,
And cry on him that smote his brother,
That he therefore may be the child of death,
For we will follow and destroy the heir.
So will they quench that sparkle that is left,
And leave nor name, nor issue on the earth,
To me, or to thy handmaids husband dead.

David. Woman return, go home unto thy house,
I will take order that thy son be safe,
If any man say otherwise then well,
Bring him to me, and I shall chastise him:
For as the Lord does live, shall not a hair
Shed from thy son, or fall upon the earth.
Woman to God alone belongs revenge,
Shall then the kindred slay him for his sin?

Widow. Well has King David to his handmaid spoke,
But wherefore then have thou determined
So hard a part against the righteous Tribes
To follow and pursue the banished,
When as to God alone, belongs revenge.
Assuredly thou say against thy self,
Therefore call home again the banished,
Call home the banished, that he may live,
And raise to thee some fruit in Israel.

Da. Thou woman of Thecoa answer me,
Answer me one thing I shall ask of thee,
Is not the hand of Ioab in this work?
Tell me is not his finger in this fact?

Wid. It is my lord, his hand is in this work,
Assure thee, Ioab captain of thy host,
Has put these words into thy handmaids mouth,
And thou art as an angel from on high,
To understand the meaning of my heart,
Lo where he comes to his lord the King.

Enter Ioab. David. Say Ioab, did thou send this woman in
To put this parable for Absalon.

Ioab. Ioab my lord did bid this woman speak,
And she has said, and thou have understood.

David. I have and am content to do the thing,
Go fetch my son, that he may live with me.

Ioab kneeles. Ioab. Now God be blessed for King David's life,
Thy servant Ioab has found grace with thee,
In that thou sparest Absolon thy child,
A beautiful and fair young man is he,
In all his body is no blemish seen,
His hair is like the wire of David's Harp,
That twines about his bright and yuorie neck:
In Israel is not such a goodly man,
And here I bring him to entreat for grace.

Enter Absolon with Ioab. David. Have thou slain in the fields of Hazor
Ah Absalon my son, ah my son Absolon,
But wherefore do I vex thy spirit so,
Live and return from Gesur to thy house,
Return from Gesur to Jerusalem,
What boots it to be bitter to thy soul,
Ammon is dead, and Absolon suruiues.

Abs. Father I have offended Israel,
I have offended David and his house,
For Thamars wrong has Absolon misdone,
But David's heart is free from sharp revenge,
And Ioab has got grace for Absalon.

David. Depart with me you men of Israel,
You that have followed Rabba with the sword,
And ransacke Ammons richest treasuries,
Live Absalon my son, live once in peace,
Peace with thee, and with Jerusalem.

Exeunt omnes. Manet Absolon. Abs. David is gone, and Absolon remains,
Flowring in pleasant spring time of his youth,
Why lives Absalon, and is not honored
Of Tribes and Elders, and the mightiest ones,
That round about his Temples he may wear
Garlands and wreaths set on with reverence,
That every one that has a cause to plead,
Might come to Absolon, and call for right?
Then in the gates of Syon would I sit,
And publish laws in great Jerusalem,
And not a man should live in all the land,
But Absolon would do him reasons due,
Therefore I shall address me as I may,
To love the men and Tribes of Israel.

Exit. Enter David, Ithay, Sadoc, Ahimaas, Jonathan, with others, David
barefoot, with some lose covering over his head, and all mourning. Dau. Proud
lust the bloudiest traitor to our souls,
Whose greedy throat, nor earth, air, sea, or heaven,
Can glut or satisfy with any store,
Thou art the cause these torments suck my blood,
Piercing with venom of thy poisoned eyes,
The strength and marrow of my tainted bones:
To punish Pharoh, and his cursed host,
The waters shrink at great Adonaies voice,
And sandy bottom of the sea appeard,
Offering his service at his servants feet,
And to inflict a plague on David's sin,
He makes his bowels traitors to his breast,
Winding about his heart with mortal gripes.
Ah Absalon the wrath of heaven inflames
Thy scorched bosom with ambitious heat,
And Satan sets thee on a lusty tower,
Showing thy thoughts the pride of Israel
Of choice to cast thee on her ruthlesse stones,
Weep with me then ye sons of Israel.
He lies down, and all the rest after him. Lie down with David, and with
David mourn,
Before the holy one that sees our hearts,
Season this heavy soil with showers of tears,
And fill the face of every flower with dew,
Weep Israel, for David's soul dissolues,
Lading the fountains of his drowned eyes,
And powers her substance on the senseless earth.

Sadoc. Weep Israel, O weep for David's soul,
Strewing the ground with hair and garments torn,
For tragic witness of your hearty woes.

Ahimaas. O would our eyes were conduits to our hearts,
And that our hearts were seas of liquid blood,
To power in streams upon this holy Mount,
For witness we would die for David's woes.

Iona. Then should this mount of Olives seem a plain,
Drowned with a sea, that with our sighs should rore,
And in the murmr of his mounting waves,
Report our bleeding sorrows to the heavens,
For witness we would die for David's woes.

Ith. Earth cannot weep enough for David's woes,
Then weep you heavens, and all you clouds dissolve,
That pittious stars may see our miseries,
And drop their golden tears upon the ground,
For witness how they weep for David's woes.

Sadoc. Now let my sovereign raise his prostrate bones.
And mourn not as a faithless man would do,
But be assurd, that Jacobs righteous God,
That promised never to forsake your throne,
Will still be just and pure in his vows.

Da. Sadoc high priest, preserver of the arc,
Whose sacred virtue keeps the chosen crown,
I know my God is spotless in his vows,
And that these hairs shall greet my grave in peace:
But that my son should wrong his tendered soul,
And fight against his fathers happiness,
Turns all my hopes into despair of him,
And that despair, feeds all my veins with grief.

Ithay. Think of it David, as a fatal plague,
Which grief preserves, but preuenteth not,
And turn thy drooping eyes upon the troops
That of affection to thy worthiness,
Do swarm about the person of the King,
Cherish their valors, and their zealous loves,
With pleasant looks, and sweet encouragements.

Da. Me thinks the voice of Ithay fills mine ears.

Ith. Let not the voice of Ithay loath thine ears,
Whose heart would baulme thy bosom with his tears.

David. But wherefore go thou to the wars with us,
Thou art a stranger here in Israel,
And son to Achis mighty king of Gath,
Therefore return, and with thy father stay,
Thou camst but yesterday, and should I now
Let thee partake these troubles here with us?
Keep both thy self, and all thy soldiers safe,
Let me abide the hazards of these arms,
And God requite the friendship thou have showed.

Ith. As sure as Isreal's God gives David life,
What place or peril shall contain the King,
The same will Ithay share in life and death.

Da. Then gentle Ithay be thou still with us,
A joy to David, and a grace to Israel.
Go Sadoc now, and bear the ark of God
Into the great Jerusalem again,
If I find favor in his gracious eyes,
Then will he lay his hand upon my heart
Yet once again before I visit death,
Giving it strength and virtue to mine eyes,
To taste the comforts, and behold the form
Of his fair arc, and holy tabernacle,
But if he say my wonted love is worn,
And I have no delight in David now,
Here lie I armed with an humble heart,
T embrace the pains that anger shall impose,
And kiss the sword my lord shall kill me with,
Then Sadoc take Ahimaas thy son,
With Jonathan son to Abiathar,
And in these fields will I repose my self,
Till they return from you some certain news.

Sadoc. Thy servants will with joy obey the King,
And hope to cheer his heart with happy news.

Exit Sadoc, Ahimaas, and Jonathan. Ith. Now that it be no grief unto the King,
Let me for good inform his majesty,
That with unkind and graceless Absalon,
Achitophel your ancient counselor,
Directs the state of this rebellion.

David. Then does it aim with danger at my crown,
O thou that holdst his raging bloody bound,
Within the circle of the silver moon,
That girds earths center with his watrie scarf,
Limit the counsel of Achitophel,
No bounds extending to my souls distress,
But turn his wisdom into foolishness.

Enter Cusay with his coat turned, and head covered. Cusay. Happiness and
honor to my lord the King.

David. What happiness or honor may betide
His state that toiles in my extremities?

Cus. O let my gracious sovereign cease these greefes,
Unless he wish his servant Cusayes death,
Whose life depends upon my lords relief,
Then let my presence with my sighs, persume
The pleasant closet of my sovereigns soul.

Da. No Cusay no, thy presence unto me,
Will be a burden since I tender thee,
And cannot break thy sighs for David's sake:
But if thou turn to fair Jerusalem,
And say to Absalon, as thou have been
A trusty friend unto his fathers seat,
So thou will be to him, and call him King,
Achitophels counsel may be brought to naught.
Then having Sadoc and Abiathar,
All three may learn the secrets of my son,
Sending the message by Ahimaas,
And friendly Jonathan, who both are there,
Then rise, referring the success to heaven.

Da. Cusay I rise, though with unwieldy bones,
I carry arms against my Absalon. Exeunt.

Absalon, Amasa, Achitophel, with the concubines of David, and others in great
state, Absalon crowned. Abs. Now you that were my fathers concubines,
Liquor to his inchast and lustful fire,
Have seen his honor shaken in his house,
Which I possess in sight of all the world.
I bring ye forth for soiles to my renown,
And to eclipse the glory of your King,
Whose life is with his honor fast inclosd
Within the entrails of a Ieatie cloud,
Whose dissolution shall power down in showers
The substance of his life and swelling pride:
Then shall the stars light earth with rich aspects,
And heaven shall burn in love with Absalon,
Whose beauty will suffice to chaste all mists,
And cloth the suns sphere with a triple fire,
Sooner then his clear eyes should suffer stain,
Or be offended with a lowering day.

Concub. Thy fathers honor, graceless Absalon,
And ours thus beaten with thy violent arms,
Will cry for vengeance to the host of heaven,
Whose power is ever armed against the proud,
And will dart plagues at thy aspiring head,
For doing this disgrace to David's throne.

2. To David's throne, to David's holy throne,
Whose scepter angels guard with swords of fire,
And sit as Eagles on his conquering fist,
Ready to prey upon his enemies,
Then think not thou the captain of his foes,
Were thou much swifter then Azahell was,
That could out-pace the nimble footed Roe,
To escape the fury of their thumping beakes,
Or dreadful scope of their commanding wings.

Achip. Let not my lord the King of Israel
Be angry with a silly woman's threats,
But with the pleasure he has erst enioied,
Turn them into their cabinets again,
Till David's conquest be their overthrow.

Abs. Into your bowers ye daughters of Disdain,
Gotten by fury of unbridled lust,
And wash your couches with your mourning tears,
For grief that David's kingdom is decayed.

1. No Absalon, his kingdom is enchaind
Fast to the finger of great Jacobs God,
Which will not lose it for a rebels love. Exeunt.

Amasa. If I might give advise unto the King,
These concubines should buy their taunts with blood.

Abs. Amasa no, but let thy martial sword
Empty the pains of David's armed men,
And let these foolish women escape our hands
To recompense the shame they have sustaind.
First Absolon was by the Trumpets sound
Proclaimd through Hebron King of Israel,
And now is set infaire Jerusalem
With complete state, and glory of a crown.
Fifty fair footmen by my chariot run,
And to the air whose rupture rings my fame,
Where ere I ride they offer reverence.
Why should not Absolon, that in his face
Carries the final purpose of his God,
That is, to work him grace in Israel,
Endeavor to atchieue with all his strength,
The state that most may satisfy his joy,
Keeping his statutes and his covenants pure,
His thunder is entangled in my hair,
And with my beauty is his lightning quenched,
I am the man he made to glory in,
When by the errors of my fathers sin,
He lost the path that led into the land,
Wherewith our chosen ancestors were blessed.

Enter Cusay. Cus. Long may the beauteous King of Israel live,
To whom the people do by thousands swarm.

Abs. What means Cusay so to greet his foe,
In this the love thou shewdst to David's soul,
To whose assistance thou have vowed thy life,
Why leauest thou him in this extremity.

Cus. Because the Lord and Israel chooses thee,
And as before I serud thy fathers turn,
With counsel acceptable in his sight,
So likewise will I now obey his son.

Abs. Then welcome Cusay to king Absalon,
And now my lords and loving counselors,
I think it time to exercise our arms
Against forsaken David and his host,
Give counsel first my good Achitophel,
What times and orders we may best observe,
For prosperous manage of these high exploits.

Achi. Let me choose out twelve thousand valiant men,
And (while the night hides with her sable mists
The close endeavors cunning soldiers use)
I will assault thy discontented fire,
And while with weakness of their weary arms,
Surchargd with toil to shun thy sudden power,
The people fly in huge disordred troops
To save their lives, and leave the King alone,
Then will I smite him with his latest wound,
And bring the people to thy feet in peace.

Abs. Well has Achitophel given his advise,
Yet let us hear what Cusay counsels us,
Whose great experience is well worth the ear.

Cus. Though wise Achitophel be much more meet
To purchase hearing with my lord the King,
For all his former counsels, then my self,
Yet not offending Absolon or him,
This time it is not good, nor worth pursuit:
For well thou know thy fathers men are strong,
Chafing as she bears robbed of their whelps.
Besides the King himself a valiant man,
Traind up in feats and stratagems of war,
And will not for prevention of the worst
Lodge with the common soldiers in the field:
But now I know his wonted policies
Have taught him lurk within some secret cave,
Guarded with all his stoutest soldiers,
Which if the forefront of his battle faint,
Will yet give out that Absalon does fly,
And so thy soldiers be discouraged.
David himself withal, whose angry heart
Is as a Lions, let of his walk,
Will fight himself, and all his men to one,
Before a few shall vanquish him by fear.
My counsel therefore, is with Trumpets sound
To gather men from Dan to Bersabe,
That they may march in number like sea sands,
That nestle close in another neck:
So shall we come upon him in our strength,
Like to the dew that falls in showers from heaven,
And leave him not a man to march withal.
Besides if any city succor him,
The nnmbers of our men shall fetch us ropes,
And we will pull it down the rivers stream,
That not a stone be left to keep us out.

Abs. What says my lord to Cusaies counsel now?

Ama. I fancy Cusaies counsel better far
Then that is given us from Achitophel,
And so I think does every soldier here.

All. Cusaies counsel is better then Achitophels.

Abs. Then march we after Cusaies counsel all,
Sound trumpets through the bounds of Israel,
And muster all the men will serve the King,
That Absalon may glut his longing soul
With sole fruition of his fathers crown. Exeunt.

Ach. Ill shall they fare that follow thy attempts,
That skornes the counsel of Achitophel.

Restat Cusay. Cusay. Thus has the power of Jacobs jealous God
Fulfild his servant David's drifts by me,
And brought Achitophels advise to scorn.

Enter Sadoc, Abiathar, Ahimaas, and Jonathan. Sadoc. God save lord Cusay, and
direct his zeal
To purchase David's conquest against his son.

Abia. What secrets have thou gleande from Absalon.

Cusay. These sacred priests that bear the ark of God,
Achitophel aduisd him in the night
To let him choose twelve thousand fighting men,
And he would come on David at unawares,
While he was weary with his violent toil:
But I aduisd to get a greater host,
And gather men from Dan to Bersabe,
To come upon him strongly in the fields,
Then send Ahimaas and Jonathan
To signify these secrets to the King,
And will him not to stay this night abroad,
But get him over Iordane presently,
Least he and all his people kiss the sword.

Sadoc. Then go Ahimaas and Jonathan,
And straight convey this message to the King.

Ahim. Father we will* if Absalons chief spies
Prevent not this devise, and stay us here. Exeunt.

Semei solus. Semei. The man of Israel, that has ruled as King,
Or rather as the Tyrant of the land,
Bolstering his hateful head upon the throne,
That God unworthily has blessed him with,
Shall now I hope, lay it as low as hell,
And be deposed from his detested chair.
O that my bosom could by nature bear,
A sea of poison to be powr'de upon
His cursed head that sacred baulme has graced,
And consecrated King of Israel:
Or would my breath were made the smoke of hell,
Infected with the sighs of damned souls,
Or with the reeking of that serpents gorge,
That feeds on adders, toads, and venomous roots,
That as I opened my revenging lips
To curse the sheepeheard for his Tyranny,
My words might cast rank poison to his pores,
And make his swollen and ranckling sinews crack,
Like to the combat blows that break the clouds,
When Jove's stout champions fight with fire,
See where he comes, that my soul abhors.
I have prepared my pocket full of stones
To cast at him, mingled with earth and dust,
Which bursting with disdain, I greet him with.

David, Ioab, Abyshai, Ithay, with others. Semei. Come forth thou murderer and
wicked man,
The Lord has brought upon thy cursed head
The guiltless blood of Saul and all his sons,
Whose royal throne thy baseness has usurped,
And to revenge it deeply on thy soul,
The Lord has given the kingdom to thy son,
And he shall wreake the traitrous wrongs of Saul,
Even as thy sin has still importund heaven,
So shall thy murders and adultery
Be punished in the sight of Israel,
As thou deserust with blood, with death, and hell.

Hence murderer, hence, he threw at him. Abis. Why does his dead dog curse my
lord the King,
Let me alone to take away his head.

Da. Why medleth thus the son of Zeruia
To interrupt the action of our God?
Semei uses me with this reproach,
Because the Lord has sent him to reprove
The sins of David, printed in his brows,
With blood that blusheth for his conscience guilt,
Who dares then ask him why he curses me?

Semei. If then thy conscience tell thee thou have sind,
And that thy life is odious to the world,
Command thy followers to shun thy face,
And by thy self here make away thy soul,
That I may stand and glory in thy shame.

Da. I am not desperate Semei like thy self,
But trust unto the covenant of my God,
Founded on mercy with repentance built,
And finished with the glory of my soul.

Semei. A murderer, and hope for mercy in thy end
Hate and destruction sit upon thy brows
To watch the issue of thy damned ghost,
Which with thy latest gasp they will take and tear,
Hurling in every pain of hell a piece.
Hence murderer, thou shame to Israel,
Foul letcher, drunkard, plague to heaven and earth.

He throws at him. Ioab. What is it piety in David's thoughts,
So to abhor from laws of policy
In this extremity of his distress,
To give his subjects cause of carelessness,
Send hence the dog with sorrow to his grave.

David. Why should the sons of Zeruia seek to check
His spirit which the Lord has thus inspired:
Behold my son which issued from my flesh,
With equal fury seeks to take my life.
How much more then the son of Iemini,
Cheefely since he does naught but Gods command,
It may be he will look on me this day
With gracious eyes, and for his cursing bless,
The heart of David in his bitterness.

Semei. What do thou fret my soul with sufferance*
O that the souls of Isboseth and Abner,
Which thou sentst swimming to their graves in blood,
With wounds fresh bleeding, gasping for revenge,
Were here to execute my burning hate:
But I will hunt thy font with curses still,
Hence Monster, Murderer, Mirror of Contempt.

He throws dust again. Enter Ahimanas and Jonathan. Ahim. Long life to David,
to his enemies death.

Da. Welcome Ahimaas and Jonathan,
What news sends Cusay to thy lord the King.

Ahim. Cusay would wish my lord the King,
To pass the river Iordane presently,
Least he and all his people perish here.
For wise Achitophel has counseld Absalon
To take advantage of your weary arms,
And come this night upon you in the fields.
But yet the Lord has made his counsel skorne,
And Cusaies policy with praise preferred,
Which was to number every Israelite,
And so assault you in their pride of strength.

Ionat. Abiathar besides entreats the King
To send his men of war against his son,
And hazard not his person in the field.

David. Thanks to Abiathar, and to you both,
And to my Cusay, whom the Lord requite,
But ten times treble thanks to his soft hand,
Whose pleasant touch has made my heart to dance,
And play him praises in my zealous breast,
That turned the counsel of Achitophel
After the prayers of his servants lips.
Now will we pass the river all this night,
And in the morning sound the voice of war,
The voice of bloody and unkindly war.

Ioab. Then tell us how thou will divide thy men,
And who shall have the special charge herein.

Dau. Ioab, thy self shall for thy charge conduct,
The first third part of all my valiant men,
The second shall Abisaies valor lead,
The third fair Ithay, which I most should grace,
For comfort he has done to David's woes,
And I my self will follow in the midst.

Ith. That let not David, for though we should fly,
Ten thousand of us were not half so much
Esteemd with David's enemies, as himself,
Thy people loving thee, deny thee this.

Da. What seewes them best, then that will David do,
But now my lords and captains hear his voice
That never yet pierst pittious heaven in vain,
Then let it not slip lightly through your ears,
For my sake spare the young man Absalon.
Ioab thy self did once use friendly words
To reconcile my heart incenst to him,
If then thy love be to thy kinsman sound,
And thou will prove a perfect Israelite,
Friend him with deeds, and touch no hair of him,
Not that fair hair with which the wanton winds
Delight to play, and loves to make (...) curle,
Wherein the Nightingales would build their nests,
And make sweet bowers in every golden tresse,
To sing their lover every night asleep.
O spoil not Ioab, Jove's fair ornaments,
Which he has sent to solace David's soul.
The best ye see (my lords) are swift to sin,
To sin our feet are washed with milk of Roes,
And dried again with coals of lightening.
O Lord thou see the prowdest sins, poor slave,
And with his bridle, pulst him to the grave,
For my sake then spare lovely Absalon.

Ith. We will my lord for thy sake favor him.

Exeunt. Achitophel solus with a halter. Achi. Now has Achitophel orderd his
house,
And taken leave of every pleasure there,
Hereon depends Achitophels delights,
And in this circle must his life be closde.
The wise Achitophel, whose counsel proved
Ever as sound for fortunate success,
As if men asked the Oracle of God,
Is now used like the fool of Israel,
Then set thy angry soul upon her wings,
And let her fly into the shade of death,
And for my death, let heaven for ever weep,
Making huge floods upon the land I leave,
To ravish them, and all their fairest fruits.
Let all the sighs I breathed for this disgrace,
Hang on my hedges like eternal mists,
As mourning garments for their masters death.
Open earth, and take thy miserable son
Into the bowels of thy cursed womb,
Once in a surfeit thou did spue him forth,
Now for fell hunger suck him in again,
And be his body poison to thy veins,
And now thou hellish instrument of heaven,
Once execute th'arrest of Jove's just doom,
And stop his breast that curses Israel. Exit.

Absalon, Amasa, with all his train. Abs. Now for the crown and throne of
Israel,
To be confirmd with virtue of my sword,
And writ with David's blood upon the blade,
Now Jove let forth the golden firmament,
And look on him with all thy fiery eyes,
Which thou have made to give their glories light,
To show thou love the virtue of thy hand,
Let fall a wreath of stars upon my head,
Whose influence may govern Israel,
With state exceeding all her other Kings.
Fight lords and captains, that your sovereigns face
May shine in honor brighter then the sun,
And with the virtue of my beauteous rays,
Make this fair land as fruitful as the fields,
That with sweet milk and honey ouerflow'd.
God in the whissing of a pleasant wind,
Shall march upon the tops of Mulberie trees,
To cool all breasts that burn with any greefes,
As whylome he was good to Moses men.
By day the Lord shall sit within a cloud,
To guide your footsteps to the fields of joy,
And in the night a pillar bright as fire
Shall go before you like a second sun,
Wherein the essence of his godhead is,
That day and night you may be brought to peace,
And never swerve from that delightsome path,
That leads your souls to perfect happiness.
This shall he do for joy when I am King:
Then fight brave captains that these ioies may fly
Into your bosoms with sweet victory. Exeunt.
The battle, and Absalon hangs by the hair. What angry angel sitting in
these shades,
Has laid his cruel hands upon my hair,
And holds my body thus twixt heaven and earth?
Has Absalon no soldier near his hand,
That may untwine me this unpleasant curle,
Or wound this tree that rauisheth his lord?
O God behold the glory of thy hand,
And choicest fruit of Natures workmanship,
Hang like a rotten branch upon this tree,
Fit for the axe, and ready for the fire.
Since thou withholdst all ordinary help
To lose my body from this bond of death,
O let my beauty fill these senseless pla^^s,
With sense and power to lose me from this plague,
And work some wonder to prevent his death,
Whose life thou madst a special miracle.

Ioab with another soldier. Sold. My lord I saw the young prince Absalon
Hang by the hair upon a shadie oak,
And could by no means get himself vnlosde,

Ioab. Why slewst thou not the wicked Absalon,
That rebel to his father and to heaven,
That so I might have given thee for thy pains
Ten silver sickles, and a golden wast.

Sold. Not for a thousand sickles would I slay
The son of David, whom his father chargd,
Nor thou Abisay, nor the son of Gath,
Should touch with stroke of deadly violence.
The charge was given in hearing of us all,
And had I done it, then I know thy self,
Before thou would abide the Kings rebuke,
Would have accused me as a man of death.

Ioab. I must not now stand trifling here with thee.

Abs. Help Ioab, help, O help thy Absalon,
Let not thy angry thoughts be laid in blood,
In blood of him, that sometimes nourisht thee,
And softened thy sweet heart with friendly love,
O give me once again my fathers sight,
My dearest father, and my princely sovereign,
That shedding tears of blood before his face,
The ground may witness, and the heavens record,
My last submission sound and full of ruth.

Ioab. Rebel to nature, hate to heaven and earth,
Shall I give help to him, that thirsts the soul
Of his dear father, and my sovereign lord?
Now see the Lord has tangled in a tree
The health and glory of thy stubborn heart,
And made thy pride curbd with a senseless plant,
Now Absalon how does the Lord regard
The beauty whereupon thy hope was built,
And which thou thoughtst his grace did glory in?
Findst thou not now with fear of instant death,
That God affects not any painted shape,
Or goodly personage, when the virtuous soul
Is stuffed with naught but pride and stubbornness?
But preach I to thee, while I should revenge
Thy cursed sin that staineth Israel,
And makes her fields blush with her childrens blood?
Take that as part of thy deserved plague,
Which worthily no torment can inflict.

Abs. O Ioab, Ioab, cruel ruthlesse Ioab,
Herewith thou woundst thy Kingly sovereigns heart,
Whose heavenly temper hates his childrens blood,
And will be sick I know for Absalon.
O my dear father, that thy melting eyes
Might pierce this thicket to behold thy son,
Thy dearest son gor'de with a mortal dart*
Yet Ioab pity me, pity my father, Ioab,
Pity his souls distress that mournes my life,
And will be dead I know to hear my death.

Ioab. If he were so remorsefull of thy state,
Why sent he me against thee with the sword?
All Ioab means to pleasure thee withal,
Is to dispatch thee quickly of thy pain,
Hold Absalon, Ioabs pity is in this,
In this proud Absalon is Ioabs love.

He goes out. Abs. Such love, such pity Isreal's God send thee,
And for his love to David pity me,
Ah my dear father, see thy bowels bleed,
See death assault thy dearest Absalon,
See, pity, pardon, pray for Absalon.
Enter five or six soldiers. See where the rebel in his glory hangs,
Where is the virtue of thy beauty Absalon,
Will any of us here now fear thy looks?
Or be in love with that thy golden hair,
Wherein was wrapped rebellion against thy sire,
And cords prepared to stop thy fathers breath?
Our captain Ioab has begun to us,
And here is an end to thee, and all thy sins.
Come let us take the beauteous rebel down,
And in some ditch amids this darkesome wood,
Bury his bulk beneath a heap of stones,
Whose stony heart did hunt his fathers death.

Enter in triumph with drum and ensign, Ioab, Abyshai, and soldiers to
Absalon. Ioab. Well done tall soldiers take the Traitor down,
And in this myerie ditch interre his bones,
Covering his hateful breast with heaps of stones,
This shadie thicket of dark Ephrami
Shall ever lower on his cursed grave.
Night Ravens and Owls shall ring his fatal knell,
And sit exclaiming on his damned soul,
There shall they heap their preyes of Carrion,
Till all his grave be clad with stinking bones*
That it may loath the sense of every man,
So shall his end breed horror to his name,
And to his traitrous fact eternal shame. Exit.
5. Chorus. Oh dreadful president of his just doom,
Whose holy heart is never touched with ruth
Of fickle beauty, or of glorious shapes,
But with the virtue of an upright soul,
Humble and zealous in his inward thoughts,
Though in his person loathsome and deformed.
Now since this story lends us other store,
To make a third discourse of David's life,
Adding thereto his most renowned death,
And all their deaths, that at his death he iudgd,
Here end we this, and what here wants to please,
We will supply with treble willingness.

Absalon with three or four of his servants or gentlemen. Abs. What boots it
Absalon, unhappy Absalon,
Sighing I say what boots it Absalon,
To have disclosed a far more worthy womb

Trumpets sound, enter Ioab, Ahimaas, Cusay, Amasa, with all the rest. Ioab.
Soldiers of Israel, and ye sons of Judah,
That have contended in these irksome broiles,
And ripped old Isreal's bowels with your swords:
The godless general of your stubborn arms
Is brought by Isreal's helper to the grave:
A grave of shame, and skorne of all the Tribes,
Now then to save your honors from the dust,
And keep your bloods in temper by your bones,
Let Ioabs ensign shroud your manly heads,
Direct your eyes, your weapons, and your hearts
To guard the life of David from his foes.
Error has maskt your much too forward minds,
And you have sind against the chosen state,
Against his life, for whom your lives are blessed,
And followed an usurper to the field,
In whose just death your deaths are threatened,
But Ioab pitties your disordered souls,
And therefore offers pardon, peace, and love,
To all that will be friendly reconcil'de
To Isreal's weal, to David, and to heaven.
Amasa, thou art leader of the host,
That under Absalon have raisde their arms*
Then be a captain wise and polliticke,
Careful and loving for thy soldiers lives,
And lead them to this honorable league.

Amasa. I will, at least I Will do my best,
And for the gracious offer thou have made,
I give thee thanks as much as for my head.
Then you deceived poor souls of Israel,
Since now ye see the errors you incurd,
With thanks and due submission be appeasde,
And as ye see your captains president
Here cast me then our swords at Ioabs feet,
Submitting with all zeal and residence
Our goods and bodies to his gracious hands.

All stand up. Ioab. Stand up and take ye all your swords again,
David and Ioab shall be blessed herein.

Iona. Now let me go inform my lord the King,
How God has freed him from his enemies.

Ioab. Another time Ahimaas, not now,
But Cusay go thy self, and tell the King
The happy message of our good success.

Cus. I will my lord, and thank thee for thy grace.

Exit Cusay. Iona. What if thy servant should go to my lord?

Ioab. What news have thou to bring since he is gone?

Iona. Yet do Ahimaas so much content,
That he may run about so sweet a charge. Exit.

Ioab. Run if thou will, and peace be with thy steps,
Now follow, that you may salute the King
With humble hearts and reconciled souls.

Ama. We follow Ioab to our gracious King,
And him our swords shall honor to our deaths.

Exeunt. David, Bethsabe, Solomon, Nathan, Adonia, Chileab, with their train.
Beth. What means my lord, the lamp of Israel,
From whose bright eyes all eyes receive their light,
To dim the glory of his sweet aspects,
And paint his countenance with his hearts distress?
Why should his thoughts retain a sad conceit,
When every pleasure kneeles before his throne,
And sues for sweet acceptance with his grace,
Take but your Lute, and make the mountains dance,
Retriue the suns sphere, and restrain the clouds,
Give ears to trees, make savage Lions tame,
Impose still silence to the loudest winds,
And fill the fairest day with foulest storms,
Then why should passions of much meaner power,
Bear head against the heart of Israel.

Da. Fair Bersabe, thou might increase the strength,
Of these thy arguments drawn from my skill,
By urging thy sweet sight to my conceits,
Whose virtue ever serud for sacred baulme
To cheer my pinings past all earthly ioies,
But Bethsabe, the daughter of the highest,
Whose beauty builds the towers of Israel,
She that in chains of pearl and unicorn,
Leads at her train the ancient golden world,
The world that Adam held in Paradise,
Whose breath refineth all infectious aires,
And makes the meddowes smile at her repair.
She, She my dearest Bethsabe,
Fair peace, the goddess of our graces here,
Is fled the streets of fair Jerusalem,
The fields of Israel, and the heart of David,
Leading my comforts in her golden chains,
Linckt to the life and soul of Absalon.

Beth. Then is the pleasure of my sovereigns heart,
So wrapped within the bosom of that son,
That Solomon, whom Isreal's God affects,
And gave the name unto him for his love,
Should be no salve to comfort David's soul?

Dau. Solomon (my love) is David's lord,
Or God has named him lord of Israel
In him (for that, and since he is thy son)
Must David needs be pleased at the heart,
And he shall surely sit upon my throne:
But Absalon the beauty of my bones,
Faite Absalon the counterfeit of love,
Sweet Absalon, the image of content,
Must claim a portion in his fathers care,
And be in life and death King David's son.

Not. Yet as my lord has said, let Solomon reign,
Whom God in naming, has anointed King.
Now is he apt to learn the eternal laws,
Whose knowledge being rooted in his youth,
Will beautify his age with glorious fruits,
While Absalon incenst with graceless pride,
Usurps and stains the kingdom with his sin,
Let Solomon be made thy staff of age,
Fair Isreal's rest, and honor of thy race.

Da. Tell me my Solomon, will thou embrace
Thy fathers precepts graued in thy heart,
And satisfy my zeal to thy renown,
With practice of such sacred principles
As shall concern the state of Israel?

Sal. My royal father, if the heavenly zeal
Which for my welfare seeds upon your soul,
Were not sustaind with virtue of mine own,
If the sweet accents of your cheerful voice
Should not each hour beat upon mine ears
As sweetly as the breath of heaven to him
That gaspeth scorched with the Summers sun,
I should be guilty of unpardoned sin,
Fearing the plague of heaven, and shame of earth:
But since I vow my self to learn the skill
And holy secrets of his mighty hand
Whose cunning tunes the music of my soul,
It would content me (father) first to learn
How the eternal framed the firmament,
Which bodies lead their influence by fire?
And which are filled with hoarie Winters yse?
What sign is raignie, and what star is fair?
Why by the rules of true proportion
The year is still divided into months,
The months to days, the days to certain hours?
What fruitful race shall fill the future world?
Or for what time shall this round building stand?
What Magistrates, what Kings shall keep in awe
Men's minds with bridles of the eternal law?

Da. Wade not too far my boy in waves too deep,
The feeble eyes of our aspiring thoughts
Behold things present, and record things past:
But things to come, exceed our humane reach,
And are not painted yet in angels eyes:
For those, submit thy sense, and say, Thou power
That now art framing of the future world,
Know all to come, not by the course of heaven,
By frail conjectures of inferior signs,
By monstrous floods, by flights and flocks of birds,
By bowels of a sacrificed beast;
Or by the figures of some hidden art:
But by a true and natural presage,
Laying the ground and perfect architect
Of all our actions now before thine eyes,
From Adam to the end of Adams seed,
O heaven protect my weakness with thy strength,
So look on me that I may view thy face,
And see these secrets written in thy brows.
O sun come dart thy rays upon my moon,
That now mine eyes eclipsed to the earth,
May brightly be refined and shine to heaven.
Transform me from this flesh, that I may live
Before my death, regenerate with thee.
O thou great God, ravish my earthly sprite,
That for the time a more then humane skill
May feed the Organons of all my sense,
That when I think, thy thoughts may be my guide,
And when I speak, I may be made by choice
The perfect echo of thy heavenly voice.
Thus say my son, and thou shall learn them all.

Salo. A secret fury rauisheth my soul,
Lifting my mind above her humane bounds,
And as the Eagle roused from her stand,
With violent hunger (cowring in the air)
Seaseth her feathered prey, and thinks to feed,
But seeing then a cloud beneath her feet,
Lets fall the foul, and is emboldened
With eyes intentive to bedare the sun,
And stieth close unto his stately sphere:
So Solomon mounted on the burning wings
Of zeal divine, lets fall his mortal food,
And cheeres his senses with celestial air,
Treads in the golden starrie Labyrinth,
And holds his eyes fixed on Iehouaes brows,
Good father teach me further what to do.

Nath. See David how his haughty spirit mounts
Even now of height to wield a diadem,
Then make him promise that he may succeed,
And rest old Isreal's bones from broiles of war.

David. Nathan thou Prophet, sprung from Iesses root,
I promise thee, and lovely Bethsabe,
My Solomon shall govern after me.

Beth. He that has touched thee with this righteous thought
Preserve the harbor of thy thoughts in peace.

Enter Mess. Mess. My lord, thy servants of thy watch have seen
One running hitherward from forth the wars.

David. If he be come alone, he brings news.

Mess. Another has thy servant seen my lord,
Whose running much resembles Sadocs son.

Da. He is a good man, and good tidings brings.

Enter Ahimaas. Ahim. Peace and content be with my lord the King,
Whom Isreal's God has blessed with victory.

Da. Tell me Ahimaas, lives my Absalon?

Ahim. I saw a troop of soldiers gathered,
But know not what the tumult might import.

Dau. Stand by, until some other may inform
The heart of David with a happy truth.

Enter Cusay. Cusay. Happiness and honor live with David's soul,
Whom God has blessed with conquest of his foes.

David. But Cusay lives the young man Absalon?

Cus. The stubborn enemies to David's peace,
And all that cast their darts against his crown,
Fare ever like the young man Absalon,
For as he rid the woods of Ephraim
(Which fought for thee as much as all thy men)
His hair was tangled in a shadie oak,
And hanging there (by Ioab and his men)
Sustaind the stroke of well deserved death.

David. Has Absalon sustaind the stroke of death?
Die David for the death of Absalon,
And make these cursed news the bloody darts,
That through his bowels rip thy wretched breast.
Hence David, walk the solitary woods,
And insome Caedars shade the thunder slew,
And fire from heaven has made his branches black
Sit mourning the decease of Absalon,
Against the body of that blasted plant
In thousand shiuers break thy yuorie Lute,
Hanging thy stringlesse harp upon his boughs,
And through the hollow saplesse sounding truncke,
Bellow the torments that perplexe thy soul.
There let the winds sit sighing till they burst,
Let tempest mufled with a cloud of pitch,
Threaten the forests with her hellish face,
And (mounted fiercely on her iron wings)
Rend up the wretched engine by the roots
That held my dearest Absalon to death.
Then let them toss my broken Lute to heaven,
Even to his hands that beats me with the strings,
To show how sadly his poor sheepeheard sings.

He goes to his pauillion, and sits close a while. Beth. Die Bethsabe to see
thy David mourn,
To hear his tunes of anguish and of hell,
O help my David, help thy Bethsabe,
She kneeles down. Whose heart is pierced with thy breathie swords,
And bursts with burden of ten thousand greefes.
Now sits thy sorrows sucking of my blood,
O that it might be poison to their powers,
And that their lips might draw my bosom dry,
So David's love might ease him, though she die.

Not. These violent passions come not from above,
David and Bethsabe offend the highest,
To mourn in this immeasurable sort.

Dau. O Absalon, Absalon, O my son, my son,
Would God that I had died for Absalon:
But he is dead, ah dead, Absalon is dead,
And David lives to die for Absalon.

He looks forth, and at the end sits close again. Enter Ioab, Abisay, Ithay,
with their train. Ioab. Why lies the Queen so prostrate on the ground?
Why is this company so Tragic hewed?
Why is the King now absent from his men?
And marches not in triumph through the gates?
He unfolds the pauillion. David awake, if sleep have shut thine eyes,
Sleep of affection, that thou can not see
The honor offered to the victors head,
Ioab brings conquest pierced on his spear,
And joy from all the Tribes of Israel.

David. Thou man of blood, thou sepulcher of death,
Whose marble breast intombe my bowels quick,
Did I not charge thee, nay entreat thy hand,
Even for my sake to spare my Absalon?
And have thou now in spite of David's health,
And skorne to do my heart some happiness,
Given him the sword, and spilt his purple soul?

Ioab. What? irkes it David, that he victor breaths,
That Judah and the fields of Israel,
Should cleanse their faces from their childrens blood?
What art thou weary of thy royal rule?
Is Isreal's throne a Serpent in thine eyes,
And he that set thee there, so far from thanks,
That thou must curse his servant for his sake?
Have thou not said, that as the morning light,
The cloudlesse morning, so should be thine house,
And not as flowers by the brightest rain,
Which grows up quickly, and as quickly fades?
Have thou not said, the wicked are as thorns,
That cannot be preserved with the hand,
And that the man shall touch them, must be armd
With coats of iron, and garments made of steel,
Or with the shaft of a defenced spear?
And art thou angry he is now cut off,
That lead the guiltless swarming to their deaths,
And was more wicked then an host of men?
Advance thee from thy melancholy den,
And deck thy body with thy blisfull robes,
Or by the Lord that swaies the heaven, I swear,
I Will lead thine armies to another King,
Shall cheer them for their princely chivalry,
And not sit daunted, frowning in the dark,
When his fair looks, with Oil and Wine refresht,
Should dart into their bosoms gladsome beams,
And fill their stomachs with triumphant feasts,
That when elsewhere stern war shall sound his trumpe,
And call another battle to the field,
Fame still may bring thy valiant soldiers home,
And for their service happily confess
She wanted worthy trumpes to sound their prowess,
Take thou this course and live, refuse, and die.

Abisay. Come brother, let him sit there till he sincke,
Some other shall advance the name of Ioab.

Offers to go out. Beth. O stay my lords, stay, David mournes no more,
But rises to give honor to your acts. Stay.

He rises up. David. Then happy art thou David's fairest son,
That freed from the yoke of earthly toiles,
And sequestered from sense of humane sins;
Thy soul shall joy the sacred cabinet
Of those divine Ideas, that present
Thy changed spirit with a heaven of bliss.
Then thou art gone, ah thou art gone my son
To heaven I hope my Absalon is gone,
Thy soul there placed in honor of the Saints
Or angels clad with immortality,
Shall reap a seuenfold grace, for all thy greefes,
Thy eyes now no more eyes but shining stars,
Shall deck the flaming heavens with novel lamps,
There shall thou taste the drink of Seraphins,
And cheer thy feelings with archangels food,
Thy day of rest, thy holy Sabbath day
Shall be eternal, and the curtain drawn,
Thou shall behold thy sovereign face to face,
With wonder knit in triple unity,
Unity infinite and innumerable,
Courage brave captains, Ioab; tale has stird,
And made the suit of Israel preserd.

Ioab. Bravely resolud and spoken like a King,
Now may old Israel, and his daughters sing. Exeunt.

FINIS.

