THE HONOR OF THE GARTER.

Displaied in a Poem gratulatorie: Entitled to the worthy and renowned Earl
of Northumberland.

Created Knight of that Order, and installd at Windsor. Anno Regni
Elizabethae. 35. Die Iunij. 26.

By George Peele, Master of Arts in Oxenforde.



AT LONDON, Printed by the Widdowe Charlewood, for John Busbie, and are to be
sold at the West door of Paul's.

HONY^SOIT QVI^M^^ Y^PENSE^
SEMPER EADEM


Gallia victa dedit flores, inuicta Leones
Anglia: ius belli in flore, leone suum:
O sic O semper ferat Elizabetha triumphos
Inclyta Gallorum flore Leone suo.
Ad Maecaenatem Prologus.
Plain is my coat, and humble is my gate,
Thrice noble Earl, behold with gentle eyes
My wits poor worth: even for your noblesse,
(Renowned Lord, Northumberlands fair flower)
The Muses love, Patron, and fauoret,
That artizans and scholars do embrace,
And clothest Mathesis in rich ornaments,
That admirable Mathematique skill,
Familiar with the stars and Zodiac.
(To whom the heaven lies open as her book)
By whose directions undeceivable,
(Leaving our Schoolemens vulgar trodden paths)
And following the ancient reverend steps
Of Trismegistus and Pythagords,
Through uncouth ways and inaccessible,
Do pass into the spacious pleasant fields
Of divine science and Phylosophie,
From whence beholding the deformities
Of common errors and worlds vanity,
Do here enjoy that sacred sweet content
That baser souls not knowing, not affect:
And so by Fates and Fortunes good aspect
Raised; In thy height and these unhappy times,
Disfurnisht wholly of Heroycall spirits,
That learning should with glorious hands uphold.
(For who should learning vnderbare, but he
That knows thereof the precious worthiness,
And sees true Science from base vanity)
Have in regard, the true Philosophy,
That in pure Wisdom seats her happiness.
And you the Muses, and the Graces three,
You I invoke from Heaven and Helicon.
For other Patrons have poor Poets none,
But Muses and the Graces to implore.
Augustus long ago has left the world:
And liberal Sidney, famous for the love
He bare to learning and to Chivalry;
And virtuous Walsingham are fled to heaven.
Why thither speed not Hobbin and his pheres?
Great Hobbinall on whom our shepherds gaze.
And Harrington well lettered and discreet,
That has so purely naturalized
Strange words, and made them all free-denyzons.
Why thither speedes not Rosamonds trumpeter,
Sweet as the Nightingall, Why go not thou
That richly cloth'st conceit with well made words,
Campion, accompaned with our English France,
A peerless sweet Translator of our time?
Why follow not a thousand that I know,
Fellows to these Apolloes fauourets:
And leave behind our ordinary grooms,
With triuiall humors to pastime the world,
That favors Pan and Phoebus both alike?
Why thither post not all good wits from hence,
To Chaucer, Gowre, and to the fairest Phaer
That ever ventured on great Virgils works?
To Watson, worthy many Epitaphes
For his sweet Poesy, for Amyntas tears
And joys so well set down. And after thee
Why hie they not, unhappy in thine end,
Marley, the Muses darling for thy verse;
Fit to write passions for the souls below,
If any wretched souls in passion speak?
Why go not all into the Elisian fields,
And leave this Center, barren of repast,
Unless in hope Augusta will restore,
The wrongs that learning bears of covetousness
And Courts disdain, the enemy to Art.
Leave foolish lad, it mendeth not with words,
Nor herbs nor time such remedy affoordes.
Your Honors in all humble service, Geo: Peele.
The Honor of the honorable order of the Garter.
ABout the time when Vesper in the West
Began set the evening watch, and silent night
Richly attended by his twinkling train,
Sent Sleep and Slumber to possess the world,
And Fantasy to hauzen idle heads;
Under the starrie Canapie of heaven,
I laid me down laden with many cares,
(My bed-fellowes almost these twenty years)
Fast by the stream where Tame and Isis meet,
And day by day roll to salute the sea.
For more then common service it performd
To Albions Queen; when Foe-men shypt for fight
To forage England, plowde the Ocean up,
And slonck into the channel that deuides
The French-mens strond fro Britains fishie towns.
Even at that time all in a fragrant Meade,
In sight of that fair Castle that ore-lookes
The Forest one way, and the ferull vale
Watered with that renowned River Thames,
Old Windsor Castle did I take my rest:
When Cynthia companion of the night,
With shining brand lightning his Eben Car,
Whose axeltree was Iet, enchac'd with stars,
And roof with shining Ravens feathers cealed,
Peircing mine eylyds as I lay along
Awaked me through: Therewith me thought I saw,
A royal glimmering light streaming a loft;
As Titan mounted on the Lions back,
Had clothed himself in fiery pointed beams,
To chase the night and entertain the morn.
Yet scarce had Chaunticleere ronge the midnight peale,
Or Phoebe half way gone her journey through,
Sleeping, or waking, as alone I lay,
Mine eyes, and ears, and senses all were served,
With every object perfect in his kind.
And lo, a wonder to my senses all,
For through the melting air perfumed with sweets,
I might discern a troop of Horsemen ride,
Armed Cape de Pe with shield and shiuering lance;
As in a plash, or calm transparent brook
We see the glistring fishes skoure along.
A number numberless, appointed well.
For turnament, as if the God of war,
Had held a Iusts in honor of his love:
Or all the sons of Saturn and of Ops,
Had been in arms against Enceladus.
Therewith I heard the Clarions and the Shalmes,
The Shakbuts, and a thousand instruments
Of several kinds: and lowdest of them all,
A Trumpe more shrill than Tritons is at Sea,
The same Renown Precursor of the train
Did sound, (for who rings louder than renown.)
He mounted was upon a flying horse.
And clothed in Phawcons feathers to the ground;
By his Escutchion justly might you guess,
He was the Herald of Eternity,
And Purseuant at arms to mighty Jove.
I looked to see an end of that I saw,
And still me thought the train did multiply,
And yielding clouds gave way, and men at arms
Succeed as fast one at onothers heels,
As in the Vast Mediterranean Sea,
The rolling waves do one beget another.
Those that perfumed the air with myrrh and balm,
Dancing and singing sweetly as they went,
Were naked Virgins decked with Garlands green,
And seemed the graces, for with golden chains
They lincked were, three louelir countenaunces.
About them Cupid (as to me it seemed)
Lay playing on his party colloured wings;
And sometime on a Horse as white as milk
I see him armed and mounted in the thronge,
(As love had right to march with men of war.
Weary of looking up, I laid me down,
Willing to rest as sleepie souls are wont,
When of a suddne such a noise I heard,
Of shot of Ordnance pealing in mine ears,
As twenty thousand Tire had played at Sea:
Or Aetna split had belcht her bowels forth;
Or Heaven and Earth in arms thundering amain,
Had bent their great artillarie for war;
And weary Atlas had let fall his load,
Enough to wake Endymion from his trance.
Yet was the welkin clear, nor smoke nor dust
Anoyd mine eyes: I gazd, and as I looked,
Me thought this host of ayrie armed men,
Girt Windsor Castle round. Anon I saw
Under a Canapie of Crymson bysse,
Spangled with gold and set with silver bells,
That sweetly chimed, and luld me half a sleep,
A goodly king in robes most richly dight.
The upper, like a Roman Palliament,
In deed a Chapperon, for such it was;
And looking nearer, lo upon his leg,
An ancient badge of honor I espied.
A Garter brightly glistring in mine eye,
A worthy ornament. Then I called to mind,
What Princely Edward, of that name the third,
King Edward for his great atchiuements famed,
What he began; The order of S. George,
That at this day is honored through the world.
The order of the Garter so ycleepd.
A great effect, grown of a slender cause,
Graced by a King, and favored of his feeres,
Famed by his followers, worthy Kings and Queens,
That to this day are Sovereigns of the same.
The manner how this matter grew at first.
Was thus. The King disposed on a time
To revel after he had shaken France,
(O had he bravely held it to the last)
And decked his Lions with their flower de Lyce,
Disposed to revel: Some say otherwise,
Found on the ground by Fortune as he went
A Ladies Garter: But the Queens I troe
Lost in a dance, and took it up himself.
It was a silken Ribban weaued of blewe.
His Lords and standers by, seeing the King
Stoop for this Garter, smiled: as who would say,
Our office that had been, or somewhat else.
King Edward vvistlie looking on them all,
With Princely hands having that Garter ceazd,
From harmelesle heart where honor was engraued,
Bespake in French (a could the language well)
And rife was French those days with Englishmen;
They went to school to put together Towns,
And spell in France with Feskues made of Pikes.
Honi Soit Qui mal y pense, quoth he,
Wherewith upon aduizement, though the cause
Were small, his pleasure and his purpose was
T'aduance that Garter, and to institute
A noble order sacred to S. George:
And Knights to make, whom he would have be termed
Knights of the Garter. This beginning had
This honorable order of our time.
Heereon I thought when I beheld the King,
But swifter then my thought by that I saw,
And words I heard, or seemed to hear at least,
I was instructed in the circumstance:
And found it was King Edward that did march
In robes, like those he ware when with his Lords,
He held S. Gorges royal Feast on earth,
His eldest son surnamed the Black Prince,
Though black of hue, that surname yet in France
He wan; For terror to the Frenchmens hearts
His countenance was, his Sword an Iron scourge.
He one a cole-black Coorser mounted was,
And in his hand a battel-axe he hent:
His Beuer up, his Corslet was of Steel,
Varnisht as black as Iett: his bases black,
And black fro head to foot, yea horse and hoof
As black as night; but in a twinck me thought
A chaungd at once his habit and his Steed,
And had a Garter as his father had.
Right rich and costly, with embroyderie
Of Pearl and Gold. I could on it discern,
The Poesy whereof I spoke of yore;
And well I wot since this King Edwards days,
Our Kings and Queens about their royal Arms,
Have in a Garter borne this Poesy.
Still as I lay, I gazd and gest at once
What was this train, and whether it did bend:
I found at last King Edward was the man,
Accompanied with Kings and Conquerours,
That from the spacious aerie house of Fame,
Set forward royally to solemnize,
Th'installment of some new created knights.
For lo, I saw in strange accutrements,
Like to King Edwards and the Prince of Wales,
Full four and twenty Knights nor more nor less,
In robes with precious collors of S. George:
And Garters all they had buckled with Gold.
Fame in a Stoale of purple, set with eyes,
And ears, and tongues, carried a golden Book;
Upon the cover this I saw engraued: Pauci quos aequus amauit
Jupiter, aut ardens euexit ad aethera virtus
Dijs geniti.

Me thought this saying could not but import,
They should be noble men of golden minds,
And great account, favored of Prince and Peers:
Whose names should in that Register be writ
Consecrate to S. Georges chosen Knights.
Heerewith the golden book did open fair,
And eathly I might read their names that next
Went to the King. They were no common men,
For to my seeming each one had a Page,
That bare a fair Eschuchion after him,
Whereon his arms were drawn: I have forgot
Their several coats, but well I vvot their names.
And first I savve enrold within this book,
King Edwards name, he was the Sovereign.
Their Register was Fame, Renown before
That sounded shrill, was officer at arms
And Usher to the train; His office badge,
Was a black rod whereof he took his name.
Honor went King at arms next to the Knights
Half armed, like Pallas shaped for arms and arts:
Rich in abilliments of peace and war,
Ancient and grave he was, and sage to see.
Near him went Time, well pleazd and well content,
As if he ioyed t'accompany this train;
And in his hand a Royal standerd bare,
Wherein S. George was drawn and limnde in gold.
Under the Verge as title to the book,
Was writ: Knights of the order of S. George,
Knights of the Garter. Edward Prince of Wales
Was first, Then Henry Duke of Lancaster,
And Nicholas Earl of Warwick made the third.
Captain de Bouche was next renowned for arms.
Then the brave Earls of Stafford and South-hampton,
To whose successors, for his sake that lives
And now suruiues in honor of that name,
To whom my thoughts are humble and deuote,
Gentle VVriothesley, South-hamptons star,
I wish all fortune that in Cynthias eye,
Cynthia the glory of the Western world,
With all the stars in her fair firmament,
Bright may he rise and shine immortally.
And Mortimer a gentle trusty Lord,
More loyal than that cruel Mortimer
That plotted Edwards death at Killingworth.
Edward the second, father to this King,
Whose tragic cry even now me thinks I hear,
When graceless wretches murdered him by night.
Then Lisle, and Burwash, Beuchamp, and Mahun,
Gray, Courtney, and the Hollands worthy Knights,
Fitzsimon, VVale, and Sir Hugh VVoortesley,
Neale, Lording, Chandos, Sir Miles Stapelton,
Walter Pagannell, Eme, and Dandley, last
Was the good Knight Sir Haunchet Dambricourte.
These names I read, for they were written fair;
And as it seemde to me, these were the first
Created of that order by the King:
And man by man they marched in equipage.
A many more there were than I could note,
And sooth to say, I think the book was full;
And in the train a number infinite,
True Knights of all the orders in the world,
Christians and, Heathens, that accompanied
This worthy King in his Procession.
Caesar himself was there, I saw him ride
Tryumphing in his three and twenty wounds,
Because they showed the malice of the world.
Pompey was there the rival of his fame,
That dyed a death as base and vyolent.
Leave I this theme: The mightiest that have lived
have fallen, and headlong to: In misery
It is some comfort to have company.
Hector of Troy, and Kings ere Troy was built,
Or Thrace was Thrace, were there; Old Dardanus
And Ilus, and Assaracus came along.
For in the house of Fame what famous man,
What Prince but has his Trophie and his place?
There Joshua, David, and great Machabee,
Last Anker-hold and stay of Jacobs race
Did march: and Macedonian Alexander,
Victorious Charles the great, the flower of France,
Godfrey of Bullen, whom the Christian Kings
Created King of great Jerusalem.
And Arthur glory of the Western world,
And all his Kinghts were in this royal train.
Jason was there, Knight of the golden Fleece,
Knights of the Tosson, and of S. Iago,
Knights of the Rhodes, Knights of the Sepulcher
Were there; the air was pestered to my thought.
Among them all a worthy man of mark,
A Prince of famous memory I saw,
Henry the eight, that led a warlik band
Of English Earls, and Lords and lusty Knights,
That ware the Garter sacred to S. George.
Who was not there? I think the Court of Fame
Was naked and unpeopled, in this train
There was so many Emperors, Lords and Kings,
Knights errant and aduenturous. In the book
That on a Desk lay open before Fame,
For in a sumptuous Chariot did he ride
Of Crystal, set with leaves of glittering Gold,
And fair tralucent stones, that over all
It did reflect. Within that glorious book
I saw a name rejoiced me to see.
Fraunces of Bedford: I could read it plain,
And glad I was that in that precious book
That name I found: for now me thought I said,
Here virtue does outliue th'arest of death.
For dead is Bedford, virtuous and renownd
For arms, for honor, and religions love,
And yet alive his name in Fames records,
That held this Garter dear and ware it well.
Some worthy wight let blazon his deserts.
Only a tale I thought on by the way
As I observed his honorable name.
I heard it was his chance ore-tane with sleep,
To take a nap near to a Farmers lodge,
(Trusted a little with himself belike)
This aged Earl in his apparel plain,
Wrapped in his russet Cloak lay down to rest,
His badge of honor buckled to his leg,
Bare and vnhid. There came a pilfring swad,
And would have prayed upon this ornament:
And said t'vnbuckle it, thinking him a sleep.
The noble gentleman, feeling what he meant,
Hold foolish ladde (quoth he) a better pray;
This Garter is not fit for every leg,
And I account it better then my purse.
The varlet ran away. The Earl awaked
And told his friends: and smyling said withal;
A would not (had a understood the french
Writ on my Garter) dared to have stolen the same.
This tale I thought upon, told me for truth:
The rather for it praisde the poesy,
Right grave and honorable that imports much.
Ill be to him (it says) that evil thinks.
O sacred loyalty, in purest hearts
Thou buildst thy bower: thy weeds of spotless white;
Like those that stood for Romes great offices,
Makes thee renownd, glorious in innocence.
Why stick I hear? The train cast in a ring
About the Castle, making melody,
Under the glorious spreading wings of Fame,
I saw a Virgin Queen, attyrde in white,
Leading with her a sort of goodly Knights,
With Garters and with Collers of S. George.
Elizabeth on a compartiment
Of gold, in Bysse was writ, and hunge a skue
Upon her head, under an imperial crown:
She was the Sovereign of the Knights she led.
Her face me thought I knew: as if the same,
The same great Empress that we here enjoy,
Had clymed the clouds, and been in person there;
To whom the earth, the sea, and elements
Auspicious are. A many that I knew
Knighted in my remembrance, I beheld;
And all their names were in that Register,
And yet I might perceive some so set down,
That how so ere it hapt I cannot tell,
(The Carle Oblivion stolen from Laethes lake,
Or Envy stepped from out the deep Auerne)
Had raced, or blemished, or obsured at least.
What have those Fiends to do in Fames fair Court?
Yet in the house of Fame and Courts of Kings,
Envy will bite, or snarle and bark at least,
As dogs against the Moon that yelpe in vain:
Say Frustra to those Curs and shake thy coat.
And all the Kings since that King Edwards days,
Were with their Knights and companies in that train.
When all were whist, King Edward thus bespake:
Hail Windsor, where I sometimes took delight
To hawke and hunt, and back the proudest Horse;
And where in Princely pleasure I reposde
In my return fro France: A little sigh
I heard him fetch withal: His reason why
I cannot guess: I think it was for this,
That England had given ore their traffic there,
And twenty times hayle Windsor, quoth the King,
Where I have stalled so many hardy Knights,
And tournaments and royal Iusts performed.
Behold, in honor of mine ancient throne,
In honor of fair England and S. George,
To whom this order of the Garter first
I sacred held: in honor of my Knights
Before this day created and installed,
But specially in honor of those five
That at this day this honor have received,
Under Elizabeth, Englands great Sovereign,
Northumberland, and Worcester, noble Earls,
Boroughe, and Sheffeilde, Lords of lively hope,
And honorable old Knowles, famed for his sons,
And for his service gracious and renownde.
Lo from the house of Fame, with Princely traynes
Accompanied, and Kings and Conquerers,
And Knights of proof, loyal and valorous,
I resalute thee here, and gratulate
To those new Knights created by a Queen,
Peerless for wisdom and for Majesty,
The honor of the Garter: May they long
Wear them, as notes of true Nobility
And virtues ornaments. Young Northumberland
Mounted on Fortunes whele by virtues aim,
Become thy badge as it becomes thee:
That Europes eyes thy worthiness may see.
And Worcester, what pure honor has put on
With chaste and spotless hands, in honor wear;
Answer the noblest of thine auncestry
In deeds to fame and virtue consecrate.
Borough brought up in learning and in Arms,
Patron of Music and of Chivalry,
Brandish thy sword in right, and spend thy wits
In Commonwealth affairs: It shall become
Thy forwardnes to follow virtues cause,
And great designs of noble consequence.
And Sheffeilde, shape thy course no otherwise,
Then loyalty the loade-starre of renown
Directs: that as thine ancestors have done,
Thine earthly race in honor thou may run.
To thee old man with kindness (quoth the King)
That reapest this honor in thy waning age,
See what a Trophey Queen Elizabeth
Prepares before thy herce, long may thou live,
And dye in fame: That have well near atchiued
The Noble Norris honor in thy sons.
Thrice noble Lord, as happy for his few,
As was the King of Troy for many more.
With that he ceased, and to the foremost Earl,
(For why me thought I see them every man,
Stalld in their places and their ornaments.)
Percy (quoth he) thou and thy Lordly Peers,
Your names are in this Register of Fame,
Written in leaves and characters of gold;
So live, as with a many more you may
Survive, and triumph in eternity,
Out of Obliuions reach, or Enuies shot;
And that your names immortally may shine
In these records, not earthly but divine.
Then Shalmes and Shakebutts sounded in the air,
But shrilst of all, the Trumpet of Renown,
And by and by, a loud rertaite he runge;
The train retired as swift as stars don shoot,
From whence they came; And day began to break,
And with the noise and Thunder in the sky,
When Fames great double doors fell to and shutt,
And this tryumphant train was vanished quite;
The gaudy morn out of her golden sleep
Awaked, and little Birds vncagde, began sing
To welcome home the Bridgrome of the Sea.
Epilogus.
WHerewith I rouzd, recounting what I saw;
And then thought I: were it as once it was,
But long ago, when learning was in price,
And Poesy with Princes gracious:
I would adventure to set down my dream,
In honor of these new advanced Lords
S. Georges Knights. I was encouraged
And did as I have done: Which humbly here
I yield, as firstlings of my Scholars crop,
Consecrated purely to your noble name.
To gratulate to you this honors height,
As little boys with flinging up their cappes,
Congratulate great Kings and Conquerours.
Take it en gree (fair Lord) Procul hinc turba inuidiosa:
Stirps rudis vrtica est; Stirps generosa rosa.
G. P.
FINIS.

