AN INTRODVCTION TO THE WORTHY RECEIVING THE SAcrament of the Lords SVPPER.

By that late learned Minister of Gods holy Word, WILLIAM PEMBLE, of Magdalen
Hall in Oxford.

Published since his death by his friend.

Qui discordat a Christo, nec manducat carnem eius, nec sanguinem bibit,
etiamsi rei tantae Sacramentum ad iudicium suae praesumptionis quotidie
indifferenter accipiat. De Consecrat. Did. 2. c. 65. Qui discordat. Ex Aug. in
li^. Sent. c. 339. Vt quid puras dentes and ventrem? Creed and manducasti.
Ibid. c. 47. Vt quid. Ex Aug. tract. 25 and 26. in Joan. LONDON* Printed by
I.B. for James Boler, and are to be sold at the sign of the Mary gold in Pa^^s
Churchyard. Anno D^^* 1633.

TO THE Worshipful his worthy good friend, JOHN BAKER Esquire. at Mayfield in
Sussex, Grace and Peace.
SIr, to err in speculative Doctrines, chiefly where the soveraigntie and
sufficiency of the Scripture is maintained (as it is with us) is not so
frequent nor so easy, as to mistake in matters practical: Errors in doctrine
are more dangerous, but corruptions in practice are more often, by reason that
our practice flows immediately from more various and weak principles in us,
than our speculations do. Hence we see that in matters divine amongst us,
where the Scriptures are in force and have their due place, there are few
errors in the doctrine, many faults in the practice. For an instance we need
go no further than the Sacrament of the Supper: the doctrine whereof, is, by
the blessing of God, out of question for the Orthodoxie of it in our Church.
But where Satan cannot taint the Doctrine, there he will corrupt the Practice
all he can: so we find that in S. Paul's time the 1 Cor. 11.21, ^2.
Practice of this Sacrament was rather grown faulty, than the Doctrine; a
type of our days, wherein we see the people grown careless, remiss, and
profane for the practice in the receiving of this Sacrament, so very few
prepare themselves in a 1 Cor. 11.25.
discerning manner. In matters moral and divine (contrary to what we see in
things natural) we leap from one extreme to another sine medio, from
superstition to profaneness, from bad to worse. Maldon in John 6.
Papists and we agree that this Sacrament is not to be given to children, who
cannot examine themselves: Aug de merit. peccat. l 1. c. 24 and passi^ alibi.

Tert. l. 4. adver Marcion. Amb. l 3 Sacr. c ^ followed by some in Bohemia
Chry. praelect Chron. and Russia. O dorbard de Relig. Rus.


we all say, that to this Sacrament there is required a personal and a
praeviall disposition in the receiver, an opus operantis, and yet we find our
people come to the Lords Table, though not children in years, yet in
understanding, Nay do we not hear the very best complain much this way? their
grief is, that this Sacrament does them little good: and where one complains
of his unprofitable hearing the Word, many bemoane their uncomfortable
receiving of this Sacrament. What may be thought the cause? are they not both
the very ordinances of God? Yes, I know that Sacraments have a certain Exodus
4.8.
voice, and that they are a kind of visible words; yet there is not that
Hieron. Paulino.
viva vox in the Sacrament administered, as is in the Word preached. Now this
Latens. (...). Ibid.
force which is in the lively voice of the Preacher, does help much to
qualify the Hearer. Let this then go for a truth, that amongst some other
reasons of this difference, one maine cause why we say and feel that we
profit less by this Sacrament, than by the Word preached, is, for that as we
should prepare more, so we do prepare less before-band to the receiving of
this Sacrament. The way then to cure this disease, is to prepare and fit our
selves better; and to that end is this book, serving rather to prepare the
Communicant in the practice, than to defend the doctrine of this Sacrament. A
good book, and in our dead and unsavourie times very needful: which I now
dedicate to you (to say nothing of mine own respects) for reasons taken from
the deceased Author. Were he alive, and say he would print this book, you are
the man whose name it should bear; you supported the vine that bore this, and
many other excellent grapes: his studies had shrunk and withered, even then
when they were about to knit, had it not been for you and your exhibitions. To
tell you what great charge you bestowed on him, I need not: to tell the world
in print, is a thing you desire not; only I would men of quality would stay
their hands from their excesses upon unprofitable creatures, and learn of you
to show their bounty, in watering such plants as this was; and then they need
not repent of their excesses, but rather rejoice with you for their expenses:
And I could wish, that every Gentleman of rank, could say, as you can, that in
his time he has raised up an able Scholar, a learned Divine, a well studied
Artist, a skillful Linguist, and, which is the soul of all, a very godly
Minister. Had he lived, you had enjoyed him, and he you; but he is gone to
enjoy the Lord, and in reading of this his book, you may in some sort enjoy
him. And such as read this and the rest of his labors, if they profit not by
them, let them blame themselves: if they do (as I am certain many do) next
unto the Lord, let them thank you, and bless God for him and you, to whom I
commit both you and yours, and remain

Yours in the Lord Christ, RICHARD CAPEL.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, if any other print this book according to any notes, I
thought good to give thee notice, that this is according to the Original,
under the Authors own hand; left unto me, when he departed this world: and
therefore take this as the only, true, and genuine Copy. And so farewell.

R. CAPEL*

AN INTRODVCTION To the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords SVPPER.
MOst true is that of Solomon, Pro. 19.2. Without knowledge the mind is not
good: and, He that hastes with his feet sins. True, where the mind wants
knowledge, the foot will be hasty, Ignorance and Rashness are inseparable
companions: but this is true also, that Knowledge alone cannot make a man good.
Where the mind has knowledge, the foot may be lazy; and where knowledge
abounds, negligence may abound too. Now of the two Monoris criminis reatus est,
legem nescire, quam spernere, as Salvian speaks; and an unadvised practice
coming from ignorance, is far more tolerable, De Gub. l. 4.
than wilful disobedience convicted and condemned by knowledge. There is then
a necessity for practice ^o follow after knowledge, and there is also an
excellency wherein practice goes before knowledge, as the end always deserves
more love and praise than the means. The younger brother in order of Nature,
has here the preheminency to be blessed above the elder: which I spoke not to
make divisio^ among brethren, and set at odds these two parts of Religion by a
quarrelsome comparison; but that I may have leave at this time to do as Jacob
sometime did, when Manasseh and Ephraim were presented unto him by Joseph:
namely to cross my hands of purpose; and, contrary to my usual course, lay my
right hand on the head of the younger my left hand on the head of the elder
brother: I mean, that whereas in the handling the nature of the holy Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, a twofold consideration offers it self: the one
concerning knowledge, in the explication of the nature of the mysteries
contained therein; the other concerning our religious practice in the
celebration thereof. You will not be displeased if I first begin with practice
insisting upon such holy duties as concern us in going about this business;
laying aside, for a while, such contemplations about the nature of this
Sacrament, as serves only to inform our knowledge. I have made choice of this
course, as that which is 1. mere necessary for this Auditory, 2. most necessary
for this subject, the Sacrament, whereof we are to speak. I may in charity
hope, that there is none among us so rudely and ignorantly bred up under such
governors, as Country or University has afforded, but that he is furnished
with such a competency of knowledge, as to give a reasonable account of his
faith, touching the doctrine of the Sacraments: Yet if there be any whose
ignorance in this behalf may make them blush, to such I wish an increase of
godly carfulness in their governors that they will provide for the
advancement of Religion, as well as Learning, in those that are under them; and
also a more conscionable industry in themselves, to hearken unto instruction,
and to make use of all such means as they shall be directed unto, for the
attainment of knowledge in this and other points of true Religion. For the
Sacrament it self, we shall not err in following that rule, which holds true
in all Divinity, that, We shall the better know the nature of secret
mysteries, Io^. 7.17.
by first making conscience to practice our known duty. And therefore this
Sacrament being instituted in the Church for the continual exercise of many
heavenly graces of the Saints, much rather, than for the employment of their
wits in long disputes and curious speculations about the nature of this holy
ordinance; it will be, I hope, not unfit, first to acquaint you, how this
Sacrament serves for the increase of grace in the hearts of the godly, and
hereafter, as God shall give ability and opportunity, to unfold the truth in
such controverted doubts, as have been raised touching this Sacrament, rather
by the darkness and superstition of men's brains, than from any true
difficulty that can be found in the institution it self. I come therefore in
the first place, to put you in mind of that which concerns our Christian
practice about this Sacrament, where our duty is twofold: 1. A frequent
celebration of this Sacrament. 2. A right remembrance of Christ's death, set
forth unto us therein.


Both these duties are comprised and commended to us in those words of the
institution, in 1. Cor. 11.

Again, Verse 24. This do ye in remembrance of me. And, Verse 25. This do
as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.

Verse 26. For as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this c^p, ye do
show the Lords death till he come.

These words do plainly contain those two forementioned duties, concerning
the time when this Sacrament is to be celebrated, and that is, often; and
touching the manner or end of its celebration, which is, a perpetual
remembrance of the death of Christ.

For the first, that its a necessary duty which lies upon every one, often to
frequent this Sacrament; it were only to be wished, that our practice were as
conformable, as our consciences are generally convicted of the truth of it. Yet
if any man list to doubt, these reasons may persuade him that will not be
obstinate.

1. The Commandment of Christ, ( This do as often as ye drink it.) (...)
here implies a (...) as often as ye do it, therefore do it often; not once
in our age, as Baptism, never to be repeated; nor once a year and no more as
the Passover: but many times in our age, many times in a year, according as
the Saints in the Primitive Church understood the meaning of these words, and
not as some in these times, when Sophistry has wrangled out Divinity, would
seem to cavil; that because the words run ( Do it as often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup) therefore it is at their discretion to do it as
seldom as they please.

2. Their own necessity may persuade them, if they can be sensible of their
spiritual weakness and wants. Let them look inward, and see how great need
they have of many and often confirmations of their Faith, renovations of their
Repentance, of stirring up the graces of God in the soul, to add an edge and
eagerness unto all spiritual affections after holiness, to get unto
themselves the most powerful provocations unto obedience. Every one that has
grace knows how frequently the power thereof is impaired by temptations,
weakened by worldly distractions even of our lawful employments, and
over-mastered, by the force of sinful lusts: so that they must needs
discover a great deal of ignorance in their spiritual estate, that feel not
in their souls a pronenesse to affamishment, as well as in their bodies; at
least they bewray intolerable carelessness* that finding the emptiness and
leanenesse of their souls, yet neglect to repair often unto his holy Table
whereon is set forth the Bread of life, whereof when they have eaten, their 1 Samuel 30.12
spirit may come again, their hearts may be strengthened, their souls may be
replenished as with marrow and fatness.

Wherefore give me leave to persuade you to the practice of so needful a
duty, and withal to tell you of that fault, whereof this age is extremely
guilty. A very shame it is to compare the slacknesse of our days with the
forwardness of those primitive times of the Church, in the often celebration
of this holy Sacrament. Then it was administered almost every Lords day; now we
are fallen from fifty times a year, to once, twice, thrice, or for the
greatest part to four times in the year. It is true, that as in other, so in
this divine institution, Satan has done much by his malicious policy, to
corrupt men's hearts in the observation of it: When the Sacrament was
administered often, he brought it into contempt by the commonnesse of it; now
that it is administered seldom, thorough ignorance, it is abused and neglected
as unnecessary. I may not prescribe how often the celebration thereof is fit to
be used: our Church has partly left it to the discretion of her Ministers,
partly enjoined the solemnization thereof at the least See the book of Canons.
three times a year. She has seen the untowardlinesse of her children, who
must be compelled by Law to come in unto this feast, or else the Lords Table is
likely to stand unfurnished of guests.

A strange matter that men should need a Law to bring them to the Sacrament.
One would think that men's consciences should herein be a Law unto themselves,
and that there were no necessity to have a Statute for hungry men to eat, or
for sick folk to take physic. But here is the intolerable infidelity and
irreligion of our times; did not fear of Law and shame of the world prevail
more with many, than any benefit which they perceive is to be gotten by
frequenting the Sacrament, they that now come but seldom, would come never:
they have no appetite to this spiritual bread, their taste cannot relish this
Angels food, and thence the Table of the Lord is contemptible in their eyes,
and their very soul loatheth this bread of heaven.

I confess indeed, that persecution is a sharp spur to put men on upon the
diligent practice of all religious duties: and so it was in the Primitive
Church, that the bitterness of afflictions gave a sweeter relish to religion.
Nevertheless they must needs be ill nurtured, that will do nothing without
beating; and very strange it is that men should constantly wait upon the
service of God, when pain and disgrace terrify them from it, and then fall off
to neglect it, when honor, peace and liberty invite them to it. And what, my
brethren, had the blood of Christ a fresher taste in these first ages after it
was newly shed? had his sacrificed body a more fragrant smell inviting the
Saints like birds of prey, to fly from far with marvelous swiftness, unto
this dead but yet all-quickning carcass? Has it now, through tract of time,
lost that swetnesse wherewith hertofore it cheared both God and Man? No; it is we
have lost our senses, our faith, our zeal, our love. Christ's blood, like the
Manna in the Ark, putrifies not but endures for ever, to feed us also in these
last ages of the world unto everlasting life. That fountain which was opened in
his side, runs yet afresh, and has an everlasting virtue to cleanse us from
the leprosy of sin, and to cool the heat of a weary soul, inflamed with
sin and the fire of Gods wrath: only if we can be sensible of our thirst, and
that our hearts can pant after these waterbrooks, running amain unto them for
refreshing, when we are furiously chased by our iniquities following us at the
heels. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let us be admonished henceforward to
make conscience of frequenting the Lords Table so often as by fit opportunity
we may enjoy the benefit thereof, lest our lazy sloathfulnesse be at last
punished for a profane contempt of the precious blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This be spoken of the first duty in coming to the Sacrament; the next
follows touching that which is to be done about the celebration of it. Now
this is in general, A soleme commemoration of the death of Christ, expressed in
those words ( Do this in remembrance of me) and in those ( Ye show forth the
Lords death till he come.) Which words do summarily declare what was the end
and intent of Christ in instituting this Sacrament, and what is the duty which
he requires of every Christian in the solemnizing thereof; namely, That therein
we should make a perpetual commemoration of his death and passion unto the end
of the world, till he come again to judgment. Now this remembrance of the
death of Christ in the Sacrament, is to be taken in a double sense.

1. In opposition to the outward Elements and Ceremonies in this Sacrament.

2. In relation to those spiritual graces of the soul, which are to be
exercised in this commemoration.

In the former must be showed upon what our hearts and thoughts must be fixed
in the holy Sacrament; namely, not on the Elements and actions of the
Sacrament: but on Christ and his benefits; all the desires of our souls must
be toward him, and to the remembrance of his Name.

In the latter it will appear, how, and in what manner our souls must be
fixed on Christ; namely, not in a bare historical remembrance of his
sufferings, but in a powerful and gracious feeling of the virtue of his death,
working life and holiness in our souls.

Of these two points in order; and of the first briefly, which is this, That
our thoughts are not to dwell upon the outward elements and actions of the
Sacrament, but from them to be raised up to the meditation of Christ's
sufferings, and the benefits we obtain thereby.

Do this in remembrance of me, says Christ, i. e. of my death, and your
redemption by it: not, Do this for it own sake, looking no further than what is
visible to your eyes in the outward solemnity. Never was any Ceremony, legal
and Evangelical, appointed for its own worth, as if either God were pleased*
or man's soul^ edified in grace by such carnal observations. For God is a
Spirit, and will always be worshipped in spirit and truth: and man's soul is a
Spirit of a pure and immortal substance, which cannot be nourishd and
maintained in life and strength by any outward fading thing or action; but only
by that which is proportionable to its own celestial and spiritual quality.
Now this alone is the grace and favor of God, the treasury and storehouse
whereof is the person of our ever-blessed Mediator Jesus Christ, unto whom the
ancient church was directed in all Leviticall observations, to whom these
Evangelicall Sacraments do still direct us.

Wherefore you are again to be admonished, those especially of the younger
sort, That they do attentively observe what that thing is, whereabouts all
their meditations are to be employed in this sacred business. Remember that
here Christ crucified is all in all, in every element, in every action. When
thou see the Bread and Wine separated by consecration unto this holy use,
think on Christ ordained and fore-appointed by the Father from everlasting,
unto the accomplishment of our redemption by his bloud-shedding. When thou
see the Bread broken and the Wine powered forth, think on Christ torn and
rent in his precious body with stripes and wounds, pained even to the death in
his most holy soul, full of the wrath of God and indignation of the Almighty,
by whom he was smitten for thy sins, and plagued for thy transgressions. When
the Minister offers to thee the bread and wine, think on Christ given unto thee
of God freely, and giving himself unto thee if thou will receive him. When
thou receivest and eatest these elements, think on Christ, that living Bread,
that gives life unto thy soul, and by his merits preserves it from eternal
death. Knit thy heart unto him by the band of an holy faith, throw thy self
into his arms stretched out on the Cross to embrace thee; wash thy soul in
his blood, that thou may be clean; hide thy self in the holes and clefts
of this rock, from the stormy tempest of Gods wrath, that i^ may not touch
thee: put thine hands and thy fingers in his side, and the pr^nt of the nails,
and cry out with that blessed Apostle in the highest degree of all possible
rejoicing, MY LORD, AND MY GOD. This is the life of this holy Sacrament,
whithout which spiritual applications, all is but a dead and empty Ceremony.
Wherefore miserable is their error, who out of ignorance or a wrong opinion,
bend their senses and amuse their thoughts, only upon the things which in this
Sacrament are presented unto their bodily eyes, never looking up unto the
graces and merits of Christ, unto whom only these outward Ceremonies do point.
Two sorts there are guilty of this offense: 1. Papists, who, in this and the
whole frame of their religion, love to glory in the flesh, and do ate upon
carnal outward ceremoniousnesse; rest too much in the opus operatum, the work
done, without all power and life of holiness in the doer. 2. The second sort
are ignorant Protestants, of whom there be thousands that understand nothing at
all of the end and use of these mysteries, It is pitiful to behold the
demeanor of the ordinary sort of people at the Sacrament: they come thither
they know not wherefore, and they do there they know not what; they cannot
tell how to look, which way to turn themselves about any holy meditations:
many times their minds are like a clock that is over-wound above his ordinary
pitch, and so stands still; their thoughts are amazed at the height of these
mysteries, and for the time they are like a block, thinking nothing at all: or
else their thoughts fall flat on the earth to base and bodily things, yea some
in that wonderful simplicity, as to imagine they come thither for a draught of
sweet wine, and a morsel of finer bread: or at best they raise their thoughts
no higher than the Communion Table, thinking that if they have received the
outward elements* in a reverent manner, behaved themselves decently during that
action, forborne their worldly business before and after, tempered their
tongues from all uncivil speech, and demeaned themselves mannerly for that
day, then that they have done a right acceptable piece of service to God. This
stupidity of many, whether popish or clownish, cannot but be much commiserated
by all those, unto whom it is given to know any thing concerning the mysteries
of the Kingdom of God. To conclude this point, let us remember that admonition
the Church gives us in this business, calling on us with a Sursum corda, Lift
up your hearts, and let us answer in doing as well as saying, We lift them up
unto the Lord. Yea, be we always mindful of that general rule which Christ
gives his Disciples, when they, together with the simple Capernaites, hearing
Christ call himself [ living Bread] and [ his flesh Meat indeed] and [ his
Blood Drink indeede] were much offended at it, as an absurd impossibility;
Christ tells them they mistook his meaning, [ It is the Spirit, says he, that
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they
are Spirit, and they are Life.] Ioh. 6.63.

Thus you see whom we must remember, in, and by this Sacrament, viz. Christ,
and him crucified: In the next place we are to consider, in what manner this
commemoration is to be made, [ Do this in remembrance of me.] What? in a
bare recounting the story of his passion, amplifying the indignity of all
circumstances, in curio^s contemplations about every passage of Christ, from
the garden to the grave? Is this all? no, nor half: You must therefore here
remember a rule given by Divines, [That in Scripture words of knowledge, in
matters between God and Man, do imply the affections,] And as God is said not
to know the wicked, because he likes them not; so when we are commanded to know
God, to remember our Creator, etc. we must not streighten this precept unto
bare speculation of the Head, but extend it unto the holy devotion of the
Heart, and obedience of the Hand. In this sense must Christ crucified be
remembered of us in the Sacrament, not only as an object of our Knowledge, but
principally as the object of our Love, our Faith, our Hope, our Joy, our
Thansgiving, our Obedience. These and other heavenly graces are all to be set a
work, and employed about this remembrance of Christ in the Sacrament; and it
is the increase and exercise of these graces, that our Savior intended, when
he instituted this Sacrament, commanding us to observe it in remembrance of
him, and by it to show his death till his coming again. But that we may go a
little more particularly to work in this point, observe that there are four
principal graces that have a singular use in this holy business: they are 1.
Faith, 2. Repentance, 3. Thankfulness, 4. Love. Touching which, I would not
have you expect, that I should here handle them at large, by way of common
place: my purpose only at this time is to show you, what singular virtue may
be drawn from the meditation of Christ's death, for to quicken and increase
the life and power of all those forementioned graces. I will do this briefly,
desiring the younger sort especially, carefully to attend unto such general
heads of meditation as I shall propose, to the end their thoughts may have some
matter whereon to work, which otherwise will be too too wild, and confusedly
distracted.

1. First then touching Faith, Christ crucified is proposed unto us in the
Sacrament, as the object of our Faith alluring us to a firm belief in him,
upon these two strong persuasions:

1. That he is a Savior All-sufficient, having with him plenteous Redemption.
One that has paid the utmost farthing that could be demanded for our ransom,
having trodden the winepresse of the fierce wrath of the Almighty; and borne
upon his shoulders the whole burden of that vengeance, which would have sunk
our souls to the bottom of hell. A Savior that has utterly defeated all the
powers of darkness; and spoiled them, leading captivity captive: thereby
purchasing for us a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, but sure and steadfast
against all violence of our spiritual adversaries, even a stable and firm
estate in present grace, and an open and fair passage unto that immortality
and glory which shall be revealed. Wherefore justly has he in this Sacrament set
forth himself unto us, under the two elements of Bread and Wine, parts of one
complete and perfect nourishment: to assure us, that in his merits, there is an
absolute all sufficiency to bring us to everlasting life.

2. That he is a Savior freely given of God, and giving himself unto us. He
laid down his life freely, no man having power to take it from him: and
therefore he freely gave his flesh for the life of the world; and in the
Sacrament he freely offers himself to every believer, to be received and
embraced by him. Both these are strong motives to qu^cken our faith in
remembering Christ's death: for if either the greatness of the work of
redemption, and surpassing difficulty to save a sinner, should terrify us; we
know what ever it be, he has finished it: or if our unworthines should
discomfort us, we see that Christ stays not till we can deserve him; but as
he died for us when we were unworthy, so eve^ whilst we are unworthy he
offers himself to us in all the benefits of his death. Wherefore let us in a
lively faith fasten our eyes upon this Brazen serpent, lifted up on the cross
to cure the fiery stingings of sin: let our eyes, our thoughts, and our
affections be drawn after him, and learn we, as the Apostle exhorts, to trust
perfectly unto that salvation which is brought unto us. This for Faith.

2. In the next place is required the exercise of Repentance, to which there is
no provocation in the world more powerful, than the serious meditation of
Christ crucified. Two motives there are, which commonly best prevails with all
natures, to work in them sorrow for an offense; and they are both in this
matter most lively and vigorous.

1. Mercy wonderful and incredible to a desperate offender, beyond all hope
and expectation of his. When we were of no strength, when we were sinners, when
we were enemies, even then Christ in his time died for us, as the Apostle
notably aggrauates the death of Christ, Romans 5 6.8.10. How hopeless was the
state of us men being once fallen by our first transgression? and yet even in
the extremity of misery, how proudly and rebelliously did we carry our selves
against that majesty, whom we had offended? Yet then behold in God the riches
of all patience, gentleness and compassion: he is mindful of us, when we had
forgot both him and our selves; his merciful wisdom prevents all thought,
and care, and possibility in us of providing the means of our recovery. Now
where malice and unworthiness is thus overcome by goodness, certainly if
there be any spark of grace, of noble nature, of ingenuity left within us, it
cannot be but our hearts should be overcome with sorrow, for offending so
gracious a Master, and rent asunder with godly grief for the displeasure of so
loving a Father.

2. The horrible nature of the offense, which, when it is small, is slighted,
but strikes the heart with astonishment and confusion, when it is capital. Now
sin is of the worst deserving quality that possibly may be; and it appears
by nothing so much as the furious displeasure of God inflicted on Christ, when
he bare our sins in his body upon the tree. Trace him from the Garden to
Golgotha, and you shall see whole armies of sorrows ready to invade him, every
step he treads, the deeper he wades into a sea of blood and wounds, and
stripes, and waters of affl^ction; men and devils, yea and God himself fight
against him; he is forsaken of God, persecuted, despised, and scorned of all
the world, assailed and tempted by all the powers of hell, become the
astonishment of Angels, the wonder and amazement even of senseless creatures.
Ah, my Brethren were our souls in his stead, and did we feel but the least
part of that anguish which possessed and encompassed that holy person within
and without: how miserable might we judge our case to be? Blessed we are now,
that in this we feel it not: but yet we shall not be blessed always, unless
we can compassionate his feeling of it. Wherefore let us turn our thoughts
upon our crucified Savior, and looking upon him whom we have pierced, let us
as we are commanded, Zach. 12.10* (Mourn for him as one mourns for his only
son, and be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his
firstborn.) Let us see the cause of his sufferings to be in our selves, and
lament we for our sins that have slain the Lord of Life. And now let us
learn to acknowledge what a detestable thing sin is, which deserved so
horrible a punishment, that could turn the favorable countenance of the most
merciful and pitiful God, into frowns and fierce displeasure against his
eardely beloved Son, as soon as he beheld in him the person of an offender.
Shall the pleasures of sin be sweet to us, which caused Christ to drink of
the bitter cup, even down to the dregs? Shall we make a jest of that, that
made God angry in the greatest earnest that ever was? Seems that a light
thing in our eyes, that brought on Christ a burden so heavy, that it pressed
the blood out of his veins, the soul out of his body? Oh how would these
meditations dash in pieces the conceptions of lust in their infancy? How
mightily effectual would they be to mortify our corruptions, and crucify the
body of sin in us? Know this and remember it, that of all motives to
repentance, and preservatives against the infection of sin, there is none so
powerful, as continually in all places and employments, to bear about with us
in our hearts and meditations, The Dying of the Lord Jesus.

And this of Repentance: it follows that we speak of the third grace to be
exercised in this holy commemoration of Christ's death, which is Thankfulness.
A grace of singular use in this Sacrament, which thence takes its name of
Eucharistia, whereby it is frequently styled. Sorrow and joy must here be
mingled together; a sorrow for sin that deserved such sufferings, bu^ a joy
unspeakable and glorious, in Thanksgiving to Christ for his great mercy, in
taking upon him such sufferings. And great cause there is, we should be
thankful for the death of Christ in th^se three respects.

1. Because by it the greatest blessing that ever was, is purchased for us;
namely, pardon of sin, reconciliation with God, grace and glory.

2. Because there is on our part, the greatest undesert of it that may be. For
wherein was God beholding unto us? we were his creatures when we were at best,
and then he needed us not: we were his enemies when we were at worst, and he
had just cause to hate and punish us.

3. In regard of the infinite disproportion between us and Christ who died for
us; the just for the unjust, the Lord for the slave, the King for the subject,
the Creator for the creature. All th^se are forcible motives to stir up in us
a thankful rejoicing in the Lord our Savior, that has done so great things
for our souls. It should make our hearts break forth into blessings, and
thanks, and praises, admirations, and extolling of the wonderful favor he
has showed to the sons of men. Wherefore if it be possible, let us bring our
hearts in tune to bear a part in that new song which the Elders sing before
the throne of the Lamb, Rev. 5.9, 10. [ Thou art worthy to take the book and
to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God by
thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and have
made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the Earth.] And
for a sweeter harmony, let the Angels be admitted into this quire; with them
and the Saints, sing we as it is verse. 12. [ Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and blessing:] Yea, for a full consort, let us with every creature in
heaven, in earth, under the earth, and in the sea, sing as it is in verse 13. [
Blessing, honor, glory and power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. [And so much also of the third grace: the
last follows, which is

4. Love unto Christ, in a holy affection of the soul, carrying us with full
desire to the enjoying of him, and making us to prefer our communion with
him, before all things that in this world may challenge our dearest respect.
All those motives that stir up to Thankfulness, provoke also unto Love: the
smalnes of our desert, the greatness of the benefit, the gloriousnes of the
person, al are here in a singular degree, and for them Christ deserves our Love
in the highest degree that we can possibly show it in. Hence the Church in the
Canticles can find no names so fit whereby to call her Spouse Christ Jesus, as
these; [Him whom her soul loves, her Beloved, and her well beloved.] Its
admirable what pleasures she takes in describing and talking of his rare
excellencies; here is her full contentment, and the height of her joy and peace,
that she is able to say, [ My welbeloved is mine, and I am his.) Certainly,
my Brethren were our hearts truly spiritual, had our souls tasted how good
the Lord Jesus has been unto us, were our eyes opened to see him at the right
hand of God clothed with all beauties of holiness, glory, and majesty, it
could not be but that our sins, our pleasures, all the pomp of this world
would be most vile and despicable in our esteem, and nothing but Christ would
appear worthy of our Love, Delight, and Admiration.

These are those heavenly graces of chief mark, that receive life and
strength from the death of Christ, remembered in this Sacrament. And the effect
of them all is our obedience in life and conversation, that we should serve
him faithfully, that has bought us at so dear a price. This is the trial of
the truth of all those forenamed graces; when our faith works by Love, our
Repentance is approved by reformation, our Thankfulness and Love shown in
keeping of his Commandments. This is also the end of the death of Christ, who
has redeemed us from our vain conversation, wherein we lived in the lusts of
the flesh, that henceforth we should live unto him: who has delivered us from
the fear of our enemies, that we should serve him in righteousness and
holiness all our days.

And thus you see what it is rightly to remember Christ crucified, and to show
forth the Lords death in the use of this holy Sacrament, even to remember him
with believing, with penitent, with thankful, with loving, with obedient
hearts. Not to remember him in this sort, is to forget him; not to know the
virtue of his death in this manner, is to be ignorant of Christ crucified. An
excellent knowledge, but of all most difficult to be put in practice: It Is an
easy thing to turn the story into a tragedy, to make a Scenicall
representation of the death of Christ, as the Papists use to do on
Good Friday, or to compile a curious declamation of this subject, as Popish
Postillers and Preachers do in their Lenton Sermons. I discommend not
eloquence in so excellent a subject, words cannot be better bestowed than here:
yet there is an error to be feared, lest the tongue only be employed, where
the heart chiefly should be busied; and there is danger also lest such high
discourses prove not unlike those of Tragedians, made more to breed admiration
of the Poet, than attention and observation of the fact. Thus much I may safely
say, that the meditation of the death of Christ requires not so much strength
of wit and invention, as the exercise of all holy and zealous affections of the
soul to the increase of piety and obedience. There cannot be a greater
incongruitie, than to discourse of so holy a subject, with an unhallowed heart;
to amplify the indignity of Christ's passion, and yet not be moved at all to
remorse of conscience for sin; to rail on Judas and the Jews, and yet
swear by Christ; to descant upon his Blood and Wounds in passionate discourse,
and ye^ to tear these, and trample upon that inexecrable blasphemies: to talk
of Christ, and yet not to live as a Christian; to relate to others the story of
his crucifying by the Jews; and in the mean while by obstinate impiety and
profaneness to crucify him again unto himself. This is far from being a
Preacher and a follower of Christ: to such let me speak in Salvians words a
little altered, Christum legunt and impudici sunt, Christum audiunt and
inebriant^r, Christum sequuntur and rapiunt: Sal. de Gub. l. 4. and 5.
haec ergo etiam nos qui Christiani dicimur, facimus. What might one of
Mahomeds disciples here say, Ecce quales sunt qui Christum c^lunt; see the
servants of the crucified God, see them luxurious, profane, intemperate,
blasphemers, scorners of Religion: it must needs be, will he then say, they have
a bad master, that are such evil servants: Si enim bona discerent, boni
essent, and, Sancta a Christianis fierent, si Christus sancta docuisset. Thus
whilst some prof^sse themselves Christians, they are a reproach unto Christ, a
disgrace of the Gospel, and shame of all Religion. Wherefore I beseech you
persuade your selves of this, that you never know Christ crucified aright, till
your hearts can bleed in sorrow for sin, as his bled for satisfaction, till
your Faith embrace him, your souls rejoice in him, your love be fixed on him,
till his death have caused the death of sin in you: till then, know that you
are but ignorant in this great mystery of Christ's sufferings. And now you are
to go unto the Sacrament, take time and care to think of these things; so may
you go with comfort, and depart thence with profit unto your souls.

The Apostle after he has declared the true institution of the Sacrament, and
the right end to be observed in the celebration of it, namely, The perpetual
commemoration of Christ's death, in the words before spoken of; he goes forward
in the next place, to show the great danger that men run into by perverting
this holy institution, and abusing of it to wrong ends and purposes. They
commit a great sin, which draws upon them great judgments both temporal
and eternal, unless by diligent examination of themselves, the sin be
prevented, and the punishment removed. This the Apostle does from the 27. verse.
unto the 33. verse. The resolution of which words is in brief thus: They
contain. 1. The sin of unworthy receiving, verse. 27. 2. The means to avoid
this sin, which is due examination of ones self before the Sacrament, verse.
28. 3. The punishment which they incur, who commit the sin, and neglect the
means; now that is damnation or judgment, verse. 29.
This punishment as it is temporal, is amplified three ways 1. By experiment
in the Church of Corinth, wherein God made it appear by judgments he inflicted
upon the^, how much he was offended at the profanation of the Sacrament, verse
30. 2. By the true cause of those afflictions, the not-judging of th^mselves,
verse. 31. 3. By the right end wherefore these judgments came upon them, which
was to bring them to repentance for such their abuse of Gods ordinance, lest
otherwise going on they fall into further condemnation, verse. 32.


At this present I shall speak only touching the sin of unworthy
communicating at the Lords Table whereof the Apostle speaks in these words.

Verse 27. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

In this verse we have two general parts: 1. The sin it self, unworthy
receiving the Sacrament, in those words. [ Whosoever shall eat, etc.
unworthily.] 2. The quality of this sin: it is no small fault, but a bloody
offense, it is to be guilty of murder, and that of the best man that ever was,
Christ Jesus: [ He shall be guilty, etc.]


Of these in order* First let us enquire what it is to eat this Bread and
drink this Cup, i. e. to receive this Sacramen^ unworthily (...).
Unworthiness in receiving the Sacrament, may be taken in re^pect either of the
person, or of the manner of receiving. Unworthiness of the person is not here
meant, for so it is apparent that no man can come worthily to the Sacrament,
forasmuch as the best of men cannot deserve of God the smallest blessing of
this life, much less so great a favor as to enjoy the benefit of the Word and
Sacraments to everlasting life. Wherefore in our public Leiturgie, we do
justly acknowledge, [ That we do not presume to come to this Table, trusting
in our righteousness, but in Gods great mercy; and that we are not worthy so
much as to gather the crummes under the Lords Table] much less to sit thereat
as a guest.

Unworthiness then is here to be taken in regard of the manner of receiving. A
poor man may be unworthy to be set at a Kings table, but yet he may there
carry himself worthily, i. e. in such a decent behavior, as is agreeable to
the reverence and majesty of the place in which he is. So we are unworthy to
sit at this Table, yet when God invites us thither, we may carry our selves
worthily, i. e. in such a holy disposition of our hearts, and reverent
demeanor in our outward actions, as God requires of us in so sacred a
business. The poverty, blindness, lamen^sse, and the like, is not objected to
such as come to the Marriage Feast, Matthew. 22. but the matter that is
questioned, is the want of a wedding garment. Now you know, that he which
makes a solemn sumptuous feast, cannot but take it as an indignity and
dishonor offered to him and his cheer, if any be so rude as to thrust in
himself among the rest, in his ragged and vile apparel. Let us then see how
we may offend in the manner of celebrating this Sacrament: We shall know this
by that which the Apostle reproves in these Corinthians. They had many faults;
among them they are here taxed for dissentions, and quarrelsome factions
amongst themselves, verse. 18. for prophanenes, in coming to the Sacrament with
as little reverence as they did to their Love Feasts; nay with less, having in
those feasts first distempered themselves, verse. 21. for excess in their
Love Feasts, and thence coming drunken to the Sacrament, verse. 21. lastly, for
pride and disdain in despising the poorer sort, that had not wherewithal to
carry matters in so brave and frolic manner as themselves, verse 22. Thus they
cared not with what minds, nor in w^a^ manner they came to the Lords Supper,
making the Sacrament an occasion of debate, hatred, riot and luxury, which
should have been a cause of modesty, peace, humility, sobriety, and love. The
case was too too bad with them* their disorders being so foul, that the
Apostle professes in express terms, that this their coming together could
not be called a celebration of the Sacrament: [ This is not, says he, to eat
the Lords Supper] verse. 20. Now what the Apostle reproves in them in regard of
the forenamed particulars, holds true by proportion in all communicants, in
regard of other the like disorders: whence in the general, observe this
conclusion,

[They that celebrate this Sac^ament in any other manner, with other minds,
for other ^nds, than Christ intended in his institution of it, they observe it
unworthily.]

For this is a general rule touching every part of Gods worship, We must serve
God, no^ as we think fit, but as he has appointed; God must be Judge of his
own honor: and in all matters of substance, there is nothing befitting and
aggreeable to his good liking, but those things that he hat^ commanded,
observed, and done in that manner which he has prescribed. And therefore in
this Sacrament, it is not what ends and fancies we have of it, but what manner
exercise of Religion God has intended by it, that is acceptable. If this be
neglected, the Supper of the Lord is not celebrated worthily, but unworthily
profaned. But not to stay upon generalities, let us see how many ways the
Sacrament is thus profaned. 'Twere endless to reckon up all particulars:
wherefore observe that there are generally three sorts of people who do
unworthily receive it;

The 1 Ignorant. 2 Superstitious. 3. Unreformed in life.


1. The ignorant, who observe it of fashion, by course of Law, and custom of
the Country; because they are now at years of discretion, and must do as
others do: but in the mean time know not a syllable what it is, or
whereabouts they go. Examine them, they cannot tell you what a Sacrament is,
what the outward signs are, what the graces thereby signified are, what the
ends and uses of a Sacrament be: If you ask them these questions, they
understand you no more, than if you spoke in an unknown language; or if they
can answer you out of a Catechism, it is by rote; they do not know a ^ot the
meaning of what they speak: and you may perceive it plainly, do but a little
vary the question from that which they find in their books. These when they
come to the Sacrament, are merely passive in all that business; there their
bodies are, there they sit and see, and do as others do, but for their
m^ndes, they cannot tell which way to set them aworke in any meditation. Were I
to speak to an auditory that is not learned, this fault were much to be urged.
It deerves much pity, to see abroad that some are not taught, and more
detestation to behold, that for the greatest part, they will not learn their
duty, in this or any other part of Gods worship. It must needs much affect the
heart of any one that is Christianly disposed, with sorrow and indignation, ^o
see those that profess themselves the servants of Christ, know as little of
him, as those that are his open enemis. Barbarians and Turks know the name of
Christ, and so do these: but for their duty in the worship and obedience,
they both know much alike. This and more might be said, were it not in this
place, where knowledge does abound. Nevertheless to deal plainly, let no man
flatter himself, nor another. Let us be well advised, that none of us be
ignorant amongst so plentiful, so easy means of knowledge. A great fault it
is in any, in us much greater, who if we be not better than others are, and
therefore worse, because we ought to be better. Vbi sublimior praerogativa,
mayor est culpa, says Salvian: and he gives a good reason of it, because
Praeter eam deformitatem quam vitium in se habit, ipso sublimitatis nomine
notatur. Ignorance in matter of Religion, is of it self a notable deformity in
every one that calls himself Christian: but in the learned, their profession
makes it much more visible and odious. Those that be free from this fault, are
also free from touch of this reproof; but if any may justly blame himself for
being ignorant of this duty, let me bespeak him in Salvians words, Non a mea
sibi hoc lingua dici aestimet sed a conscientia sua; It Is not I, but his own
conscience that reproves him. And let such a one carry hence this lesson to his
study, That he that's ignorant, must needs be wicked, even because he is
ignorant: nor is it possible, but he shall fail in his duty, whatever he go
about. For the Sacrament, it is plain, an ignorant receiver is an unworthy
receiver, because as the Apostle speaks afterward, verse 29 [ He discerns
not the Lords body,] he knows not what ends and uses are to be made of this
holy Sacrament. We must know that we now have no altars to the unknown God, no
worship of a known God in an unknown manner; we must understand both whom,
and how we worship, else our service of him is not (...), a reasonable service,
as the Apostle would have it, Romans 12.1. but a blind aim, and brutish
devotion.

2. The Superstitious, who use the Sacrament quite in another fashion, and
other intents than Christ ever appointed it. In this kind those of the Romish
Church have intolerably perverted this holy Institution of Christ, both Priest
and People. There Is scarce left any shadow at all of the first Institution,
all is perverted and corrupted with fond and impious abuses. Never was there any
device more blasphemous, and more ridiculous too, than that abomination of the
Mass. Wherein we have a Supper for the living, turned into a sacrifice for
quick and dead, a Minister into a sacrificing Priest, a Table into an Altar,
Bread and Wine into very flesh, blood, and bones, eating of bread into
devouring of a living man, a cup of wine turned to a draught of man's blood, the
remembrance of Christ's death, into adoration of the outward elements, all the
simplicity of Sacramental Actions metamorphosed into strange gesticulations,
crouching, ducking, crossing over the bread, the wine, the Priest, the people
whispering, murmuring, washing, shifting from place to place, from this to that
side, dipping the bread in the wine, mingling the wine with water, lifting up
the bread over the Priests head, keeping it like a Be in a box, carrying in
procession, bringing it to sick men's bed-sides to keep thence evil spirits,
carrying it into the field in war to defend from gunshot, with a world of
other ceremonies, trinkets, and fopperies, devised without any ground in
Scripture or reason, as may be seen in their books and practice. By this
means they have turned the Sacrament into a Stage Play, or Masking show: where
the poor people are spectators only, understanding nothing at all, but feeding
their eyes by gazing upon the outside of empty ceremonies and idolatrous pomp.
It is a thing somewhat admirable to consider whence, and how so great impiety,
should spring from so plain an Institution as this of the Sacrament is, and
how in course of time it should so far degenerate into such a strange mixture
of foolery and iniquity: but as in Gentilisme, the devil having drawn men from
the knowledge of one pure invisible God, he easily pulled them into infinite
errors, both to frame unto themselves many gods, and to conceive most absurd
opinions of them; so here having once perverted the simplicity and sanctity of
Christ's institution, he has by degrees (every age adding some new trick or
other) brought it at last unto that Mass of Idolatrous abominations, which
Gentilisme it self could hardly equal; and Christianity, but that it sees now
come to pass, could never have suspected the possibility of it. We are highly
to praise Almighty God, that has delivered us and this whole land, from so
great a corruption; and that we have the Sacraments celebrated in our Churches,
in that pure simplicity of substance, and that reverend decency of ceremonies,
as is agreeable to Christ his first Institution. Nevertheless, we ought yet to
be admonished, that even we take heed of superstition, that in our secret
thoughts we incline not too much unto that conceit of Opus operatum. Let none
think the the bare outward actions and elements are able to sanctify him, or
that he is the better for them, and the ground he treads on for that day; that
if he go fasting, he has the more, if having eaten before, he has the less
benefit, or that even the very receiving of the elements, is of great virtue to
a sick man. I confess it is so to him and all others, if with a pure heart and
faith unfeigned, it be rightly received; only this would be looked unto, that
Protestants in profession, be not Papists in some part in their opinion,
conceiving too highly of the outward work, taking little heed to the inward
virtue. Against the superstitious use of this and all other parts of Gods
service, let us remember that rule of Christ [ In vain they worship me,
Matthew. 1^ 9.
teachi^g for d^ctrines men's traditions.] If Scribes and Pharisees, Papist o^
Protestant, deprave Gods ordinances, or make new of their own, teaching them
for doctrines, whereby, and wherein to worship and please God (We speak not
now of lawful ceremonies, that touch not the substance of Gods worship) in so
doing they teach an error, and worship God in vain.

3. The Unreformed, who happily know what belongs to the Sacrament, and use it
not with any superstitious conceit, but yet they use it without any amendment
and reformation of life. This kind of profanation is of all most to be feared
amongst us, where knowledge of the nature of the Sacrament, takes away all
superstitious opinion in the use of it. Now by the Unreformed, I mean those in
whom the use of this holy Sacrament, breeds not a proportionable increase of
grace and sanctity. You heard heretofore that the exercise of many Christian
graces, was intended in this commemoration of Christ's death, and where that is
wanting, all the rest is naught worth. The Sacrament is appointed for our
nourishment in grace; where we grow not by it, it is a sign this food was not
digested, but vomited up again. Where Faith, Repentance, Thankfulness, and
Obedience are not increased, there Christ crucified was not remembered, but
forgotten in this Sacrament. Where holiness thrives not by so holy a means,
profaneness must needs be very rank: guilty of this great fault were these
Corinthians. They came to the Sacrament, but with what mind? They were
uncharitable, contentious, proud, despising the poor, and, which is worst of
all, they came drunken. They are registered for it, verse. 21. Who would think
it possible else, that there could be such profaneness, that a man, when he is
drunk, would venture to come into the Church, and to the Sacrament? Such a one
was Judas, that came to the Passover, and was, or would have been at the
Lords Supper, with a mind full of treason and covetousness. Such are all they
that come, not having their hearts at all touched with remorse for their
sins, or if for the present they be somewhat moved, yet they presently fall
into all their former sins again. For such as come with a resolution to hold
on in their sins, it is manifest that they profane the Sacrament extremely.
For whereas in the Sacrament we make public profession of our obedience to
Christ, giving up our names in his honorable service, by taking on us this
badge thereof, and so eat this Bread and drink this Cup, in a thankful
remembrance of his death, whereby that great blessing of remission of sins is
purchased for us: who now can believe that they do this heartily, who in the
mean time disobey Christ's commandment, despise all holiness, continuing with
delight and wilfulness in those sins which Christ died to expiate? Is this
the use we should make of Christ's death? [ Shall we continue in sin^e, that
grace may abound?] The Apostle makes the answer, [ God forbid.] How shall we
live in sin, when Christ is dead for sin, and we with him should be dead
unto sin? as the Apostle argues, Romans 6. Its therefore but a mere mockery of
God, for men in the Sacrament to make show of what they intend not at all.
Others come happily with a good meaning to do well in the general, but this
resolution holds not longer than a day or two, or a week: afterward they are
as bad as before, yea somewhat worse by their re^apses. The one sort make
Christ a patron of their sins, thinking they may more sec^rely serve Satan,
under the protection of Christ's livery. The other make the Sacrament a payment
of the old score, that they may the more freely run on upon the new; the
pardon of the former sins, is unto them a license for lewd practices to come.
Between both sorts, a world of people there is that strangely profane this
blessed Sacrament, never using it to any increase of piety in their souls. The
same men they came unto it, the same they depart thence, only herein still the
worse, because not amended. Were they proud before? they are so still: were
they covetous before? they are never the more liberal unto the poor members
of Christ Jesus, for all that Christ has bin so franke-hearted, as to bestow
his heart-bloud upon them: were they voluptuous before they went? they still
follow the same pleasures with all greediness: drunken before, and drunken
still: swearers before, and swearers still; despisers of Gods service and true
Religion, scoffers at Christian piety, ignorant, unbeleeving, unfaithful,
unthankful, impenitent, envious, malicious before they went to the Sacrament,
and they are the same men still. They have indeed been at the Sacrament, and
there they profess openly to be of the number of those that [ Do truly and
earnestly repent of all their sins, that are in love and charity with their
neighbors, that intend to lead a holy life, following Gods commandments, and
walking thence-forth in his holy ways,] they there seem to confess [ that
they are heartily sorry for their misdoings, that the remembrance of their
sins is grievous, the burden of them intolerable:] yea they go further,
promising all amendment, when they say, [ Here we offer and present unto thee
O Lord our selves, our souls, our bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively
sacrifice.] Be not here good words now? but what is the effect of all these
prayers and protestations? Look upon them, you shall see nothing at all
performed of that which was spoken: there is no alteration in them; they are
still the same men they were. What Jeremy spoke unto those false-hearted Jews,
Ier. 42.20. [ Surely ye dissembled in your hearts, when ye sent me unto the
Lord your God, saying Pray for us unto the Lord our God and according to all
that the Lord our God shall say declare unto us and we will do it,] may be
applied unto these men; questionless they thought not of what they spoke, or
spoke what they did not mean, when they thus professed before God and his
Church their repentance and resolution for obedience. No, those were but words
of course: if the heart had intended what the tongue uttered: it had not bin
possible for men to tell God a lie unto his face, in so serious a matter. Was
indeed the burden of sin intolerable? was the sorrow for it hearty and
earnest then? and is yet the practice of the same sins pleasant, easy, and
full of contentment? Is any man so mad to thrust his shoulders under that
weight which he knows to be insupportable? And what is now become of all that
sweetness, of the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, in pa^doning that which wa^
past? was it never felt at all? or is it so soon forgotten? or may be so
easily recovered? Is his love so little worth, as thou will part with it for
every toy? or is it so common and cheap, that a fair word or two may win it?
It is not c^edible, that those who have indeed washed their garments in the
blood of the Lamb, and made them white, would so qu^ckly d^file them again,
had they been of a right breed, i. e Sheep of the Lords flock, and not Swine
of another Heard. Wherefore now let every one of us descend into his own
heart, and try how the case stands with his soul: if his conscience tell him
that he is as bad this year as he was last, as unreformed after, as before
the Sacrament, that his heart is as full of evil thoughts his mouth of
unseemely, unclean, and cursed speaking, his life of careless and irreligious
practices as ever, let him conclude with himself, That hitherto he has eaten
this Bread, and drunk this Cup of the Lord unworthily; most shamefully abusing
that to profanenes and impiety, which God has appointed for the exercise and
increase of holiness and true devotion.

Hitherto of the Sin it self, how, and by whom it is committed. In the next
place we must consider of the quality of it: It Is very heinous, and they that
commit it, [ are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.] A very hard censure
of a fault that seems not to be very great. What? to profane the Sacrament,
shall it be counted murder and bloud-guiltinesse? an abetting and consenting
to the damnable fact of Judas and the Jews, in crucifying the Lord of Life? A
very horrible offense. But here not much out of the way, let us learn one
observation that may be of use to rectify our judgments in this and other the
like matters: It Is this,

[The quality of Sin is not to be measured by ours, but by Gods Judgment of
it.]

As the heavens are above the Earth, so are my ways higher than your ways,
and my thoughts above your thoughts, says God, Esaias 55.8. It Is true in all
things, and it holds in this also about the nature of si^ne; [God sees not as
man sees, he judges not as man judges.] It Is as natural to man to extenuate
sin, as it is to sin: to make a small fault of a great, and no fault of a
little one. Our love to the pleasure of sin, blindes our judgment in
discerning of its filthy nature. Whence issued that notorious depravation of
the Law of God, by those favorable and flattering interpretations thereof,
which the Pharisees of old brought in, and those of Rome still maintain, yea
naturally every one of us allow them in our hearts. Alas, what great harm can
there be in it, to be rashly angry, when a man's urg^d to it? to call our
brother fool? to look on a woman with some ill desire and no more? to swear
by Jerusalem, by the Temple, the Altar, by ones Head, this Hand, this Light, or
such other little oaths? these be small matters, venial sins, and why
should we be so nice, as not to think that the Pharisees were in the righ^;
leaving out such petty matters, as not forbidden by the Law? True most men
would think so; but our great and only Doctor, Christ Jesus, whom we ought
to hear, has taught us another lesson, not to judge any thing a toy and
trifle, that breaks Gods Law, and brings the soul in danger of hell fire. See
Matthew 5. For a man, whose calling requires it, not to reprove his brother, when
he sees him run into an ill co^rse, and by loving rebuke to reclaim him,
wo^ld be interpreted by most for a courtesy, rather than an unkindnesse, Why
should he meddle, and put his friend into melancholy, provoke him to anger and
dislike of him, with many pretenses? See now what God judges of this
kinde-heartednesse, he ca^ls it hatred of our brother in plain terms, Levit.
19.17. [ Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy neighbor and not suffer sin upon him.] Saul had a fair excuse,
one would have thought; the people must have a little content in the spoil of
the Amalekites* and God must ^ave a sacrifice too: if then something of the
best be spared from destruction, will Samuel take it so hainously? Yea that
he will, and God also, who by Samuel tells Saul, that however he slight the
matter, yet this his offense is Rebellion, and that as bad as Witchcraft, and
that his transgr^ssion is Iniquity and Idolatry; and, that which will grieve
Saul more than the loss of Gods favor, he shall lose his Kingdom for it, 1 Samuel 15. Its a small thing to eat an Apple: true; but it is a great matter to
disobey God, and if Adam transgress, though but in taking of an Apple, he
shall dye for it, and all his posterity. Nothing then is small, whereupon
depends the sanctity of Gods commandment and our obedience. Now here you must
remember, that there is a double reason, why we our selves are not equal judges
of the nature and quality of sin.

1. Because we are the parties accused, and impleaded as guilty of sin; and
therefore we cannot be equal arbitrators in our own cause, where love of sin,
and of our selves must needs make us partial.

2. Our judgment is not the rule of righteousness, but only Gods will and
Gods law. He is Judge, and the only L^^-giver that must save or destroy,
acquit or condemn. He is the person offended that only can without partiality
interpret the quality of the offense.

Let this then be a caution to make us look about us and advise what we have
to do when we deal with sin. We know not what we go about when we meddle
with it; it is like entermedling with State businesses; a small matter, as a
word misplaced, a circumstance not observed, throws a man before he is aware
into a Praemunire or Treason. Power is in the hand of a King, and it is he must
interpret how far he takes himself wronged by the attempt. So in sin,
when we meddle with it, we meddle with God our chiefest Sovereign Lord* our
allegiance to heaven is streight-waies called in question, every offense in
this case is Capital, and incurres the punishment of rebellion. Wherefore it
concerns us so to think of sin, as God speaks of it, and in this point
less than in any, to lean unto our own wisdom, but to be ruled by his. All
our Distinctions, Extenuations, Qualifications, Rejections upon other, good
Intentions, with a thousand such other shifts, will vanish away into horror and
utter confusion, when God shall lay righteousness in the balance, and censure
our sins according to his most impartial and exact judgment. Thus much I
thought it not amiss to observe by the way; seeing the Apostle seems to go
far in censuring this sin of unworthy communicating, to be no less fault
than guiltiness of blood: that we may not think the Spirit of God here
speaks by an Hyperbole; but that we may learn, as here, so in other things, to
bring ou^ judgments to his, and not to qualify his by our Rhetorical devices.

We must now proceed to enquire what the Apostle means, when he says, that
such as eat and drink unworthily, are guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord. By the body and blood of the Lord, he means the Death of Christ Jesus,
whose body was crucified, and his blood shed by the Jews. But here the
question is, how such as profane the Sacrament are guilty of Christ's death? I
answer, Guiltiness of a fault, reaches partly to the Actors, partly to the
Abettors of it; such as give counsel and aid to the doing, or consent to it
when it is done. Those are the principal, these the accessory; and in all crimes
that are capital, the same punishment is due unto both. Now the Jews were the
principal actors, and so in the first place guilty of Christ's death, at whose
hands his blood innocently shed shall be required* But others may be abettors
of this their fact; as both the posterity of the Jews are unto this day, who
blaspheme his name, and account him justly put to death by their fathers, as a
malefactor and deceiver, for which cause they still feel the vengeance of God
upon them, according to their fathers curse; [His Blood be upon us and our
children;] and also many Christians are, who professing the name of Christ, yet
deny the virtue of his death and suffering. But is any Christian so wicked as
to allow of that fact of the Jews in crucifying Christ? Yea that there is,
even all those that use this Sacrament of his body and blood unworthily, they
allow it, and by so doing are guilty of his death. But how can this be so?
Thus: He that profaneth and abuses this holy Sacrament, does in a special
manner offer contempt unto the body and blood of Christ. Forasmuch as the
Sacrament is appointed for this very end, to be a sign and visible
representation of the death of Christ, wherein his sufferings and the benefits
of them unto us, are in lively characters figured out before us, and, as by a
seal, confirmed unto our use and comfort. Wherefore, when this most solemn
and holy commemoration of Christ crucified, is celebrated in any other manner,
than what is agreeable to the dignity and greatness of so excellent a person,
so excellent a blessing as Christ crucified is unto us: then, however we may
think we honor him by our outward service, yet Christ takes himself to be
dishonored, and his death despised. Other ways there are whereby dishonor
falls upon Christ; as by disobedience to his Gospel, despising of his
Ministers, etc. but this is an immediate contempt of him, when he is
dis-regarded in that very thing which sets forth his death and sufferings: an
indignity in this kind, is a villeny, that's offered properly and immediately
to his sacred person and precious merits. As in a like, but much inferior case,
when the picture, seal, arms, chair of Estate of any King, are violated, the
disgrace done to them, redounds immediately to the contempt of the Kings
person, and the doer of it is punishable, as if he had attempted violence upon
the King himself. So he that unworthily uses this Sacrament of Christ's
death, must needs offer contempt to his death it self. Now no man can in any
sort dis-esteeme the death of Christ, but he in part consents to the
treasonable conspiracies and practices of Judas and the Jews, in putting him
to death, as if it were a matter not ill done, o^ not so ill done as it was
indeed. Yea, he that slightly passes over the death of an innocent person,
making a small matter of it; he either makes the innocent to be indeed nocent,
one that has justly deserved to be slain, who being slain deserves so little
regard, or at least he makes himself nocent, breeding a just suspicion that
he was or would have been consenting to that man's death. You see then, that it
is no small matter to profane the Sacrament; but a very heinous offense, which
brings us within the guilt of that horrible sin of murdering the Lord of
Life, the thought whereof should make us to tremble, and to detest both them
that did it, and our selves too, if we be accessory to it. This should make us
very careful and wary, how we approach unto the Table of the Lord, seeing as
the benefit is great if we rightly receive this holy Sacrament, so the danger
is as great if we receive it unworthily, because thereby we become guilty of
the death of Christ. I would I might persuade you seriously to think of this
point: much rashness and impiety in coming to the Sacrament would be
prevented by this means, if men would duly consider how fearful a sin
they commit when they come unpreparedly and unreverently thereunto. All the
difficulty lies in this, if they would but believe, that this were such a fault
indeed. The Apostle we see is express, [Whosoever eats unworthily is guilty,
etc.] but yet men can hardly assent to this. What? are they not baptized into
the name of Christ? are they not Christians professing the Gospel of Christ?
do they not receive the Sacrament in honor of Christ? and will ye yet judge
them such beasts and miscreants, that they are consenting to the death of their
Savior? They were not worthy to live an hour, if they did bear an ill mind
toward him, they could wish him accursed, whosoever loves not the Lord Jesus;
for themselves they love him, and honor him in their hearts: if any Jew or
Turk should revile him, they will fight and die for his sake; yea if any
affirm that they hate him, they will spit in his face, and have him by the ears.
Here now be great words, one would think; and men that are thus resolved, can
we judge them otherwise than the very friends of Christ? We judge them not:
but let us hear what the Scripture says, [He that eats, etc. unworthily, is
guilty, etc.] Guilty he is not, but by consent; consent he would not unless
he did despise and hate Christ; this he cannot do and be his friend: yet
this he may do even then whilst he eats this Bread and drinks this Cup with a
good meaning as he imagines, in a honorable celebration of the memory of
Christ's death. Wherefore that such men may not deceive themselves with vain
imaginations, I will commend unto their observation one conclusion more that
arises from these words, and then I have done. It Is this,

[Many that profess Christianity, thinking that they love and honor Christ,
may yet hate him as much as the Jews did that crucified him,]

The point is clear from the Apostles doctrine, whereby we see, that men may
think to honor Christ by receiving the Sacrament of his body and blood,
whilst yet at that very time they may so far dishonor him, as to be
accounted enemies and haters of him, such as stand guilty before God of
shedding the blood of that his only Son. No Christian, you may be sure,
would be so furiously mad, to go to the Sacrament with such an intent, therein
to profess his malice against Christ, and bring upon himself the guilt of his
blood: but see how bad it is to trust our own good meanings, and how easily we
may commit a fault, whilst we verily think we do avoid it. The heart of man
is wicked, many times making profession of love, when it is full of secret enmity
and hatred: withal, man's heart is so strangely deceitful, that it may
sometimes hate, where it directly intends to love. The truth of this is
certain, and of singular use in judging truly of our spiritual estate. I
will but briefly touch in so much as concerns our present purpose, Exodus 20.5.
God threatens to punish Idolaters to the fourth generation. Yea but why should
God be angry with h^s friends? they honor God, and would not for a world rob
him of his glory; it is not the creature, but him they worship in the creature:
their piety is so great toward him, that willingly they would always have him
in their minds, and what better than an image to put them in remembrance? They
desire much to have their weakness helped, and a lively picture is a singular
matter to stir up devotion; besides; their reverence of this majesty is so
much, that in very modesty they will not presume into his presence, but by
meditation of a Saint or Angel; and he that honors Gods friend, does not, they
hope, dishonor God. Thus plead they of the Romish Church, and the like
pretenses had the ancient Idolaters among the Gentiles and Jews, thinking
verily that in thus doing, they had demonstrated much love toward God. But
does God take it so? no, in his wrath and jealousy he will punish them and
their posterity, as haters of him: for did they love him, they would have kept
his commandment, as it is ver. 6. worshipping him as himself had prescribed,
not as themselves listed. And this hatred which Idolaters bear toward God, is
most manifest, when at any time God shall send his Prophets and Ministers, to
charge them with his commandment, and require them upon their allegiance to
forsake such their courses, then does the malice and bitterness of their
hearts break forth outragiously in all despitefull contempt and cruel usage
of the Lords messengers, as all the stories of the Scripture do testify.
Again, there is no doubt but the Scribes and Pharisees, thought that Christ used
them very hardly and uncharitably, when he told them that they allowed the
deeds of their forefathers, in murdering the holy Prophets of the Lord,
Christ, if he would, might see well enough that they were no such men, nor so
bloody minded, their doings testify the high opinion they have of the Prophets
[ for they build the tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of the
righteous [let their own words be witness of their dislike they have of such
foul facts, [ If we, say they, Mat. 23.29, etc
had been in their days of our fathers, we would not have been partners with
them in the blood of the Prophets.] No, would not? then it is likely a Prophet
shall find honorable entertainment among the Scribes and Pharisees, if he
live in their days. Now see, it is a Prophet that speaks unto them, that great
and only Prophet, whereof all others spoke; namely, the Messiah: if they honor
any, they will sure honor him. Nothing less, the very same murderous mind their
fathers bare toward the old Prophets, the same do these their children carry
toward this Prince of Prophets; witness that of Christ, Ioh. 8.40. [ Now ye
go about to kill me, a man that has told you the truth, which I have heard
from God.] And as much kindness would these men have showed to any of the
Prophets, had they been then living, and as eager in rebuking those vices for
which Christ taxed those times. Wherefore, Christ knowing the ungracious temper
of their hearts, full of all hypocrisy and wickedness, justly pronounces
them guilty of their fathers fault, and tells them in plain terms, that [
the blood of all the Prophets, shed from the foundation of the world, shall be
required of that generation,] as you may read, Luke 11.47. and seq. Again,
should these Pharisees and other Jews, who crucified Christ, have been told
before hand, how vilely and maliciously they would use the long expected
Messiah, whom they so much honored and desired after: with what indignation,
think you would they have defied him that should thus have called their
loyalty in question? Well, Christ is come amongst them; do they receive him
lovingly? No, now their hot love to the Messiah is turned to hatred and
despite; they vilify him by base reproaches, and conspire against him by all
means possible. What Is now the cause of this? did not Christ manifest himself
even unto their consciences what he was? Yes, but here is that marres all; 'twas
another manner of Messiah that they looked for, a magnificent King, under whom
they might domineere over all the world, live in state, and enjoy their
pleasures; such a one they expected, such a one they loved: as for Christ, he
was a poor man in show, and little hope they saw of great matters by him;
besides, he was, as they thought, too too eager in reforming the monstrous
abuses of the Jewish Church; he was, as Malachy prophesied of him, [ like a
purging fire, and like Fullers s^pe, sitting himself d^wn to try and refine
the silver, yea even to purify the sons of Levi, and to purge them as gold
and silver, that he might offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness,]
Mal. 3.2.3. He falls foul upon the ambition, covetousnes, hypocrisy, and other
great enormities of the Pharisees, Scribes, and chief Rulers; he spares none,
but freely reproves every offender, and smites at every corruption with that
sharp two edged sword, which goes out of his mouth. This enrageth the corrupt
minds of the Jews, and quite dasheth all their imaginary love and respect,
which they seemed to bear to the Messiah* the honorable and good affection
which they had conceived toward his person, is turned into the very gall of
bitterness, when once his person appears accompanied with such circumstances
and quallities, as are utterly distastefull to their false opinions and corrupt
affections. So that now, as the Prophet Malachy had foretold, so it falls out,
[ Who may abide the day of his coming, and who may endure when he appears?]
Mal. 3.2. These Jews could not abide it with any patience, nor can any whose
hearts are like unto theirs.

Now the cause of all this, why men indeed may hate that good they seem to
love, is from that perpetual enmity which is between the flesh and the
spirit, corruption and grace. A bad man that's unregenerate, may for some
respects profess much love and liking of the Gospel and of Religion, and he
may for the present speak as he thinks: but in the mean while he is not
aware, that still there remains in him a root of bitterness, deeply fastened
in his nature, which till it be plucked up, makes all religion distastefull to
him. There Is in him an habitual corrupt temper of his heart, that stands
utterly opposite to God and Goodness: and let it be but once stirred by the
preaching and application of the Word, you shall see presently, that the man
who made show of much love and affection to Christ and his Gospel, now boyles
in fierce rage and inward malice against them, his heart swells with very scorn
and disdain to be brought in obedience under the commands of the Word; and now
he testifies to all the world, that he cares not a button for God, for Christ,
for Prophet, for Apostle, for Minister, for all or any of them: they are none
of his friends: that will cross him thus in his contentments, and he will be
an enemy to all that thus control him.

Wherefore you see how dangerous it is to trust our selves, wherein without great
heed taken, we may be Christ's bitter enemies, when we think we are his dear
friends. Let this be observed by those that are apt to think; Oh if Christ
lived on the earth, or the Apostle Paul, or some other of those famous men were
alive to preach unto us, we would honor them with all possible reverence, we
would kiss the ground they trod on, chain our ears to their lips, follow
them, hear them, observe them, do as they bid us. Fond conceits of men that
know not what they say: such was the opinion of the Pharisees touching the old
Prophets [ Oh had we then lived, etc.] such was the rich man's dream in hell, [
Oh, father Abraham, but if one come from the dead.] We know how vain these
imaginations were, and will always prove. Men admire virtue when they see it
not, and the old proverb is true, Dead men do not bite: The Prophets are
dead, Christ is gone to heaven Paul preaches no more, their names are now most
honorable; it is a credit to be their Disciples, and as for their writings, we
can choose either not to read them, or not to apply them. But did we indeed s^e
the holiness, hum^lty, zeal, severity against sin, strictness of
conversation, still living and breathing in these men: were Christ again in
that his humbled estate, or any of his servants to preach unto us out of our
Pulpits, should they with their accustomed boldness and zeal freely rebuke
the disorders that are amongst all sorts of men, the Atheism, Infidelity,
Profaneness, Pride, Luxury, Oppression, etc. that are now in the Christian
world; Christ must be crucified again, and scorned as much as ever, Paul
should again be accused by many a Tertullus for a pestilent fellow, and mover
of sedition throughout the world, Act. 24.5. Amaziah would make a complaint
upon Amos to Iereboam, that Amos has conspired against him in the midst of the
house of Israel, and that the Land is not able to bear all his words, Amos
7.10, Ahab would again call Eliah a troubler of Israel, and his enemy, because
he reproves him of his Idolatry, covetousness, and murder, 1 King. 13.17. and
21.20. Look what measure they found in their times, the same they should
find. The reason is manifest from that of Solomon, Prove. 29.27.
[the rightious is an abomination to the wicked] impiety and ungodliness
abhorres the fellowship of holiness and purity; they that do evil will hate
the light: and that of Christ stands good for ever, Ioh. 7.7. [ The world
hates me, because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil.] It
hated him then in his own person; it hates him now in his Word, Sacraments,
Ministers, and Ambassadors, all which are by ungracious men, yet calling them
for Christians, derided, scoffed, contemned and trampled upon by a thousand
indignities: and hate him it will still, so long as Christ by his Word and
Ministers shall rebuke men of all their ungodly doings, It is not possible that
men should ever love those, in whom as Salvian speaks, Nihil vident suum,
quoniam Dei totum; De Gub. l. 8.
they see nothing agreeable to their own humors, because all things agreeable
to Gods will.

To conclude then, let us not think, that because we are baptized, profess
Religion, hear the Word, receive the Sacrament; we are therefore such as do
truly love and honor the Lord Jesus Christ. No, let us go upon a surer
ground, and that is that most certain and infallible rule which Christ gives,
John 15 14. [ Ye are my friends if you do whtsoever I command you.] He loves
him truly that loves to obey him, and for his sake will be content to do any
thing he bids him* be disobedient, and pretend what thou will, thou art an
enemy of Christ, and Christ an enemy of thine. Think of this seriously as
many as God shall touch their hearts to go unto the Sacrament, that they may
first purge their souls of their inward rebellion, and natural hatred of
Christ, lest whilst they in the Sacrament seek for life by his death, they
become guilty of his death. And remember, that as the blood of Christ sprinkled
on the soul by an holy faith, speaks better things than the blood of Abel,
namely, for mercy and pardon to be given us; so where it is despised and trodden
under foot, being counted as an unholy thing, it cries much ^owder for
vengeance than did the blood of Abel, and deserves a sorer punishment than any
transgression against Moses Law, Heb. 10.28, 29.

Thus we have seen the nature and quality of this sin of Unworthy partaking
at the Lords table: it follows that we go forward unto the means which the
Apostle here prescribes for the avoiding of this sin, and that is diligent
examination of a man's self before he come unto the Sacrament. This the
Apostle sets down, verse. 28. in these words, Wherefore let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.

The words need not any curiosity in the division or interpretation of them.
The sense is plain: Here Is a duty commanded unto us, that's Examination of
ones self; and here the time or particular occasion that requires it, that's
Before we come to the Sacrament. It Is not put to our discretion, the words are
imperative: Let a man examine, let him eat; He must do both, but first
examine, then eat. The practical conclusion that hence issues out is this.

[It is a necessary duty of every one, first, to examine himself before he
presume to come to the Lords Table.]

In unfolding unto you this point of most excellent practice in Christianity,
let us ascend a little from the particular to the general; first touching upon
the nature, necessity, and use of Selfe-examination considered at any time,
then descending to the explication of this duty, with its particular relation
to the Sacrament.

To examine ones self is in brief, to take a true survey of our spiritual
estate in grace. This done by comparing our present condition, what we find
in our selves, with the Scriptures. The Scriptures are they that supply unto us
all Articles to be inquired of; telling us what is good, and required of us,
what evil, and forbidden to us. They acquaint us with the nature of every
sin, of every grace, making a full discovery of the kinds and properties of
both. When now a man shall question himself upon such interrogatories as
these; Such and such sins are forbidden in the Word, and they that love and
live in the practice of them, are wicked and graceless persons. Am I one of
them that delight in doing such things? Again, Such and such graces and
duties are required of all thos^ that are truly good and godly men, Have I
those graces? Do I practice those duties? The conscience being thus examined,
will return a true answer to every question, Yea or Nay. Whence it will be
easy to give a true censure of our spiritual estate, how matters go with us
in regard of grace or corruption. This is, in few words, selfe-examination: the
necessity of which duty will appear unto you by consideration of a double
consequent that follows; one upon the neglect, the other upon the practice
thereof.

1. The neglect of this Christian duty, breeds ignorance of a man's spiritual
estate: a fault very easy to be run into, but be ye assured, of very great
danger to those that take no notice of it in themselves. It Is true, that man's
heart is deceitful above all things, and it is very difficult to know it
thoroughly; besides that, love of sin and self-love makes us unwilling to
see our own foul corruptions, or to enquire after such virtues and graces, as
we know the want of them would but grieve us, and we suppose withal, that if
we had them, they would be but a burden to us. Wherefore we are apt to cast a
veil upon our understanding, and take up our rest in an ignorant persuasion,
that all is well with us, because we list not to know what we want. Which
resolution how dangerous it is, will soon appear to any that can understand
what mischiefs these are; namely, hardness of heart, presumptuous boldness
in sinning, continual danger to fall from bad to worse, and a fearful
preparation for all future terrors. There is no Millstone or Adamant so
unyeelding to the stroke of the hammer, as is that heart which has once for
all taken up this conclusion, All is well with me. Counsel him, admonish him
threaten him out of the Word, Lapidi dixeris (in another sense) he hears you
not, you may hold your self quiet, he is well and warm, what do you
disquieting him? Discover unto him the danger of such courses as he follows;
that if he continue therein he runs upon his own eternal ruin and
destruction, you move him not a jot, except it be to choler: in which, for your
courtesy, he will return such an answer as this; Sir, shift for your self,
care not for me, I trust to do well enough for all that you say to the
contrary: and so he goes on presumptuously, till at last he perish in his
great folly. Besides, such a careless regard of ones spiritual estate,
throws a man every moment upon a thousand unexpected dangers. He that knows
not how bad he is assuredly he cannot tell how bad he shall be. We walk among
snares, and temptations are laid for us, which way soever we turn our selves
about: to prevent these, there needs great wisdom and watchfulness; he that
has neither, can he hope to escape taking? When the prudent are oftentimes
caught, what shall become of rash and heedlesse adventurers? Surely experience
tells us what is the issue of such wretchlesse and ill-advised men: when God in
his righteous judgment shall suffer them to fall upon some fearful
temptations, that fit their secret, but to themselves unknown corruptions,
they take fire at the first stroke, and break out into those vile impieties,
when even themselves aforetime could not think of without detestation. But yet
there is a misery worse than all this: when once God shall awake such a sleepy
conscience, and tear off that covering wherewith sloth and security had
^^uffled and overspread it. When by some notable judgment fallen on a man, God
shall quicken in him the remembrance of his former iniquities, or when
sickness shall seize on him, summoning him to death, and death to judgment,
when he shall see his sins set in order before him, and large rolls of
indictment written against him, within and without full of sins and woes:
think you not that a man has then rewarded evil unto his soul, by plunging
himself into those perplexities, which watchfulness in time would have
prevented? Oh what a maze is such a man in, who has so many reckonings to be
made up; when new and old must be reckoned for at once, when so many thousand
thousand debts are to be cleared, whereof there is not so much as one poor
farthing discharged? Had it not been wisdom to have looked into these things
betimes, again and again to have set all reckonings to right, to have gotten
the debt-booke crossed, the obligation cancelled, and a discharge sealed up
unto our consciences in the blood of Jesus Christ? This had been a safe
course; and not like desperate Bankrouts to let all things run at adventure.
Then might one have rejoiced in sickness, and triumphed in death, being
delivered from all those terrors, which utterly overwhelme those careless
persons, who in their days of peace and health never remembered God or
themselves.

This and more also if more can be, is the danger of this duty of
examination, neglected: the benefit that comes by the

2. Practice of it, is on the contrary, a distinct and clear knowledge of our
spiritual estate. By this proof and examination of our selves, we shall know
plainly whether we be in the Faith, whether Christ be in us, yea or no; whether
we be dead in sin, or alive to righteousness: we shall see what graces we
have, what we want, what corruption we have overcome, what do yet overcome us,
what godly duties we practice, what we omit, where we do well, where we
fail. This will discover unto the whole temper of our souls, what evil
affection is strongest in us, in what thing we are aptest to sin, that so we
may be the more ^eedfull to prevent a danger: again, what graces are weakest
in us, what most useful for us, that so we may get these, and strengthen
those. This particular distinct knowledge of our selves, will bring forth these
three blessed effects.

1. Wakefulnesse and tenderness of Conscience. He that is thoroughly
acquainted with the state of his body, tha^ knows what dish is hurtful, what
healthful to him; he that has found what the danger of a surfeit is, will be,
you may be sure, wary of his diet and course of living. Nature learnes us this
care over a crazie body, and grace will teach as much watchfulness over a
sinful soul. He that has taken thorough notice of the great distempers of
his heart, how quickly enticed by every temptation to practice any evil, to
neglect any good duties: He that has found how ougly and fearful the face
of sin is, when it is presented in its true shape, stripped of all its lying
pleasures or profits, and accompanied only with Gods hatred and curse. He that
has found what it is to venture upon sin, with the loss of Gods favor, the
joy of the holy Ghost, the peace and sweetest repose of a good conscience,
blame him not, my Brethren, if he be afraid of sin. Do not censure him for
foolishly precise, if he often ask, and inquire, and doubt in many
particulars of his practice, not daring to hazard himself where happily he
sees others go on confidently. Nay, blessed is this tempter of the heart, if
that of Solomon be true, [ Blessed is he that fears always.] By how much
more odious is the sin of those, who in their hearts despise this tenderness
of conscience, and with their tongues rail, revile, and curse it, deeming it
the sign of a silly effeminate mind to be afraid of any sin, especially of
small offenses? But ever let those that bear the faces of men, and name of
Christians detest such impiety, that, tramples under foot with scorn and
disdain, the most precious comfort of a Christians soul, a Good Conscience.
Those men will then see their error, when God shall cool the heat of their
high blood, and rebete the edge of their furious resolutions, by casting them
upon their beds of affliction, and scourging them with the rod of his
indignation. Then they will confess that a good conscience, softened by grace,
and purged by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, from the guilt of sin,
is more worth than millions of those unlawful pleasures, wherein only, they
sometimes thought, true contentment was to be found.

2. Humility. He that shall often look his face in the glass of the Law of
Liberty, which will not make him one jot fairer or fouler than he is, but truly
discover unto him all his deformities; such a one will not be forward to fall
in love with his own beauty. When he sits down to try himself by this Law,
he finds therein all perfection of holiness commanded but not the thousand
part of this holiness and goodness in himself. He reads in the Law large
Catalogues of sins forbidden, upon pain of Gods eternal displeasure, and in
his own conscience he finds the guilt of all or most of those transgressions.
When he scans his best works, he finds they fall far short of that faith,
zeal, sincerity, and perfect charity, wherein they ought to have been
performed. This examination lets him see that he has little whereof to be
proud; and now what ev^^ others may think of him, he knows so much evil, and
so little good by himself, that he cannot think highly and honorably of
himself. Let him be despised, reviled, reproched as base and vile, it is no
corasive to him; for why? he abhorres himself more than another can despise
him, and is more vile in his own esteem, than he can be in another
reproaches. Thus when he looks on his graces, he sees Gods glory: when on his
sins, his own shame: which breeds in him all humble affections of
thankfulness to God, that of bad has made him good: and carfulness in
himself that of good he may become much better.

3. True Peace and Comfort in life and death, Often reckoning (says the
Proverb) makes long friends. It Is never truer than in this matter: He that
often calls himself to a strict account, judging himself for his
transgressions, weeping over them in godly sorrow, never ceasing till pardon be
obtained; this man alone possesses his heart in peace and comfort. He knows
God is at peace with him, and therefore nothing can p^t him to much fear or
trouble: which makes him with much quietness and resolution expect the
approach of all adversity, of sickness, of death, of judgment. Again, whereas
the joy of a man's heart in this life is, that he shall be saved in the life to
come; this can never be sound where no examination is had, upon what reasons
and certain grounds this hope is built. Many have fell short of that they
looked after, because they expected heaven, when it did not belong to them. A
severe trial of our selves will prevent this error, and give exact notice of
the truth of such graces, which God has given us as pledges of future glory,
that so shall our re^oycing in the hope of salvation be full and perfect.
Lastly, our jo^ and peace will be by this means cons^ant, whilst through
frequent examination of our hearts, and watchfulness over our ways, we shall
prevent many sins that would wound our consciences, and pierce our hearts
through with many sorrows.

Use. You see the duty; but all this is nothing worth the knowing, unless you
will practice it. The practice, I confess, is hard: men being loath to see that
by themselves which they like not; and Satan, as loath men should do that which
he knows would do them good. For man, it is impossible to him to persuade the
heart; but oh thou, that Blessed Spirit of Grace, which speak to the heart
of the unwilling, to make them willing to every good work, persuade your hearts
and mine to the serious practice of this most Christian duty. My beloved
Brethren, I cannot but be earnest in this matter, because, who can but see and
bewail the backwardness and general neglect of us all in this point? It Is a
shame to see the carelessness of most, that seek to know all things but
themselves. They enquire after all without them, nothing within them. Their
minds are as ill set as their eyes, they can turn neither of them inward.
Speak I this of the unlearned, or of the learned also? I would I did not of
these. But it is no breach of charity to say, that there are many among us, who
know the Histories of a thousand years past, that yet cannot tell you the
particulars of their own lives; men well acquainted with the mysteries of Arts
and Nature, but utterly ignorant of the secrets of their own souls. How many
are there amongst us, that can say with David, Psalm. 119.59. [ I have thought
on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies?] Nay, we have a thousand
matters to think on all the day long, the night too, the week, the year: but
who sits down, and thinks on himself, questioning thus with his own heart;
What am I? What do I? How live I? Such a course I follow, is it good and
lawful? Such things I do not, are they my duty, yea or no? Is God my friend?
Am I his? What hope have I of heaven? Say I dye to morrow, to day, this very
hour, where is my assurance I shall be saved? What Apology can I make against
the accusations of Satan and my conscience? Will Christ be mine Advocate when I
shall stand in judgment? Do I grow in grace, or do I decay? Does my Faith,
my Love, my Obedience, my Knowledge, increase or decrease? Am I better this
year than I was last? What sins have I conquered now, that held me in
combat then? What graces have I obtained now, that I had not then? Do we thus
commune with our own hearts, upon our beds, or in our studies? Surely when God
looks down from heaven upon us in our several employments, taking notice of
our busy imaginations and enquiries; may not he say to us, as he spoke by
Jeremy to the Jews, Ier. 8 6. [I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not
aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every
one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.] Yea this
inquiry, What have we done? seems only to be wanting among so many
questions, as are every day scanned by us. Hence it comes, that most of us,
when we are brought to the trial, and required by others or our own
consciences, to answer distinctly touching the estate of o^r souls, in matters
between God and us, we shuffle and shift it off, with an, I think so, I hope
well, I persuade my self all shall be well, I shall do as well as men of my
rank: but in the mean time, all these hopes and good opinions go upon no
clear and certain grounds at all. Me thinks that admonition of the Apostle,
Heb. 3.12. should shake us out of this lazy humor [ Take heed, Brethren,
lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the
living God.] Lock to it, a man may be stark naught, and yet think himself
good: it stands us in hand to go upon sure proof in so weighty a business,
and not upon blind surmises and groundless presumptions. Here therefore let
me exhort you to observe two directions.

1. To take all opportunities that shall be offered us for the exercise of
this duty. We are not at all times alike disposed to this; there are special
occasions that fit us for it. Many times one sad accident or other turns home
our thoughts to our selves, and makes us see what we are in other men. The
loss of a dear friend, the sound of a passing bell, the sight of a dying man,
has a strange virtue many times, to compose a disordered heart, putting it
into an excellent calmness to attend any religious employment. Sometimes a
Sermon has set us to rights, and sent us home quickened with much holy
affection more than ordinary. Sometimes vacation from all business, lends many
a silent and still hour. Sometimes a fit of natural melancholy and
pensiveness, makes us apt for inbred speculation. Sometimes a wakefull bed
calls upon us to examine our hearts. Many such occasions God offers, if we
were wise to see them, and willing to make use of them. Much were gained in
this, and all other Christian practices, by the observation of such seasonable
opportunities* if our folly and sloth did not rob us of so great a benefit.

2. If opportunities will not be had of their own offering, then make some.
Spare an hour in a week, or a day in a month for this business. Certainly
it is strange how we post over the time of this our short pilgrimage: we eat
away one part, sleep away another, idle away a third, and of the remainder God
has by far the least part. Do we spend two hours of four and twenty in
religious services? Nay one were a fair allowance with most of us. What shall
we say? Is not heaven worth the having? or may a man so easily get thither? or
must God give it us when we seek not after it? Let them blush for shame of
their intolerable carelessness, who have so much, or so little to do, that
they never could spare day or hour for these meditations, to set themselves of
purpose upon a thorough examination of their own hearts and lives. It Is
singular profaneness for a man that h^th a God to serve, a Soul to save, a
Heaven to hope for, a Hell to fear, Sins to be avoided, Graces to be gotten*
yet not to find an hour spare to think of these weighty affairs. Tell me
not thou have a calling, a study, many businesses that require thy presence and
diligence, and thou can not intend all. Intend thou the chiefest; and that is
Religion: Diligence in a calling, knowledge of arts, skill of languages; in a
word, Learning will never bring a man to heaven; it is Religion must do that.
That is good in its time and place, this only absolutely necessary: When love
of learning and preferments tell thee it is needful thou be a scholar, let
love to God and thy soul make answer, it is more needful thou be a Christan:
care for that, but not before this. Moreover, know this, that convenient
seasons wisely chosen and spared from civil employments unto religious
exercises, never hinder but bless all other our affairs. And persuade thy
self now of this truth, which one day thou shall not choose but acknowledge,
That those days and hours which are spent in prayer, in fasting, in
examination of thy heart, and such other exercises of repentance, will bring
thee more true peace and comfort upon thy death ^ed, than all other times of
thy life besides: Wherefore be wise, and redeem the season: and thou that in
thy busiest employments, can every weeks, every day, find a spare hour for
to talk with a friend, to sport, to do nothing, to do evil; save this
waste, and turn it to a better use, and let God have that small part, who
deserves all. Beloved, let me heartily entreat you, to reserve to your selves
sometime for these purposes. I will stint no man and I think, I shall
over-burden none, If I should persuade each one to set apart from all business
an hour or twain in a week, a day in a month, for this spiritual exercise.
Our great negligence, gives occasion of despairing, that we shall never equal
those rare patterns of holiness, which this and other ages have commended
unto us; who thought it no weariness, every night to scan the actions of the
day, every week, month, and year, to make surv^y of what had been done in
that time. Their industry was blessed, and they enjoyed the fruits thereof, in all abundant increase of graces and comforts, and the world cannot but
acknowledge it. Let us follow them, though we cannot overtake them; and we
also, according to our endeavor, may expect a blessing too, in all increase of
grace and peace unto our souls.

Thus of this duty in general, as fitting to be used by a Christian at all
convenient occasions: let us come to consider of it, as it is a special
preparation before the receiving of the Sacrament, when by no means it ought
to be neglected. Whosoever will eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup,
must first examine himself.

This 1. Excludes from the Sacrament all such, as thorough natural or casual
impotency, are not able to examine themsels: as Children, Fools, Madmen.

2. The necessity of this practice, leads us to enquire wherein this
examination does consist, that every one may know how to discharge himself
therein. In general, the sum of this trial, is, Whether we come worthily to
the Sacrament, or no. Now to make us fit and worthy partakers of the Sacrament,
there are required in us (as heretofore has been showed) diverse spiritual
grace, whereof whosoever is destitute, he certainly profanes this holy
ordinance, and by unworthy receiving, makes himself guilty of the Death of
Jesus Christ. Wherefore we must know what those graces are, and whether they
be in us in truth, yea or no. There are chiefly these Graces required in a
worthy receiver, Faith, Repentance, Charity: touching which we are to enquire
after some certain and infallible rules, whereby we may be assured, that we
have or want those graces. This I shall do briefly in every one of them.

For the trial of our Faith, whereby we firmly rest our souls upon the
promise of salvation in Christ, we have these two certain marks to discover
the truth of it unto us.

1. Equality of Obedience unto all Gods Commandments: True Faith has alike
respect to every word of God. He that truly believes any one part of Gods
will believes the rest also; because he knows, all is of God. Whosoever
therefore shall say, That he does this good work, or leaves that ill
practice, out of Faith in Gods Word, because he believes Gods commands,
prohibitions, and threatenings in such and such particulars; this man tells an
apparent lie, if his eonstent endeavor be not the same in all other
particulars, wherein his Faith and Obedience stands engaged unto God, as
deeply, upon as strict terms, as in those few things that he observes. This
point has been heretofore more at large handled in its proper place; and
therefore now I do but name it. Let it always be remembered as an infallible
trial of that Faith which is sound and sincere. Look we then every man into
his life, and take we good heed to our ways, whether they be strait or
crooked: If thy practices be uneven, that thou obeyest in some things, not in
others, taking liberty to transgress, where pleasures, profits, or any
predominant carnal affection craves service and satisfaction at thy hands,
doing just so much of Gods will, as may stand with thine own and other men's
good liking: In this case, thou must seek for true Faith, for as yet thou have
it not. But if thy courses be regular and uniforme, that in all things thou
unfainedly endeavourest to bring thy will to Gods will, offering thy hearty
obedience to every thing that he commands thee, to things that cross thee and
the world, as well as that content either; not caring who be offended, so God
be pleased by thine obedience: In this case, thou may rejoice in that thou
have a sure testimony in thy self, that thy Faith is without falsehood and
hypocrisy.

2. Trusting on God in all temporal matters. Gods truth is the same in
promises of this life, as in those of the life to come. Wherefore he that
affirms, that he believes undoubtedly God will be gracious to his soul,
according to his merciful promise in Christ; if he tell true, he must also
believe undoubtedly, that God will provide for his bo^y, according to those
loving promises, which he has made in matters of this life. He then that
being placed in low estate, seeks by indirect means of bribery and flattery
to climb higher, disdaining to wait on the provident hand of heaven, which
will soon find a fit advancement for him, when he is fit for it: He that is
in poverty, and will grow rich, or that is rich, and will become mighty by
fraudulent and unjust practices; He that is wealthy, stored with sufficiency
in temporal blessings, yet still cares and fears, lest he should want, and
fall to beggary: He that dares not be liberal to the poor, for fear it should
impoverish his estate: He that in adversity makes flesh his arm, putting his
trust in his purse, his wits, his friends, making haste for his escape by all
unlawful shifts, leaping the wall, not staying till God open the prison door:
He that dares not trust God with his children, fearing their miscar^iage,
except himself see them well provided for: all these and the like have not
learned as yet, what it is truly to believe the promise of merc^ of Christ
Jesus, when as they dare not take Gods word for smaller matters. It Is certain
he does not indeed trust God with his soul, that dares not trust him with his
estate. But when in all occasions and conditions of this life, a man can
patiently wait on God, using lawful means, committing the success to God,
preparing himself with contentedness for every event, however God shall
dispose of matters: this confident and quiet resolution* flows from the
steadfast apprehension of that glorious and rich mercy, which God has
vouchsafed to his soul: which makes him rest assured, that all things needful
will be supplied in season for the relief of body and estate. This for the
trial of our Faith.

The second Grace to be enquired after, is Repentance; which we may describe to
be, A spiritual sorrow for sin joined with a true hatred of it. There Is
inward grief for the fact, and the offense thereby given unto God: And there is
inward hatred or aversion of the heart, from the foulness and corruption of
sin remaining in us. This change of the affection is wrought in true
Repentance. The proper marks whereof are expressed by the Apostle, 2. Cor.
7.11. We cannot run over the particulers, let us take the general sum,
whereunto they may be cast; and that is, Amendment: This is a sure mark that
will never fail: he that in truth dislikes and sorrows for his sin, he
will endeavor to amend it. They are always joined together, Repent and Amend
your lives. He that can confess sin, speak against sin, and weep for
sin; yet after a while return freely to the practice of sin; believe him
not, there is seven abominations in his heart: he loves sin in his very soul,
even then when his tongue and his eyes seem to proclaim his detestation of it.
There may be, I confess, a relapse into the same fault, thorough much
infirmity and violence of temptation: but a willing continuance in an ill
course, and true Repentance, are utterly incompatible. Wherefore this trial is
easy; see what reformation there is in the li^e; if when thou have been
reproved by the Word for such faults, as thou know thy self guilty of,
thine heart has smitten, and thy soul been humbled within thee with that
sorrow, which has brought forth a full resolution and constant endeavor of
Amendment, then may thou be truly called a Penitent Convert; but if for
the present thou did cry God mercy, and afterward hold on still in the
same ungodly practices, then reckon thy self to be as thou art, an Impenitent
and Obstinate sinner. This of Repentance. Next follows.

The third grace to be inquired into, and that is Charity. This is a large
word, and has reference sometime to God, sometime to Man. Charity or Love
toward God, is not properly that grace which here we understand. It Is true,
the heart of man ought to be replenished with heavenly love unto God and
Christ, in all spiritual exercises; and especially in this Sacrament, wherein
their love to him is so graciously revealed. But the trial of the two former
graces, will quickly show what true Love of God there is in us: He that Obeyes,
Believes. He that Amends, Repents. The very same, Obedience and Reformation,
are the touchstone of our Love to God, according to that infallible Canon set
down by our Savior, Ioh. 14.15. [ If you love me, keep my commandments.]
He that will not do what God would have, he hates God and Jesus Christ at the
very heart, let him make, never so great shows of love unto them. But we pass
from this, to that Charity which properly comes here to be enquired after, viz.
that which respects man; which in general, is that affection of the heart,
whereby we wish good unto our neighbor as to our selves* and are willing, in
what we are able, to do him that good, we would have done to our selves in his
case. This affection is branched by the Apostle Peter, 2. Pet. 1.7. into two
parts; 1. Brotherly Kindness, and 2. Love. That's more particular, respecting
man as a Christian, made one of the household of Faith, and of that blessed
number of those, whom Christ is not ashamed to call Brethren. This is more
general, respecting man as a man, made like unto us in one communion of
Nature. Let us see what may be the trial of our Charity both ways.

1. Of our Love unto the godly. The proof hereof is this: If it be
indifferent, without respect of Persons; if it be constant, without respect of
Times. He truly loves a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, because
he is such, that can find in his heart to place his entire affection any
where, where God has placed his, be he stranger or acquaintance, mean or
mighty, honorable or base: it is all one, if God have cast his love upon him,
that's sufficient to make him worthy of any man's love in the world. Does his
estate alter, and falls he into disgrace with the world, into persecution, into
poverty? Charity fails not for all this. It Is not affliction shall divide
between Ionathans soul, and the soul of David. Religion ties no such loose
knots between Gods love to us, or our love one to another. Nor tribulation,
nor anguish, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor the
sword, nor death, nor any thing can separate us from the love of God our
heavenly Father; and how then should these things work in those, that are his
children, a breach of affection one toward another? But now on the contrary
side, He that loves Religion in a rich, gentle, or nobleman, but sleights it in
a poor and mean man: he that loves the company and commerce with those that
are Religious, because they are affable, of fair and pleasant conditions, men
of excellent endowments for learning, policy, etc. because able to do him a
good turn or an ill, or in regard they are such as will deal truly, and not
cozen him: he that can look strangely upon a good man in adversity, turning
him off with a few cold words, when he seeks for some help at his hands: he
that of many children has some truly Religions, yet in dividing his estate,
has no respect to Grace, to honor that with a special blessing: he that in
a marriage desires Religion only as over-weight to so many pounds of gold;
such men's love unto Religious persons is merely counterfeit, and no better
than plain dissimulat^on.

2. Of our Love that's common to all men. Among other arguments of this
Charitable affection, we have these two that are infallible, whereby we may
proceed in this trial.

1. When a man can truly grieve in the Evil, and heartily rejoice in the Good
that befalls our neighbor. This is a sure mark of a charitable mind, when a
man can truly grieve at their afflictions, pity them in their decays,
losses, disgraces, sicknesses; but above all in their Sins. When a man can
visit them, counsel them, comfort them, reprove them in love and mildness,
and pray heartily for them. Again, in such good things as befall them, if we
can unfainedly rejoice in them: in their graces, their civil virtues, their
learning, their reputation amongst men, their places of preferment, with the
like. If we can wish them well to thrive with those good things, and desire
that they may do much good with them. If we can speak well, and think well
of them, because God, the Church, the State has use of them, what ever
relation they have to us; yea especially, though their credit seem to obscure
and hinder ours. This is true Charity, like that of Moses, Number. 11.29. [ Would
God that all the Lords people were Prophets.] Is he Magistrate, Minister,
Scholar, etc. as good or better than I am, Would God not he alone, but all
others were so too, that amongst the good, I were the meanest. But on the other
side, privily to rejoice in the evils of other men, to repine at their
prosperity, to be displeased with our neighbor for being equal, or better
than our selves, and half angry with God for making him so; these be symptoms
of a bad mind, wherein malice, envy, and spite, have eaten up all loving
respect unto our brethren.

2. A mind willing to pardon offenses done to us, and to seek reconciliation
where we have given them. This is a very hard matter to put in practice men's
minds are so full of pride, scorn, and malice, that they cannot stoop to
others: they count it cowardlinesse to put up a wrong done them, and baseness
to acknowledge an injury done to another. Wherefore they resolve to take no
wrong, to do no right. This is far from Christian Charity, which is always
accompanied with a patient, peaceable, and humble mind. We see what men will
do, in case they have offended their dear friends, whom they much respect;
they rest not till by just excuse, or plain confession, they have reconciled
themselves, and won their loves again. Why will they not do so toward
others? It Is because they love them not, nor care for their love; and therefore
they are at a point: if themselves receive hurt they will right themselves if they
can; if they do hurt, let others look to it, and get satisfaction where they
can. But that heart which is charitable, preferres peace and good will amongst
men, before all such wild and furious resolutions. He will do for man what
God has done for himself, who has freely pardoned him far greater
offenses; and, though he were the offended party, yet first sought
reconciliation with him. Thus much for the examination of our hearts touching
these several Graces. In conclusion I will but name two questions, and answer
them in one word.

1. What is to be done, if, after examination, we find our selves unworthy?

I answer, They that find their wants of these Graces, and acknowledge it,
mourn for it, pray for the redress of it, these are indeed worthy, though not
so worthy as they would be. But for those that neither have these Graces, nor
care to have them such are utterly unworthy. Dogs they are, to whom this
Bread is not to be given.

2. What if men find themselves fit at one time, need they make no other
trial at other times?

I answer: Yea, they must always examine their hearts. The Precept is
general, not limited to this or that time. Sin is deceitful, and our hearts
may be hardened by such carelessness. A godly man is not so privileged, but
he may receive the Sacrament unworthily, coming to it in a careless and
profane manner. And therefore these Graces must ever more be set aworke, and
fresh means still uses for their increase.

We have done with the sin of Profanation of the Lords Table, in Unworthy
receiving of those holy mysteries, mentioned verse. 27. We have also showed what
is the means whereby that sin may be avoided; which is due examination of a
man's self, spoken of, verse. 28. We must now go forward unto the punishment
of this sin, when men come unto the Sacrament unworthily: this is set down
verse. 29. in these words, [For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.]

These words contain a plain declaration of that danger whereinto men run,
who neglecting duly to examine themselves approach unworthily to the Table of
the Lord. They bring themselves in danger of damnation that do so; and therefore
they had need be very wary and circumspect, with what mind, and how disposed,
they venture to come unto the Sacrament.

In the words we have two parts: First, The sin of unworthy receiving the
Sacrament, mentioned before, verse 27. Here again repeated with an addition of
an interpretation, what is meant by eating and drinking unworthily. [ For he
that eats and drinks unworthily,] But how is that done? the last words of
the verse show it [ Not discerning the Lords Body.] Secondly, The punishment
that's inflicted upon this sin, which is Damnation, or Judgment, in these
words [ He eats and drinks damnation to himself.)

Touching the sin of eating and drinking unworthily, we have spoken at large
heretofore; for the present, I shall only add a word or two concerning that
clause which the Apostle adds by way of interpretaton, viz^ (Not discerning
the Lords Body.]

The meaning of the phrase is not obscure. To discern the Lords Body, is to put
a right difference between the outward Elements in the Sacrament, and common
bread and wine. This difference is not at all in substance, but in the use; the
one is profane, the other sacred; being set apart to signify unto us the
benefits of Christ's death and passion. He then that touches these outward
Elements, without any due regard unto their mystical use, as they set forth
unto us our Redemption by the Body and Blood of Christ, but uses them as he
would do his ordinary food, he discerns not the Lords Body, because (...),
he separateth not, nor puts any distinction between the holy and profane,
but uses that which is sacred in a profane manner* Of such that do this,
there are two sorts: 1. One Ignorant, that know not the signification and use
of these things, who come unto the Sacrament upon mere outward respects,
without all regard to the spiritual use of it. They know not poor souls,
what it is to feed on Christ by Faith, how his flesh becomes meat indeed, and
his blood drink indeed unto them, they have no skill in such mysteries as
these. Bread and Wine they see upon a Table, and some extraordinary solemnity
in the distribution thereof; and therefore, as at a great man's table, they
behave themselves soberly and mannerly: and that's all the devotion they have,
or think they need to have. 2. Another sort are Negligent persons, that know
well enough the end and use of these things, but by reason of security, with
other worldly and wicked affections, they become careless and unprofitable
partakers of these holy mysteries. They stir not up their hearts unto the
exercise of these heavenly graces unto worthy receiving. They strive not for
more assurance of Faith, in laying hold on the promise of grace offered them in
Christ; their hearts are not touched with greater sorrow for sin that has
crucified Christ, nor more ardent love unto Christ, who by his blood has
washed away their sins, nor spiritual joy in Christ, who has done so great
things for them. Their resolutions of obedience unto Christ are not quickened,
with more vigor and constancy than before. But in this and all other graces,
they are as they were, not a whit amended and increased by this so holy means,
as God has of purpose appointed for the nourishment of grace in the heart, and
obedience in life. Both these sorts are faulty, in not discerning the Lords
Body; the one not doing it at all, the other no^ as they should do it. As in
the time of the Ceremonial Law, these that observed the Legal Ceremonies,
either without knowledge of their use, or without true devotion in faith and
obedience, both did profane them: so is it still in these ceremonies of the
Gospel. They do not discern Lords Body, who either mistake the shadow for
the substance, ignorantly supposing nothing else is to be looked after, but
that which is visible in the outward Ceremony: or who know whereto these
Sacramental Ceremonies tend, but out of negligent profaneness, use them not
with that spiritual affection, which is agreeable to the institution of God. Of
the two faults, it is hard to say, which is greater, and which the Apostle most
charge the Corinthians withal, or whether both alike. They were a Church, but
newly converted from Gentilisme, out of whom it was hard to take away, on a
sudden, their former ignorance and profaneness. They had been instructed, but
yet they might in many things be misled through blindness. Nevertheless,
profaneness seems to have borne the greatest sway amongst them; offending not
so much, because they knew not what was their duty about the Sacrament, as for
that they cared not to observe it.

The conclusion that arises from these words of the Apostle, is this in the
general.

[The worship of God is then profaned, when the Ceremony and outward work
thereof is performed, but the spiritual inward service neglected.]

Bread and Wine, breaking, pouring out, distributing, eating and drinking, all
these things are but sensible representations of spiritiuall good things; they
are the shadow, but the substance is Christ; and therefore if the heart dwell
only upon these outward Ceremonies, and Christ be neglected, the Sacrament,
without all doubt, is profaned. God has appointed those things to help our
infirmity, thereby to ascend unto higher matters; but not to nourish is in our
weakness, still to gaze on transitory outward things. This is a general rule,
not for Sacraments alone, but in every part whatsoever of Gods most holy
worship. The service of God during the time of the Law, consisted much of
carnal ordinances, as the Apostle calls the Sacrifices, Meats, Drinks,
diverse Washings with such like outward observations in the Jewish Church, Heb.
9.10. But yet then in these carnal ordinances, there was a spiritual worship
required; namely, that these things were to be observed with knowledge, in
fath, in zeal to Gods glory, and with reformation of life. When those
external rites were kept without this spiritual use of them, we know how
meanly and contemptibly God speaks of such a mechanical worship, Esa. 1.
verse. 11. and seq. He sets forth his displeasure against such services, in all
terms of dislike and disdain: telling the people, That the multitude of their
Sacrifices is [ to no purpose,] that [ He delights not] in the blood of
bullocks, and fat of fed beasts, that he [ requires no] such things at their
hands, that such oblations are [ vaine] and an [ abomination,] their solemn
feasts and assemblies he [ cannot away with them,] that his [ soul hates
them] that [ they are trouble to him, and he is weary to bear them.] And
wherefore now all this disdain of such Ceremonial worship? the reason is,
verse 15. [ Your hands ^re full of blood.] Again, Chap. 66.3. he sets it out
to the full how acceptable such service is to him, [ He that kills an ox,
is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a lamb, as if he cut off a dogs
neck, he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood; he that
burns incense, as if he blessed an idol.] Nothing can be spoke with greater
scorn and indignation: the reason whereof follows in the next words, [ Yea,
they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in their
abominations.] So long as they follow this course, God detests thhem and all
their services. Now in the times of the Gospel, Christ having Heb. 9.10.
reformed the worship of God, has abolished those carnal ordinances, and in
room thereof erected a worship of God Ioh 4.
in Spirit and Truth. We are to perform a spiritual worship; but yet
withal, some outward bodily observations are required of us now, though very
few and very easy. To fast, to bow their knee in prayer, to pronounce or hear
the Word, the administration of the Sacraments in all their outward rites,
these are external and bodily exercises, which profit little where godliness
is wanting. [ The Kingdom of God, says the Apostle, is not meats and
drinks, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.] These
things are first acceptable to God, and other things for them. Outward
Ceremoniousnesse is mere hypocrisy, where grace and sanctity is not first
mover to such observances. It Is a poor matter to forbear a meal or twain,
and yet take ones fill in sin till he surfeit; to go softly, look sadly,
speak faintly, and weep a little too, as it were in sorrow for sin, and
carry in ones breast a heart unrent, unbroken, unsof^ned, by true sense of
sin, and work of grace. What profit is it, to speak a Sermon, or hear a
Sermon, when only one man's tongue and the others ears are employed for that
hour? when it comes not from the Preachers heart, nor pierces unto the
hearers conscience, neither the one nor the other intending to practice as they
speak or hear? To what purpose is it to ^ow the body to God, and yet to make
ones heart like an iron sinew, that's too stiff and stout to bend in obedience
to Gods Commandments? If the tongue go glibbe, the eyes and hands lift up to
heaven, yet if the thoughts wander, the heart and affection lie flat upon the
earth, will such a prayer be an acceptable Sacrifice? What avail^s it a man to
have his face sprinkled with a little cold water, but not to have his heart
washed from an evil conscience, and purged from the uncleanness of sinful
corruption? to take on him in Baptism the badge of Christianity, yet in his
conversation to live like an Infidel, in all disobedience to the Laws of
Christ? Will it advantage a man any whit, that he goes four or five times a
year to the holy Sacrament, if he be either ignorant of what he goes about,
or profanely careless of making good use of what he knows? If he remain
still irreligious and impenitent, continuing in covetousness, in swearing, in
lying, in idleness, in unjust practices to get gain, in common neglect of the
exercises of Religion, a secret despiser of grace, and scoffer at true
sincerity, with other the like ungodly practices: will it help or save him,
that at solemn times, he comes to the Lords Table, there eats a bit of
bread, drinks a little wine, hears a few prayers, stays till all be done, and
so away the same man he came thither? No, this helps not, but hurts
exceedingly, having brought upon himself the guilt of a fearful
transgression, in profaning the holy Sacrament, because he discerns the
Lords Body. God, who looks unto the heart, and is well pleased in the
sincerity thereof, regards no Ceremony without obedience, but hates such
complementall hypocrisy, as much as we do detest the like dissimulation in a
man, that vailes bonnet, bows hammes, smiles in your face, speaks fair and
friendly, but yet his heart is not with you.

But we pass from this point, having touched upon it heretofore; we come unto
the punishment here denounced against unworthy receivers of the Sacrament, viz.
Damnation, [ He eats and drinks damnation to himself.

For these words we are to enquire what is meant by Damnation in this place,
and what it is to eat and drink it. Damnation in this place signifies two
things.

1. That punishment of man in hell fire, which we call eternal damnation. 2.
Those evils which in this life are inflicted upon transgressors, which we call
afflictions and temporal judgment.
Both these are included in this word (...), here rendered Damnation. That
eternal judgment in hell fire, is hereby meant, will be made apparent unto us

1. From the nature of the sin of profanation of the Sacrament; which were it
but a small offense, did yet deserve the wages of eternal death, but being so
heinous and horrible a crime as it is, viz. Guiltiness of the Death of Christ,
it must make him that commits it, obnoxious to everlasting condemnation.

2. From the quality of the persons that commit this sin^e, who are partly the
wicked, that continually profane this Sacrament, partly the godly, that yet
sometimes profane it too. Such as be ungodly, unbeleeving persons, they,
without doubt, bring themselves in certain danger, not of temporal judgment
alone, but much more of eternal damnation, for their perpetual abuse of th^se
sacred mysteries, whereof they partake without faith, repentance, or any
amendment of life at all. As for the true believers, they do sometime come
unworthily to this holy Table, being now and then overtaken with security, and
seduced by manifold temptations, though otherwise holy and godly men. This
their negligence deserves also the same punishment, though God for Christ's sake
be pleased to turn from them his everlasting wrath, making them only to feel
a little part of his displeasure, in some temporal afflictions, wherewith he
chastises them for the amendment of their error.

Now what temporal judgments are signified by this word Damnation, is
manifest also by the Text, in the verse following, where the Apostle mentions
sicknesses, infirmities and temporal death, as afflictions laid upon the
Corinthians, for their profane abuse of the Sacrament. [ For this cause many
are sick, etc.] God corrected them to bring them to repentance and amendment
of their fault, that so leaving their sin, they might escape eternal
condemnation. This then is the full meaning of the word, (...), viz. Eternal
and Temporal judgment: whereunto all are liable that profane ^he Sacrament,
in not discerning the Lords Body; be they believers or unbeleevers, godly or
wicked. Only here is the difference; the one sort by this sin deserve both,
and have both, being punished eternally and temporal^y too for the most part.
But the other deserves both, yet feels but one; being in mercy chastised with
temporal afflictions, that coming to repentance they may avoid eternal
punishment. Wherefore I take it, our last Translators have with good reason
rendered this word (...) not [ Iudgement] but [ Damnation] the highest degree of
judgment, and that proper punishment which this sin of unworthy receiving does
deserve.

So that the observation which Zanch observat. in con. fess. suam de Relig.
Christiana in cap. 16. appor. 10.
some here make upon the word, that the Apostle here uses [(...)] not [(...)]
thereby signifying not [ exitium aeternum] but [ castigationes temporales] is
not here to be admitted. Neither does the Analysis of this place require it,
nor yet the use of the word in other Ioh 3.17.18.19 2. These 2.12. 1. Tim. 3.12.
places. It being apparent that these words are used indifferently in the same
signification.

Having now s^ene what is meant by Damnation, it is easy to understand what is
meant by eating and drinking damnation; which is in plain terms, To commit
such a sin in profaning the Sacrament, as deserves both eternal and
temporal judgment. Not that there is in those outward elements of Bread and
Wine any destructive and hurtful quality, or that Christ, signified by those
elements, is become of his own nature a savor of death, and cause of
damnation unto any; but because in the profane use of those holy things they
commit a fearful sin, whereby Gods wrath is provoked against them, to the
punishing of them with temporal and eternal plagues. The Sacrament is not as
poison, which of its nature works death in the eater; but it is the food of
life, most healthful and nourishing unto the soul, if it be received into an
heart duly prepared for i^. But as the fruits of that tree of knowledge of
Good and Evil, might be wholesome in it self, yet Adam did eat his death,
when he tasted of it contrary to Gods Commandment: so this Table of the Lord,
which is a feast of choicest delicates for refreshing of the soul, when men
come rightly prepared thereto, becomes the bane and destruction of souls, when
men present themselves thereat with unbeleeving, impenitent, and unholy hearts.
This the Apostle signifies in that word, He eats and drinks [(...)] to
himself damnation; to teach us, that the cause why these things, ordained for
our good, prove hurtful unto us, is not in the things themselves, but in man's
sin, that unworthily partakes of them. That other interpretation, He eats
damnation to himself, not unto Others who communicate with him: this sits well
against the Schismatic humors of some, who think our Sacraments and
solemn assemblies, polluted by the sin of those that are wicked amongst us;
and therefore dare not join with us in the worship of God, for fear of
infection: but this fits not so well unto the Text, wherein [ Non quis
damnationem incurrat, sed quis sit huius exitij author indicatur,] as Beza
truly notes upon this place and word. From these words thus expounded, I deduce
this practical conclusion,

[The profanation of Gods most holy worship, deserves eternal and temporal
punishment.]

I frame the Conclusion generally touching every part of Gods worship, as well
as the Sacrament. It Is a high dishonor to the very person of Christ, when the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood is abused; it is also a horrible sin committed
against the majesty of God, whenever we profanely mock and contemn him in
any of those things wherein he would be sanctified and honored by us. And
therefore we may ascend from the particular to the general, and consider how
great a sin it is to profane any one wha^soever of the sacred ordinances of
Gods service, and what punishment they incur that do so. All offenses become
greater or less, according as the person, against whom they are committed, is
of more or less dignity. Therefore a sin against ^od, is greater than a
wrong against our Neighbor. Further, those offenses which immediately touch
the person offended, are more heinous than those that strike him at the
rebound. Therefore if we compare the sins of the first table, with the sins
against the second; in the general, we may judge those sins, whereby God
himself is immediately contemned in this worship, are greater than those
wherein he is despised mediate and secundario, because we neglect our duty to
man. But not to enter into an exact comparison about this point: this is for
certain, That all offenses committed in the matter of Gods worship, are of a
most provoking nature, such as he cannot endure without severe punishment
inflicted on the offenders. Atheism, Infidelity, hatred of God, etc. be
sins, the very names whereof be terrible: Idolatry, Superstition,
Will Worship, Profane and Negligent worship, these have gentler names, but be
most hateful sins, against which Gods wrath and jealousy burns, to see his
holiness and honor trampled in the dust by base and sinful wretches. A
King must needs take it very tenderly, to be dis-regarded in those very
ceremonies, wherein he looks for special honor from his subjects; much more
must God be offended, if when he has made us for to honor him, and made orders
according to which we should show our reverence and subjection, we shall out
of our pride devise other ways of our own to worship him, or out of
negligence and profaneness of spirit, do those things he has prescribed we
care not how. Against this sin God has ever revealed from heaven his fierce
wrath, upon States and Kingdoms, as well as private persons, by whom he has
been despised and neglected in his worship. [ Cursed (says Jeremy, chap. 48,
10) is he that does the works of the Lord negligently.] This was a particular
threatening against those that would spare Moab, and not execute the full
judgment of God upon that people in their utter destruction, but kept back
their swords from blood. Notwithstanding the rule is appliable to all
particulars whatsoever in Gods service; Cursed is he that does any thing
negligently, which God sets him about: for it is Gods work, who as he is a
bountiful rewarder, so is he a severe exactor of faithful service at our
hands. He will not balke us in our reward, and accordingly he looks we should
not falter with him in our obedience. To slight him in his worship, doing
matters by halves, seeming more to content our idle humors, than aiming
sincerely at his glory, is a foul contempt, and cannot but bring a curse upon
us. [ Ye have despised my Name] says God unto the Priests, Mal. 1.6 Wherein,
say then? In that [ Ye offer unclean bread upon mine altar*] verse 7. Matters
were come to that pass in this Prophets time, that neither Priest nor People
cared a ^ot how God was served. Any thing they thought would content him; and
therefore they presumed to offer that to him, which they durst not present unto
their Prince or Governor; the blind, the lame, the torn, the sick, any
thing which their covetousness could best spare, was a sacr^fice good enough
for God. Yea the whole frame of Legal Ceremonies they were utterly weary of
them, counting them base and contemptible, and in effect, nothing but an
unprofitable drudgery. Does God take this well at their hands? No, he curses
them for this their impiety, [ Cursed be the deceiver, which has in his
flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing.] The
reason follows, [ For I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name
is dreadful among the heathen.] Wherefore it must needs be a horrible offense
in the Jews, the people of God, thus to vilify so great a majesty, when even
the Gentiles themselves yielded a more awefull reverence thereunto.

I shall not need to stand long in proving a truth so evident; the time and
pains will happily be better employed in making application of it to our
selves. A threefold use of this point I commend unto your consideration and
practice.

Use. 1. First, Information of our judgment touching such evils, as we see
do befall men in this life. We behold the best Churches in great calamities,
the best men sorely afflicted, and we wonder that God should deal so
rigorously with those that serve and worship him. We guess at many causes,
but seldom do we hit upon the right, which here the Apostle intimates unto,
viz. Profanation of the ordinances of Gods worship. This Irreligiousnesse in
Gods service, is the maine cause, as of other sins, so of all judgments.
Unrighteousness against man, issues from irreligion toward God; and therefore
in punishment we must chiefly cast our eyes that way, if we will follow the
stream up unto it first fountain. We commonly look another way, and put off
our calamities upon other causes. If any other but the Apostle had told these
Corinthians, that their sicknesses and death was sent upon them ^or their
profanation of the Lords Supper, they would have doubted of his opinion. Many
were sick and dyed, but what of that? men cannot live or be well always;
these things come at adventure, or by course of Nature: it was want of care in
their diet, it was the malignity of some unwholesome dish, want of exercise, ill
temper of the body, infection of the air, and such like causes, have made them
weak and sickly; want of physic, want of looking to, old age, or some such
matter has brought them to their end. Any thing, rather than what the Apostle
speaks of, should be reckoned up as the cause of their present griefs. But
he having a better spirit to judge of matters, tells them plainly, that what
ever they may imagine, it was for abuse of the Sacrament, [ For this cause] that
sicknesses and deaths reigned amongst them.

When the Jews endured so many miseries, even from their first plantation in
the land, to their final casting out from thence, they were seldom aware of
this point, that their corruptions and abuses in Gods worship brought such
plagues upon them: If the Philistims, Canaanites, and other Borderers upon
them, do spoil their Country, tyrannize over them, and oppress them with
cruel slavery, as they did in the times of the Judges, they will interpret
this to be nothing but an old grudge, which these Nations bare against the
Israelites, for dis-possessing them of their Country, for which they were
hated, and all occasions sought to work revenge. If the Kingdom be divided,
that's nothing but Rehoboams folly, and ill counsel of ill advised Courtiers:
If Israel make war on Judah, or Judah upon Israel, that's but policy to keep
down one another, lest one should encroach upon both Kingdoms: If there be
civil wars, that's thorough the factions of potent and ambitious Statesmen:
If a Forreiner invade them, it is nothing but the pride of ambitious tyrants,
that cannot be content with their own, but seek after glory and greatness in
the ruin of other Kingdoms. Yea if a Salmanasser or Nebuchadnezzar carry them
away captive out of their land, though they may think in the general, that
God is not well pleased with them, yet they would resolve these effects into
other causes, more proper, as they conceive; It Was weakness in their Kings
degenerating from their ancient valor, want of good confederates, of good
counselors* of skillful and trusty commanders, of hardy soldiers, they were
over-borne by multitude; and these, or some thing like these, were the cause of
this misfortune: but of their sins, they think not of that matter. Many
there were, no doubt, who judged better touching the success of Civil and
Ecclesiastical affairs, whose eyes God had opened to discern the equal
dependence between the sins and the punishments of the present age wherein
they lived; but for the generality of the State, their thoughts went another
way after worldly and politic reasons. Which was the cause that being so
often smitten, yet they returned not to God that smote them, because they were
ignorant of their sins, for which he smote them. Thence in many grievous
calamities of the State, they did what they could by all politic Hos. 5.13.
and 7.11. [ They call to Egypt, they go to Ashur.]
means to uphold the ruins thereof; but yet there was no reformation at all of
the horrible corruptions of Gods pure Religion. This they looked not after, as
if all had been well on that side; whereas indeed the maine crakce which
threatened the downfall of that glorious state, was not in the roof, or sides
of the building, barely in the Laws and Civil government; but in that only
strong pillar, whereupon all rested, viz. Religion, now rent and shivered in
pieces. Had we a history of those times of the Jewish state, compiled by
Jewish Politicians living then, and relating unto us the same public events,
which we find recorded in Scripture, it would quickly appear by the
comparison, that God judged otherwise of the causes of those things, than the
State then did. Those stories would be like unto these written in latter ages,
touching Christian Commonwealths, where Church and State are put asunder, as
having little dependence one upon another; All notable events, prosperous or
unhappy, the rising or decay of states, or great men in the state, etc. are
curiously enquired into, all consells and circumstances scanned and censured;
but for Religion, what intercourse it has with such events, there is scarce so
much as a glance that way. So ^linde and earthly is every man, in discerning
aright of Gods judgments, and the course of his government over all humane
affairs. Wherefore, that man may see his error in this point, God has been
pleased by revelation from heaven, to make known unto him the chief cause of
such calamities, as come upon States and Kingdoms professing true Religion.
For which purpose, God raised up Prophets from time to time, to put the Jews
in remenbrance of that which otherwise they would not have thought of, viz.
that for their abominable corruptions in Gods worship, and other sins
proceeding thence, they were thus plagued. These men cried out loud enough to
be heard, saying, as it is 2 King. 17.13. [ Turn from your evil ways, and
keep my commandments and my statutes.] But then, as now, the poor Prophets
preached to little purpose; they might talk till they were weary, few men
regarded what they said. Wherefore God has caused their Sermons, and the
Stories of their times, to be recorded in everlasting monumen^s, that all ages
of the world may take notice of the true cause of Gods judgments, Wherein we
see that God lets pass, as scarce worth the naming, all civil considerations,
and brings all the prosperity or adversity of Church or State unto this head,
viz. the Neglect or Regard had unto Religion and Justice.

The children of Israel did wickedly in the sight of the Lord, they served Baal
and the gods of the Nations, they forsook the Lord, they walked not in his
statutes, these be the reasons, for which matters go ill with them, as we may
find it at large expressed, Judge. 2. and 2. King. 17. and 2. Chron. 36. Yea in
this matter God gave unto them a general rule, whereby to rectify their
judgment, and ours in the like case, in the 29. of Deuteronomy. Where Moses tells
them, that when their posterity, or the stranger from a far land should see the
plagues of the Jews country, and the diseases thereof, where with the Lord
should smite it, they would ask after the reason of it, and say [ Wherefore
has the Lord done thus unto his land? what means the heat of this great
anger?] The answer follows, [ Then men shall say, because they have forsaken
the Covenant of the Lord God of their fathers, which he made with them when
he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt. For they went and served other
gods, and worshipped them: gods whom they knew not, and whom he had not given
unto them. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against this land, to bring
upon it all the curses that are written in this book.] verse. 14, 15, 16, 17.
According to this observation we may judge of the state of the Christian
Church, ruinated in the East by Saracens and Turks, overrun in the West by
Goths, Vandals, and other Northren nations, then when pure Religion was
corrupted by Sects and Heresies, by superstitious abuses brought into the
worship of God, especially into the Sacrament, more and more polluted by
abominable vaniti^s, by pride and contention among the Bishops; by negl^gence
in the inferior Clergy, by tur^ing Religion into regular hypocrisy each one
serving God after the statutes of Ahab, and decrees of the house of Om^i, I
mean, after the rule of his new devised order, but not according to that rule
prescribed in the Word, whereby alone all must walk that look for peace upon
themselves and the Israel of God. When thus by superstition, profaneness,
impiety, and all filthy corruptions in doctrine and manners, the name of
Christian became even to be a dishonor unto Christ, God dealt with them as
before he had done with the Jewish Church, delivering them over into the hands
of cruel enemies, who vexed and spoiled them on every side. But what shall we
say unto Churches reformed and purged from the leaven of such corruptions? may
we apply this rule unto them? Yea we must even in these days of distress and
trouble, wherein God dasheth the nations of the earth together, breaking them
one upon another like earthen vessels. Now that the Kingdoms of the earth are
shaken, and the Church of God persecuted and afflicted with fire, sword, and
desolation; We that are yet but passengers, going on in quiet by the way,
cannot but behold and bewail her sorrow, which sits upon the ground,
weeping sore in the night for these miseries that are come upon her. Oh that
our heads were full of water, and our eyes a fountain of tears, that we also
could weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of Zion! But now if we
stand still and wonder, and enquire [ How does the City sit solitary that was
full of people? how is she become a widow? Lam. 1. ver. 1.
she that was great among the Nations, and a Princess among the Provinces,
^ow is she become tributary?] Hear what answer her self will make: [ The
Verse. 14.
yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand, they are wreathed and come up
upon my necke] therefore it follows, [ he has made my strength to fall, the
Lord has delivered me into their hands, from whom I am not able to rise up]
And again, [ Verse. 18.
The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandments: Hear I
pray you all people, and behold my sorrow, my virgins and my young men are gone
into captivity.] And again, [ Verse. 20.
Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress, my bowels are troubled, my heart is
turned within me: For I have grievously rebelled*] Yea this is it. It Is the
sins of a Church that kind a fire in her palaces; Her sins that sharpen
her enemies sword to the slaughter, Her sins that destroy her strong Hold,
and make the rampart and the wall to lament and languish together. Let us not
here cry out upon men, complain upon Princes, blame we know not whom, nor for
what; as if all had been well, had they done, or would they do as we have
contrived it: but lay we the blame where the fault is, and say we, That they be
the sins of the Church that kept good things from her, and brought evil upon
her. And be we still sighing in silence, for it is the Lord has done this; even
he has done that which he had devised; he has covered the daughter of Zion
with a cloud in his anger, and cast down from heaven to earth the beauty of
Israel. Indeed Reformation is a glorious name; a Church reformed and restored
unto purity of doctrine and discipline, is a glorious society. But its one
thing to have Gods pure worship established by Law, another thing to have it
settled in men's hearts, and observed in their practice. The doctrine of a
Church may be pure, the Sacraments rightly administered, the government duly
ordered; and yet God may be highly dishonored by that Church, when that which
is well adpointed is not yet well used. This is happily the Corinthians case here
in the Text; they did not, for ought we can prove, pervert the Institution of
the Sacrament, adding or omitting any thing material to the essence thereof:
but yet they displeased God in the celebration of it, because they observed the
outward form, but with irreligious and graceless hearts, making to themselves
no spiritual benefit at all. So is it with any Church wherein purity of
Doctrine, Sacraments, and Discipline is maintained, but this form of
god^inesse is without the power of it, no fruits thereof appearing in men's
obedience unto the Gospel. I ^peake not this to accuse our brethren, but to
warn our selves. They feel the smart, and no doubt, do know their sins.
Our duty is to pray for them, that God would speak peace to his people in
their affliction, and restore unto them joy of heart for the days of mourning
which they have seen. Well, lets pity them, and look we to our selves,
whose privileges and blessings are as many as theirs, and our sins happily
more. Be we instant in prayer, that God will pardon the deformities of our
reformed Church; I mean, the neglect of his Worship, the contempt of his Word,
the scorning of his Ministers, the profanation of the Sacraments, the despising
of government, the schisms and discords amongst us, the profaneness of men's
lives, the Infidelity, Atheism, Pride, Intemperance, Injustice, with such
corruptions as disgrace Christian Religion, discredit our most Christian
Church, dishonor God, and provoke his wrath against the Land. It Is not the
power of an enemy, the conspiracy of Jesuits, the malice of hell that shall
endanger us, if our sins do not fight more powerfully against us, than the
force or craft of any adversary. Spare then O God thy people, and be merciful
to the iniquities of the remnant of thine heritage. Pardon our sins and help
us graciously. So shall thy blessing always continue upon the head of thine
anointed, thy favor upon his posterity, thy peace upon this Church, and
prosperity upon thy people. I have but one word more to say, and I have done;
and that is,

Use 2. ^or exhortation, that we would put in practice what we know touching
this point. Profaneness in matters of Gods worship bring temporal and eternal
punishments upon a man. Apply this to that condition wherein thou art, whether
adversity or prosperity. If affliction be upon thee, on thy body, thy soul,
thy name, thy estate, thy friends, come to scrutiny and make search where and
what thy sin is. Say with thy self, Do not I neglect some parts of Gods
worship? do I not use others carelessly? Where thou find the fault, repent
of it, amend it speedily, and so God will remove his rod from thee, and in due
time make thy paths prosperous. But if they be so already, and thou desire to
have thy peace continued unto thee, here learn the way to enjoy comforts, and
prevent many sorrows. Attend diligently unto the worship of God, do not
slubber it over, do him service, and do it faithfully, else it is no service
but sloth. Hear the Word, but attentively, and mix it with faith; pray, but
fervently; fast, but unloose the bonds of wickedness; receive the Sacrament,
but fruitfully. Do not these things as common businesses, go not to Church as
thou would go to thy chamber; preach not, nor hear a Sermon as thou
would do an Oration, pray not to God as thou would speak to a man, come
not to the Lords Table as to an ordinary repast. Put on other affections and
thoughts in sacred, than thou do in civil businesses: advise thy self
before thou meddle with them; in doing of them stir up thy heart to a regard
of God with whom thou have to do; of thy soul, whose well or ill-fare depends
much upon these things. Know that it is no light matter to mock God to his
face, to come before him with the body, and draw near with the lips, but turn
from him in thy heart, to make a show of regarding him, but indeed to slight
him. Remember Salomons rule, [ Take heed to thy ^ort, etc,] Eccles. 5.1. when
thou go to the House of God, i. e. to perform any worship to him, take heed
to thy footing, be advised whereabouts thou go, [ and be more near to
hear,] that is, to obey Gods will declared unto thee in his Word, [ than to
offer the Sacrifice of fools,] i. e. to observe the ceremony and outward
worship, without obedience and inward grace; as fools do, who think by such
service they please God, whereas in so doing, they do evil, and sorely offend
him. Only this spiritual service in faith and obedience is acceptable; all
other without this is vain, neither pleases God nor profits us. This doing
we shall have good prosperity, providing well for our comfort in this life, in
the escape of many evils that profaneness would bring on us, and also for our
happiness in the world to come.

Thus much be spoken touching the punishment of the sin of Unworthy
receiving; namely, that by so doing men run them into hazard of temporal
and eternal judgments, in this 29 verse. I now proceed unto the 30 verse*
wherein the Apostle shows unto the Corinthians the danger of their profanation
of the Sacrament, by a particular instance of their present miserable
condition, wherein they now were by reason of such their offense. What he had
spoken generally touching all unworthy Communicants, that they eat and drink
damnation unto themselves, he declares to be most true in a real experiment
among themselves, in the words of the 30 verse.

[For this cause, many among you are weak, and sick, and many sleep.] They
need not look far for a proof, let them but turn home their eyes upon
themselves, they might see apparent marks of Gods anger against them, for their
sinful abuse of the blessed Sacrament. The weak and sickly bodies, the dead
carcasses of so many amongst them, were witnesses sufficient that God was
highly displeased at them for profaning his holy Table. The words fall into two
parts: First, a Cause [ For this cause] (...), for this matter; namely, a sin
before mentioned, for not discerning the Lords Body in the Sacrament. Secondly,
an effect, and that is a particular punishment, described 1. by the persons
upon whom it is inflicted, The Corinthians; and that not one or two, but many
there were that suffered it [ Many among you, etc.] 2. by the qualities and
degrees of this punishment, it is Bodily, upon the outward man, in three degrees,
Weaknesses, Sicknesses, and Death. [ Many are weake] ((...)) and sick ((...))
and many sleep ((...)) i. e. are dead. Of these briefly and plainly.

[ For this cause.] The Apostle here admonishes them of that, which of
themselves they would not easily have thought of. God punishes them, yet still
they profane the Sacrament; and why? they are not aware that those plagues were
sent of God for that their sin. Therefore the Apostle points out unto them the
true cause of all their misery, [ For this cause] says he, are ye punished;
whatever else they might vainly imagine, it was their abuse of the Lords Supper
that drew on all that mischief. To teach us, That

[Many men are punished, who yet are ignorant of the cause why they are
punished.]

Naturally we are all children of darkness, and, like men in the dark, we
know nor by whom nor wherefore we are smitten. When God strikes us for sin,
Satan deals with us as the Jews with Christ, blindfold him, and then bid him
prophecy who smote him. So in afflictions, we commonly grope as blind men,
ghessing at this cause, and that, but seldom fastening on the right. It is the
great unhappiness of our ignorant and corrupted minds, never to know aright
our friends or our foes; and it is the policy of Satan to delude our judgments
by carnal reasoning, that when God afflicts us to bring us to repentance, we
should yet then do more and more wickedly, by not seeing nor amending the
sin for which we are punished; that so by sin we might be brought into
misery, and by misery our sin might be yet increased. This note serves us
unto a double use:

1. To let us understand, what, among other, is one true cause of men's
Unprofitableness under the afflicting hand of God. Hence their murmuring, and
impatience, and want of reformation, because they do not rightly discern the
cause, wherefore this or that punishment lies upon them. Creatures accustomed
unto darkness, are of all other most fierce and furious; as beasts of prey: so
men abiding in the darkness of corrupted nature, have brutish and fell
affections, full of rage and wrathfulnesse, when they are provoked by any smart
and pain, they fly upon God, and man, and all that comes next to hand, hoping
to rid themselves of their afflictions, not by a reformation, but by revenge.
But when once such men are brought forth into the light, they grow tamer; then
they see the foulness of their offenses, how much evil they have done, yet
how l^ttle they s^ffer in comparison; whence they truly judge, that it is
unreasonable to murmr against God, who has so great reason to chastise them.

2. To teach us what just cause there is, that we should be corrected of God,
to the end, we may come to the knowledge of our selves. Indeed corrections of
themselves cannot do this; it is the Word and Instruction that brings us to
knowledge of our estates. But ordinarily instructions pierce not, till
corrections have sharpened them A man that lives at peace and hearts ease, is
apt to pass by rebukes with very little notice of them, perhaps with contempt,
because he judges himself well: but when chastisements have softened the
heart, and awakened the conscience, then rebukes have a keener edge, and they
wound deeply. Wherefore Solomon says excellently, Prove. 6.23. [ The
commandment is a lantern, and instruction a light: and correction with
instruction are the way of life.] Instructions are the light that guides us in
the way; but corrections joined with them, do quicken our eyesight, and make
us heedfull to follow the directions of the Word. It is with man in this case,
as with dogs and other unreasonable creatures, (for every man borne, is, as
Job speaks like a wild Ass colt) which when they are punished for any fault,
we usually bring them unto the sight of that thing, wherein they have done it,
else they will never amend it. Such is our dullness in discerning of our faults,
that we seldom acknowledge and amend them, till correction have made us look
about us, and learn that which instruction alone could not teach us. [ It is
good for me, says the Prophet David that I have been afflicted, that I might
learn thy Law.] Had he not been taught it before? Yes, but Vexatio dat
Intellectum. Adversity was a better Schoolmaster than Instruction, and that
makes him now to heed, what before he attended not. Wherefore when Gods hand
is any time heavy upon us, let this be our first care, that [ Every one know
the plague in his own heart,] as Solomon speaks, 1. King. 8.38. This
knowledge of the sin is the first step to repentance, and that is the only
way to escape the punishment. Let us imitate the Church in the third Chapt. of
the Lamentations, first lay down this as a general conclusion, That sin
brings affliction, [ Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins?] verse. 39. Thence go to a particular application to
our selves entering into a serious consideration of our own ways; to find the
sin for which we are afflicted, [ Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again unto the Lord. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the
heavens. We have transgressed, and have rebelled, and thou have not pardoned,
etc.] verse. 40.41, 42. Without this course observed, there is nothing to be
expected from a man in affliction and misery, but only sullen and unjust
complaints, with stubborn continuance in his sin. He will blame God, and
curse men, cry out upon the malice of Satan, the malignity of the Stars, the
unhappy concourse of second causes, he will find fault with all things, and
that mostly which is least to be blamed, not considering mean while that his
sin has procured all this unto him. [ Why criest thou in thine affliction?]
says God to the Jewish Church, Ier. 30.15. complaining bitterly of her
miserable estate, Why criest thou? What do thou complain to no purpose? If
thou will grieve at any thing grieve for thy sin, never look to cure thy
sorrow till thy sin be cured; for so it follows, [ Thy sorrow is incurable
for the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sins were increased I have
done these things unto thee.] Now to avoid this mischief, observe a few
directions, which may help us to find out our sin when we lie under
punishment: they are these.

1. Diligent meditation in the Word, whereby we shall learn what are the
sins that go before such and such punishments; whereunto we must join
humble prayer unto God for wisdom to discern of our own corrupt hearts and
lives: that so by the light of the Word, and assistance of the Spirit, we may
follow the search till we find out the malefactor. When the Israelites were
beaten by the Cananites at Ai, and that they were ignorant for what offense
that disaster happened to them, Joshua and the Elders betake them to fasting
and prayer before the Arc. After that, God says to Joshua, [Get thee up,
wherefore lie thou th^^ upon thy face? Israel has sinned.] Josh. 7.20.21.
It Was Achans privy theft of execrable goods that had troubled all Israel; till
that be expiated, God will not be with them any longer. Let us do the like
when any unknown sin troubles us, when our bodies are distempered, our
estates vexed, our consciences disquieted, and we know not well wherefore; Fall
we down before the Arc, go to the Word and Prayer, ask counsel of God,
and he shall discover unto us what is that Achan, what the secret accursed
sin that works us all this woe.

2. Consider we diligently the quality of the punishment it self; for the
rule holds true very commonly, that God punishes men in the same kind wherein
they offend. Whence it will be easy, by the punishment to judge of the sin:
If a Land be smitten with a famine of bread, is it not because plenty has bred
luxury? if with a famine of the Word, was it not because it was entertained
with disobedience and contempt? if with poverty, it is because riches bred vice:
if David defile his neighbors wife, so shall Absalom deal with his own
concubines; if he murder Vriah, so shall Absalom do to Amnon, and seek to
do the same to his father. Is a man vexed with disobedient children, it is
likely himself was so to his own parents? if friends be unfaithful to thee,
have not thou been so to thine? or have thou not made flesh thine arm, and
put more trust in them, than God? Is disgrace fallen upon thee, and wast thou
not proud before? Do thy gifts of mind or body decay, and is it not because
thou art high minded, unthankefull to God, Men sharpliest punished for those
sins they have committed with greatest pleasure and security.
and scornful of meaner men? In short, look unto the punishment, and
consider it duly; we shall commonly find, that in the same, or some other
kind nearly proportionable, as we have done in sinning, so God has done to us
in punishing.

3. Observe advisedly the inditements, which at such a time thy conscience
shall bring-in against thee. Conscience is a faithful Register, and what ever
drowsinesse may possess it in times of peace, yet so soon ^s its netled and
stung with the fear of approaching judgment, or the sense of present smart,
it grows very clamarous, and will give us information touching our estate,
both true enough and loud enough, if we list to hear and observe what it
says. If a storm be toward, the sea quickly foretokens it by its working, and
change of color. And in corrupt bodies, the least alteration of the weather,
breeds a distemper in them. So do all outward change,, whether felt or feared,
work strange alterations in the soul that's tainted with the guilt of any
foul transgressions. Then be sins that were almost forgotten, all mustered
up together, and brought to a fresh remembrance, as if done but yesterday: and
if we do attentively mark what Conscience then pleads against us, we shall
hear it ring in our ears such voices as these, Lo, see thou not judgment
ready now to take hold on thee for such a sin, at such a time committed? And
thou be remembered, once thou committedst such a secret abomination, now see
God punishes thee for it openly: So many years ago such a villainy was done
by thee, now at last God has met with thee for it. Admirable is the work of
Conscience in this regard, and very remarkable in the brethren of Joseph. They
had sold their brother, and cou^ened their father, and all was hushed up for a
long time. After they go down to Egypt they are roughly used there by their
unknown brother, imprisoned as Spies, no entreaties nor apologies will serve
their turn. Now their sin revives and their brother Joseph comes into their
minds; they cannot keep it in, their traitorous and unmercifull usage of
their poor brother, swells in their consciences, and bursts forth at their
tongues; they cannot take so much time as till they be all in private, but
even in Joseph's presence they must out with it, [ We have sinned against our
brother, etc. -- therefore is this trouble come upon us.] Genesis 42.21. So Job in
his elder years, when he fell into those great calamities, though a holy and
good man, yet confesses that he smarted for the sins of his youth. [ Thou
writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the sins of my
youth.] says he, Job 13.26. Sin may be soon committed, but it is not so
soon forgotten: God remembers it, and Conscience registers it, and an hundred
years after the fact done, a man may hear on it again, to his woe and grief.

By these three directions well observed, we may speedily attain the
knowledge of our sin, for which, at any time, Gods punishing hand lies upon
us: that so knowing where the disease lies, we may with speedy success apply
the medicine of Repentance and true Reformation. And so much of this point. I
go forward.

[ For this cause many are weak.] For the abuse of the Sacrament, in not
discerning the Lords Body, God plagued them in their own bodies with diseases
and death. Hence the conclusion is, That

[The abuse of spiritual good things, causes loss of bodily and temporal
good things.

This is agreeable to reason and equity, That where the greater good is
despised, there men should be punished with deprivation of that good, which is
less in worth, but more in their esteem; to the end, that by the want of
this, they might learn to have a better regard unto the other. They that abuse
spiritual good things, will much more abuse corporal good things: wherefore
God at once both prevents their sin in these, by taking them away, and also
punishes their sin in those, by such a deprivation of these. Besides it is
the nature of sin, as it infects the soul, so it hurts the body, and all
external good things. Adams abuse of the forbidden fruit, brought destruction
upon his soul, and death upon his body, and a curse upon all ^he world, which
God had given him as his patrimony and inheritance^ No less dangerous is the
abuse of the commanded fruit (that we so call Jesus Christ, the Tree of Life)
in the Sacrament. They that eat it worthily, feed thereby both soul and body;
they that profanely use it, bring destruction upon both. [Godlinesse, says the
Apostle, has the promises of this life, and that which is to come;] and
therefore on the contrary, Ungodliness, has the threatenings of both. [My
son, let thine heart keep my commandments,] says Solomon, Prove. 3.1. If he
do it, they shall bring him increase of days, prosperity, favor in the sight
of God and man, health to his navell, and marrow unto his bones, with abundance
unto his barnes and winepresses, as it follows in the next verses of that
Chapter. So on the other side, where God is disobeyed, his Word and Ordinances
despised, there nothing thrives well, neither for body, nor name, nor goods,
but sin, like a blasting wind, makes all to wither, and fade away like a
leaf. This may lesson us two things;

1. That if we would have our bodies and lives to be precious in Gods account,
we learn our selves to make precious account of his service and holy
ordinances. If we contemn the sacred Body and Blood of Christ, and make no
reckoning of his death, it is but just with God to give up our vile and
sinful bodies to be as ^ung for the earth, that sickness should consume
us, and the grave have dominion over us.

No marvel if we be left in bodily weaknesses, when we labor not to feel the
strengthening power and comfort of the Sacrament in our souls. If we dishonor
God in despising his Word, and Sacraments and Ministers, it is equal that he
should pour contempt upon us, and give up our names for a reproach upon earth.
They only can expect that God should have a tender regard of their lives, and
health, and credit and other good things they enjoy, who have themselves a
dutiful respect of his glory, and do with all thankfulness and good
conscience, receive and use the favor and means of grace he bestows on them.

2. This shows the cause, why many times those that profess true Religion
fare worse than others, in regard of so many troubles and afflictions as betide
them more than others. The reason is, because as the spiritual good things
which God bestows on his Church, are greater than any other favors which he
imparts unto other men; so is their abuse of them more highly displeasing unto
God, than others contempt of more inferior favors. But of this I have spoken
largely upon the 29. verse, therefore I do but name it now. To proceed,

[ Many among you are sick, etc.) Many: The sin of profaning the Sacrament,
was not a particular private sin of some one or few among the Corinthians;
but it was a public disorder, and a common fault of the greatest part. Now
accordingly, the punishment lights not upon a few, here and there one; but upon
Many: as there were many that had sinned. But yet touching the community of
these judgments upon the Corinthian Church, it is to be noted, that they were
not such judgments as came indifferently upon the City of Corinth. For then
they might have replied, that these sicknesses and death came not upon them for
their profanation of the Sacrament, seeing they lighted as well upon the rest
of the Idolatrous Citizens. Wherefore as the sin was peculiar unto the
Christians that were in Corinth, so also were these punishments, in some
special extraordinary manner, inflicted on them; whereby it appeared, that God
singled them out in special for their foul profanation of his most holy
worship. The practical conclusion hence is, That [Common sins, have common
punishments.]

When the Ulcer is spread over the whole body, a Plaster is ill applied but
unto one part. Where God comes to cure, he fits his medicine to the disease;
and were he comes to kill, his consuming wrath runs so far as does the
overflowing of iniquity in that place, wherewith he has to deal. If he be
to punish a whole world, after he has provided for the safety of his Church,
all the rest perish to the last man. If he be to destroy a Sodom, wherein
there is not one righteous, they shall die every mothers son of them. This
may teach us a twofold lesson:

1. That if we will escape from common plagues, we learn to live free from
common sins. Let us not partake with others in their sins, lest we also
share with them in their punishments. [ Flee out of the midst of Babel, and
deliver every man his soul, be not destroyed in her iniquity,] says the
Prophet Jeremy, Chapt. 51.8. unto the Jews residing at Babylon in Chaldea. [
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues,] says the voice from heaven unto the godly,
abiding in the mystical Romish Babylon. Let us now follow this admonition, and
withdraw our selves from amongst all ungodly persons in the world; not in
place, for then we must go out of the world: but in our love and practice of
their wicked doings, that in nothing we have fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness. How shall we do this, ye will say? The best way we can
follow, is this, Learn to mourn for common sins, and so thou shall be sure
to live free from them. Put on that holy affection which was in David. Let
thine eyes run with rivers of waters, Psalm. 119.136.
because men forsake Gods Law. Make not thy self sport with other men's ^innes;
but when thou look on them, let thine eye break thy heart with godly
sorrow, for the Irreligious contempt of Gods Word and Worship, the pride, the
excess, the oppression, the swearing, the drunkenness, that fills every
corner of the Land. If there be any spark of true love to the Church and
State wherein thou live, if any pity of the souls of thy brethren, let it
grieve thy soul to see men post madly unto destruction, and weep in secret to
see the measure of iniquity rising up to the brimme, to the hastening of
destruction upon Church and State. Be a mourner in Zion, and so escape the
punishment of the sinners in Zion; that when fear and confusion takes hold on
them, thou may be marked out to safety and deliverance. Other means to
provide for thy welfare in common calamities, Ezekiel. 9.4.5.6
there is none at all. As for such as will continue to be as bad as the worst,
and yet hope, by finenesse of wit and policy, to speed as well as the best, let
such scornful men, and mockers of Gods counsel, read with attention that
excellent place, Esa. 28.14. and seq. Where they may see such their vain
confidence pulled down to the dust, in the example of others that have
likewise trusted to it, and bin confounded.

2. We learn hence what to judge, of any Christian Church, when once
corruptions grow common and overspreading all. If God begin once to take in
hand to punish such a Church, will it be think you, some light touch, and
easy affliction? Nay, Flagellum mundans, an overflowing scourge is then to be
expected, a scourge that shall go thorough every quarter of the Church, to whip
out from thence those that have polluted and defiled it by their abomination in
every place. These Corinthians were but a poor handful of people, newly drawn
out of Gentilisme, in one no very great City, yet see how sharply the Lord
deals with them for this one abuse of the Sacrament. Many of those, that in all
were but a few, are severely punished for it. What then, and how sore will be
the judgments of such Churches, which have flourished (...) extent, abundance
o^ peace, (...) ^ight and liberty of the Gospel so long, wherein yet the
fruits of Obedience, worthy of so unspeakable mercies, a^e not to be found?
Judgment is already begun at the house of God, and we cannot but with
bleeding hearts bewail the woeful desolations come upon some, and the utter
ruin threatened unto all foreign Churches. Oh my beloved brethren, let us pray
daily and fervently, that the Lord would now say to his destroying Angel, It
is sufficient, Hold now thy hand. That he would make wars to cease unto the
ends of the earth, that he would give peace to them his people, who want it,
that he will continue peace to us his people, that yet enjoy it. That the cup
of his furious indignation, whereof so many nations of the earth have been made
to drink, may not pass over unto us; but the dregs thereof, if any remain,
may rather be powered out upon the nations that know him not, nor call upon his
Name: but amongst us for ever may his Gospel flourish, upon us be his peace
and protection unto the worlds end, Amen, O Lord, for thy Son Christ's sake. I
come to the last words.

[ Many weak, and sick, and many sleep.] Here is the punishment in the three
degrees of it: 1. Weaknesses, viz. the first languishing of the body, and
inclination unto diseases: 2. Sicknesses, the next degree, when diseases had
fully seized on the body; 3. Death, the last degree and complement of both the
former. Now of the two first degrees, which were the lesser evils, the Apostle
says, that (...) Multi, Many were afflicted with them: but of the third, the
greater evil, namely, Death, he alters the word, and says, (...), Satis
multi, not a few were dead, though not so many as weak and sick. From this
diversity in these punishments observe we in the last place, That

[God in punishing man for sin, orders his punishments differently, according
to the quality of the offense, and party offending.

Some sins are of deeper dye than others, and require more washing to (...)
them off. Some are like unto humors se^led in the body, which require stronger
potions to purge them out; others be, as some infirmities, newly fallen upon
the body, which are cured by medicines of weaker ingredients.

As when men have made a bargain, men will have earnest, or so to confirm it;
so is the Sacrament to confirm the Covenant.

FINIS.

