IOSVAHS GODLY Resolution in conference with Caleb, touching household
government for well ordering a family.

WITH A twofold Catechism for instruction of youth; the first short, for the
weaker sort, set forth in six principal points; the latter large for other of
greater growth, and follows the order of the common Authorized Catechism,
and is an explanation thereof: both set forth for the benefit of his Christian
friends and wel-willers.

By RICHARD BERNARD preacher of Gods word, at Woorksoppe in Nottingam-shire.

1. Pet. 2. 2. As newborn babes desire that sincere milk of the word, that
ye may grow thereby. Printed at London by JOHN LEGATT, Printer to the
University of Cambridge, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign
of the Crown by Simon Waterson. 1612.

To the right Worshipful Sir Henry Pakenham Knight, and to his religiously
affected Lady, all good and sound comforts tending to the best and most
assured joys in glory are heartily wished.
RIGHT Worshipful: man was made for his Creators glory; the way is to know
him, to observe his good pleasure, and with alacrity of spirit to do his will;
Though all receive Being of him, yet most, as the Heathen, know him not at all.
Some sort in the world profess him: but are little obseruatiue of his will:
these only say, Lord, Lord; and therewith rest so content: other do ask,
what he would have done; and when they know his pleasure, they have it only
upon their tongue, but far from practice. Very few know with faith, and do
what they believe and know, with conscience. Turks for their lives, are as good
as many Christians: and these no better then other, but for an idle profession.
Means sure have we many to amend this; as his holy word, his multitude of
mercies and manifold chastisements: But the first is despised, therefore it
prevails not: the second is unthankfully abused, and mercies move us not:
and the last is contemned, we grow hard, and therefore o Lord save us, for
judgments reclaim us not. But the godly wise, will I hope, lay these things
to heart, though most be careless: lest correction turn to destruction,
mercies be removed, and of the Gospel we be utterly deprived. The Lord may
thus do, it is our deserving; that by justice he revenge not himself of us,
it is mercy still without any man's merit God make us thankful, that our
knowledge may cause an acknowledgment heartily, with amendment seriously, so
shall we enjoy what we have, and have what yet we possess not, for our greater
good.

My words of complaint and my hearty wish tend to stir up some to well
doing, that, if so. God please, in a world of wickedness, there may be found
Noah's preparing the Arc, and godly Lots dwelling in Sodom, that when
destruction comes, such may find in that day favor in Gods sight for
themselves and their families. For this end I have sent forth, with the
principles of religion, and the points of Catechism, certain instructions
delivered Dialogue wise, teaching and persuading all Christians, to a mutual
care of one an others salvation, and every household governor, with the members
thereof, to an orderly disposing of themselves, that Jesus Christ may dwell
amongst them, and that the houses of Christians may be lodgings for the Lord,
and not dens of infidells, or habitations of devils.

What has bin delivered after an other manner, the same changed for a more
easy information, I now offer (right Worshipful) thankefully unto you: let it
please you to accept my little labor for your Worships so large kindness
already showed. I do acknowledge my self beholden: I profess readiness, to
express still more thankfulness, as time shall afforde fit occasion. In the
mean space I shall not cease to pray for you, that Iosuahs resolution may be
ever in you, that you may follow the steps of Father Abraham, and your good
Lady imitate the holy graces of Sarah, to your households happiness, and both
your endless comforts here and in heaven,

Amen.
Worksoppe, August. 1. Your Worships to be commanded, Richard Bernard.

Iosuahs resolution of household government.
Joshua. 24. 15. But I and my house will serve the Lord.


IOSVA, CALEB. LET me speak unto you Coherence of the text with that which
went before.
(O ye house of Israel) our fathers have received mercy diverse ways, we
their children have experience of the goodness of our God; we have sound proof
of his assured promise, us has he delivered, our enemies confounded, and has
given us possession over Canaan, as appears this day. Now my advise and will
is, that you would therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in uprightness and
truth, and serve him alone, abandoning all idolatry, and not follow your own
corrupt ways, nor errors of Forefathers, in so great an evil. If it seem
good unto you, so to do, I shall rejoice, it is that I wish heartily for your
good: but if you will not, be it known unto you all this day, and take notice
of my full determination herein, that I and my house will serve the Lord.


Call. God forbid, God forbid, that we should (O most noble Prince) be of any
other mind, then so also with thee, to seek the honor of our God, and to
serve him.


Ios. Surely you well persuade me of Gods continuing mercy to us hereby, for
if we seek him, he will be found of us, if we 2. Chr. 15. 2 1. Sam. 2.
honor him, he will honor us, but if we forsake him, he will forsake us. It
is also my hearts joy that we do conioine as one herein: but nevertheless this
know, that though company do encourage men to serve the resolved Christian
should desist in his holy purpose.


Call. Godly men tie not their religion Peter to follow Christ, if all else do
forsake him: thy words ( Iosuah) declare herein thy judgment, and thy promise,
what we all ought to practice.


Ios. Therefore, as I purpose, so ought


Call. Urge, I beseech thee, this point upon the people with reasons, that they
may see how they may persuade themselves herein to a resolution.


Ios. The Lord in giving his law does Thou shall have no other Gods before me,
Thou shall make no graven Image, and so in the rest, as if he had said; Though
other will not serve me, though some will have other Gods, though all other
will commit idolatry, yet see thou do not so, I charg al as one, and one as
al, that every man may be obedient to single himself forth alone to serve me
the Lord his God.

Again, we all do covenant one by one


Call. Indeed it is an honest man's part to more ought we to regard to keep our
word with God, the promise being made so voluntarily, before so many witnesses,
and sealed with the blood of Christ? This reason were sufficient to persuade,
but if you have any more, I beseech you proceed, for we need much spurring to
run on the race to eternal life.


Ios. Our Savior tells us, that we are to Luke 14
wife and children, yea to hate them for his sake and the Gospel, else can we
not be his Disciples: by which he teaches this instruction, that we are to
depend on none in our religion to God, be held back by none, from our walking
with God: that all earthly affection must be laid aside, and we must embrace
Christ and the Gospel alone, if none neither father nor mother, sister nor
brother, will go with us.


Call. Indeed men in matters of this life, conversation, blasphemy, and
prophanenes, and yet men are loath to be any whit more religious toward God,
the^ other be. Thus alas, we see, men hold it no shame to be notorious in and
for the world, in and for their pleasures, in and for honor; Satan can make
them grow more vain, more wicked, then other, without shame, without daunt of
spirit, without fear of man, either to be noted, or pointed at: but the Lord
cannot persuade us by his word to become more holy then other; that is forsooth
singularity, and men fear now a days more to be noted for any strict course
of life, from a common road, then for crying sins.


Ios. This shows the power of Satan in the one, and the little love or zeal
of God in the other, the wicked herein shall condemn these, though they shall
not so save themselves: but to proceed; If we consider that we are made alone,
brought out alone, that we die in our appointed time alone, and that though we
shall all appear before God in the last day, yet must every one give om. 14.
13. Cor. 5. 10.
an account for himself unto God, we should walk and live, if so we needs
must with God alone.


Call. I know if a man have a long journey would desire honest company, but if
he can get none, the fear of punishment makes him set forward alone. We all
are in our journey to heaven by our profession, and we must be so by our
practice, upon pain of damnation; if we can get any to go in a good life with
us, it is well, but if not, must we therefore herein stay our course?


Ios. Be it far from us; the example of Noah would serve God alone, when all
the Gen 6.
old world was drowned in wickedness. Lot Genesis 19.
was in his singular way from all the Inahbitants, 1. King 19. 2. Chro. 18.
Ruth. 1.
in the midst of Sodo^. Eliah was alone, Michaiah avouched the truth alone: and
to conclude, Ruth would go alone with Naomi, when Orpha her sister left her. We
must be of Ruths mind toward religion, as show was in her love to Naomi. If
anything would withdraw us, if any person would dissuade us from a godly and
devout course, let us say to Ruth. 1. 16. 17.
them with Ruths speech, Entreat me not to leave religion, nor to depart from
it, for whither it goes, I will go; and where it dwells I will dwell: the
true professors of it, shall be my Thy people, my people.
companions, God, the Author thereof, shall be my God, where it rests, will I
rest, and there will I die: the Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but
death depart it and me.


Call. Without doubt these examples are very pregnant, and do give lively
encouragement to serve God, if we be alone. But (my Lord) is it not grievous to
be alone? Eliah sorrow, and vex his spiritat this, that he was left alone, yea
and desired therefore to die?


Ios. True it is, that Solomon says, woe to Answer to the objection.
him that is alone, but alone without help from the Lord: but this his
children want never finally, the Lord is with them, and if he be their familiar
friend, they may with David say, We care not what man can do unto us, for the
Lord is on our side. By him more is with us then against us; this Elisha being
alone saw, and prayed that his servant Gehezi might see: and albeit Eliah
seemed to himself to be alone, yet was he not alone, God was with him, and
7000. not seen, who bowed not their knee unto Baal: and whereas he wished to
die for bodily presence of men, it was his weakness, in which the Lord did show
mercy, and afforded him comfort afterward; the like mercy may we expect, as
holy martyrs have experienced.


Call. Does it not derogate ( Renowned Duke) from your greatness, to profess
singularity from all nations in religion, and Prevention of an objection.
from all Israel, though they do follow their forefathers, which were beyond
the flood, and in Egypt serving strange Gods?


Ios. Albeit God has exalted me here But I and my house will serve the Lord,
even I Joshua, though Duke, though Prince in Israel, and a guide to Gods people,
I will with my family serve him, who has showed me this great mercy.


Call. You have great cause to bless God, that you in such glory, have so great
humility, in so great prosperity such zeal. It is rare for men of note to
entertain religion, but most rare for such therein to become singular.


Ios. Such as truly seek God in heart makes the same more glorious. By


Call. The weight of these reasons may force any man to hold religion and
sincere walking with God, to be a grace unto him, be he never so mighty in
this world. He has here honor, and men attend him, but by a holy conversation
he has honor with God Alsufficient, and Angels wait upon him. Here a man has
wealth, but by religious holiness, he has an everlasting tresurie, and a
supply of all wants by grace. Here has he, as a man, his pleasures and
delights, but by devout serving of God, he has peace which passes all
understanding, that which the eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart
of a natural man able to comprehend. Therefore ought we


Ios. Else may we rightly be judged with Achitophels policy overthrew him:
Absoloms beauty brought him to destruction: Hamans honor was his ruin.
Religious fear of God is man's stay in every the worse he is, farthest from
God, and nigher to confusion. I therefore and my house will serve the Lord.


Call. Me think (Sir) by adding these And my house. The ground of the doctrine
following.
words, my house, in your speech, you insinuate your care to have other
religious, as well as your self.


Ios. True it is you say, I now desire as did my Master Moses, Would to God all
the people could prophecy. Indeed rather then God be unserved, a man ought
alone to serve the Lord, this is his feruencie and zeal to God; but true grace
rests not in the bosom compassion and love.


Call. I am able to avouch this from my My Romans 10. 1.
hearts desire and prayer to God is for Israel that they may be saved: who
after his conversion did labor in the Lords vineyard with vndurable pains to
bring men unto God.


Ios. Return and cause other to return; and our Savior said to Peter, When
thou art converted strengthen thy Ezec. 18. 33 Luke 22. 32.
brethren. The hatred of sin should move us where we may, to root it out,
the grief which we ought to take, when we see men to sin, should cause us as
far forth as we be able to reclaim them, and not suffer sin Leu. 19.
to rest upon them. That we ought to grieve for sin in our selves, so for the
same in other, Psalm. 119. 136.
we see by David, whose eyes gushed out rivers of water, at the sight of other
men breaking Gods law. Our Savior wept Luke 19. 41. Ier. 13.
over Jerusalem, Ieremies soul mourned in secret, S, Paul writ with tears;
shall we have a passion for sin committed, and not use means to have it
amended?


Call. He that is truly touched with the sight of sin, cannot possibly
neglect the means to win men from sin. It is the nature of grief to
manifest it self, and works in man an endeavor, to use means to have the
cause of grief taken away. Therefore if we truly grieve that men offend God,
we will not suffer them to go on in sin, if we may amend it.


Ios. And as grief may move us, so the consideration of the sinners misery,
may enduce us to care for their salvation. The sinner is Satan's slave, subject
to wrath, the heir of confusion, who may daily look for damnation and
vengeance; oh, who can but pity a man in so great misery? is he not merciless
and cruel that sees one in a deadly danger, and may relieve him, and yet will
not? Can we see a man hanging himself, stand by, and not cut the cord? Can
we behold one running into a pit to drown himself, and if we may, not hold
him back? These be merciless cruelties, if so we should neglect our brothers
bodily life: and it is no less hardness of heart to suffer men by sin, if
it lie in us to reclaim them, to run headlong to hell, where they shall hang
in torments, and be drowned in the gulf of perdition.


Call. Condemnation merciless belongs Iam. 2.
to such as will show no mercy, it is true touching soul and body. No doubt
Abraham our Forefather taught his household; David the King was so minded, who
professed to teach Gods ways unto the wicked, Psalm. 51. 23.
that sinners might be converted unto the Lord. Philip we see sought out
Nathaniel, and brought him to Christ; and the woman of Samaria did run
hastily for her neighbors to behold the Messiah; all which are written for our
learning, that we by their examples should do the like.


Ios. A man would think that enough were said to stir up one to care for
another salvation, but for that men herein are too remiss, and indeed
profess a carelesnes of this with cruel Cain; What, am I my Genesis 4. 9.
brothers keeper? I will the longer stay upon this point, as a matter of
absolute necessity, the neglect whereof is the cause of so great increase of
wickedness at home and abroad. It is the fruit of love in the communion and
holy fellowship of Saints: One


Call. You have here from a natural work, plainly set out our duty in a
spiritual action: nature forces the one, and therefore grace I hope will set
us forward to the other.


Ios. If this suffice not, let this move us, he shall cover the multitude of
sins, he Iam. 5. Dan. 12. 3.
shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. The Ioh. 3. 16.
the work moved God the Father to give his only Son to die, and Christ


Call. If neither the commandment of God, the grief of heart for sin, the
sinners Abriefe repetition of all the reasons.
misery, holy men's examples, the bond of fellowship and mutual communion, our
own danger in the neglect hereof, the care to enlarge Christ's kingdom, the
reward of happiness, nor the love of god, nor Christ's sufferings, can move us
to do our best to save a poor sinner; let the devil teach us to look unto
it, who with his members studiously endeauonr to draw men from God, to
themselves, and to bring them to destruction: If he and his be so forward to
ill, the reward whereof is death, why should not we do more to oppose him and
his instruments for man's life and salvation? especially ministers in feeding
their flock, who are charged to do it upon their love to Christ, Ioh. 21. 15.
16. 17. 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2 Ezec. 33. 8. Governors of families should tea^h their
household.
upon their allegiance to their sovereign, to avoid blood guiltines, and to
prevent eternal vengeance: And nothing less are governors of families tied
thereunto, they see and blame, and not unworthily, ministers that neglect their
flock: but they find not the same fault in themselves for careless omitting
the instruction of their family, which they be in their own persons Deuteronomy. 5. 7.
Ephesians. 6. 4. 1. Cor. 14. 35 Genesis 18. 19. 2. Tim. 1. 5. with 3. 15.
father, the mother, the master and Governor is to teach their children and
household in the ways of God. So are they commanded, so examples teach them to
do.


Ios. Thou have truly spoken (Honorable Caleb) for we that have charge of
families are commanded to inform the^; even necessity to keep a holy unity
among us, Lamb and the Lion dwell together, a Cain and an Abel, a mocking
Ismael, and faithful Isaac, a scorning Michol, and a zealous David? How can
ministers reform whole Assemblies, if we do not our endeavor to help them in
our families? This want of private help makes


Call. Undoubtedly, if the benefit which hence would arise, first to our selves,
to our children and household, then to the help of the public ministry, were
well weighed, there be none that have either care of themselves, wish well to
their children, desire faithfulness in their servants, and covet to see
Jerusalem in prosperity, but they would betake them speedily to this so great,
so necessary and godly a work. How come children


Ios. I therefore and my house, by Gods help, will serve the Lord, as God has
given mes grace to see and know the evil, I will endeavor to prevent it in me
and mine.


Call. Your speech in the order thereof teaches me, as I take it, not only
your care herein to do what you ought, but your wisdom in an orderly
proceeding therein.


Ios. It is well noted of you: I set my self


Call. I do persuade my self, that some have good desires hereunto, and more
perhaps by this may be set forward to settle their households in order: but
every one that gladly would do well, know not how to do so; therefore let me
obtain (most Noble Lord) the knowledge of 3. things at your hands, both for
mine own, and the peoples instruction herein. I. How a family Three questions.
may be at the first religiously planted? II. How a family irreligious may be
reformed? III. How it may be so kept, and preserved?


Ios. Three necessary questions propounded and worthy to be answered. To
satisfy you in the first. To plant a family in religious Answer to the first.
How a family may be religiously planted.
fear of God. I. Parents must bring up such children well, with which they
will build up a house, acquaint them with the Lords will, with duties of a
husband and wife, of a father and mother, and so marry in judgment, before
they marry, and not in carnal lust. Without knowledge of the former christian
duties, men's marriages are but Turkish, and to marry in the latter only, is
sensual and brutish. II. Parents must see that the parties to be married be
fitted, that their be no dislike in affection, nor jar in religion, but that
the marriage be made in love, and settled in Gods fear; both believers, both
embracing one and the same truth, as near as may be. Abraham does fetch a
Rebecca for Isaac, from his fathers house, and there is religion; when
Iehosaphat taking an Athalia for his son, brings into his house idolatry
and superstition. To plant religion, we must bring in religion into a family,
by education, and by a holy conjunction of them together in the fear of God.
III. and lastly, Parents must care that the religious persons, religiously
married, be religiously served. And therefore, that such as become servants to
them, be of the same holy profession with them, and of like conversation. And
thus may a family be planted religiously.


Call. What direction give you for the second, viz. to reform a disordered
family?


Ios. The governor must do, as in making Answer to the second question. How a
family may be reformed.
a new house, where an old stood; he must remove the old wholly as far forth
as it is unprofitable, and make the rest all new. The man and the wife must be
sound, they be the two side posts; so their children, who are as the beams
laid overthwart, if they be rotten, though all the rest be new, at the length
the work will fall.


Call. How must they be made sound, if they be rotten?


Ios. By repenting of all former sin, and negligence past, and by undertaking
this work sincerely with a constant durablenes.


Call. What timber is so rotten, as will never serve to be put in the new
building?


Ios. Every one that persists in evil, and will not be reformed.


Call. But what if there be some such, whom the master of the family cannot cast
out?


Ios. Let such so be in the house, as they bear no rule in it, neither any
sound part depend or stay upon them; so shall there be neither breach nor ruin
thereby.


Call. What other means is there to reform by?


Ios. Secondly, the governor must bring all his household in subjection to Gods
word, to hear and attend unto the public ministry thereof, as the ordinary
means to reclame men. It is the power of Romans 1. 18. Heb 4. 12. Psalm 1^9 9.
Pro. 2. 11. 12. 16. The benefit of religious exercises in houses.
God to salvation, it is mighty in operation, it cleanses our ways, and
keeps us from all evil. Thirdly, he must set up within his house religious
exercises; these make public means more profitable, more highly to be
esteemed, and the judgment better to be settled; evil hereby is prevented, yea
thrust out from the family, bad persons hereby are tried and found out, the
well disposed made more religious, and God not a little glorified.


Call. What are the holy exercises which you here speak of?


Ios. Reading of the holy Scriptures, the voice of God, Catechizing, telling
some short story of some notable example in the word, making use thereof,
singing of psalms, and when the public sermon has bin heard, to repeat
thereof as much as is remembered.


Call. This, say some, will make servants weary, and none will come to them.


Ios. It were better to be without servants then have such as hate goodness,
but this same which is objected, and so much feared, may be answered easily,
and the fear taken away. The master to hold up such good exercises, and not to
weary his household, must I. be toward all his servants merciful, in giving
them a time to rest, not to dog them day and night to their labor, as
beasts. II. He must perform al things seasnably, not late in the night after
toylsome labor, and when wearines and time it self do enforce the body to
sleep. III. He must not have the same exercises held long, at one time, but
avoid tedious prayers, least one be speaking, whilst the rest be sleeping; as
it falls out sometime by the weakness of one, and the zealous indiscretion
of an other. IV. He must regard much a religious servant, reward him well, and
pray to God for such, and he shall not want godly servants, and be well rid of
the lewd and profane.


Caleb. If servants be encouraged, godly discretion be used, honest liberty
granted, competent wages allowed, tolerable labor only urged, difference
made, and the best answerably rewarded, there is no doubt either of getting or
retaining servants: but how may a family reformed so be preserved?


Ios. I. The chief must themselves keep Answer to the third question. How to
keep in order a family reformed.
breeds in other carelesnes, their omission occasioneth in other transgression.
II. They must make known their full resolution to all, in matters of religion,
that they will walk uprightly in the midst of the house, that they will allow
no order to be Psalm. 101.
against God and religion more narrowly, Psalm. 101.
obstinate, mocking Ismaels may not remain with Isaacs: a little leaven
leaueneth 1. Cor. 5.
the whole lump, one lewd person may do much hurt. VI. They may not
touchstone of profession: where the husband is loving, the wife learnes
obedience; where the wife is obedient, the husband is moved to be kind, by
their well living the house is preserved in peace, and where they two do as
they ought to themselves and their family, the children and servants learn to
walk in subjection, and do in an awefull love discharge their duties, and
hereby do they provoke one another unto piety, continue love and unity in the
spirit, and keep up holy exercises with prayer. Lastly, they


Call. It remains only now to give some reasons, why the several sorts in a
family, and so that all therein should be religious, as first why the father,
master and husband, which are all one person in the house, should be religious?
Why the husband should be religious. Deuteronomy. 6. Exodus 20. Ephesians. 6. 4.



Ios. I. Because he is specially charged with instruction of the household, and
to see to the^. Secondly, because the family has from him chiefly the name.
Thirdly, because he is the head. Fourthly, for a special example, as most
forcible to draw other on. Fifthly, because of the examples of good governors of
families, as Abraham, Cornelius, and other. Sixthly, for that he shall answer
for his household, as the minister for his flock. Seventhly, to bring a blessing
vppn his children. Exodus 20.



Call. Why should the wife, mother, mistress of the family be religious?


Ios. First, because she is the husbands shadow, Why the wife should be
religious.
or rather picture to represe^t him in all good things, and as the moon does
from the sun, so she is to receive her light from him, which she also is to
let shine out to other. Secondly, because she is to be an help to her husband;
now she can be in nothing more a help, then in being with him religious to
further his instructions taught to his household. Thirdly, for that the husband
is often from home, and she is to supply his place, to see the household kept
in good order. Fourthly, for mutual peace sake; if she be not religious, she
will oppose him, as a mocking Michol, or as an idolatrus Iesabel, cause him to
forsake the worship of the true God. Fifthly, because godly wives are co^me^ded
for religion in scripuure, which are to be followed. Sixthly, because she is
the first that instructs the child, as being most with it, causing it to
understand that which she does please to teach it. Seventhly, for that she
being frail by nature, and apt without grace to go astray herself, may
sooner, as usually it comes to pass, corrupt the child then the father, by
being so continually with it.


Call. Why ought children to be religious?


Ios. First, for their godly parents sake. Why children should be religious.
Secondly, because they be the second link in a family, and so in the middle
between the highest and lowest; they therefore next Parents must be religious,
that servants by them grow not vicious. Thirdly, for their fathers joy, whose
true and sure comfort is not that their children can hunt, so could profane
Esau; nor that they be fair; so was Absalom beautiful, and came to anill end;
nor that they be in Honor; so was Saul a cast-way; nor great Churchmen, so
were Elies sons who perished in their sins: but even because they be
religious, for the grace of God endures ever. Fourthly, for a blessing unto
themselves, as God has promised to all that fear him. Fifthly, for
encouragement unto their Parents, beholding grace in them, which will cause
them to continue gracious, lest their children lose grace. Sixthly: because they
preserve the good name upon their Parents, get them honor, and are a crown of
glory to them, even after death.


Call. Why ought servants to be religious?


Ios. 1. For their masters praise. 2. For Why servants ought to be godly.
their own comfort. 3. Because good servants are recorded in Scripture for
imitation sake. 4. Because whilst they be men's servants, they may be the
Lords free men by religion. 5. To do their service honestly, as looking for
reward from God. 6. For childrens good, whom lewd servants may easily misleade.


Call. So then, all ought to be religious, that the master with his whole family
may be said to serve the Lord, as thou have (most noble Joshua) promised this
day for thy self and thy household.


Ios. So it is, and great is that blessing, where all become the Lords true
servants, religion their practice, the holy word their guide: there man and
wife are brother and sister, parents and children of spiritual kindred, and
have one father: masters and servants mutual members and co-heires with Christ
Jesus: there have they one voice in prayer with devotion, one care to abandon
superstition. All perform mutual duties; one seeks to please another, to
hold love, to keep peace, and to preserve a holy communion in charity with
piety. One distrusteth not another, one wrongeth not another, there is a godly
striving together, who shall do the best to please God. They bear with
weaknesses, they joy in each others goodness; here they desire peace of
conscience, the fellowship of the godly; Gods glory they do aim at: the
world they live in, but ever with desire of heaven, which God has promised to
all that walk righteously before him, and serve him; which grace the Lord
vouchsafe us now and ever.


Call. Amen, Amen. But yet (Sir) before we end, I beseech you commend to my
meditation some special Scriptures to stir me up unto devotion.


Ios. If it please you for the godly man's blessedness, read Psalm. 1. for his
comfort, Psalm. 37. Heb. 12. for his holy desires to Gods word, and his
obedience, Psalm. 119. for his religious practice, Job. 31. Romans 12. Heb. 13.
for his faith, Heb. 11. for his love, 1. Cor. 13. and for the effectual marks
of his vocation, and eternal salvation, Romans 8.


Call. I thank you humbly, and bless God for you, whom I beseech to prosper
these things to our comfort, and that they may further us to a holy practice,
to the praise of the God of Israel, that we may be found the Israel of God in
the last day.


Amen.
FINIS.
The Catechism.
Question. HOw many things are needful for you to understand, that you may
know both God and your self?
A. These six things: I. rightly to conceive of God what he is, by his word
and works: II. to understand the creation: III. man's misery by the fall. IV.
our redemption: V. our sanctification. VI. the certainty of our glorification.

Of God.
Q. Who made you?
A. God. Esa. 42. 5. Genesis 1. 26, 27.

Q. What a one is God?
A. God is a spirit, Ioh. 4. 24. holy, Exodus 15. 11. Just, 2. Chron. 12. 6. and
merciful, Exodus 34. 6.

Q. How many Gods are there?
A. But only one God, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. yet three persons, Mat. 3. 16. 1. Ioh. 5. 7.

Q. Which are the three Persons?
A. The Father begetting, the Son begotten, and the holy Ghost proceeding, 2.
Cor. 13. 13. Mat. 28. 19. and these three are God, Ioh. 1. 1. 1. Ioh. 5. 7.
Act. 5. 3. 4.

Q. Which of these three became man?
A. The second Person, Jesus Christ both God and man, Esa. 9. 6. Heb. 2. 17.

Of our Creation.
Q. Of what did God make man?
A. His body was of dust, the woman of Adams ribbe, Genesis 2. 7. 22.

Q. What a one did God make them?
A. He made them both good, Genesis 1. 31. holy and righteous, Genesis 1. 26. Ephesians. 4.
24. Colos. 3. 10.

Q. What was then man's estate and happiness?
A. It was the state of innocence, without sin or misery, and to God was he
acceptable, Genesis 1. 27. 31. and 2. 25. and 1. 28.

Of man's fall and misery.
Q. Are you now such a one by birth, as he was by creation?
A. Alas no: I am by nature full of sin, Psalm. 51. 5. Job 25. 4, 5, 6. Romans 3.
from verse. 9. to 19. And so most miserable, Job 14. 1. 2. Romans 5. 14. Ephesians. 2.
1, 2, 3. Romans 3. 23. and 2. 8. 9. And to God detestable, Psalm. 11. 5. Gal. 3.
10. Mat. 7. 23. and 25. 41.

Q. What is sin?
A. The breaking of Gods commandments, by thought, word, or deed, 1. Job. 3. 4.

Q. How many commandments are there?
A. Ten, Deuteronomy. 10. 4. divided into two Tables, Deuteronomy. 4. 13.

Q. Which be the Commandments?
A. I am the Lord thy God, etc. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. 6.

Q. Do these ten command or forbid no more but only what there is set
down in show?
A. Yes: they command or forbid all the kinds contained under the sameth^ng
mentioned, and all the causes, with occasions thereunto, 1. Ioh. 3. 15. Mat. 5.
28. 32.

Q. Are they a prayer?
A. No, nor so to be used: they are a rule for me to live after, and do teach
me my duty to God and my neighbor, Deuteronomy. 6. and 31. 12. Psalm. 119. 105.
Eccles. 12. 13. Mat. 22. 37. 39.

Q. What is your duty toward God?
A. My duty toward God, is to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him,
etc. 2. Chro. 20. 20. Eccl. 12. 13. Mat. 22. 27.

Q. What is your duty toward your neighbor?
A. It is to love my neighbor as my self, etc. Mat. 22. 39. Romans 13 9.

Q. Can you keep the Commandments, and not offend God, or your neighbor?
A. No: I break them every day in thought, word, and deed, hating both God,
and my neighbor by nature, Psalm. 14. 1, 2, 3. Romans 8. 7. and 1. 30. 2. Cor. 3.
5. Tit. 3. 3,

Q. What is then now your estate, and what deserve you by thus offending God?
A. I am in the state of corruption, and do deserve Gods curse, which is
eternal destruction of body and soul. Deu. 27. 26. Mat. 25. 41. 46. Gal. 3.
10.

Of man's redemption.
Q. What are you in this case to do?
A. To cry unto God for mercy, and seek for deliverance. Luke 15. 17. Ps. 51.
1. 2. etc.

Q. Are you of your self able, or is there any good in you to move God to set
you free?
A. No indeed: Romans 3. 10. and 7. 18. Luke 17. 10. 2. Cor. 4. 4. Ephe. 2. 8, 9.

Q. Then who does redeem you?
A. Only Jesus Christ. Romans 7. 25. 2. Cor. 5. 21. Romans 5. 19. Gal. 2. 20. and
3. 13.

Q. What is Jesus Christ?
A. He is the eternal Son of God. Mat. 17. 5. Heb. 1. 23, a King to govern
us, Psa. 2. 6. Mat. 28. 18. a Priest to offer for us, Ps. 110. 4. and a Prophet
to teach us, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Esa. 51. 1. Mat. 17. 5.

Q. What believe you concerning him in the Articles of the Creed?
A. I do believe that he was conceived by the holy Ghost, etc.

Q. What is this to you?
A. I do persuade my self hereby, that his purity is for my corruption, his
obedience for my transgression, his death for my debt, and his ascension for my
eternal salvation. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Phil. 3. 20.

Q. But as God made all, will so Jesus Christ also save all?
A. No verily, many shall be damned, few shall be saved, Mat. 7. 13. 14. Only
the elect, which take hold of Christ by a lively faith. Ioh. 3. 16. 36. Mar.
16. 16.

Q. What is this lively faith?
A. It is a true persuasion of my heart, grounded upon Gods promises. Ephesians. 3.
17 Romans 4. 21. that Jesus Christ is given to me, Ioh. 3. 16. and the merits of
his death and passion, are as truly mine, as if I my self had wrought them, 2.
Cor. 5. 21. Romans 8. 1.

Q. How come you by this faith?
A. From my effectual calling by the word preached, and the work of Gods
spirit, Act. 13. 48. Romans 10. 14, 15. Ephesians. 1. 13.

Q. Where is set down the sum of your belief?
A. In my Creed, I believe in God the Father almighty, etc.

Q. Are these a prayer, or so to be used?
A. No: it teaches me what to believe concerning God and his Church.

Q. What good has Gods Church, the true believers, above the rest of mankind?
A. They are in the state of grace, they have communion with Christ, and one
with another, the forgiveness of sins, the glorious resurrection of the body,
and life everlasting.

Of Sanctification.
Q. How may it appear, that you have this faith, and also these benefits?
A. By my sanctification.

Q. Who does sanctify you?
A. The holy Ghost, Romans 15. 16.

Q And what is sanctification?
A. It is a making new of the whole man, whereby he daily dies to sin, and
increases in holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4. 23. 24 Gal. 5. 24. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1.

Q. What grace proceeds from this sanctification?
A. True repentance, leaving that which is ill with hatred, and performing new
obedience with gladness of heart continually. Ier. 31. 19. Act. 26. 20. Psalm.
119. 10. 14. 34. 35. 44. 113. 115. 136.

Q. What estate stand you in, being sanctified and penitent?
A. I am in the blessed estate of grace, wherein if I continue, I shall inherit
eternal life, Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. Romans 11. 12. 2. Tim. 4. 8.

Q. Why has God thus made, redeemed, sanctified, and hitherto preserved you?
A. To serve him truly all the days of my life, Ephesians. 2. 10. Tit. 2. 11. 12.
Luke 1. 74 75.

Q. How must God be served?
A. Only after his will revealed in his written word, Deuteronomy. 30. 8. 10. and 4.
2. 2. Cor. 4. 6.

Of our strengthening in the state of grace, for the certainty of our
glorification.
Q. Is it needful for such as are elected, and once called, justified, and
sanctified, that they should continue still in using means to salvation?
A. Yea truly: else they will fall away, Pro. 29. 18. 2. Chro. 15. 2. Heb. 3.
12. 13.

Q. What things must you continue in to assure your self of salvation, and to
grow strong in the way of life?
A. I. In the knowledge of Gods word, Psalm. 1. 2. Act. 2. 42. 2. Pet. 1. 19.
Ioh. 10. 27. 28. II. In faith, Ioh. 3. 36. III. In love to the godly, Ioh. 13.
35. 1, Ioh. 3. 14. IV. In obedience. Eze. 36. 26. Psa. 15. 5. Ier. 32. 39, 40.
V. In patient suffering for Christ, Romans 8. 17. Iam. 1. 12. VI. In alonging
after Christ's coming, 2. Tim. 4. 8. VII. In sincerity without hypocrisy,
which will appear by my appealing to God in these things, Ioh. 21. 15.

Of the Sacraments.
Q. Has God given any helps and commanded further any other means besides
the word, for the strengthening of us herein?
A. Yes, these two: Sacraments and prayer.

Q. What is a Sacrament?
A. An outward sign and seal of invisible graces.

Q. How do the Sacraments strengthen you?
A. By a reverent using and meditating of them rightly understood, as signs
representing Christ and his benefits, and sure seals of his covenant with us.
Genesis 9. 9. to 18. and 17. 9, 10.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?
A. Only two: Baptism, and the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. Mat. 28.
19. and 26. 26, 27. 1. Cor. 11. 23, 24 25.

Q. What is the sign and thing signified in Baptism?
A. The sign is water, and the grace is the blood of Christ, by which I am
washed from my sins. Act. 2. 38. and 22. 16.

Q. What are the signs and things signified in the Lords Supper?
A The signs are the bread and wine; the things signified are the body and
blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 11, 23, 24, 25.

Q. Why come you to receive?
A. To strengthen my faith, and to keep in remembrance Christ his death, till
his coming again, Romans 4. 11. 1. Cor. 11. 26.

Q. What ought you to do before you come?
A. Prepare my self by examination, 1. Cor. 11. 28.

Q. What ought you to come with, to the Sacrament?
A. With 4. things. 1. Knowledge both of my misery, Gods mercy, and the
doctrine of the Sacrament. II. With faith in Jesus Christ, Heb. 11. 6. III.
With repentance for all my sins, Esa. 1. 10. 11. 14. 15. 16. Prou. 21. 27.
IV. With hearty love unto my neighbor, Math. 5. 23.

Q. What if you come unprepared without these?
A. I come unworthy, I am guilty of the body and blood of Christ, 1. Cor. 11.
27. I do eat and drink my own damnation, verse 29. God may punish me, verse
40. and the devil may enter into me, as he did into Judas, and bring me to
destruction of body and soul, Ioh. 13. 27.

Of Prayer.
Q. What is prayer?
A. It is a right hearty, and faithful request made unto God, in the name of
Jesus Christ, 1. Ioh. 5. 14. Romans 8. 26. Iam. 1. 6. Ioh. 14. 14. and 15. 16.
Math. 3. 17.

Q. Can or does every one pray, that utters words, and uses a form of
prayer?
A. No. It is a special gift to Gods children, and such only pray, as have
knowledge what to ask, a hearty desire in asking, and faith to believe.

Q. What direction of prayer have you?
A. The same which our Savior Christ taught his disciples, Our Father which
art in heaven, etc.

Q. What desire you of God in this prayer?
A. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is the giver of all goodness,
to send his grace unto me, and to all people, that we may worship him, serve
him, and obey him, as we ought to do; and I pray unto God, that he will send
us all things that be needful, both for our souls and bodies, and that he
will be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins, and that it will please
him to save and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily, and that he will
keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from
everlasting death. And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore I say, Amen. So be it.

The first part of Catechism: Of new birth.
Q. WHat is your name?
A. Channanuel, God is gracious to us. Love wholly the Lord with the heart.
Benalleuel, God is gracious to us. Love wholly the Lord with the heart.



Q. Who gave you this name?
A. My Godfathers and my Godmothers, who with my father, brought me to the
Minister, into the congregation, to be baptized, and were especial witnesses
of the same, and professors of my faith and obedience to God for me.

Q. Why were you baptized?
A. That I might receive a badge of my Christian religion, and be admitted into
the Church, to live amongst the professors of Christ's name, and to be received
of them, and accounted as a member of Christ, the child of God, and an
inheritour of the kingdom of heaven, until I show the contrary.

Q. Whereby may you now be certain that you are such a one in deed?
A. If I do what my Godfathers and Godmothers did make profession of for me.

Q. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers make profession of for you?
A. They did profess three things in my name: the first was the forsaking of
the Devil, and all his works, the pompes and the vanities of this wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh.

Q. What, were you then bound to them, that you have promised to forsake them?
A. Yea verily, I am a bondslaue to Satan, by the corruption of my nature,
prone to all vice, having the seed of all sin in me, and do hate both God
and my neighbor.

Q. How can you then forsake this woeful estate, and cease from any evil,
being thus bound and prone thereunto?
A. Not by any natural power, in, or of my self, but only by the grace of
God, when it is given unto me.

Q. Are you sure you have forsaken them, are you not deceived?
A. I am not deceived: for I hate unfeignedly the works of the devil, the
worlds vanity, all the ungodly manners of every man: and I labor by all good
means, to die to all sin daily, loving the word of God, following it and all
godly examples, endeavoring to kill speedily every ill motion, but cherishing
the good in my heart, by meditation, vows, fasting, and prayer.

Q. But can you tell me what are the works of the devil, the worlds vanity,
and the ill motions of the heart?
A. Whatsoever I, or any other, do think, speak, or do, against the will of
God, revealed in his written word.

Q. What has moved you to forsake the devil, the world, and the flesh?
A. For that I have learned, and do well perceive, by knowledge from the word,
and mine own experience, that these three be the only malicious, spiritual,
powerful, subtle and continual enemies of my eternal felicity.

Q. What are the other two things, that your Godfathers and Godmothers made
profession of for you?
A. They secondly made profession of my belief to all the twelve Articles of
my Christian faith: and thirdly, of my willingness to learn diligently Gods
holy will and commandments, and to walk obediently in the same all the days
of my life.

Q. Where is this will of God to be learned?
A. Not from mine own fantasy, man's wisdom, traditions, or examples of men,
but only out of the Scripture, which is the word written by his Prophets and
Apostles, in the books of the old and new Testament, which is sufficient to
teach us all things necessary, that we need to believe for our salvation.

Q. What reasons have you to persuade your self, that this Scripture which we
hold, is the true word of God, and none other?
A. First, from the penmen, being many, and most of them simple and plain
persons, who do mutually consent, setting down their own faults without
partiality. Secondly, from the matter, above natural men's reach; of man's
creation, resurrection, last judgment, and of the Trinity in unity, prophecies
also fulfilled in all circumstances. Thirdly, from the manner of speaking,
peremptorily reproouing or allowing, without sinister respects. Fourthly, from
the effect, binding conscience, converting men, to hate even life it self for
Gods glory. Fifthly, the miraculous preservation thereof, with punishment of
such as seek to overthrow either it, or the professors thereof. Lastly, that
it ascribes all glory to God, the maine end that it aymeth at.

Q. What means must you use to come to the saving knowledge of Gods word?
A. 1. Daily reading. 2. Learning the Catechism, the grounds of religion. 3.
hearing the Word with mind and affection both read and preached publicly, by
Gods Ministers. 4. Meditation in mind, to understand the doctrine gathered,
and in heart to affect the use made, after I have either read or heard it. 5.
Conference by asking of superiors and Ministers, by reasoning with equals, and
teaching inferiors, all in reverence and humility, to understand that I know
not, to be resolved in that I doubt of, and to call to memory what I have
forgotten. 6. Continual prayer, with practice of it in my particular calling.

Q. Do you think you are thus bound to forsake the devil, the world, and the
flesh, to believe in God, to learn to know and do his will, as they have
promised for you?
A. Yes verily, and by Gods help so will I endeavor to do, or else were I
unthankful to God my Father, that has called me into the state of salvation,
making me his child; and also unmindful of my sureties, that have made such a
profession for me.

Q. But tell me, how could any persuade themselves, that you should do as they
have made profession for you?
A. By being assured by faith, that the seed of the faithful are blessed,
they judging me charitably to be one of them, did hope by the grace of God
belonging unto me in Christ, and through the means which should be used, I
would perform the same.

Q. What are the means which ought to be used?
A. 1. To be taught so soon as I shall be able to learn, what a solemn
profession I have made by them. 2. To be exhorted to hear Sermons, and to
learn all things which a Christian ought to know for his souls health: but
especially the principles of religion, contained in these four: the Creed,
the Lords prayer, the ten Commandments, and the doctrine of the Sacraments.

The second part.
Q. Let us then see, whether these means have been used, and how you have
profited: rehearse the articles of your belief?
A. I believe in God the Father, etc.

Q. What do you chiefly learn out of these articles of your Christian faith?
A. 1. I learn to believe that there is a God, to believe God, and also in
him. 2. That he is but one in substance, yet distinguished into three, the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, which distinction is in person, property, and
manner of working. 3. That this God has a Church, to which only he is truly
known, and by the same sincerely worshipped.

Q. How can you be persuaded that there is a God?
A. 1. By his created works declaring: 2. by my conscience accusing: 3. by
judgments terrifying: 4. by order observed in all things: 5. by heathen
authors consenting: 6. by the Scripture confidently auouching the same.

Q. What is God we cannot tell, therefore tell me what a one he is?
A. A spiritual substance, most holy, and of glorious majesty; in finite in
his being, as every where present; in wisdom, foreseeing and rightly
disposing all things: in power, doing what he list; in justice, punishing whom
he will justly; and in mercy, to save whom he pleases.

Q. How do you behold and conceive of this God?
A. Not by any bodily shape, but spiritually, by his word, as he has therein
manifested himself, and by his works of creation, preservation and governing
every thing, according to his foreknowledge, and appointment therein, to his
own glory.

Q. What believe you concerning God the Father?
A. That he is God almighty, in order the first Person in the Trinity,
begetting the Son from everlasting, of his whole substance: maker of heaven
and earth, men and angels, and all things else very good, only by his word, of
nothing, at the beginning, in six days, and still by his providence preserues
the same, for my benefit.

Q. What was man especially made of?
A. Man consists of body and soul, the first man's body was made of the dust of
the earth, but our bodies come by generation, and are with his mortal: and
both his and all our souls by inspiration, and are immortal.

Q. What estate stood man in by creation, and what a one did God make him?
A. In the estate of innocence, void of all sin, free from any punishment^
and was made after Gods Image, that is, holy and righteous, having perfect
knowledge of God and his will, as much as was needful for him, and also
readiness of will in hearty affection, with bodily strength to fulfill the
same: and had withal the rule of all Gods creatures, made for his benefit.

Q. How then come you into this wretched estate?
A. By the fall of Adam and Eve, my first parents, who wilfully disobeyed God,
by the devils inticement, infidelity and pride possessing their hearts, and
stood and fell in the room of all mankind.

Q. How can our souls be sinful, that come not by propagation, but by
inspiration?
A. 1. For that his soul was deputy for all souls of men naturally begotten.
2. Because man sinned, and man is not man, before body and soul be knit
together, which being conjoined, become together, as man, partaker of man's fall
and corruption.

Q. Does any thing of that Image of God remain yet in us?
A. Yes: 1. In the mind a certain general corrupt knowledge of nature,
concerning good and evil, to make us inexcusable before God. 2. In the
conscience a power to reprove and repress in part unbridled affections. 3. In
will, though a free, yet a weak choice, in every natural and civil action.

Q. What evils do we receive by this fall?
A. 1. In the mind ignorance of heavenly things, unaptness to learn them, or
to judge of them aright; but apt to learn evil, and to invent the same. 2. In
conscience impurenesse to excuse sin, not to accuse, being dead or benumbed:
and to accuse for well or ill doing: 3. In will, want of power, to will any
true good, but to resist it, and only to will that which is evil. 4. In
affection, to hate good, and run after ill. 5. In body, fitness to begin
sin, by receiving outward objects and occasions thereof by the senses, and
also to execute the same, when the heart has conceived it in word and deed:
and this is called original sin, which is in every man.

Q. Do all men continue in this sinful and cursed estate for ever?
A. No: but only the reprobate, whom God has not decreed to save, to manifest
his justice: for the elect, being predestinate to eternal life, are in this
world in their appointed time called effectually, through Gods word and his
spirit, justified and sanctified, and so shall continue in this estate of grace
to be glorified, for that God will also show his mercy, and all for his own
glory.

Q. Are none of the reprobate ever in the estate of grace, and Gods favor?
A. No verily: though many of them, endued with the common gifts of the Spirit,
may in outward appearance, for a time seem to be of the elect, in the
judgment of the Church.

Q. Can any of the elect then be ever before God in the state of damnation?
A. No indeed: albeit both before their conversion: and also after they be
called, they falling by infirmity, and lying a time in their sin, may appear
in show to the Church, to be none of the elect: yet can they not fall away,
wholly or finally.

Q. May not men then live as they list, sithence he being a reprobate, cannot
be saved, or an elect cannot be damned?
A. Not so: for that one elect cannot but use the means which are ordained for
him to walk, to make his election sure to himself, which who so does not,
cannot be saved.

Q. What believe you concerning God the Son?
A. That he is God the second person in the Trinity, Christ Jesus, the only
natural Son begotten of the Father, our Lord, made man, conceived and
sanctified by the holy Ghost, joining two natures into one person, borne
according to the promise, of the virgin Mary, who perfectly fulfilled the law,
humbled and suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, bearing upon him Gods
curse, and hellish torments, who died and was buried, and being a while held
captive of death in the grave, he was exalted, and victoriously rose again
the third day, and is ascended up into heaven, and there he sits on the right
hand of God his Father, having all power in heaven and earth to rule and
govern his Church; where his manhood does, and shall at all times remain
(though in his godhead he be present with me ever) until he shall come from
thence, to judge us all, here on earth, both quick and dead at the last day;
which day cannot be now far of.

Q. Why should he need to be both God and man?
A. That he might be the only Mediator betwixt God and man, to satisfy for
sin, which neither the manhood by deserving, nor godhead by dying, alone
could do.

Q. Why is he called Christ?
A. To declare, that he was the promised Messiah, and to signify his offices,
that he was anointed, not with material oil, but with the gift of the spirit
without measure, to be our King, Priest, and Prophet: from which name we are
called Christians, and are by him Kings, Priests, and Prophets.

Q. How is Christ a King?
A. I. He is King, not only as God, but because he is the head governing the
Church, without any general Vicar under him, by his word and spirit
immediately, making laws, and ordaining Ministers to the gathering together
and preservation thereof. II. By destroying Satan, his angels, unbelievers,
idolaters, heretics, antichrist, and the whole kingdom of darkness.

Q. How is Christ a Priest?
A. I. By satisfying for all the sins of the elect, by his passion and
fulfilling of the law. II. For that he makes prayer continually to God for
them.

Q. How is Christ a Prophet?
A. By immediately revealing from his father, his word and means of salvation
contained in the same.

Q. Why is he called Jesus?
A. To signify that he is a Savior to every true believer: neither is there
any other means of our selves, or by any other, either in part or whole, to
obtain salvation, but only by him alone.

Q. Why is he called Lord?
A. Because we owe all homage and duty in love to him, for our redemption.

Q. What believe you concerning the holy Ghost?
A. That he is God, the third person in the Trinity, proceeding from the Father
and the Son, who spoke by the Prophets, dwelling in the faithful, sanctifying
them in part in this life, working by the word and holy motions, an utter
loathing of sin, and a hearty love of righteousness, leading them into all
truth, persuading them of Gods favor, teaching them in prayer, bearing them up
in temptation, quickening, renewing, and increasing his gifts in them; that
they may know, believe, love, and do that which is good, which he will perfect
fully in the life to come.

Q. Why did this God thus make, redeem, sanctify, and hitherto preserve you?
A. That I might praise his name, in living godly, righteously, and soberly,
according to all his commandments, in my calling, in all things, whatsoever my
estate be, in this present world.

Q. What do you believe concerning the Church?
A. That it is but one mystical body whether militant or triumphant, visible or
invisible, in heaven or in earth, being a company of the Lords elect, holy by
Christ, Catholic, gathered of the dispersed abroad, and having special
prerogatives above the rest of mankind, communion with Christ, and one with
another by the bond of the spirit, the forgiveness of al sins, the joyful
resurrection of the body, and life everlasting, whereof I believe my self to be
one, and therefore, that the same things belong also unto me.

Q. What are the marks of the true Church here on earth?
A. Inwardly faith and love, outwardly, (besides the uncertain notes, of
universality, antiquity, and consent) these two: Christ's word truly preached,
his Sacraments rightly administered, whereto add, faithful prayer, and holy
discipline.

Q. Is the Church of Rome a true Church of Christ?
A. No: but of Antichrist the Pope, the chief teacher of the doctrine of
devils.

Q. What reason have you to disallow that religion?
A. For that it is a false religion. I. The author is the devil. II. The means
used to uphold it, are unlawful: 1. deceived Councels: 2. unwritten verities,
and forged authors: 3. falsifying the Fathers: 4. corrupting Scripture, by
adding thereto: 5. by taking from it, by false interpreting: 6. retaining the
people in ignorance, by forbidding to study the word, and teaching it in an
unknown tongue: 7. pretending revelations, and showing lying miracles: 8.
counterfeit holiness: 9. bloody persecution. III. The matter of their religion
is untruths, idolatry, heresy, and novelties invented by man. IV. The form in
the service ridiculous, by foolish gestures: carnal, by fleshly pomps and
delights, their worship is by hypocrisy. V. The end to advance men, by
worshipping of Saints, and extolling man's power and merits. VI. The benefit
gotten thereby is nothing, because it keeps a man in the state of damnation:
and allows the breach of all the 10. commandments. 1. To fear God by men's
doctrines. 2. To worship images. 3. Magic and coniuring. 4. idol-seruice. 5.
Treason against Christian Princes. 6. Assoyles for murderers. 7. Stews, and
restraint of marriage. 8. Wages for no lawful labor, to Masse-mongers, and for
deceits. 9. To break an oath to a Christian made lawfully. 10. That
concupiscence is no sin. VII. Gods judgments against many of the most fiery
professors thereof, which is never seen to happen to zealous and constant
professors of the truth.

Q. What must be done to maintain the Church, and to overthrow heresy, that
destroies the foundation, errors corrupting religion, scismes breaking the
peace of the Church, and vices staining our profession?
A. 1. To cleave only to the written word, which is both in time before, and in
authority above the Church, to judge all controversies in religion. 2. To call
sufficient men, and ordain them ministers to teach, allowing necessary
maintenance; but suffering no insufficient to creep in, or to abide still:
neither the able to live idly, by carelessness, pride, or covetousness. 3.
That there be a godly order established and peaceably kept of every one,
without giving offense. 4. That there be a holy and right use continually of
true discipline, to admonish, suspend, and excommunicate obstinate offenders
whosoever they be.

Q. Are not the articles of your belief a prayer?
A. No: but only a sum of the Gospel: which is one part of Gods word,
containing the promises of salvation by Christ, and is also a rule by which I
must examine my faith.

Q. What mean you by faith?
A. Not faith to work miracles, which is past: nor historical, only believing
that to be true which God says; nor te^porary, to know, profess, and to teach
Christ, fear to commit sin, sorrow after, to make satisfaction, to destroy the
wicked, to make many prayers wishing heaven, and to live for a time in show
honestly, yet out of Christ: but justifying faith is here meant.

Q. What is justifying faith?
A. It is a gracious and true persuasion in my heart, grounded upon Gods
promises concerning Christ, whereby I do apply him and all his benefits to my
self, being assured, that he is my wisdom, strength, righteousness,
holiness, and redemption, and that what he has done, it is as well done for
me, as for any other, and so is mine, as if my self had done it.

Q. How came you by this faith?
A. By the holy Ghost, working the same inwardly by the outward ministry of
the Gospel preached ordinarily, and is by the same word, sacraments, and
prayer, confirmed, continued, and increased.

Q. What profit reap you by this belief?
A. I a wretched sinner in my self, being pardoned of sin, and Christ given
to me; am in him the adopted son of God, and righteous before him, my heart
purged, my conscience quieted, my imperfect works do please him, all crosses
are for comfort and further to salvation: holy Angels tend upon me, heaven is
mine inheritance, I am set at liberty from the curse of the law, Satan, the
world and fleshly lusts, without fear of death, damnation, and hell fire.

Q. Has every one this faith, and so these benefits?
A. No: but only such as show repentance, the fruits of faith.

Q. What is repentance?
A. It is a true turning of my mind, will, and heart wholly from the world, the
flesh and devil unto God, with full purpose to attend carefully to the
counsel of his word and spirit, and through the whole course of my life,
readily and constantly endeavor to follow the same.

Q. What are the true tokens of this true repentance?
A. 1. A continual striving of the flesh and spirit. 2. A hatred of my former
vanities, avoiding occasion, company, counsel, or example to ill, with love
unfeigned to the contrary. 3. Increase of peace in conscience: with an affection
for righteousness sake. 4. A joy full expecting and wishing Christ's coming to
judgment.

Q. May not a man that truly repents, fall afterward?
A. Yes indeed, and into the same sin, or some other.

Q. How then may a man be persuaded, that his repentance was then true before?
A. 1. If this be of infirmity, feeling before, and in the committing a dislike
thereof: for after true repentance sin is never wholly committed. 2. If that
godly sorrow follow, which is not either for earthly shame, temporal
punishments, hellish torments, or loss of heaven: but for displeasing God so
merciful a Father, and this is called renewed repentance.

Q. How should this appear to be true?
A. 1. By an utter loathing and condemning my self for the sin newly
committed, with desire and persuasion of pardon. 2. A godly anger and burning
zeal against my self, with taking revenge, vowing and practicing strictly the
contrary virtue for offending. 3. A watchful care and continual fear, lest
I fall afterward at any time again into the same.

Q. What may comfort a troubled conscience?
A. These things: 1. That God can pardon any sin. 2. That he will by promise
made, pardon every penitent. 3. That he which feels a true desire to leave
sin, and to please God, is bound to believe his sins are both pardonable and
pardoned. 4. That doubting of salvation, with fear to offend God, is a sign
of salvation. 5. No condemnation to such as are in Christ, and therefore their
sins cannot damn them. 6. Justification must not be judged after
sanctification, there is no perfection here, and the best children of God have
grievously fallen, and have felt this sting of conscience. 7. The assurance of
salvation must not be judged as men feel assurance in affliction, but by the
stability of Gods promises, from former comforts and tokens of grace, but in
trouble from present desires only.

The third part.
Q. You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you, that you
should keep Gods commandments, tell me how many there be?
A. Ten, and are divided into 2. Tables.

Q. What does the first Table teach you?
A. The duty which I owe unto God in holiness, whom I must love with all my
heart, with all my mind, and with all my soul, and with all my strength, set
down in the four first commandments, containing the matter, manner, end, and
time of Gods worship.

Q. What does the second Table teach you?
A. The duty which I owe unto my neighbor. which is every one in
righteousness, whom I must love, as my self, set down in the six last
Commandments, containing his dignity, life, body, goods, credit, and more
spiritually all of them.

Q. Which be the Commandments?
A. The same which God spoke in the 20. of Exodus, saying, I am the Lord thy
God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage,
which is no commandment, but the preface unto them.

Q. What is the first commandment?
A. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?
A. To make choice of one, and the true God, to be my God, and not to take that
for God, which is not God by nature: the occasion whereof was the lusting after
strange gods.

Q. What are the things for bidden by this commandment?
A. Ignorance of God and the truth, not to pray, distrust of God, impatiency,
to fear, love, or joy in the creature more then in the Creator, to deny God,
or his word, power, presence, justice or mercy, openly or secretly in heart:
security without fear of God. The contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the second commandment?
A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?
A. I must neither worship false gods, nor this true God with self worship:
but in spirit and truth as his word only teaches. The occasion of this
commandment was a foolish desire of a carnal worship, and a false conceit,
to be able to prescribe a manner of worship to God of our selves.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?
A. Idolatry, picturing of God, or Christ, Papistry, will worship, good intents
without warrant, our own fantasies, men's traditions, worship of images,
pilgrimages: not to destroy errors, heresies, and monuments of idolatry. The
contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the third commandment?
A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?
A. Not to bereave God of his honor that is due unto him: but in all things to
give him his due glory. The occasion of this commandment was our readiness to
abuse God, his name, word, and works.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?
A. To think or speak of God, of his word, or works lightly or
contemptuously, without reverence: to swear by any thing, but by God: or by
him without a calling, in our ordinary talk, where neither Gods glory, our
brothers salvation, nor magistrate requires it: to swear falsely. So
blasphemy, witchcraft, coniuring, and cursing: to deny the known truth: to
profess piety, and live wickedly. The contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the fourth commandment?
A. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?
A. That every day in the week I prepare my self to keep the Lords day holy,
that when it comes, it be not profaned, nor the public worship of God
let, but furthered by me and mine. The occasion of this commandment, was
our aptnes to fall from God, without daily means be used.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?
A. To do unnecessary labors without godliness and charity: Faires,
iourneies, or vain sports, eating and drinking, that may hinder devotion: not
to hear Gods word preached, or to hear carelessly, sleepily, with weariness,
or without purpose to amend. To omit meditation and conference. For Ministers
to omit ordinarily the preaching of the word, to preach in a strange language
vain-gloriously, falsely, hypocritically, flatteringly, or by constraint,
without chearefulnes; for any to absent themselves negligently or wilfully from
the Sacrament: the contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the fifth commandment?
A. Honor thy father and thy mother, etc.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?
A. To preserve the dignity of every one by all means, that is any way to be
preferred, either by his place, age, or gifts, and that no ways I diminish the
same. The occasion of this commandment was our proud and envious nature, that
cannot abide to be under government, nor to give men their due.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?
A. Contempt of our betters, vnreuerent behavior toward them, by word or
deed, to disobey their lawful commandments, counsels, or advice. All treason
and rebellion: the contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the sixth commandment?
A. Thou shall do no murder.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?
A. I must neither hurt nor hinder either mine own life, or my neighbors life,
but by all means preserve the same. The occasion of this commandment, was our
impatience and uncharitable desire of revenge.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?
A. Want of love, anger, malice, envy, grudging, a frowning countenance, desire
of revenge: contention, railing, quarelling, mocking, offensive ieasting,
oppression, fighting, murder, and bodily hurt: to neglect to use means of
health, or to hinder the same: to be contentious, and not to seek after
peace. The contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the seventh commandment?
A. Thou shall not commit adultery.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?
A. I must not any way hurt or impair the chastity of my neighbor, but every
way seek to preserve the same. The occasion of this commandment, was our
lustful and fleshly nature.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?
A. Lustful desires, fornication, adultery, with all occasions hereunto:
idleness, wanton attire, a rolling eye, corrupt and dishonest talk, wanton
songs, lascivious pictures, unchaste plays, mixed dancing of men and women,
unseemly gestures and acts, and companying with wantons. The contrary is
commanded.

Q. What is the eight commandment?
A. Thou shall not steal.

Q. does this commandment teach you?
A. That I must not any way hinder or diminish my neighbors goods, but by all
means preserve and increase the same. The occasion hereof was our covetous
nature, discontent ever with our present estate.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?
A. Pilfering and robbery, any way to take or keep that which is not ours
unlawfully: all theft, with all occasions thereunto. Not to restore things
found, borrowed, or left only to be kept in trust: to give what is not thine,
either whole or part. Not to live contentedly, all covetous desires, idleness
out of calling, or lithernesse in it. The contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the ninth commandment?
A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?
A. That I must not diminish the good name or credit of my neighbor, whether
friend or so, known or unknown: but carefully preserve the same. The occasion
of this commandment was our seditious nature.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?
A. Lying in jest or earnest, backbiting, slandering, revealing secret
infirmities and private offenses before admonition, false witness, by adding
or detracting in words or sense: to take a doubtful matter in the worst part:
also all occasions to this sin, as envy, disdain, anger, self-love, to be
too suspicious, to be ready to receive a false report against our neighbor.
The contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the tenth commandment?
A. Thou shall not covet, etc.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?
A. That I may not have once an unlawful lust to that which is my neighbors:
but for ever think good toward him. The occasion of this commandment was the
frailty of our' flesh which intermitteth the work of the holy Ghost, by sinful
fantasies.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?
A. Lust, and sudden motions against our neighbor, without consent, which come
from the corruption of nature: and also such as be offered by Satan, or man,
so far as we give any way consent thereto: not to resist il motions. The
contrary is commanded.

Q. Are these commandments a prayer?
A. No: but the sum of the moral law, which is the other part of Gods word,
teaching the righteousness of God, and showing me my sins and cursed estate, and
is a schoolmaster urging to Christ: and therefore ought in order first to be
preached, and then the Gospel showing deliverance, and gives grace withal.

Q. How must this law be obeyed?
A. Perfectly, willingly, and continually to God and my neighbor in thought,
word, and deed, agreeing with Gods nature, and our first estate by creation.

Q. Can you then keep the commandments?
A. No: for I break them always, either wittingly or ignorantly, in
committing evil, or omitting my duty: besides that, I am guilty of them by
natural corruption, through Adams fall, before I could in my self, either
think, speak, or do any evil.

Q. What is this breach of the law called?
A. Sin, whereby the infinite justice of God is injured.

Q. What is then the reward of sin?
A. The infinite wrath of God, and his vengeance for ever, in this world and in
the world to come, is due for the least sin, whether it be mortal or venial.

Q. What are the punishments of sin in this life?
A. In name, slander and shame: in goods, losses: in his body, pains and
sickness: all manner of adversity, and all corporal plagues befalling in this
life. In the soul, ignorance, madness, an ill conscience accusing, benumbed,
dead, or desperate: a heavy stony heart, likewise disobedient and wicked
children, a disloyal wife, false friends, cruel adversaries: to be suffered
to fall into sin, God taking away his grace, especially the sin of whoredom,
as a punishment for sin. And lastly, bodily death, ordinary or sudden.

Q. Comes always afflictions as punishments for sin?
A. Afflictions first came for sin, but are also to try our patience, faith,
and constancy: to weane us from our selves and the world, and to become
comfortable to Christ in persecutions: that Gods power and goodness may appear
to us: and these afflictions be called fatherly chastisements of the godly to
every one in his measure.

Q. How may you persuade your self, that afflictions are chastisements, and
not punishments of a Judge, when they befall?
A. If I can make good use of them, to further me in godliness: else are they
but forerunners of my eternal destruction, as they be to the reprobate, that
are not bettered by them.

Q. What are the punishments for sin after death?
A. The separation from God, the loss of heaven, and of the joyful company of
Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Saints, the true
professors of Christ, for ever: to be damned with the devil, and his angels,
the infernal fiends, with all the wicked accursed to hell, there to be
tormented unspeakably without end.

Q. How must you escape this vengeance of God?
A. By no good deeds that I can do, but only faith in Jesus Christ, who is the
merit only and wholly of my salvation: and without whom my best thoughts,
words, and deeds, are abominable before God, seem they never so holy in mine
and other men's judgment.

Q. Why then should you do good works, if you cannot nor may not think to
win heaven by them?
A. I must do good works, because I am already ordained to be saved. 1. To make
my election the more sure to my self, which is certain with God. 2. To show my
love and thankfulness to God for it, by obeying his commandments. 3. To
confirm the converted, and to win others not yet called. 4. To stop the
mouths of the wicked, and to shame them by well doing, when they speak ill of
v 8. 5. To benefit one another for our quiet peaceablenes in Church and
commonwealth.

Q. Are not then works necessary?
A. Yes verily, to such as will have assurance of salvation: for without works,
baptism, hearing the word, knowledge, faith, love, hope, fasting, sorrow,
prayer, and profession, are in vain.

Q. What is a good work?
A. Whatsoever is done or spoken without doubting, from the warrant of Gods
word, of a true believer, in charity, and to Gods glory.

Q. Though our good works merit not, may we not yet think that they shall be
rewarded?
A. Yes verily: for in his mercy he has so promised to do, both in this
world, and in the world to come.

Q. What is the blessing and reward in this life?
A. Increase of knowledge in Gods word: assurance that his gifts in us are
graces, and not only common favors: al earthly blessings, a good name, wealth,
honor, friends, and prosperous success, so far as it shall be for Gods
glory, and my spiritual safety:(...)

faith, to apprehend as much as shall be necessary. 6. My hope to wait without
appointing God either time, place, manner, or quantity of the matter. 7. My
will, to use afterward all the honest means appointed to obtain the same.

Q. What be the true properties of prayer?
A. 1. That it be in true love: for we must remember to pray for all our
brethren not departed this life, for there is no Purgatory. 2. It must be made
only to God, for him only can we call heavenly Father, neither to Saints nor
Angels. 3. In the name of Christ, through whom only he is our Father by
adoption. 4. In faith, for that he is a Father, and will not deny his
children. 5. Without a carnal conceit of God, vain babbling, or wandering
thoughts: for he is in heaven.

Q. Which be the six petitions?
A. Hallowed be thy name, etc.

Q. What do these teach you?
A. The sum of all the things which I can lawfully ask at Gods hands, for body
or soul: whereof the first 3. concern the glory of God, and the latter 3. the
good of man.

Q. Which is the first petition, and what desire you in it?
A. The first is, Hallowed be thy name: and I desire therein, in the first
place, that I and all other may acknowledge God so truly, in his word and
works, as in every of our thoughts, words, and deeds, he may be highly
worshipped and praised.

Q. Which is the second, and what desire you in it?
A. The second is, Thy kingdom come: and I desire that he will send us the
means, thus to honor his name, that is, his word and Spirit, with all things
that do further thereunto: that so the elect may be gathered, and Christ come
to the last judgment to give us his kingdom of glory.

Q. Which is the third petition, and what desire you in it?
A. The third is, Thy will be done, and I desire, that as we pray to do, not
ours, but his will, as all his commandments and word teaches us: and as the
blessed Saints and Angels do in heaven, heartily without hypocrisy,
willingly, without grudging, readily without lingering, faithfully without
sinister respects, joyfully without murmuring, and constantly without wavering,
unto the end.

Q. Which is the fourth petition, and what desire you in it?
A. The fourth is, Give us this, etc. and I desire, that he will provide those
necessaries for our bodies, without which we cannot serve him: and that we may
depend patiently upon his providence, using diligent labor, and all honest
means to help our selves and others.

Q. What is the fifth petition, and what desire you in it?
A. The fifth is, And forgive us our trespasses, etc. and I desire that he
would forgive al of us, friend or foe, our sins, lest they either hinder us
of the former mercies, or cause them to be taken from us: and that he will
persuade our consciences, that we are forgiven, by giving us grace to forgive
freely, and to forget those offenses, whereby in any thing, or any way, our
neighbors have been grievous unto us.

Q. Which is the sixth and last petition, and what desire you in it?
A. The sixth is, Lead us not into temptation, etc. and I desire, that as he
will pardon us, so he would also give us the gift of continuance, that though
we be tempted, yet may we overcome, and be delivered from sin and Satan, and
never fall again any more from God.

Q. Which is the confirmation?
A. For thine is the kingdom, etc.

Q. What learn you by this?
A. I do learn hereby 2. things: 1. that it is a reason, not to move God, but
to stir up our affections. and to stre^gthe^ our faith in asking.

Q. How does it this?
A. When it teaches me to acknowledge the kingdom of God our Father, that
is, his dominion and right over al: and that his power is the greatest to
compel all to do what he will, and as he will: and his glory the highest,
which himself maintains, and we seek above all.

Q. What is the second thing we learn?
A. 2. A thanksgiving and praising of God, which we ought to use in the end, as
the second part of prayer: which is done, in giving to God his own, the rule,
power, and glory, which we desire him to manifest by granting our petitio^s,
and we will acknowledge the same; not for a time, but for ever and ever.

Q. Which is the conclusion?
A. This word, Amen.

Q. What mean you by this word?
A. That I am persuaded by the aforesaid reasons, that my request is granted,
and shall be performed, as my Father shall see it convenient for me and his
glory, in time and place. And therefore I say, it is so, or it shall be, which
is Amen.

The fifth part.
Q. What is a Sacrament?
A. It is a visible sign, and seal of invisible graces, commanded and
ordained with a promise by Christ in the Church, to be administered publicly,
by a lawful Minister, with the preaching of the word: which Sacrament with all
the rites thereof does represent and convey by proportion and relation, in the
present use, invisible graces, first Christ, and then all his benefits, for
further assurance of the same things, which God has made by the promise of his
word, unto a true believer, who is with Christ by the H. Ghost united and made
on.

Q. What mean you by Christ, and all his benefits?
A. Whole Christ, God and man, with his righteousness, justice, holiness, and
redemption; who as he is Christ, one person of two natures, is truly said to be
really present in the Sacrament, not properly in his humanity, but by the
communion of properties.

Q. How may you be sure that you have received true benefit by the Sacraments?
A. If I do feel a dying to sin, and living unto righteousness, getting
strength, and also increasing therein daily, by the force of Christ's death and
resurrection.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?
A. Two, and no more: Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Q. What is Baptism?
A. It is the first Sacrament in the new Testament, by which such as are within
the covenant, are either washed, sprinkled, or dipped in the water, in the name
of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Q. What is the outward sign and rite?
A. Water and washing.

Q. What is the invisible grace?
A. The blood of Christ which cleanses us of all sin, original and actual, past
and to come.

Q. Are we then no sinners?
A. Yes in our selves: for original sin still is sin in us, but we are
washed from it, because it shall not be imputed, nor any sin else unto me a
true believer.

Q. Who are to be baptized?
A. Not only such as be of years, that can and do testify their faith: but
also infants of either father or mother professing Christ and baptized: for the
promise of salvation belongs to them and to their children.

Q. Is baptism so necessary to salvation, that without it children cannot be
saved?
A. It is necessary to all that have it, but not of necessity, to such as cannot
rightly come by it: for not the want, but the careless neglect and contempt
thereof condemns.

Q. How often should we be baptized?
A. But once, for we may not be baptized again after true baptism: for
being once borne, we cannot be borne again naturally, nor spiritually.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?
A. It is the latter Sacrament in the new Testament, whereby we are nourished
and preserved in the Church to eternal life.

Q. What be the outward signs?
A. Bread and wine.

Q. What be the things signified?
A. The body and blood of Christ.

Q. What are the rites?
A. The actions of the Minister and receiver.

Q. What are the actions of the Minister?
A. 1. To take the bread and wine into his hands. 2. to bless it. 3. to break
the bread, and power forth the wine. 4. to offer and give them to the receiver.

Q. What are the actions of the receiver?
A. 1. To take the bread and wine offered into his hand: 2. to eat the one,
and drink the other, and so digest and concoct them, as that they feel
nourishment to the body.

Q. What learn you by all these actions?
A. I am assured that the visible actions of the Minister do represe^t the
spiritual actions of God the Father to my soul, who has decreed his Son, and
elected him the Mediator, to have his body broken, and his precious blood shed
for me, being offered to all, but given only to the true believer, that can by
the hand of faith take hold of him, who shows as lively the virtue of his
death to preserve his soul, as the virtue of the bread and wine is felt to
norish the body.

Q. Is the bread turned into Christ's body, and is the wine into his very blood?
A. No verily: for then, 1. it were no Sacrament, 2. it is against reason, 3.
against scripture, 4. against an article of our Creed, 5. against the judgment
of ancient Fathers true writings, 6. against the judgment of reformed
christian churches, 7. against the opinion of holy Martyrs, who shed their
blood for the contrary, 8. it is against experience of our senses, that the
bread should be flesh, or wine blood: neither is Christ's body in, with, or about
the same.

Q. Is there then no difference of this bread and wine, from that which we use
commonly?
A. There is no difference in the substance, but in the holy use: being at that
time set apart to be signs of Christ's body and blood.

Q. May every one offer to receive that will?
A. No: but only such as come prepared, and be fit, that both are able in
knowledge to examine, and also by a good conscience will judge themselves,
whether they be in any measure prepared thereunto.

Q. What if you come unprepared?
A. I am an unworthy receiver, provoking Gods wrath against me, and so eat
and drink my own damnation.

Q. Who are those that ought not to come?
A. Open impenitent sinners, fools, mad persons, children, all that be of
years, and yet ignorant, not being able to try and judge themselves: and if
such profane ones do offer themselves, they are not to be admitted.

Q. What be those things whereof you must try and judge your self?
A. 1. Of my knowledge, concerning my miserable estate through sin; of Gods
mercy and our deliverance by Christ, and the understanding of this Sacrament.
2. Of my belief in Christ, which I may do by the Creed. 3. Of my repentance
toward God, for old and new sins, examined by his commandments. 4. Of my
brotherly love, which I do owe to every one, which I may try and judge by my
forgiving others, as I desire God to forgive me, and by my seeking to satisfy
whom I have offended of my knowledge either in word or deed.

Q. May any by omitting these duties be free from sin, if therefore they will
not receive the Sacrament with others?
A. No: for as to come unprepared is damnation, so to neglect to prepare for
any earthly occasion, is a great wickedness, such living in disobedience without
repentance and charity.

Q. Why do you go to the Lords Supper?
A. 1. To testify my love in obedience to God commanding. 2. To strengthen my
faith being weak. 3. To maintain and increase the holy communion and
fellowship of brotherly love amongst us the members of Christ: and 4. to keep
a remembrance of his death till his second coming.

Q. How must you be exercised in the time of administration, and afterward?
A. I must 1. meditate upon the death and passion of Christ, how grievously I
have sinned. 2. Gods endless mercy. 3. the unity and fellowship that is amongst
the true members of the Church with Christ, and one with another: rejoicing in
heart, and praising God therefore with the congregation. Afterward 1. I must
give alms to the needy brethren, and do other good works of charity in
token of thankfulness, that day especially, for so great a mercy. 2. Grow from
thenceforth in obedience, faith, and unfeigned love to my lives end.

The sixth part.
Q. Can you briefly show me any rules to be observed, that you may do so, as
you have bin taught?
A. I. Every morning before other business, I must, 1. thank God for my safety,
2. desire pardon of sin, 3. Gods further protection against ghostly and bodily
enemies.

II. I must know that, that day, and all other times after given me to live in,
are for more earnest repentance, increase of knowledge, faith, and practice of
godliness: and therefore of these continually I must be mindful, setting some
part of the day aside for reading, hearing, or meditating upon heavenly things:
that the vanities of the world short and uncertain carry me not away.

III. I must have, or else prepare my self to some particular calling, fit to
keep me from idleness, and to exercise the duties of religion, in which calling
must I be both honest, and profitable to others: to which, 1. I must betake me
speedily, that no time be lost: 2. to do therein as I would be done unto: 3. to
seek first in my labor Gods glory, the^ my own good with my neighbors
profit: 4. labor therein painfully and constantly, in adversity using good
means, hoping for prosperity, in prosperity neglecting no humble duties for
fear of adversity: 5. my present estate I must account it ever the best for
me, and most for Gods glory: 6. I must not fear to spend where God and
charity requires, sparing from idle expenses, and only lay up, for the time
to come, whatsoever shall remain, when I have discharged necessary duties
honestly and righteously.

IV. I must retire my self sometime from my wearisome labor, when I see need,
which must be: 1. at times convenient: 2. in things lawful: 3. short,
delightsome to the mind, and healthful for the body: 4. to make me more
cheerful to return to labor, and not to draw me to loiter and to idleness,
no end appointed to man or beast.

V. I must warily see to mine own ways. I. My thoughts and heart must: 1. be
far from unlawful affection: 2. upon lawful things on earth moderate, and no
more the^ needs: 3. upon God and heavenly things often, fervently, and
reverently: 4. that I strive against self-love, thinking of my self basely,
and wax, by more and greater gifts, the more humble and less envious: 5. Of
other I must think highly and charitably, judging well without suspitio^s,
what I hear or see good in them, receiving with joy: and hoping of better what
I see or hear to be ill in them, taking doubtful words or deeds from the^ in
the better part. II. My eyes must be shut against objects to sin, that they let
the^ not into my heart, to stir up ill motions: but quick to observe every
good example and occasion to goodness. III. My ear must be exercised in hearing
the truth, good counsels, friendly admonitions, and godly exhortations, but
shut against flattery, lyings, slander, filthy and wicked speeches. IV. My
tongue must keep silent, unless just cause and convenient time and place be
to speak. In speaking the matter must 1. be gracious to profit the hearers,
and also necessary to be uttered: 2. in wisdom regarding circumstances: 3. in
sincerity to speak it from the heart: 4. speaking of God and his word, it must
be religiously and joyfully: of our selves modestly, of others lovingly: 5. to
praise moderatly without contempt: to dispraise meekely showing love, to be
constrained by necessity rather the^ of will, to speak of other men's faults,
expressing sorrow in uttering: 6. to speak well of men in absence, what good
we know of the^, and to defend them, and in presence without flattery: 7. to
use few words and effectual to the matter without tediousnes: 8. not to talk
of needless matters, or which concerns us not, as busi-bodies, neither of any
thing against religion, charity, common good, or chastity. V. My behavior, 1.
it must be lowly to superiors, 2. gentle to inferiors, and 3. lovely to
familiars. VI. My apparel, it must be first for necessity, and then for
honest decency, as we are able, and agreeing with our calling. VII. My diet
must be 1. sparing, ordinarily a kind of fasting rather then a feasting: 2.
taking my food with hunger and thirsting: 3. at seasonable hours: 4. that
thereby 1. my strength may be maintained and increased, 2. my meditation and
devotion nothing hindered, 5. that we be prepared in the beginning, may feel a
necessity and pray to God: and in the end sufficient refreshing, may thank God.

VI. I must take heed what company I keep with, 1. that I make my familiars
none but honest and religious, 2. that they be my equals in estate and place,
not superiors to avoid suspicion of pride; nor too much inferiors, lest it
bring contempt, 3. that of these, not many, but one of all, I warily,
deliberately, and with much trial, choose my secret friend, 4. that in going or
keeping with any, I must ever purpose either to do good, or receive some.

VII. At night, the time of rest, 1. I must call to mind Gods benefits
received, either by preventing evil, or by bringing good upon me, to thank
him. 2. I must recount what I have done, either in evil to repent, or what
good I performed, to judge either of my increasing or decaying in grace:
sorrowing more for the duties omitted and sins committed, then joyful of any
good done. 3. In taking rest I must commit my self to God, by a devout and
faithful prayer, as thinking no more to rise. 4. to have my last thoughts of
heavenly things, by committing or recalling somewhat to mind, of which I have
either heard, or learned out of Gods word. 5. that I take sleep to refresh
nature, and not to satisfy slothful flesh.

VIII. and last is, that all the week long I remember to labor in my calling,
and dispose of my ordinary business, that I be prepared for the Lords day to
keep it holy: but especially at the end of the week, so that when it comes, I
may neither by them break it, or be hindered. Thus living to God holily, to my
neighbor charitably, and toward my self soberly, my conscience shall be
comforted, my weak brethren strengthened, the strong confirmed, the wicked
made ashamed, the devil confounded, and God greatly Glorified.

FINIS.

