BRIEF INTRODVCTION TO GEOGRAPHY CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION OF THE GROUNDS, AND
GENERAL PART THEREOF, VERY NEcessary for young students in that science.

WRITTEN BY THAT LEARNED man, Mr WILLIAM PEMBLE, Master of Arts, of Magdalen
Hall in Oxford.

AC: OX

arms of Oxford University

OXFORD Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD Printer to the Famous University for EDWARD
FOREST Ann. Dom. 1630.

To the Reader
GEntle Reader; I here present unto thy view these few sheets, written by that
learned man Mr William Pemble, I doubt not to call him the father, the child
favors him so much. It has long lay bid from thy sight, but now at length
emboldned upon thy courteous acceptance of his former labors, it looks abroad
into the world; It Is but little; let not that detract any thing from it, there
may lie much, though pent up in a narrow room; when thou reads, then judge of
it; Thus much may be said: Though many have writ of this subject, yet this
inferior to none; thou may observe in it an admirable mixture of Art and
delight, so that for younger Students it may be their introduction, for others
a Remembrancer, for any not unworthy the perusal: only, let it find kind
entertaynment, at thy hands.

Farewell.
A BRIEF INTRODVCTION TO GEOGRAPHIE.
CHAP. 1.
A general description and division of Geography.

TOpographie is a particular description of some small quantity of Land, such
as Land measurers set out in their plots.

Chorographie is a particular description of some Country, as of England,
France, or any shire or province in them: as in the Usual and ordinary map.

Geography is an art of science teaching us the general description of the
whole earth, of this especially we are now to speak of, and also Chorography
as a part under it contained: both, excellent parts of knowledge in them
selves, and affoording much profit and help in the understanding of history
and other things. The parts of Geography are two.

General, which treats of the nature, qualities, measure, with other
general properties of the earth. Special, wherein the several countries and
coasts of the earth are divided and described.
Of the general in the first place, and more at large then of the other,
because it is more difficult, and hard to be understood, and yet of necessary
use, for the understanding of the other. This general tract may be parted
into five particular heads.

1 of the properties and affections of the earth. 2 of the parts of it in
general. 3 of the Circles of it. 4 of the distinction and division of it
according to some general conditions and qualities of it. 5 of the measuringe
of it.
These in their order.

CAP. 2.
Of certain general properties of the earth.

IN Geography when we name the earth we mean not the earth taken severally
by it self, without the seas and waters. But under one name both are
comprised, as they are now mingled one with another and do both together make
up one entire and round body. Neither do we diue into the bowels of the
earth, and ente^ into consideration of the natural qualities, which are in the
substance of Earth and water, as coldness, dryness moisture, heaviness, and the
like, but we look only upon the out side, contemplating the greatness,
situation, distances, measuringe, and other such affections which appear in
the superficies of it, to the eyes of our bodies and minds: These then of the
earth and water together, rules are to be known,

1 The earth and the water do make one globe, i. e, one round or sphericall
body.

The natural place of the water is to be above the earth, and so it was in
the first creation of it, compassing, the earth round about as appears Genes.
1. 9. But for the use of (...) and all other living creatures, God made a
separation of them caussing the waters to sink down into huge hollow
channells, prepared to receive it, that so the dry land might appear above
it. Notwithstanding which separation, they do both still remain together, not
covering one another as (...) first, but intermingled one with another, and
that so exactly as they now make but one round body, whereas at first they
made two. Here therefore are two points to be proved, 1. That they are one
globe. 2. that this one is round.

1 They are one globe having the same Center or middle point, and the same
surface or conuexe superficies. which will appear by these reasons.

1 Common experience. Take a lump of earth and any quantity of water, and let
them both fall down together upon the earth from some high place, we see that
in the desce^t they do not sever, but keep still together in on straight
line, which could not be, if the earth and water were two several round
bodies having several centers. As for example suppose them to be two globes
and let (a) be the Center of the earth and (b) the center of the water^ from
(c) some high place above the earth hurl down earth and water, I say the
earth will part from the water in going down and the earth will fall down
upon (d) and the water upon (e) but this is contrary to experience and ergo the
supposition is false.



2 The shadow which in Eclipses is cast upon the Moon by the earth and the
water, is but one and not two, and therefore the body is so likewise. This will
appear in the proof of the next point, v. 2.

2 That both earth and water are one round body, (...) square, long, hollow, or
of any other figure. This is proved by diverse reasons.

1 By Eclipses; when the earth, stands just between the Sun and the Moon,
then does the shadow of the earth falling upon the Moon darken it wholly or in
part. Now as is the fashion of the shadow, such is the figure of the body,
whence it falls, but the shadow of the earth and water cast upon the Moon is
round, and also one, therefore they are round and also one body.



2 By the orderly and successiue appearing of the stars, as men trauile from
North to South, or from South to North; by sea or land. For as they go by
degrees, they discover ne^ stars, which they saw not before, and loose the
sight of them they did, which could not be if the earth were not round, As for
example, let (X. O. R.) the inward Circle be the earth, (Q. S. P.) the
outward, the Heaven: they cannot see the star (S) which dwell upon the earth
in (X) but if they go Northward unto (O) they may see it. If they go farther
to (R) they may see the star (P) but then they loose the sight of the star
(Q) which being at (X) and (O) they might have seen. Because, as it appears
in the figure, the earth rises up round between (R) and (X).



3 By the orderly and successiue rising of the Sun and stars, and settinge
of the same. Which appear not at the same time to all countries, but unto one
after another. As for example, let (F. C. B.) be the Circle of the earth, (D.
E. A.) the Circle of the heaven from East to west, let (A) be the Sun or a
star. When the Sun (A) is up, and shines upon them that dwell in (B) he is
not risen to them that dwell in (C) again when he is risen higher and is come
to (E) and so shines upon those that dwell in (C) he is not yet up to them
that dwell in (F). Again when he setts in the West. in (D) and so is out of
sight to the inhabitants in (B) he is yet up to them that dwell in (C) and
(F). Which shows plainly the earth is round.



4 By the different observations of Eclipses. One and the same Eclipse
appearing sooner to the Easterly Nations then those that lie farther west.
which is caused by the bulk of the earth swelling up between. As for example.

Let (X. O.) be the Circle of the earth, and the greater the Circle of the
heaven from East to West. Let (P. Q.) be the body of the Sun, (W. S.) of the
Moon in the eclipse by reason of the earth between it and the Sun. It is
manifest that the inhabitants in (O) shall see the eclipse before the
inhabitants in (X) by certain hours, according as the distance between (X)
and (O) is more or less. They that dwell in (O) shall see it in (S) they that
dwell in (X) see it not till it come to (W) a great deal higher.



5 That the water is round besides the natural weight and moisture of it,
which being apt to yield and run abroad, will not suffer some places to ly
high, and some low, like hills, and dales, but though it be made rough and
uneven by tempest, does presently return to their natural smoothness and
evenness: I say besides this: it is clear by common experience; for if we
stand on the land, and see a ship go forth to sea, by degrees we loose the
sight of it, first of the bulk then of the must, and all. So also one the
other side they that are at sea by degrees do^ loose or gain the sight of the
Land: As for example.

Let (A) be some steeple upon the land (B) a shipp at sea: He that stands at
(A) shall by little and little loose the sight of the ship, as she goes out,
and get sight of her as she comes in. Both first and last he shall have the
sight of the top mast (B) when he sees nothing else. Because the sea rises up
between his sight and the ship.



These reasons and experiments may suffice to prove the roundnesse of the earth
and water; which might be farther demonstrated by showing the falsehood of all
other figures regular or irregular that can be given unto it: that it is
neither square, nor three-cornerd, nor Piramidall, nor conicall on Taperwise,
nor Cylindricall like a barley roll, nor hollow like a dish, nor of any other
fashion, as some have imagined it to be of. We come to this second rule.

2 The tops of the highest hills, and bottoms of the lowest valleys although in
several places they make the earth uneven, yet being compared to the vast
greatness of the whole, do not at all hinder the roundnesse of it.

Among all Geometrical figures the sphaetiall or the round is the most
perfect, and amongst all natural bodies the heaven is the most excellent. It
was therefore good reason the most beautiful body should have the most perfect
and exquisite shape. Exact roundnesse then is not found in any body, but the
Heavens; the earth is round as was showed before, but not precisely, with out
all roughnes and inaequality of its surface. There are hills like warts and
valleys like wrinkels in a man's body; and that both for ornament and use. Yet
is there such vnformity in this variety, as that there is no notable and
sensible inaequa^ity made in the earth by Hills and valleys. No more then if
you should lay a sly upon a smooth Cartwheele, or a pinnes head upon a great
globe. Now that this is so appears by Sense and Reason. By Sense thus, If we
stand on a hill or in a plain, when we may discrie the country round about
15. or 20. miles: we may behold the b^im or edge of the earth round about us
to be in a manner even and straight, even there, where the country is very
hilly, and full of mountains. So that a far of their height makes but a
little alteration and difference from the plain Countries, when we behold all
together a far of: though when we come near, the alteration seems more
sensible.

By reason thus, the thickness of half the earth is (as shall be showed about
4000 miles, now the plumb height of the highest mountains, is not accounted
above a mile and a half, or two miles at the most. Now between two miles and
four thousand, there is no sensible proportion, and a line that is four
thousand and two miles long, will not seem sensibly longer then that which is
four thousand; as for example. Let (O) be the center of the earth, (XW) a part
of the circle of the earth which runs by the bottomes of the hills and
superficies of champion and even plains (WOE) or (XO) is the semidiam^ter or
half the depth of the earth. (S) is a hill rising up above that plain of the
earth, (WS) is the plumb height of the hill. I say that (WS) does not sensibly
alter the length of the line (OW); for (WS) is but two miles. (WOE) 4000 miles,
and two to 4000 alters not much more, then the breadth of a pin to the length
of a perch. So a line drawn from (O) the center to (S) the top of the hill,
is in a manner all one with a line drawn to (W) the bottom of the hill.



The third rule.
3 The earth rests immovable in the very midst of the whole earth.

Two points are here to be demonstrated. First that the earth stands exactly
in the midst of the World. Secondly that it is immovable. The former is proved
by these reasons.

1 The natural heaviness of the earth and water is such, as they will never
cease mooving downwards till they come to the lowest place; Now the center or
middle point of the world is the lowest place, and ergo they must needs move
thither, as for example.

Let (O) be the center of the world, (C D E) the heavens: it is manifest that
the lowest place from the heavens on all sides is (O). S^uppose the earth to be
in (A) or in (B) some where out of the center. I say it is not possible
(unless it be violently held up) that it should abide there, but it will
descend till it come to (O) the middle point.



2 If the earth stood any where but in the midest we should not see half the
heavens above us, as now we always do, neither could there be any Aequinox,
neither would the days and nights lengthen and shorten in that due order and
proportion in all places of the World as now they do; again Eclipses would
never fall out but in one part of the heavens, yea the Sun and Moon might be
directly opposite one to another and yet no Eclipse follow, all which are
absurd. As for example, let the center of the World be (O) let the earth stand
in (A), a good way distant from the center, it is manifest that the greater
half of the Heavens (C I B) will always be above, and the less half (C D B)
below, which is contrary to experience. Thence also it follows that the days
and nights will never be equal, for the Sun (B) will be always longer above
the earth whilst he moves from (B) to (C) then below, moving from (C) to (B).
Again the Sun (B) may stand just opposite to the Moon (X) and yet noe
Eclipse follow, the earth which makes the Eclipse, standing out of the midst.



3 The shadows of all bodies on the earth would not fall in that orderly
uniformity as they now do: for if the earth stood toward the East, the
shadows would be shortest before noone, if toward the west afternoon, if
toward the North, the shadows would still fall Northward, if toward the
South, Southwards, all which experience shows to be false. As for example, let
the earth stand Eastwards in (A) the shadow of any body upon the earth, as of
the body under (E) will be shorter in the morning when the sun is in (C),
then at noone when the sun is in (X). If the earth stand Southward in (W) the
shadow of any body will always fall south, as it does in the figure (Y) and
(Z.)



The second thing to be proved was that the earth is immovable. where we must
understand a double motion, Straight, or Circular. For the first it is clear
that with out supernatural violence it cannot be moved in any straight
motion, that is, upward downewarde, or toward any side; it cannot be shoued
out of his place.

For the Second, whether abiding still in his place it may not move round, the
question is disputed, and maintained one both sides. Some affirm it may, and
does: who think there is greater probability the earth should move round
once a day, then that the Heavens should: by reason of the incredible
swiftness of the heavens motion, scares conpetible to any natural body; and
the more likely Slownesse of the earths moving. Others deny it grounding their
opinion upon Scripture, which affirms the earth to stand fast, so as it cannot
be moved; and upon Sense, because we perceive it not to move, and lastly upon
reasons drawn from things hurled up, and let fall upon the earth. The
arguments on both sides will be more easy to be understood by the figure that
follows.



In this figure it is manifest, that the earth in the midest, cannot ^oue by
any straight motion, upward toward (N) or sideward toward (M) or any other way
out of its proper place, and therefore that opinion of Copernicus and others,
that the earth should move round once ayeere in such a Circle as (M P R) is
most improbable and unreasonable. And rejected by the most.

But although it cannot move straight, it may move round. For though it be a
m^rueilous great body of vnconceaueable weight, yet being equally poised on
every side, there is nothing can hinder its Circular motion: As in a Globe of
Lead, or any other heavy substance, though it were 40. Fadome in compass, yet
being set upon his two Poles, it would easily be turned round eu^n with a
touch of ones little finger. And therefore it is concluded that this circular
motion is not impossible. The probability of it is thus made plain. The whole
circuit of the Heavens, wherein are the fixed Stars is reckoned by Astronomers
to be 1017562500. that is a Thousand and seauenteene Millions of (...)les,
five hundred sixty two thousand, and five hundred miles. Let this be the
compass of the Circle (N M O Z.) So many miles does the Heau^ns move in one
day, till the same point come to the place from whence it went; as till (N)
move round, and come to (N) again. This being the motion of the whole day 24,
^ou^es how many miles will (N) move in one hour? ^t will move 423 (...) 4^7
and a half. i. e. Forty two Millions three hundred ninty eight thousand, four
hundred thirty seven miles and an half. So many miles will (N) move in one
hour, from (N) to (M.) A motion so swi^^ that it is utterly (...)dible. Far
more likely it is, the circuit of the earth (A S X V) being about 24000. i. e.
twenty four thousand (...)les (...) or less, it should move round once aday
For then one point as (N) should move in one hour from (X) to (V) but a
thousand miles, which motion although it be swifter then any arrow or bullet
from a Cannons mouth, yet is it incomparably flower then that of the Heavens,
where so many Millions are posted over in an hour.

Now for the saluing of all the caelestiall Phenomenon, or appearances, the
truth is the same, if we suppose the earth to move, as if we believe it to
stand still. The riseing of the Sun and Stars, the motions of all the
Planets, will keep Correspondence that now. Nor need we fear logging, or
that steples and towers would totter down, for the motion is regular, and
steady without rubbes, and knocks. As if you turn a globe about, it will go
steadyly, and a fly will set fast upon it, though you move it apace. Besides
the whole body the air is carried about with the whi^linge of the earth, so
that the earth will make noe wind, as it turns swiftly about; as a wheel
will, if it be turned apace.

Notwithstanding all this, most are of another opinion, that the earth stands
still without all motion, rest rather befittinge so heavy and dull a body then
motion. The maine reason brought to establish it is this. Let a stone be
thrown down out of the air from (W:) if the earth stand still, it is
manifest it will fall upon (X) just under it; as we see it does by common
experience, a stone will fall down from any height upon the place we aimed
at, but let the earth move, the stone will not light upon (X,) but some where
else as one (S:) for (X) will be moved away, and gone to (U.)

So again let two pieces of ordinance that will shoot at equal distance be
discharged one just toward the East, the other toward the West; if the earth
move (as they say it does) toward the West, the bullet that is discharged
Eastward will fly farther then that Westward. For by the contrary motion of the
earth he will gain ground. But experience has proved this to be false,
showing that the bullets, will both fly at equal distance.

To salve thi^ answer is made that the earth by its swist motion carries with
it and that steadily not only all bodies resting or moueing upon it, but also
the whole Sphaere of Air (W E Q) with all things whatsoever that are moved in
it naturally or violently, as clouds, birds, stones hurled up or down,
arrows, bullets, and such like things violently shot forth: as may appear in
the figure.

The fourth rule.
4 The earth, though it be of exceeding great quantity being considered in
itself, yet being compared to the Heavens, especially the higher sphaeres, is
of noe notable bigness, but may be accounted as a point or prick in the midst
of the world.

That the earth is noe bigger then a point or pinns head in comparison of the
highest heavens will easily appear unto us, by these reasons.

1 The stars which are many times bigger then the earth, seem yet to us to
be noe bigger then a great pinns head, or such like quantity; therefore much
less shall the earth appear to be of any sensible magnitude.

2 We always behold half the heavens above us, which could not be if the
earth had any sensible proportion to the heaven.

3 All observations of hights and distances of the celestial bodies, which
are made on the superficies of the earth, are as exact, and true, as if they
were made in the very center of the earth. Which were impossible, unless the
thicknes of the earth were insensible in regard of the Heavens.

4 All Sunn Dialls which stand on the superficies of the earth, do as truly
cast the shadows of the hours, as if they stood in the Center. As for example.

The star (S) appears like a point or prick to them that dwell in (A)
wherefore the earth (O X) will appear much less to the sight of him that
should behold it from (S), nay it would not be seen at all. Again half the
Heavens (B F E) are always seen to the^ that dwell in (A) wanting some two
minutes, between (E D) and (B C) which difference is altogether insensible.
Again if we observe the height of the star (S) above the Horizon (B E) it
will be all one namely (B S) whether we observe it in the topp of the earth
in (A) or in the middle in (O.) For, (A) and (O,) are so little distant one
from another, that (A S,) and (O S) will be parallel lines, and be esteemed
but (...) one line. The fourth reason concerning Dialls, is clear by the
framing and constructio^ of them: wherein either the lower end of the Cock (or
Gnomon) whereat all the hour lines meet, or the vpperend and knobb (as in many
Dialls) is supposed to be the Center of the earth.



CAP. 3.
Of the parts of the terrestrial Globe.

THe properties of the earthly Globe have been handled in the former chapter
we come now to the parts, which are two in general.

Earth Water
Both contain under them more particular parts to be known.

The more notable parts of the Earth are these. 1 A Continent or maine Land, or
as some call it firm Land, which is not parted by the Sea running between. 2
An Island, a land compassed about with waters. 3 A Peninsula, a land almost
surrounded by waters save at one place, where it ioynes by anarrow neck of
land to the Continent; this is also called Chersonesus. 4 An Isthmus, a
straight neck of land which ioynes two countries together, and keeps the Sea
from compassing the one. 5 A Promontorie or head land running far out into
the Sea like a wedge. All easy to be known without any definition.
6 A Mountain 7 A Valley 8 A Champion plain 9 A Wood



The more notable parts of the Water are these 1 Mare the Sea, or Ocean, which
is the gathering together of all waters. 2. Fretum a straight or narrow sea
running between two lands. 3 S^nu^ a Creek, Gulf, or Bay, when the sea
runs up into the bosom of the land by a narrow entrance but opens it
broader when it is within; if it be very litell it is called a Haven, Portus.
4 Lacus a Lake, a little sea with in the land having rivers running into it, or
out of it, or both. If it has neither it is calldd Staguum a standing Poole,
also Palus; a senne. 5 Fluvius a River, which from the pleasantness is also
called Amnis; from the smalnesse of it Rivus.


Now concerning these parts diverse questions are moved; whether there be more
Sea or Land? whether the sea would naturally ouerslow the land, as it did in
the first creation, were it not withheld within his banks by divine power?
whether the deepenes of the Sea, does exceed the height of the mountains?
whether mountains were before the flood? what is the hight of the highest
hills? whether Islands came since the stood? what is the cause of the Ebbing
and flowing of the Sea? what is the original of springs and rivers? what
manner of motion the running of the rivers is? with such like, whe^rof some
belong not so properly to this science of Geography as to othe^s. We speak
only a word or two of the last, and soproceed. The question is whether the
motion of the rivers be straight, or Circular. The doubts on both sides will
best appear by a sigure first drawn: wherein, Let (HMO) be the Meridian of
Alexandria in Aegipt, or of the Mouth of Nilus and answerable to the meridian
of the Heavens. Another in the Earth (XBY.) Let (B) be the mouth of Nilus, and
(C) the fountain and head of it. Now the mouth of Nilus, where it runs into
the mediterranian Sea, is placed by geographers in the 31, degree of the North
latitud; and the head of Nilus where it rises is placed by Polomaeus in 11.
degree of the South latitud, but by latter and more exact geographers in the
14. degree of the Southern latitud, so that the distance between the founts
and Ostia, i. e. between (C) and (B) is 45. degrees of a great Circle, which
after the vsua^l account makes 2700. one eight part of the earths compass, The
quaestion now is, whether the runninge from (C) to (B) run continually
downward in a straight line; or circularly in a crooked line. If it run in a
straight line, as is most agreeable to the nature of the water it must move
either by the line (CEB) or by the line (DB.) By the line (CEB) it cannot move:
for when it is come to (E,) it will stand still. Because from (E) to (B) it
must move upward, if it move at all, which is contrary to the nature of water.
If therefore it move by a straight line it can be noe other, but (BD,) and so
from (D) to (B) it shall continually descend; for of all places between (D,)
and (B) (B) is the nearest to (A.) But then the fountain must not be in (B)
but higher in (D) which ^emees altogether improbable or impossible. For first
the line (AD) would be notably and sens^bly longer then the line (AB.) For the
compass of the earth being about 24000. Miles, and the semidiameter (AB,) or
(AC) 3828. miles the line, (CD,) would be 1581. miles, which cannot be true,
if as we have proved before, the earth be round land that the highest hills
make noe sensible inaequality. A gain they that dwell in (D) should see the
North Pole star (N) as well as they that dwell in (B,) which also is false.
So then the river cannot run either by (EB) or (DB); Runs it then
circularly by the line (CW^?) This seems probable, and the rather because
hereby a reason of the original of Rivers might more easily be given: For
the fountains (C) lying ^uen with the superficies of the Sea, the water may
easily ^^sse through the hollowes of the earth, and break out at (C) without
ascendinge. But here also are some difficulties: for first we find by
experience that the fountains of most rivers, and those great ons too, lie
sensibly higher then the plain surface of the Sea. Again, if the river move
directly cound, what should be the cause that begins and continues this
motion? It is a motion besides the nature of the water, and therefore violent,
what should drive it forward from the Sea to (C,) and from (C) to (B?) when the
water is at (C,) or (W,) it is as necre to the Center (A) as when it is at (B,)
and therefore it should seem with more liklyhood it would stand still; for why
should it strive to go further, seeing where it is, it is as near to the
Center as whither it runs. Or if some violence do drive it from (C,) toward
(W,) yet (as it is the nature of violent motions) the further it goes the
slower it will run, till in the end it stand still, if there be noe
aduantadge of ground to help it forward. As a bowl thrown down a hill
runs easily and far, if it once be set a going: but thrown upon the ice
(an even place) it will without any let at last stand still. Answer may be
made hereunto, that although there be noe advantage of the ground, yet the
water will still move forward from (C) to (B) because the water that follows,
pusheth forward that, that runs before. which answer will stand, when a good
cause may be showed, which forcibly drives the water from the Sea unto (C)
and out of the fountain (C;) considering that (after this supposition) they
lie both in the same circular superficies. Wherefore seeing, we cannot without
any inconueniency suppose it to move by any of these lines either straight as
(BC) or (BD,) or circular as (BWC) let us enquire farther.

The most likely opinion is, that the motion of the water is mixed neither
directly straight, or circular, but partly one, partly the other. Or if it be
circular, it is in a circle whose center is a little distant from the Center of
the whole globe. Let us place fountains then neither in (C) nor (D) but in (F)
I say the water runs either partly s(...)eight by the (F S) and partly
circular, from (S) to (B) which motion will not be incon(...)meant, for the
water descending continually from (F) to (S) will cause it still to turn
forward; or else wholly circular in the circle (F X B.) And this is most a
greeable to truth. For so it shall both run round as it m^st do if we will
escape the otherwise unavoidable inconveniences of the first opinion and yet in
running still descend, and come nearer to the Center, as is most be fitting the
nature of water, so that we need not seek for any violent cause that moves
it. Let us then see what is the hight of (F) the fountains of Nilus, above (C)
that is (B) the mouth or outlet of it into the Sea. The usual allowance in
watercourses is one foo^ ^n descent for 200. foot in running, but if this be
thought to much because water will run away upon any inequality of ground,
for every 500. foot allow one for descent, and so much we may with reason, in
regard of the swiftnes of many rivers, yea the most, which in many places
runs he a^long, in all places very swiftly (especially Nilus whose cateracts
or downefalls are notable) which cannot be without some notable dec^^uity of
the ground. Thus then the whole course of Nilus being 2700. miles from (F) to
(B) the perpendicular or plumb descent of it (C F) will be 5. miles. And so
high shall the fountain stand above the mouth, and the surface of the plain
Land (for rivers commonly arise at foot of hills) which is (B X F) swell up
above the surface of the Sea (B W C) or (B Y) which hight of the Land above the
Sea althought it be greater then is the height of the highest mountains above
the plain Land, yet it is nothing in comparison of the whole Earth. And this
being granted (as with most probability of reason it may) it will appear that
God in the beginning of the world imposed ^oe perpetual violence upon nature,
in gathering together, the waters into one place, and being so gathered in
keeping them from running back to cover the earth. At the first so soon as
those hollow channells were prepared, the water did naturally slide down into
them, and out of them without miraculous power they cannot return. For if the
sea (B Y) should overflow the land toward (F) the water must ascend in running
from (B) to (F) which is contrary to its nature. Certainly the midland
countries, whence springs of great rivers usually arise, do ly so h^gh, that
the sea cannot naturally overflow them. For as for that opinion that the water
of the sea in the middle lies on a heap higher then the water that is by the
shore; and so that it is a harder matter to sail out of a Haven to seaward,
then to come in) because they go upward): this is an empty speculation contray
to experience, and the grounds of nature it se^fe, as might easily be showed.
All the difficulty that is in this opinion, is to give a reason how the waters
mount up to (F,) and whence the water comes that should flow out of so high a
place of the earth, wherein I think as in many other secrets of nature we must
content our selves with ignorance, seeing so many vain conjectures have taken
no better success.

CAP. 4.
Of the circles of the earth.

IN a round body as the earth is, there can be no distinction of parts, and
places, without the help of some lines drawn or imagined to be drawn upon
it. Now though there are not, no^ can be any circles truly drawn upon the
earth, yet because there is a good ground in nature and reason of things for
them, we must imagine them to be drawn upon the earth, as truly as we see them
described upon a Globe or in a plain paper. Further this must be noted, that
all circles on the earth have the like opposite unto them conc^aved to be the
Heavenes, under which they are directly situated. Thus known, the circles
that we are to take the special notice of are of two sorts, Greater and
Lesser.


The greater circles are those which devide this earthly globe into equal
halfes or Haemispheres.

The lesser are those which devide it into two unequal parts, one bigger,
another less.

Of the former sort there are four, the 1 Equator. 2 Meridian. 3 Horizon. 4
Zodiac, or Eclipticke.


1 The Aequitor or Aequonoctiall li^e, is a li^e dra^^^ just in the midst of
the earth, from East to West, which compasses it as a girdle does a man's body,
and devideth it into two equal parts, one (...) the North side, the other on
the South The two points in the earth that are every way fa^hest distant from
it North, and South are called the Poles of the earth which do directly stand
under the two like points in the Heaven, so called because the Heaven turns
about upon them, as the Earth does in a Globe that is set in a frame. This
circle is of the first and principal note and use in Geography, because all
measurings for distances of places and quarters of the Earth are reckoned in
it, or from it. It is called the Aequinoctiall, because when the Sun in the
Heavens co(...)es to be directly over that circle in the earth, the days and
nights are of equal length in all parts of the world. Mariners call it by a
kind of excellency, The line. Upon the Globe it is easily discerned being
drawn bigger then any other circles from East to West, and with small
divisions.

2 The Meridian, is a line that is drawn quite cross the Aequinoctiall, and
passes through the Poles of the Earth, going directly North and South. It is
called the Meridian, because when the Sun stands just over that circle it is
Meridies i. d. noone day. It may be conceived thus, at noone day, when it is
just twelve a clock, turn your face toward the South, and then imagine with
your self two circles drawn, one in the Heavens, passing from the North just
over your head through the body of the Sun down to the South, and so round
under the earth up again to the North Pole. Another upon the surface of the
earth passing through your feet just under the Sun, and so compassing the
earth round till it meet at your feet again, and these are Meridians
answering one to another. Now the Meridian is not one only, as was the
Aequinoctiall, but many still varying according to the place wherein you are,
as for example. At London there is one Meridian, at Oxford another, at Bristow
another, and so along Eastward or Westward. For it is noone at London sooner
then at Oxford, and at Oxford sooner then at Bristow. Upon the globe there are
many drawn, all which pass through the poles, and go North and South, but
there is one more remarkable then the rest, drawn broad with small divisions,
which runs through the Canary Islands, or through the Islands of Azores
Westward of Spain, which is counted the first Meridian in regard of reckoning
and measuring of distances of places O^^ from another; for otherwise there is
neither first nor last in the round earth. But some place must be appointed
where to begin the account: and those Islands have been thought fittest,
because no part of the World that lay westward was known to the Ancients
further then that: and as they began to reckon there, we follow them. This
circle is called in greek (...).

3 The Horizon is twofold Sensible or appearing. Intelligible or true.


The Sensible or appearing Horizon is the space of the earth so far as in an
open plain, or upon some Hill a man may see round about him. The brim or edge
of the earth further then which you cannot see, that is the Horizon, or as some
call it the Finitor. Because finet or terminat visum, it setts the limits or
bounds to your sight, beyond which nothing can be seen upon the earth. This
is greater or lesser, according as the height of the eye above the plain
superficies of the earth, is more or less. The most exact trial hereof is at
Sea, where there are no mountains nor any unequal risings of the water to
hinder the sight, as there are at land. For example let ( B A F) be the
superficies of the Sea and let a man's eye be placed in (X) above the Sea; as
the eye stands higher or lower so will the distance seen be more or less, as
if the hight of (X A) be 6 foot which is ordinary the height of a man, the eye
looking from (X) to (B) shall see 2 miles and 3 quarters, if (X) be 20 foot
high (B A) will be five ^ (...) Navigation ^. 229.
miles, if 40 foot 7 miles, if 50 foot 8 miles. So that from the mast of a
ship 50 foot high, a man may see round about at sea 8 miles every way, toward
(B G) and (F), So far may the water it self be seen, but any high thing on
the water may be seen farther, 16, or 20 miles according as the height is as
the ship at (C) may be seen from (X) as far more as it is from (A) to (B).
There can be therefore no certain quantity and space set down for this
sensible Horizon, which continually varies according to the height of the eye
above the plain ground or sea. This Horrizon is not at all painted on the
globe nor can be.



The intelligible or true Horizon is a line which girts the earth round in the
midst, and divides it into two equal parts or Hemispheares the uppermost upon
the the top and middle point Whereof we dwell, and that which is under us.
Opposite to this in the Heavens is another Horizon, which likewise cuts the
Heaven into two Hemispheres, the upper and the lower. Above which circle when
any star or the Sun is moved, it then rises unto us, and sets unto
those that dwell opposite unto us, and so on the contrary, you may conceive it
best thus, if standing upon a hill, or some open place, where you may perfectly
see the setting of the Sun, you mark when the Sun is half gone out of your
sight, you may perceive the body of the S^nne cut in two, as it were by a line,
going along through it, the half above is yet seen, that underneath is gone
out of your sight. This line is but a p^ece of the Horrizon, which if you
conceive to be drawn upward about the World from the West to the North, and so
by East and South, to West again you have the whole Horrizon described.

This circle is not drawn upon the body of the globe, because it is variable;
but stands one the outside of it, being a broad circle of wood covered with
paper on which are set the months and days of the year both in the old and
new Calender, and also the 12 signs, and the points of the compass. All which
are easily discerned by the beholdinge. The use of this Horizon is not so much
in Geographie as in Astronomy.

The Zodiake is a circle which compasses the earth like a ^^lt, crossing the
^quator slopewise, no^ straight as the Meridians do. Opposite to it in the
Heavens is another circle of the same name, wherein are the 12. signs, and in
which the Sun keeps his own proper course all the year long, never
d^^lining from ^t on the one side or other. The use hereof in Geography is but
little only to show what people they are over whose heads the Sun comes to be
once or twice a year; who are all those that dwell with in 23. degrees of the
Equator; for so much is the declination, or sloping of the Zodiac. This
circle is also called the Eclipticke line, because when the Sun and Moon
stand both in this circle opposite each to other, then there happens an Eclipse
of the Sun or Moan, upon a globe it is easily discerned, by the sloping of it
from the Equator, and the divisions of it into 12. parts, and every of those
12. into 30. degrees.

These are the greater circles: the lesser follow; which are all of one nature,
and are called by one general name: sc. Parallels, because they are so drawn
on each side of the Equator, as they are ^quidistant unto it every way. Many
of this kind are drawn upon the globe (as is easy to ^e^ seen) and may be
conceived to be drawn upon the earth: but there are only two sorts cheifely
to be marked: namely the Tropickes and the Polar circles.


The tropickes are two, parallel circles distant on each side of the Equator
23. degrees showing the farthest bounds of the Sunns declination North or South
from the Equator, or the midest of heaven. And therefore they are called
tropickes a (...) ^ertendo, because when the Sun comes over these lines, he
either turns away from us, as in the Summer, or turns toward us again as in
the winter: There are then two of them vid.

1 The Tropicke of Cancer which lies on the North side of the Equator, to
which when the Sun comes, it makes the longest day in Summer. 2 The Tropicke
of Capricorn, lying Southward of the Equator, to which when the Sun comes,
it makes the shortest day in winter.
The Polar circles are two parallels drawn by the poles of the Zodiac
compassinge about the poles of the world, being distant from them every way 23
degrees. These are two.

1 The Articke Circle that compasses about the North Pole: it is so called
because that in the Heavens (where unto this in the earth lies opposite) runs
through the constellation of the great Bear, which in greek is called (...)

2 The Antarticke circle that compasses about the South Pole, and is placed
opposite unto the former. All these with the former are easily known upon the
Globe by these descriptio^s, and names usually added unto the^. But because
maps are of an esier price, and more common use then Globes, it will be
needful to show how all these circles, which are drawn most naturally upon a
round Globe, may also as truly, and profitably for knowledge and use be
described upon a plain paper. Whereby we shall understand the reason of those
lines which we see in the usual Mapps of the world, both how they are drawn,
and wherefore they serve. Understand therefore, that in laying down the globe
upon a plain paper, you must imagine the globe to be cut in two halfes through
the midst, and so to be pressed down flat to the paper; as if you should take
a hollow dish, and with your hand s^ui^ze the bottom down, till it lie ^lat
upon a board or any other plain thing for then will those circles that before
were of equal distance, run closer together toward the ^i^st. After this
conceit, universal Maps are made of two fashions, according as the globe may
be divided two ways, either cutting quite through by the meridian from North
to South, as if you should cut an apple by the eye and the stalk, or cutting
it through the Aequinoctiall, East and West, as one would divide an apple
through the midst, between the eye and the stalk. The former makes two faces,
or hemispheares, the East and the West hemispheare. ^he latter makes likewise
two Hemisph^ares, the North and the South Both suppositions are good, and
besitting the nature of the globe: for is touching such universal maps,
wherein the world is repre^^nted not in two round faces, but all in one square
plot, the ground whereupon such descriptions are founded, ^s l(...) natural
and agreeable to the globe for it supposes the (...) to be like a Cylinder (or
role of bowling allies) which imagination, unless it be well qualified, is
utterly false, and makes all such mappes faulty in the situation of places.
Wherefore omitting this, we will show the description of Of this Hypothesis se^
(...) errors of navigation.
the two former only, both which are easy to be done.

1 To describe an Aequinoctiall planispheare, draw a circle (A C B D) and
in^^^^be in ^t two diameters (A B) and (C D) cutting each other at right
angles, and the whole circle into some quadrants: each whereof devide into 90.
parts, or degrees. The line (A B) does ^itly represent half of the Equator,
as the line (C D) in which the points (C) and (D) are the two poles, half of
the Meridian: for these circles the eye being in a perpendicular line from the
point of concurrence (as in this projection it is supposed) must needs appear
straight. To draw the other, which will appear crooked, do thus. Lie a rule
from the Pole (C) to every tenth o^ fifth degree of the half circle (A D B)
noting in the Equator (A B) every intersection of it and the rule. The like
do from the point (B) to the semicircle (C A D) noting also the intersections
in the Meridian (C D) Then the diameters (C B) and (A B) being drawn out at
both end^ as far as may suffice, finding in the line (D C) the center of the
tenth division from (A) to (C) and from (B) to (C), and of the first point of
intersection noted in the meridian from the Equator toward (C) by away
familiar to Geometricians: connect the three points, and you have the parallel
of 10. degrees from the Equator: the like must be done in drawing the other
paralells on either side, the Equator; as also in drawing the Meridians from
centers found in the line (A B) in like manner continued. All which is
illustrated by the following diagram.

2 To describe a Polar Planisphaere, draw a circle (A C-B D) on the center (e)
and as before, inscribe in it two diameters (A B) and (B C) cutting each other
at right angles, and the circle into four quadrants. Each quadrant being
divided into 90. parts, draw from every 5th or 10th of those parts a diameter
to the opposite point: these lines all concurring in the center (E) being the
pole, are as so many Meridians. Next, having cut the half of any one of the
former diameters into 9 parts, as (e D) in the points (F G H I K L M N) draw on
the center (E) so many circles and these represent the paralells of the Globe,
being also here true paralells.

CAP. 5.
Of diverse Distinctions, and Divisions of the earth.

NExt after the Circles of the Earth, we may not unfitly handle the several
Divisions and distinctions which geographers make of the parts, and inhabitants
of the earth, These are many, but we will briefly run them over.

1 The first and most plain is by the Coasts of the Heavens, and rising, and
Setting of the Sun, so it is distinguished into the

East where the Sun arises. Oreins, Ortus (...). West where the Sun goes
down. occidens. North: between both fromwards the Sun at Noone. Septentrio.
South: between both toward the Sun at Noone. Meridies.
These four are called the chief or Cardinal quarters of the world. They
with the others between them are easily known but are of more use to Mariners
then to us, We may rather take notice of those other names which by Astrono
mers Geographers Divines and Poets are given unto them. Who sometime call the
East the right hand part of the world, sometime the West, sometime the. North,
and sometime South. the diversity is noted in these verses,

Ad Boream terrae. Sed Coeli mensor ad Austrum.
Praco Dei exortum, videt, occasumque Poeta. That is Geographers look to the
North, Astronomers to the South.
Priests turn them to the East, and Poets to the West.


This serves for understanding of Authors, where in any mention is made of the
right or left part of the World, if for example ^e be a poet, he means the
South by the right hand, the North by the left: because a poet turns his face
to the West, and so reckons the quarters of Heaven and Earth.

2 The second distinction is by the notable differences of heat and cold, that
are observed on the earth, this is the the division of the Earth by Zones or
Cirdles, which are parts of the Earth, wherein heat and cold do remarkably
increase or decrease. Those Zones are 5.

1 The hot or burning Zone (Zona torrida) which contains all that space of
earth, that lies between the two Torpicks, supposed heretofore (but falsely as
after experience has showed) to be inhabitable by reason of heat, the Sun
continually lying over some part of it.

2. 3 The temperate Zones wherein neither heat nor cold is extreme but
moderate: these are two, one on the North side of the Equator between the
Articke circle, and the Torpicke of Cancer, another on the South side between
the Torpicke of Capricorn, and the Antarcticke circle.

4. 5 The cold, or Frozen Zones, wherein cold for the most part is greater then
the heat, these likewise are two, one in the North, between the Arcticke
circle, and the North Pole, another on the South between the Antarctick circle
and the South Pole. These of all parts of the earth are worst inhabited,
according as extremity of cold is always a greater enemy to man's body, then
extremity of heat.

3 The third distinction is by the shadows, which bodies do cast upon the
earth, just at nooneday; for these do not always fall one way but diversely
according to their diverse situation upon the Earth. Now in respect of the
shadows of men's bodies, the inhabitants of the earth are divided into the

1 Amphiscij ((...)) whose shadow at noone day fall both ways, sc. to the
North when the Sun is Southward of them, and to the South when the Sun is
Northward, and such are those people that do dwell in the hot Zone. For the
Sun goes over their heads twice a year, once Northward another time
Southward, when the Sun is just over their heads they are called Ascij,
(...), without shadow.

2 Heteroscij ((...)) whose shadows do always fall one way, namely always
toward the North, as those that dwell in the Northern temperate Zone, or
always to the South, as those that dwell in the Southern temperate Zone.

3 Periscij ((...)) whose shadows go round about them, as those people who
dwell in the two cold Zones, for as the Sun never goes down to them after he
is once up, but always round about, so do their shadows.

4 The fourth distinction is by the situation of the Inhabitants of the Earth,
compared on with another: who are called either.

1 Perioeci ((...)) such as dwell round about the Earth in one and the same
parallel, as for example under the Tropicke of Cancer. 2 Antoeci ((...)) such
as dwell opposite to the former in another Parallel of the same distance from
the Equator. As those under the Tropicke of Capricorn. 3 Antipodes ((...))
who dwell ^ust under us their feet opposite to ours.
5 The fifth distinction is of the Length and Breadth of the Earth and places
upon it: these may be considered two ways 1 Absolutely, and so the Longitude
or Length of the Earth is its Circuit, and Extension from East to west,
Latitude or breadth of it, is the whole Circuit and Compass of it from North
to South:
2 Comparatively comparinge one places situation with another, and so the
Longitud of a place, is the distance of it from the first Meridian going
through the Canary Islands, Eastward. Whereby we know how far one place lies
East or West from another. Latitude of a place, is the distance of it from the
Equator toward the North or South. Whereby we know how far one Place lies
Northward, or Southward of another.



The Longitude must be reckoned by the degrees of the Equator, the Latitude by
the degrees of the Meridian.

For example, in these two Haemisphaeres, the longitude of the whole earth is
from (C) to (A) and (B) in the Equator. The latitud is from (N) to (S), and
from (Q) to (P) the North and South poles, and this reckoned in any meridian.
The first meridian is (A N B S) which goes by the Canary Islands, the
Aequinoctiall is (A B C A). Now I have a City given sc. (D) I would know in
what longitude and latitude it is. For the longitude I consider what meridian
passes through it, which is the meridian (N D S) which crosses the
Aequinoctiall in (I) at 15 degrees, wherefore I say that (D) stands Eastward
from the first Meridian 15 degrees. So I find that the City (e) is 150
degrees Eastward, (G) 195, and (F) 345.

For the Latitude I consider what parallel runs through (D E G) or (F) and I
find the 30 to pass by (D) 45 by (E) the 15 by (F) the 45 Southward by (G)
and those numbers are the latitude of the place that are distant from the
Equator, (C A B).

Concerning the means whereby the longitude of places is found out, there is
scarce any thing that has troubled Mathematicians so much as the observation
of it. For because no standing mark can be taken (the Heavens always running
about) it must needs be difficult. To measure upon the earth, going always
under the same parallel, is a way certain in regard of some few places, but so
troublesome in it self, and unprofitable in regard of other places that ly out
of that parallel, that it may be accounted a fruitless labor. The voyages and
accounts of Mariners at Sea, are so full of casualty and uncertainty by reason
of the doubtful variation of the compass, the unequal violence of winds and
tides, the false making of their sea cards, by which they fail, and the
ignorance of the Masters for the greatest part, as there can hardly be any
assured, reckoning made by them. The best means of observation is by Eclipses
of the Sun and Moon, which in several Countries are sooner or later seen,
according as one place lies farther East or farther West from another. But this
also falls out so seldom, and when it happens, is ^o seldom observed, and
when it is observed, has so many difficulties in the precise and exact
observation of it; that we may Well account this inquiry after the longitude
of places, to be one of those things whereof we must be content to be
ignorant, and rather to guess at it in Gross, then invaine to strive for
exactness, which is the cause why the tables of the longitude and latitude of
Cities, though they many times agree in the latitude, do yet for the most
part very much differ in the Longitude.

6 The sixth Distinction is by the Length or shortness of the Day in Summer
time in several Quarters of the earth. And this division is by Climates
((...)) which are several spaces of the earth contained between two
Paralells, in the which the longest day in Summer exc^edes that in another
Parallel, by half an Hour. There is a great deal of Confusion and
difference between the late and and ancient Geographers about the distinction
and diverse reckonings of the Climats. It is not worth the labor to recount
their opinions and Calculations: thus much is plain, and easy to be known.
There are 24. Climats in which the Day increases by half hours, from 12.
hours to 24. There are likewise 6. Climats in which the day increases by
months, from one month to six, that is half a year. Under the Equator the
day is always twelve hours long, but as you go from it toward the Pole,
the Day lengthen^ still till it comes to a Those th^^ dwell under the Pole have
not past 3. or 4 months profund as ^ene^ras dark night, for when the Sun is
in Libra and Pisces being then nigh, the Horizon it sends forth to them a
glimmering light not vnli^e to the twilig^^ or d^wning of the day in a morning
a little before the Suns rising Muns^er lib. 1. cap.
day half a year long. Now in what degrees of latitude every on of these
Climats begin and end, shall appear by this table following.

7 The seventh and lost distinction of the earth is taken from the situation
of it in respect of the Heavens, and especially the Suns motion. In regard
whereof Some parts or inhabitants of the Earth are said to be or dwell in a
Right Sphere, some in a parallel Sphere, and others in an oblique or crooked
Sphere.

They dwell (in Sphaerarecta) in a right or straight Sphere who dwell just
under the Aequinoctiall, whose Horizon is parallel to the Meridians, but cutts
the Equator at right Angles. They dwell in parallel Spheres, who dwell just
under either of the Poles, whose Horizon is parallel to the Equator, but cuts
all the Meridians at right Angles: and the latter is sometime called a Parallel
Sphere.

They dwell (in Sphaera obliqua) in a crooked Sphere, who inhabit any place
between the Aequinoctiall and the Pole, whose Horizon cuts the Equator, the
Paralells, and the Meridians at oblique or unequal angles.

1 The use of this table is easy. In the first Column are contained the names
and number of the Climats. In the second the Paralells which enclose it on each
side, and divide it in the midst. For the paralells here are drawn by
eueryhalfe hours increase.

The third Column is the length of the Day in Summer, in every Climate, which
from 12. hours increases by half hours to 24. hours after by months, from
one month to six.

The fourth contains the degrees of latitude, how far every climate lies
from the Aequinoctiall.

The fist contaynes the space or breadth of every Climate, how many degrees or
minutes it takes up upon the Earth.

The sixth contains so^e notable places by which the Climats pass.

2 Hereby it is easy to know what the longest Day is in any Place of the
world whose latitude is known. Or contrarily the longest Day being known to
know the latitude For example Oxford has latitude 52. 0. degrees longitude 24.
0. In the table I find that 52. degrees of Latitude lie in the 9th Climate
wherein the day is 16. hours and a half long, so much I say the Day is at
Oxford in Summer. The place of Oxford in the Haemisphaere is at (U.)

3 Upon Globes the Climats are not usually described, but are noted out upon
the brazen Meridian. So also in universal mappes they are seldom drawn, to
avoid confusion of many lines together but they are many times marked out on
the limb or edge of the map,

CAP. 6.
Of the measuring of the earth.

WE are now come to the last point concerning the measuring the Earth, which
is two fold, either of the W^^^e earth. 2 Several parts thereof, and their
distance one from another.


Concerning the first it is but a needless labor to recount the diversity of
opinions that have been held from time to time by learned Geographers, What is
the compass and depth of the earth. This may be seen in ^ues de vsu Globe,
part. 3. cap. 2. and in Clavi^s on Sacrobosco with others. They all differ so
much one from another, that there is no certainty in trusting any of them. The
most common and received opinion is that the circuit of the earth is 21600
miles, reckoning (...) miles for every degree, and then the depth or Diameter
of the Earth shall be 6877 English miles, containing 5000 foot in a mile.

The means whereby the circuit and Diameter of the earth are found out are
Principally two.

1 By measuring North or South, under one Meridian some good quantity of
ground, threescore or an hund^^d miles (or two for the more certainty) for in
those petty observations of small distances, there can be no certain working.
This may be done, though it be laborious, yet exactly without any sensible
error by a skillful workman, plotting it out upon his paper, with due heed
taken, that (...) often rectify the variation of the needle (by which he
travells) upon due observation, and that all notable ascents and descents, with
such winding and turning as the necessity of the way causes, be reduced to one
straight line. By this means we shall know how many miles in the Earth
answering to a degree in the Heavens; if exact observation by large instruments
be made to find the elevation of the pole, in the first place where we begin
to measure, and the last where we make an end.

Besides this way of measuring the circumference of the Earth, there is none
other that has any certainty of obseratio^ in it. That by Eclipses is most
uncertain; for a little error in a few minutes of time (which the observers
shall not possibly avoid) breeds a sensible and foul error in the distance of
the two places of observation. That of Erat^sthenes by the Sun beams, and a
shadow of a style or gnomon set upon the Earth, is as bad as the other. For
both the uncertainty of the calculation in so small quantity as the shadow and
the gnomon must needs have, and the difficulty to observe the true length of
the shadow, as also the false supposition whereupon it proceeds, taking those
lines for Parllells which are not, do manifestly show the reckoning hereby
made to be doubtful and not sure.

2 The second is by measuring the semidiameter of the Earth: For as the
circumference makes known the diameter, so does this the circumference. This
may be done by observ^tion made upon some great hill, hard by the sea side. The
invention is of Maurolycus Abbot of Mess^va in Sicili^, but it has been
perfitted, and more exactly performed by a worthy Mathematician Ed. W. who
himself made proof of it. By this art was the (...)idiameter of the Earth
^ound ou^ to be 1831262^ foot: which allowing 5000 foot to a mile is ^662 and
a half miles, which doubled is the whole Diameter 7325 miles. The circuit of
the earth shall be 2^030 miles, and one degree contains 63 61/36 miles, which
is almost 64 miles. Which as it exceeds the ordinary account, so may we rest
upon it as more exact then any other.

2 The second point concerning the measuringe of particular distances of
places one from another is thus performed.

First upon the Globe it is most easy. With a pair of Compasses take the
distance between any two places howsoever situated upon the Globe, and apply
the distance so taken to the Equator, and see how many degrees it takes up;
those degrees turned into miles show the distance of the two cities on from
another.

Upon universal mapps their is a little more difficulty in finding the
distance of places which here must be considered in a threefold difference of
situation: 1 Of Latitude only. 2 Of Longitude only. 3 Of Latitude and
Longitude together.


1 If the two places differ only in Latitude, and lie under the same Meridian
if the places lie both on one side of the Equator, the differences of the
latitudes: or the sum of both latitudes added together, if one place lie
North and another South, being turned into Miles gives the true distance.

2 If the places differ only in Longitude, and lie both under one parallel of
latitude the difference of longitude turned into miles proportionably
according to the latitude of the parallel, gives the true distance.

3 The distance of places differing both in latitude and longitude may thus be
found out first let there be drawn a semicircle upon a right diameter noted
with (A B C D) whereof (D) shall be the Center. The greater this Semicircle
is made, so much the more easy will be the operation; because the degrees
will be la(...). Then this Semicircle being drawn, and accordingly divided,
imagine that by the help of it, you desire to find out the distance betwixt
London and Jerusalem, which Cities are known to differ both in longitude and
latitude. Now, that the true distance betwixt th^se two places may be found
out, you must first substract the lesser longitude out of the greater, so shall
you find the differences of their longitudes, which is 47. degrees. Then reckon
that difference upon the Semicircle, beginning at (A) and so proceed to (B;)
and at the end of that difference, make a mark with the leter (e) unto which
point by your ruler, let aright line be drawn from (D) the center of the Semi
circle. This being in this sort performed, let the lesser latitude be sought
out which in 32 degrees, in the fore said semicircle, beginning your account
from the point (E) and so proceed toward (B), and at the end of the lesser
latitude let another point be marked out with the letter (G), from which point,
let there be drawn a perpendicular line which may fall with right Angles upon
the former line drawn from (D) to (e), and where it chances to fall, there
mark out a point with the letter (H): This being performed let the greater
latitude which is 51 degrees 32 minutes, be sought out in the semicircle
beginning to reckon from (A) toward (B) and at the end of that latitude set
another point signed out by the letter (I) from whence let there be drawn
another perpendicular line that may fall with right angles upon the diameter
(AC): and here mark out a point with the letter (K), this done take with your
compass the distance betwixt (K) and (H) which distance you must set down
upon the diameter (AC) placeing the one foot of your compass upon (K) and the
other toward the center (D), and there mark out a point with the letter (L);
then with your compass take the shorter perpendicular line (G H,) and apply
that wideness upon the longer perpendicular line (I K,) placing the one foot
of your compass at (I,) which is the bounds of the greater latitude, and
extend the other toward (K), and there make a point at (M), then with your
compass take the distance betwixt (L) and (M), and apply the same to the
semicircle, Placing the one foot of your compass in (A) and the other toward
(B), and there mark out a point with the letter (N), now the number of degrees
comprehended betwixt (A) and (N) will express the true distance of the two
places, which will be sound to be 39 degrees: which being multiplied by 60.
and so converted into miles according to the former rules, will produce 2340.
which is the distance of the said places.

FINIS.

