Three to One: Being, An English-Spanish Combat, Performed by a Western
Gentleman, of Tauystoke in Devonshire with an English Quarter-Staffe, against
Three Spanish Rapiers and Poniards, at Sherries in Spain, The fifteen day of
November, 1625.

In the Presence of Dukes, Condes, Marquesses, and other Great Dons of Spain,
being the Counsel of War.

The Author of this Book, and Actor in this Encounter, Richard Peeeke.



TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT Majesty.
GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN,
IF I were again in Spain, I should think no happiness on Earth, so great,
as to come into England, and at your Royal Feet, lay down the Story of my
Dangers, and Peregrination; Which I tell, as a late Sea-wrackt Man, (tos'd and
beaten with many Misfortunes;) Yet, setting my weary Body at last on a Blessed
Shore: My Hands now lay hold upon your Altar, which is to me a Sanctuary:
Here I am safe in Harbor.

That Psalm of Kingly David, which I sung in my Spanish Captivity, Psalm. 137.
(When as we sat in Babylon, etc.) I now have changed to an other Tune;
saying, (with the same Prophet, Great is thy Mercy toward me (O Lord,) for
thou have delivered my Soul from the lowest Grave. Psalm. 86.13.
And, as your Majesty has been graciously pleased, both to let your poor
Soldier and Subject, behold your Royal Person, and to hear him speak in his
rude Language; So, if your Majesty, vouchsafe to cast a Princely Eye on these
his unhandsome Papers; New Sunbeams shall spread over him, and put a
Quickening Soul into that Bosom, which otherwise must want Life, for want of
your Comfort. Those Graces, from your Excellent Clemency, (already received)
being such, that I am ashamed, and sorry, not to have Endured, and to have done
more in Foreign Countries, for the Honor of Yours; When from so High a
Throane, my Sovereign Deignes to look Down, on a Creature so unworthy, whose
Life, he prostrates before your Highness.

Ever resting, Your Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Subject, RICHARD PEEKE.

Three to One: Being, An English-Spanish Combat.
Loving Countrymen; Not to weary you with long Praeambles, unnecessary for you
to read, and troublesome for me to set down; I will come roundly to the
matter; entreating you, not to cast a malicious eye upon my Actions, nor rashly
to condemn them, or to stagger in your Opinions of my performance, sithence I
am ready with my life to Justify what I set down; the Truth of this Relation
being Warrented by Noble Proofs, and Testimonies not to be questioned,

I am a Western Man, Devonshire my Country, and Tauestoke my place of
Habitation.

I know not what the Court of a King means, nor what the fine Phrases of
silken Courtiers are: A good Ship I know, and a poor Cabin, and the
Language of a Cannon: And therefore, as my Breeding has bin Rough, (scorning
Delicacy:) And my Present Being consists altogether upon the Soldier, (blunt,
plain, and unpolished;) so must my Writings be, proceeding from fingers
fitter for the Pike then the Pen: And so (kind Countrymen) I pray receive
them.

Neither ought you to expect better from me, because I am but the Chronicler of
my own Story.

After I had seen the Beginning and End of Argeires Voyage, Argiers.
I came home, somewhat more acquainted with the World, but little amended in
Estate; My Body more wasted and weather-beaten, but my Purse never the fuller,
nor my Pockets thicker lyned.

Then, the Drumbe beating up for a New Expedition, in which, many Noble
Gentlemen, and Heroical Spirits, were to venture their Honors, Lives, and
Fortunes: Cables could not hold me, for away I would, and along I vowed to go,
and did so.

The Dissigne opening it self at Sea for Cales, Cales.
proud I was to be employed There, where so many Gallants, and English
Worthies, did by their Examples, encourage the Common Soldier to Honorable
Darings.

The Ship I went in, was called The Conuertine, (one of the Navy Royal:) The
Captain, Thomas Portar.

On the two and twenty day of October, October 22. The Fleet came to Cales.
being Saturday, 1625. our Fleet came into Cales, about three of the clock in
the afternoon, we being in all, some hundred and ten Sail.

The Saturday-night, some sixteen Sail of the Hollanders, and about ten
White-Hall-Men (who in England are called Colliers) were commanded to fight
against the Castle of Puntall, Fight at Puntall
standing three miles from Cales, who did so accordingly, and discharged (in
that Service) at the least one thousand six hundred Shot.

On the Sunday morning following, the Earl of Essex going up very early, Earl
of Essex
and an hour at least before us to the Fight, commanded our Ship (the
Conuertine, being of his Squadron) to follow him: The Castle playing hard and
hotly upon his Lordship.

Captain Portar, and the Master of our Ship, Captain Portar.
(whose name is M. Hill,) having upon sight of so fierce an Encounter, an
equal desire to do something worthy themselves, and their Country, came up
so close to the Castle, as possibly Men in such a danger either could, or durst
adventure, and there fought bravely: The Castle bestowing upon us a hot
salutation (and well becoming our approach) with Bullets; whose first Shot
killd three of our Men, passing through and through our Ship, the second
killd four, and the third two more at least, with great spoil and battery to
our Ship: The last Shot flying so close by Captain Portar, that with the
wind of the Bullet, his very Hands had almost lost the Sense of feeling, being
struck into a sudden numbnesse.

Upon this, Captain Portar perceiving the danger we, and our Ship were in,
commanded a number of us to get upon the upper Deck, and with our Small Shot
to try if we could force the Cannoneers from their Ordnance.

We presently advanced our selves, fell close to our work, and plied them
with Pellets; in which hot and dangerous Service, one Master William Jewel,
Mr. William Jewel, his Service.
behaved himself both Manly and like a Noble Soldier, expressing much Valor,
abillity of Body, and readiness; with whom, and some few more, I (amongst the
rest) stood the brunt, which continued about three hours.

Out Ship lay all this while with her Star-bord side to the Fort, who beating
us continually, with at least two hundred Muskets, whose Bullets flew so thick,
that our Shrowdes were torn in pieces, and our Tacklings rent to nothing; and
when she came off, 500. Bullets in the Star-board side of our Ship.
there were to be seen five hundred Bullets (at the least) sticking in her
side: I, for my part (without vain glory be it spoken) discharging at this
time, some threescore and ten Shot, as they recounted to me who charged my
Pieces for me.

In the heat of this Fight, Sir William Sentliger.
Sir William Sentliger (whether called up by my Lord of Essex, or coming of
himself, I know not) seeing us so hardly besett, and that we had but few
Shot upon our Deck, in regard of the Enemies number, which played upon us,
came with a Valient and Noble Resolution, out of another Ship into ours,
bringing some forty Soldiers with him, who there with us, renewed a second
Fight, as hot, or hotter then the former: Where in this Fight, one of our
Bullets was shot into the mouth of a Spanish Cannon, where it sticks fast,
and puts that Roarer to silence.

Upon this Bravery, they of the Fort began to wax calmer, and cooler: And in
the end, most part of their Gunners being slain, gave over shooting, but
yielded not the Fort until night.

Whilst this Skirmish continued, a company of Spaniards within the Castle, by
the advantage of a Wall, whose end ietting out, they still as they discharged,
retired behind it, saving themselves, and extremely annoying us; I removed
into the Fore-Castle of our Ship, and so plied them with Haile-shotte, that
they forsook their stand.

What Men on our part were lost (by their Small Shot) I can not well
remember, but sure I am, not very many: Yet the Spaniards afterward, before
the Governor of Cales, confessed they lost about fifty, 50 Spaniards slain.
whose Muskets they cast into a Well, because our Men should not use them,
throwing the dead Bodies in after.

My Hurts and Bruises here received, albeit they were neither many, nor
dangerous, yet were they such, that when the Fight was don, many Gentlemen in
our Ship for my encouragement, gave me Money.

During this Battle, the Hollanders and White-Hall-Men, you must think, were
not idle, for their Great Pieces went off continually, from such of their
Ships as could conveniently discharge, because our Ship lay between them
and the Fort; and they so closely plied their work, that at this Battery were
discharged from the Ordnance, 4000 Bullets at the Battry of the Fort.
at least four thousand Bullets.

The Castle being thus quieted, (though as yet not yielded) the Earl of Essex,
about twelve at noone, Earl of Essex his Regiment Landed.
landed his Regiment close by the Fort, the Spaniards looking over the Walls
to behold them: Upon sight of which, many of those within the Castle (to the
number of six score) ran away; Spaniards ran from the Castle,
we pursuing them with showtes, hollawings, and loud noises, and now and then
a Piece of Ordnance ouertooke some of the Spanish Hares, and stayed them from
running farther.

Part of our Men being thus landed, they marched up not above a flight shot
off, and there rested themselves. Then about six at night the Castle yielded,
upon composition, Castle of Puntall yielded,
to depart with their Arms, and Colors flying, and no Man to offend them;
which was performed accordingly.

The Captain of the Fort, his name was Don Francisco Bustamante, Bustamante,
and his Men put over to Port Real.
who presently upon the delivery, was carried aboard the Lord Generals Ship,
where he had a Soldierly Welcome; And the next day, He, and all his Company
were put over to Port Real, upon the main Land because they should not go to
Cales, which is an Island.

Monday. October 24. On the Monday, On Monday all our Forces Landed.
having begun early in the morning, all our Forces, about noone were landed,
and presently marched up to a Bridge, between Puntall and Cales; In going up
to which, some of our Men were unfortunately and unmanly surprised, and before
they knew their own danger, had there their Throats cut; Some having their
Brains beaten out with the stocks of Muskets; others, their Noses sl e'd off;
whilst some Heads were spurned up and down the Streets like Footeballs, and
some Ears worn in scorn in Spanish Hattes: For when I was in Prison in
Cales, (whether some of these Spanish Picaroes were brought in for flying from
the Castle,) I was an eye witness, of English Men's Ears worn in that
despightfull manner.

What the Forces being on Shore did, or how far they went up, I can not tell,
for I was no Land-Soldier, and therefore all that while kept aboard: Yet about
twelve of the clock, when they were marched out of sight, I (knowing that other
English Men had don the like the very same day,) ventered on Shore likewise,
Richard Peeke on Shore.
to refresh my self, with my Sword only by my side, because, I thought the
late storms had beaten all the Spaniards in, and therefore feared no danger.

On, therefore, I softly walked, viewing the desolation of such a Place, for I
saw no body: Yet far had I not gone from the Shore, but some English Men were
come even almost to our Ships, and from certain Gardens had brought with
them many Oranges and Lymons.

The sight of these, sharpened my stomach the more to go on, because I had a
desire to present some of those Fruits to my Captain. Hereupon, I demanded of
them, what danger there was in going? They said, None, but that all was hushed,
and not a Spaniard stirring.

We parted, they to the Ships, I forward: And before I had reached a mile, I
found (for all their talking, of no danger) Three Englishmen stark dead,
being slain, lying in the way, it being full of deep Sandy pittes, so that I
could hardly find the passage, and one, some small distance from them, not
fully dead.

The groans which he uttered, led me to him; and finding him lying on his
belly, I called to him, and turning him on his back, saw his wounds, and said;
Brother, what Villain has done this mischeife to thee? He lamented in sighs
and doleful looks, and casting up his eyes to Heaven, but could not speak. I
then resolved (and was about it) for Christian Charities sake; and for
Countries sake, to have carried him on my back to our Ships, far off though
they lay, and there (if by any possible means it could have bin done,) to have
recovered him.

But my good intents were prevented; For on a sudden, came rushing in upon me,
a Spanish-Horseman, whose Name, as afterward I was informed, was Don Iuan of
Cales, a Knight; I seeing him make speedily and fiercely at me, with his drawn
weapon, suddenly whipped out mine, wrapping my Cloak about mine Arm: Five or
six Skirmishes we had, and for a pretty while, fought off and on.

A Fight between a Spanish Horseman, and an English Footman.
At last, I getting with much ado, to the top of a sandy Hillock, the Horseman
nimbly followed up after; By good Fortune to me, (though bad to himself) he
had no Petronell or Pistolls about him; and therefore clapping Spurs to his
Horse sides, his intent, as it seemed, was, with full careere to ride over me,
and trample me under his Horses feet: But a Providence greater then his Fury,
was my Guard.

Time was it for me to look about warily, and to lay about lustely, to defend
a poor Life so hardly distressed: As therefore his Horse was violently
breaking in upon me, I struck him into the eyes, with a flappe of my Cloak;
upon which, turning sideward, I took my advantage, and as redily as I could,
stepping in, it pleased God, that I should pluck my Enemy down, The Horseman
dismounted.
and have him at my Mercy, for Life, which notwithstanding, I gave him; He
falling on his knees, and crying out in French to me: Pardone moy le vous pree,
le suis un buon Chrestien. Pardon me Sir, I am a good Christian.

I, seeing him brave, and having a Soldiers mind to Rifle him, I searched for
Jewels, but found, only five Pieces of Eight about him, in all amounting to
twenty Shillings English: Yet he had Gold, but that I could not come by; For, I
was in have to have sent his Spanish Knighthood home on Foot, and to have
taught his Horse an English Pace.

Thus far, my Voyage for Oranges sped well, but in the end, proved sower
Sauce to me. And it is harder to keep a Victory, then to obtain; So, here it
fell out with mine.

For, fourteen Spanish Muskatiers, spying me so busy about one of their
Contrymen, bent all the Mouths of their Pieces to kill me, which they could
not well do, without endangering this Don John's life; so that I was enforced
(and glad I escaped so too) to yield my self their Prisoner.

True Valor (I see) goes not always in good Clothes; For, He whom before I
had surprised, seeing me fast in the snare, and (as the event proved)
disdaining that his Country men should report him so dishonored, most basely,
(when my hands were in a manner bound behind me) drew out his Weapon, (which
the rest had taken from me, to give him) and wounded me through the Face, An
ungentle unworthy base Spaniard.
from Ear to Ear, and had there killd me, had not the fourteen Muskatiers
rescued me from his Rage.

Upon this, I was led in Triumph, into the Town of Cales: An Owl not more
wondered and hooted at, a Dog not more cursed.

In my being led thus along the Streets, A Flemming spying me, Wounded
basely by a Flemming.
cried out alowde; Whither do you lead this English Dog? Kill him, kill
him, he is no Christian. And with that, breaking through the Crowde, in upon
those who held me, ran me into the Body with a Halbeit, at the Reins of my
Back, at the least four inches.

A Noble Spaniard.
One Don Fernando, an ancient Gentleman, was sent down this Summer, from the
King at Madrill, with Soldiers; But before our Fleet came, the Soldiers were
discharged; They of Cales, never suspecting that we meant to put in there.

Before him, was I brought to be examined, yet few, or no questions at all,
were demanded of me because, he saw I was all bloody in my Clothes, and so
wounded in my Face and Jaws, that I could hardly speak: I was therefore
committed presently to Prison, where I lay eighteen days: The Noble
Gentleman, giving express charge, that the best Surgeons should be sent for,
least, being so basely hurt and handled by Cowards, I should be demanded at his
hands.

I being thus taken on the Monday, when I went on Shore, The Fleetes departure.
the Here departed the Friday following, from Cales, at the same time when I
was there a Prisoner.

Yet, thus honestly was I used by my worthy Friend Captain Portar; He above my
deserving, complaining, that he feared he had lost such a Man: The Lord
Generals love.
My Lord General (by the solicitation of Master John Glanuile, Secretary to
the Fleet) sent three Men on Shore, to enquire in Cales for me, and to offer
(if I were taken) any reasonable Ransom: But the Town, thinking me a better
Prize then (indeed) I was, denied me, and would not part from me.

Then came a Command to the Teniente, or Governor of Cales, to have me sent to
Sherrys, (otherwise called Xerez,) lying three Leagues from Cales.

Wondrous unwilling (could I otherwise have chosen) was I to go to Sherry,
because, I feared I should then be put to Tortures.

Having therefore a Young man, (an English Man, and a Merchant, Goodrow a
Merchant, Pikes Fellow Prisoner in Cales.
whose Name was Goodrow,) my fellow Prisoner, who lay there for Debt: and so I
thinking there was no way with me but one; (That I must bo sent packing to my
long home,) Thus I spoke unto him.

Countryman, what my Name is, our Partnership in Misery has made you know;
And with it, know that I am a Deuonshire-Man borne, and Tauestock the place of
my once-abiding. I beseech you, if God ever send you Liberty, and that you
sail into England, take that Country in your way; Commend me to my Wife and
Children, made wretched by me, an unfortunate Father, and Husband: Tell them,
and my Friends, (I entreat you, for Gods cause) that if I be (as I suspect I
shall be) put to Death in Sherris, I will dye a Christian Soldier, no way, I
hope, dishonouring my King, Country, or the Justice of my Cause, or my
Religion.

Anon after, away was I conveyed with a strong Guard, Pike Prisoner in Sherrys.
by the Governor of Cales, and brought into Sherrys on a Thurseday, about
twelve at night.

On the Sunday following, two Friars were sent to me, (both of them being Irish
Men, and speaking very good English; Two Friars sent to Confess him.
) One of them was caled Padre Iuan, (Father John.) After a sad and grave
Salutation; Brother (quoth he) I come in Love to you, and Charity to your
Soul, to Confess you: And if to us, (as your Spiritual Ghostly Fathers) you
will lay open your Sins, we will forgive them, and make your way to Heaven,
for to morrow you must dye.

I desired them, that they would give me a little respite, that I might retire
into a private Chamber, and instantly I would repair to them, and give them
satisfaction: Leave I had; Away I went, and imediately returned: They asked me,
if I had yet resolved, and whether I would come to Confession: I told them, I
had been at Confession already: One of them demanded, with whom? I answered,
with God the Father: And with nobody else (said the other?) Yes, (quoth I, Pike
at Confession, but with no Friars
) and with Jesus Christ, my Redeemer, who has both power and will, to forgive
all Men their Sins, that truly Repent; Before these Two, have I fallen on my
knees, and Confessed my grievous offenses, and trust, they will give me a free
Absolution, and Pardon.

What think you of the Pope? said Father John: I answered, I knew him not:
They, hereupon, shaking their heads, told me, they were sorry for me, and so
departed.

Whilst thus I lay in Sherrys, The Captain of the Fort a Prisoner.
the Captain of the Fort (Don Francisco Bustamente) was brought in, Prisoner
for his Life, because he delivered up the Castle; but whether he dyed for it,
or no, I cannot tell.

My day of Trial being come, I was brought from Prison, Duke of Medina, D. of
Macada, D. Ferdinando, Giron, Marquess De Alquenezes, etc.
into the Town of Sherrys, by two Drumbes, and a hundred Shot, before three
Dukes, four Condes, or Earls, four Marquesses, besides other great Persons;
the town having in it, at least, five thousand Soldiers.

At my first appearing before the Lords, my Sword lying before them on a
Table, the Duke of Medina asked me if I knew that Weapon; It was reached to me;
I took it, and embraced it in mine arms, and with tears in mine eyes, kissed
the Pomell of it. He then demanded, how many Men I had killed with that Weapon?
I told him, if I had killed One, I had not been there now, before that Princely
Assembly, for when I had him at my foot, begging for Mercy, I gave him life,
yet he, then very poorly, did me a mischief: Then they asked Don John (my
Prisoner) what Wounds I gave him; He said, none: Upon this he was rebuked, and
told; That if upon our first Encounter, he had run me through, it had been a
fair and Noble Triumph; but so to wound me, being in the hands of others, they
held it Base.

Questions by the Spaniards.
Then said the Duke of Medyna to me; Come on Englishman, What Ship came you
in? I told him, The Conuertine: Who was your Captain? Captain Portar: What
Ordnance carried your Ship? I said, forty Pieces. But the Lords looking all
this while on a Paper, which they held in their hands: Duke Medyna said, In
their Note, there was but thirty eight.

In that Paper (as after I was informed, by my two Irish Interpreters) there
was set down, the Number of our Ships, their Burden, Men, Munition,
Victual, Captains, etc. as perfect, as we our selves had them in England.

Of what Strength (quoth an other Duke) is the Fort at Plymouth? I answered,
very Strong: What Ordnance in it? Fifty said I: That is not so, said he, there
is but seventeen: How many Soldiers are in the Fort? I answered, two hundred:
That is not so, (quoth a Conde) there is but twenty.

Marquess Alquenezes asked me, Of what strength the little Island was before
Plymouth? I told him, I knew not: Then (quoth he) we do.

Is Plymouth a Walled Town? Yes my Lords: And a good Wall? Yes said I, a very
good Wall: True, said a Duke, to leap over with a Staff. And has the Town,
said the Duke of Medyna, strong Gates? Yes: But, quoth he, there was neither
Wood nor Iron to those Gates, but two days before your Fleet came away.

Now, before I go any farther, let me not forget to tell you, that my two
Irish Confessors, had been here in England the last Summer, and when our
Fleet came from England, they came for Spain; Having seen our King at
Plymouth, when the Soldiers there showed their Arms, and did then diligently
observe what the King did, and how he carried himself.

How chance (said Duke Giron) did you not in all this Bravery of the Fleet
take Cales, as you took Puntall? I replied, that the Lord General might
easily have taken Cales, for he had near a thousand Scaling Ladders to set up,
and a thousand Men to loose; but he was loath to rob an Almeshouse, having a
better Market to go to: Cales, I told them, was held Poor, Vnmand, and
Vnmunitioned: What better Market, said Medyna? I told him, Genoa, or Lisbone,
and as I heard, there was instantly, upon this, an Army of six thousand
Soldiers sent to Lisbone.

Then, quoth one of the Earls, when thou meetst me in Plymouth, will thou bid
me welcome? I modestly told him, I could wish, they would not too hastily come
to Plymouth, for they should find it another manner of place, then as now they
slight it.

Many other Questions were put to me by these great Dons, which so well as God
did enable me, I answered, they speaking in Spanish, and their words
interpreted to me, by those two Irish Men before spoken of, who also relate my
several answers to the Lords.

And by the common People, who encompast me round, many ieerings, mockeries,
scorns, and bitter iestes, were to my face thrown upon our Nation, which I
durst not so much as bite my lip against, but with an enforced patient ear
stood still, and let them run on in their Reuilings.

At the length, amongst many other reproaches, and spightfull Names, one of the
Spaniardes called English Men Gallinas, (Hens;) At which, the great Lords
fell a laughing: Hereupon, one of the Dukes (poynting to the Spanish Soldiers,)
bid me note how their King kept them; And indeed, they were all wondrous brave
in Apparel, Hattes, Bands, Cuffes, Garters, etc, and some of them in Chains
of Gold: And asked farther, If I thought these would prove such Hens as our
English, when next year they should come into England? I said no: But being
somewhat imboldned by his merry Countenance, I told him as merrily, I thought
they would be within one degree of Hens: What meanst thou by that, said a
Conde? I replied, they would prove Pullets, or Chickens. Dare thou then
(quoth Duke Medyna, with a brow half angry) fight with one of these Spanish
Pullets.

O my Lord, said I, I am a Prisoner, and my Life at Stake, and therefore dare
not be so bold to adventure upon any such Action: There were here of us
English, some fourteen Thousand, in which Number, there were above twelve
Thousand, better, and stouter Men then ever I shall be; Yet, with the license
of this Princely Assembly, I dare hazard the breaking of a Rapier; And withal,
told him, He was unworthy the Name of an English Man, that should refuse to
Fight with one Man of any Nation whatsoever. Hereupon, my Shackells were knocked
off, and my Iron Ring and Chain taken from my Neck.

Room was made for the Combatants, Rapier and Dagger the Weapons: A Fight
between Peeke, and a Spaniard.
A Spanish Champion presents himself, Named Signior Tiago; When after we had
played some reasonable good time, I disarmed, him as thus.

I caught his Rapier betwixt the Bars of my Poniard, and there held it, till
I closed in with him, and tripping up his Heels, I took his Weapons out of
his hands, and delivered them to the Dukes.

I could wish, that all you, my dear Contrymen, who read this Relation,
had either bin there, without danger, to have beheld us; Or, that He with whom
I fought, were here in Person, to justify the issue of that Combat.

I was then demanded, If I durst Fight against an other? I told them, my heart
was good to adventure; but humbly requested them, to give me pardon, if I
refused.

For, to my self I too well knew, that the Spaniard is Haughty, Impatient of
the least affront; And when he receives but a Touch of any Dishonor, Disgrace,
or Blemish, (especially in his own Country, and from an English Man,) his
Revenge is implacable, mortal, and bloody.

Yet being by the Noblemen, pressed again, and again, to try my Fortune with an
other, I (seeing my Life in the Lions paw, to struggle with whom for safety,
there was no way but one, and being afraid to displease them,) said, That if
their Graces, and Greatnesses, would give me leave to play at mine Own
Country Weapon, called the Quarter-Staffe, I was then ready there, an
Opposite, against any Commer, whom they would call forth; and would willingly
lay down my Life before those Princes, to do them Service; provided, my Life
might by no foul means be taken from me.

Herevpo^, the head of a Halbert, which went with a Screw, was taken off, and
the Steall delivered to me; the other But-end of the Staff having a short Iron
Pike in it: This was my Armor, and in my place I stood, expecting an Opponent.

At the last, The Quarter-Staffe against three Rapiers.
a hansome and well Spirited Spaniard steps forth, with his Rapier and
Poniard: They asked me, what I said to Him? I told them, I had a sure Friend in
my hand, that never failed me, and therefore made little account of that One to
play with, and should show them no Sport.

Then, a Second (Armed as before) presents himself: I demanded, if there would
come no more? The Dukes asked, how many I desired? I told them, any number
under Six: Which resolution of mine, they smiling at, in a kind of scorn,
held it not Manly, (it seemed,) nor fit for their own Honors, and Glory of
their Nation, to worry one Man with a Multitude; and therefore appointed Three
only, (so Weapond) to enter into the Listes.

Now Gentlemen, if here you condemn me, for plucking (with mine own hands)
such an assured danger, upon mine own head; Accept of these Reasons for excuse.

To dye, I thought it most certain, but to dye basely, I would not: For Three
to kill One, had bin to Me no Dishonor; To Them (Weapons considered,) no
Glory; An Honorable Subjection, I esteemed better, then an Ignoble Conquest.
Upon these Thoughts, I fell to it.

The Rapier Men trauerst their ground, I, mine; Dangerous Thrusts were put in,
and with dangerous hazard avoided: Showtes ecchoed to Heaven, to encourage the
Spaniards; Not a shoute, nor Hand, to hearten the poor English Man; Only,
Heaven I had in mine Eye, the Honor of my Country in my Heart, my Fame at the
Stake, my Life on a narrow Bridge, and Death both before me and behind me.

It was not now a time to dally, they still made full at me; And I had been a
Coward to my Self, and a Villane to my Nation, if I had not called up all that
weak Manhood which was mine, to guard my own Life, and overthrow my Enemies.

Plucking up therefore a good heart, seeing my self faint and wearied, I vowed
to my Soul, to do something, ere she departed from me: And so setting All
upon One Cast, It was my Good Fortune (it was my God did it for Me) with the
But-end where the Iron Pike was, to Kill one of the Three; and within a few
Boutes after, to Disarme the other two, causing the One of them to fly into the
Army of Soldiers then present, and the Other for refuge fled behind the Bench.

I hope, if the brauing Spaniards set upon England (as they threaten,) we shall
every One of us, give the repulse to more then Three; Of which good Issue for
the Public, I take this my Private success to be a Pledge.

Now was I in greater Danger, being (as I thought) in Peace, then before, when
I was in Battle: For, a general Murmr filled the Air, with Threatenings at
me; the Soldiers especially bit their thumbes, and how was it possible for me
to escape?

Which, the Noble Duke of Medina Sidenia seeing, called me to him, and
instantly caused Proclamation to be made, The brave mind of Medina.
that none, on pain of death, should meddle with me; And by his Honorable
Protection, I got off; And not off, only with Safety, but with Money. For by
the Dukes and Condes, were given me in Gold, to the value of four Pounds ten
Shillings sterling; and by the Marquess Alquenezes himself, as much; He
embracing me in his Arms, and bestowing upon me, that long Spanish Russet
Cloak I now wear, which he took from one of his Men's backs; And withal,
furnished me with a clean Band and Cuffes; It being one of the greatest
Favors, a Spanish Lord can do to a mean Man, to reward him with some
Garment, as recompense of Merit.

After our Fight in Sherris, I was kept in the Marquess Alquenezes House, who
one day (out of his Noble affability) was pleasant in speech with me; And by my
Interpreter, desired I would Sing: I willing to obey him (whose goodness I had
tasted,) did so, and sung this Psalm: When as we sat in Babylon, etc. The
meaning of which being told, he said to me, English Man, comfort thy self,
for thou art in no Captivity.

After this, I was sent to the King of Spain, lying at Madrill; Peeke sent to
the K ng at Madrill.
My Conduct being four Gentlemen of the Marquess Alquenezes; He allowing unto
me, in the Journey, twenty Shillings a day when we Traveled, and ten
Shillings a day when we lay still.

At my being in Madrill, before I saw the King; My Entertainment (by the
Marquess Alquenezes appointment,) was at his own House, where I was lodged in
the most sumptuous Bed that ever I beheld; and had from his Noble Lady, a
Welcome far above my poor deserving but worthy the Greatness of so
excellent a Woman; She bestowing upon me, whilst I lay in her House a very
fair Spanish Shirt, richly Laced, and at my parting from Madrill, a Chain of
Gold, and two Jewels for my Wife, and other pretty Things for my Children.

And now that her Noble Courtesies together, with my own Thankefullnes, A
Noble Spanish Lady.
lead me to speak of this Honorable Spanish Lady; I might very justly be
condemned of Ingratitude, if I should not remember, with like acknowledgement,
another rare Pattern of Feminine goodness, to me, a distressed, miserable
Stranger: And that was, the Lady of Don John of Cales; She, Another.
out of a Respect she bare me, for saving her Husbands Life, came along with
him to Sherrys, He being there to give in Evidence against me; And as before,
when I lay Prisoner in Cales, so in Sherrys, she often relieved me with Money,
and other Means; My Duty and Thanks ever wait upon them Both.

Upon Christmas Day, I was Presented to the King, the Queen, and Don Carolo
the Infant.

Being brought before him, I fell (as it was fit) on my Knees: Many Questions
were demanded of me, which so well as my plain wit directed me, I resolved.

In the end, his Majesty offered me a Yearly Pention, (to a good Vallew) if I
would Serve him, either at Land or at Sea; For which his Royal Favors, I
confessing my self infinitely Bound, and my Life indebted to his Mercy, most
humbly entreated, that with his Princely Leave, I might be suffered to return
into mine own Country, being a Subject only to the King of England, my
Sovereign.

And besides that Bond of Allegiance, there was another Obligation, due from
me, to a Wife and Children; And therefore, most submissiuely begged, that his
Majesty would be so Princely minded, as to pity my Estate, and to let me go:
To which he at last granted; Bestowing upon me, one hundred Pistoletts, to
bear my Charges.

Having thus left Spain, I took my way through some part of France; Where, by
occasion, happening into Company of seven Spaniards, their Tongues were too
lavish in Speeches against our Nation; Upon which, some high words flying up
and down the Room, I leaped from the Table, and drew.

One of the Spaniards did the like (none of the rest being Weaponed, which was
more then I knew.)

Upon the noise of this Bustling, two English Men more came in, Who
understanding the Abuses offered to our Country, the ( Spaniards in a short
time, Recanted on their Knees) their Rashness.

And so hoysing Sail for England; I Landed on the three and twenty day of
April, 1626. at Foy in Cornwall.

And thus ends my Spanish Pilgrimage: With thanks to my good God, that in
this extraordinany Manner preserved me, amidst these desperate Dangers.

Therefore most gracious God, (Defender of Men abroad, and Protector of them at
home,) How am I bounden to thy Divine Majesty, for thy manifold Mercies?

On my Knees I thank thee, with my Tongue I will praise thee, with my Hands
Fight in thy Quarrel, and all the days of my Life serve thee.

Out of the Red Sea, I have escaped; From the Lions Den, bin delivered; I
rescued from Death, and snatched out of the Jaws of Destruction, only by Thee,
O my God; Glory be to thy Name, for ever, and ever. Amen.

Certain Verses, Written by a Friend, in Comendations of the Author Richard
Peeke.
Seldom do Clouds so dimne the day,
But Sol will once his Beams display:
Though Neptune drives the surging Seas,
Sometimes he gives them quiet ease;
And so few Proiects speed so ill,
But somewhat chances at our will.
I will not instance in the Great,
Placed in Honors higher Seat;
Though Virtue in a Noble Line
Comm^nds i^, and the more does shine:
Yet this is procu'd by Sword and Pen,
Desert often dwells in private Men.
My proof is not far hence to seek,
There is at hand brave Richard Peeke,
Whose worth his Foes cannot revoke,
Borne in the Town of Tauystoke
In Deuon, where Minerua sitts
Shaping stout Hearts, and pregnant Wits.
This well resolved and hardy Spark,
Aiming at Fame, as at a Mark,
Was not compelled against his will,
In Mars his field to try his skill:
As Voluntary he did go,
To serve his King against his Foe.
If he had pleased, he might have spent
His days at home, in safe content:
But nurcing Valor in his breast,
He would adventure with the Best,
Willing to shed his dearest blood,
To do his Prince, and Country good.
Thus bent, he adding Wings to Feet,
Departed with the English Fleet:
There was no rub, nor stay at all,
The Ships saild with a pleasant Gale:
In setting forth they by their hap,
Seemed lul'd in Amphitrites lap.
At length they did arrive at Cales,
Where restles Peeke against the Walls
Made fouresccore Shot toward the Shore,
Making the Welkyn wide to rore:
He kept his standing in this strife,
Setting a straw by loss of life.
Into a Vineyard afterward
He marched, and stood upon his guard;
There he an Horseman did dismount,
By outward port of good account:
But did on him compassion take,
And spared his life for pitties sake.
The next assault, uneven he felt,
For with twelve Spaniards he dealt
At once, and held them lusty play,
Until through odds, theirs was the day:
From ear to ear they pearc'd his head,
And to the Town him Captive led.
In Prison they him shut by night,
Laden with Chains of greiuous weight,
All comfortless in Dungion deep,
Where Stench annoyes, and Vermines creep:
He grouel'd in this loathsome Cell,
Where ghastly frights and horrors dwell.
Yet nothing could his courage quail,
Hunger, nor thirst, nor wound, nor Iayle:
For being brought before a Don,
And asked, Why England did set on
A scraping, not a pecking Hen?
He answered, stain not Englishmen.
That England is a Nation stout,
And till the last will fight it out:
My self could prove by Chivalry,
If for a Captive this were free:
Why, (quoth the Duke) dare thou to fight
With any of my Men in fight?
Of thousands whom in War you use,
Not one (quoth Peeke) do I refuse:
A chosen Champion then there came,
Whose heels he tript, as at a game,
And from his Hand his Rapier took,
Presenting it unto the Duke.
Then three at once did him oppose,
They Rapiers, he a long Staff chose,
The use whereof so well he knows,
He conquered them with nimble blows:
One that beside him played his round,
He threw as dead unto the ground.
The Noble Duke who this did see,
Commended Peeke, and set him free;
He gave him Gifts, and did command
That none should wrong him in their Land;
So well he did him entertayne,
And sent him to the Court of Spain.
There he was fed with no worse meat,
Then which the King himself did eat;
His Lodging rich, for he did lie
In furniture of Tapestrie:
The King what of him he had heard,
Did with his Treasure well reward.
Our then Ambassador was there,
Peekes Pike and praise he does declare:
At Spanish Court whiles he attends,
He thriues for Virtues sake: as Friends
Foes sent him in triumphant sort
Home from a Foe and Foreign Port.
If thus his very Foes him loved,
And Deeds against themselves aproou'd;
How should his Friends his love embrace,
And yield him countenance and grace?
The praise and worth how can we cloak
Of manly Peeke of Tauystoke?
FINIS.
J. D.


