A SHORT AND SWEET EXPOSITION UPON THE FIRST NINE CHAPTERS OF ZACHARY.

BY WILLIAM PEMBLE.

2. PET. 1.20. No Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation.

Aug. de utilit. Cred. ad Honorat. cap. 7. Nulla imbutus poetica disciplina
Terentium sine Magistro attingere non auderes? Asper, Cornutus, Donatus and
innumer abiles alij requiruntur ut quilibet poeta posset intelligi: Tu in
sanctos libros fine duce irruis, and de his sine praeceptore audes far
sententiam?

LONDON, Printed by R. Young for John Bartlet, at the Sign of the gilt Cup in
Cheape-side. Anno Domini 1629.

To the right Worshipful, Katharine, the Wife of Nath. Stephens Esquire, Grace
and Peace.
Right Worshipful;
ALthough the Scripture be in its self most Psalm. 19.7.
perfect, both for 2. Tim. 3.16, 17.
sufficiency and Pro. 8.9. Ps. 119.105.
perspicuity; yet in respect of us, clear and familiar Expositions have bin,
even from anon after the Apostles times, held of use and profit in the Church
of God. For the same God who gave the Scriptures to be the 2. Tim. 3.16.
Rule of Faith and Manners, gave also Ephesians. 4.11, 12
Doctors and Pastors, for the work of the Ministry, to the edifying of the
Church: the Scriptures to be as the materials, Pastors as the 1. Cor. 3.10.
builders. The Scriptures, I know, are dark to many, because they are 2. Per.
1.9.
blind, to some because they are 2. Cor. 4.4.
blinded, and to all in sundry places, because our sight is dim and but in 1.
Cor. 13.9.
part. A dark eye (we know) has need of a spectacle, be the light ever so
clear, and the letter ever so plain; and the explanations of the godly and
learned on the Text, are as a spiritual spectacle, to help to perfect the
imperfect sight of our minds. Now the Scriptures are opened to us, not only by
the public preaching of the Word, but, in its kind and place, also by the
Writings and Commentaries of the Learned; whose pens and hands are, I doubt
not, guided by a sweet influence of the providence of God, and some instinct
of his holy Spirit: this difference being ever observed, That the Writers of
the Scripture were so 2. Pet. 1.11.
moved by the Holy Ghost that they could not err; but Commentators and
Expositors lie open to some errors, they sometimes speak as men, and not
only Romans 3.4.
may, but now and then they do, and Romans 8.28. Quia humiliores redeunt and
doctiores. Aug. de correp and great. c. 9. cum Romans 12.3. Rainold. These. 2.
sect. 12
must mistake. It Is true, that the Word of God is so brief, that none can say
he wants leisure to read it; and so plain (in necessaries to salvation) that
none can pretend he cannot understand it: but withal it is most certain, that
as there are plain places to feed us, so there are obscure places to exercise
us. which harder books and places the better to understand, its our wisdom,
first, to be qualified with a Psalm. 19.7.
simple and a Psalm. 25.9.
meek heart, and then to acquaint our selves not only with the public
Ministry, but also with the printed Expositions of such Writers as are sound
and clear. Now amongst the hardest books of Scripture the Prophets may have
place, and amongst the Prophets Zachary is a Deep wherein an Elephant may
swim; and therefore I cannot but commend the wisdom of that man of God (the
Author of this Book) who bestowed his learning and his pains to open the
mysteries of this Prophecy. Death ended his days ere he could quite finish
his Work, and great weakness hindered an intended supplement: it is even pity
the Church should want it any longer, and therefore I make bold to publish it
under your name, desiring God to give a blessing to all that read it, but
chiefly to your self, whom the Lord in mercy has made a sincere lover of the
Word of God.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, RICH. CAPEL.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE PROPHECY OF ZECHARIE.
CHAP. I.
IN the eight month, of the second year of Darius, came the Word of the Lord
unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo, the Prophet, saying,

2 The Lord has been sore displeased with your Fathers.

3 Therefore say thou unto them, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Turn ye unto
me, says the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of
Hosts.

4 Be ye not as your Fathers, unto whom the former Prophets have cried, saying,
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Turn you now from your evil ways, and from
your wicked works: but they would not hear, nor hearken unto me, says the
Lord.

5 Your Fathers, where are they? And do the Prophets live for ever?

6 But did not my Words and my Statutes, which I commanded by my servants the
Prophets, take hold of your Fathers? And they returned, and said, As the Lord
of Hosts has determined to do unto us, according to our own ways, and
according to our works, so has he dealt with us.

7 Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the month
Shebat, in the second year of Darius, came the Word of the Lord unto
Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the Prophet, saying,

8 I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red Horse, and he stood among
the Mirrhe Trees that were in a Bottom, and behind him were there red Horses
speckled and white.

9 Then said I: O, my Lord, what are these? And the Angel that talked with me,
said unto me, I will show thee what these be.

10 And the man that stood among the Myrrh Trees answered, and said, These are
they whom the Lord has sent to go through the World.

11 And they answered the Angel of the Lord, that stood among the Myrrh Trees,
and said, We have gone through the World; and behold, all the World sits
still, and is at rest.

12 Then the Angel of the Lord answered, and said, O Lord of Hosts, How long
will thou be unmercifull to Jerusalem, and to the Cities of Judah, with whom
thou have been displeased now these threescore and ten years?

13 And the Lord answered the Angel that talked with me, with good words and
comfortable words.

14 So the Angel that communed with me, said unto me, Cry thou, and speak,
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I am jealous over Jerusalem and Zion with a
great zeal,

15 And am greatly angry against the careless Heathen: for I was angry but a
little, and they helped forward the affliction.

16 Therefore thus says the Lord, I will return unto Jerusalem with tender
mercy: mine House shall be builded in it, says the Lord of Hosts, and a Line
shall be stretched upon Jerusalem.

17 Cry yet, and speak, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, My Cities shall yet be
broken with plenty: the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose
Jerusalem.

18 Then lift I up mine eyes and saw, and behold, four horns.

19 And I said unto the Angel that talked with me, What be these? And he
answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and
Jerusalem.

20 And the Lord showed me four Carpenters.

21 Then said I, What come these to do? And he answered; and said, These are
the horns which have scattered Judah, so that a man durst not lift up his
head: but these are come to fray them, and to cast out the horns of the
Gentiles, which lift up their horn over the Land of Judah, to scatter it.

THis Book seems to contain the sum of five Sermons, delivered by the
Prophet Zachary at several times; partly,

1. Doctrinall, as the first, Chap. 1. to the seventh Verse, being a Sermon of
Repentance, prefixed as a Preface to the other Prophesies both of Mercies and
Judgments: and that fitly; Repentance being the only preparative to fit a
People to hear of Mercy, and an only means to escape Judgment. In this
Sermon we are to note,

1. The Circumstances, which are three, viz.

1. The Time [In the eight moneth] two months after Haggai began to prophecy,
Hag. 1.1. when as the Jews were in ill state through Famine, and the work of
the Temple but newly taken in hand. [of the second year of Darius] There was
no King in Israel, from whose reign to date their Prophesies: And who this
King of Persia was, Whether Darius the son of Hystaspis, or Nothus, we will
leave to enquire, til we come to the twelfth verse of this Chapter. 2. The
Preachers Authority and Commission; and that's Divine, from immediate
inspiration [Came the Word of the Lord.] 3. The Person, by whose Ministry the
Message is delivered: described unto us by his Name, Pedigree, and Office [unto
Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo, the Prophet] that [the
Prophet] is to be referred to Zechariah, not to Iddo: Though there were one of
that name a Prophet; yet that Zechariah was of his Progeny, is utterly
uncertain. This Zechariah is the same that is mentioned, Matthew. 23.35. Luke
11.51. who, after Chap. 11.1, 13.
the re-edifying of the Temple, was slain by the Jews: Nor needs any long
dispute about it, seeing both the name of his Father is the same, Berechiah,
here and in Matthew. And also the manner of Christ's account easily persuades to
it: who reckoning up the innocent blood shed by the Jews, begins at Abel, and
ends even in the last of the holy Prophets. Whereas after that Zechariah, 2.
Chron. 24.22. many other Prophets and holy men were put to death. And moreover,
What warrant is there, to turn Iehoiadas name into Berechiah? Is it likely he
was trinominis, Iehoiada, Berechiah, and Iohanan? for so he is called in the
Catalogue of the High Priests, 1. Chron. 6.9. Or what ground is there, to
Genev. Note on 2. Chron. 24.22.
say Zacharies progenitors were Iddo, Berechiah, Iehoiada, etc. when no such
thing appears in Genealogy? Besides, it is not unlikely, that that Zachary,
in the second of Chronicles, was slain in the Court of the People, after he
had preached unto them, standing in an high place among them, as appears Verse
20, 21. but this was slain in the Court of the Priests, viz. between the
Temple and Altar: whither, being assaulted, he ran for sanctuary, as others
before him had done, though they were no Priests, as it may be our Zachary was
not. Some think, it was Zachary the Father of John Baptist, Luke 1. that
Christ speaks of; but it is without all ground of good reason: and therefore I
rest on the first, as a truth.
2. The substance of the Sermon; which is an exhortation to Repentance, briefly
set down, Verse 3. [Turne ye unto me.] This exhortation is,

1. Confirmed and enforced by three Arguments:

1. From Gods fierce anger against their forefathers: [The Lord has been
displeased] not in an ordinary manner, but [sore displeased] (...) with
boiling or foaming anger, [with your fathers] of former and later times, as
stories of the one, and woeful experience of the other, show you, Verse 2.
Therefore turn and repent ye their posterity. 2. From Gods soveraigntie and
high power to command, or punish: [Thus says the Lord of Hostes] and again,
[Thus says the Lord of Hostes] against whom there is no hope to rebel, and
prosper, Verse 3. 3. From Gods promise of mercy upon their repentance: [I will
turn unto you] in pardon of sin, and deliverie of them out of the scarcity
and dangerous condition they were then in, into a better estate of peace and
plenty, and outward prosperity. This promise also is strengthened by the
former attribute of Gods power [sayth the Lord of Hostes] who have command over
Man, and all other Creatures, to make your Enemies at peace with you, or to
defend you from their force, and to cause the Earth to be fruitful for your
necessities, Verse 3.
2. Amplified, by a Removal of one maine impediment of this peoples
repentance; and that is, The bad example of their forefathers, and their good
opinion of them: A point prevailing much with all, but very much with the
Jews, Ier. 44.17. Matthew. 5.21.
who were great admirers and stiff imitators of their Ancientrie. From this
the Prophet dehorts them, [Be not as your Fathers] No? Why not? The Prophet
gives two reasons, to persuade them to the contrary.

1. From their Disobedience. Your Fathers were not so honest men as you may
deem them to be; they were Rebels: Which appears by 1. The preachings of the
Prophets in former times, convincing them of their wicked courses, and calling
upon them for repentance. [unto whom the former Prophets] as we now to you
their posterity [haue cryed] spoke loud enough to be heard and heeded [saying,
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Turn you now from your evil ways, and] that
is, [from your wicked works.] 2. The practice of the people of those times,
obstinately refusing to yield obedience. [But they] as you now, for all is
spoken with reference to the present estate [did not hear:] that was much,
when the Prophets spoke so audibly; but it is God that opens the ear: [nor
much less [hearken unto me] give attention, to lay up in their hearts what was
spoken, but slighted all: or, they did not so hear, as to hearken, id est,
obey what was spoken [sayth the Lord.] And if any stand for them, and say it
was not so, they spoke a lie, Verse 4.
2. From their Punishment: Which is here more largely amplified, as an
enforcement of the first reason of the Prophets exhortation to repentance; viz.
The Fathers were punished, therefore the Children shall not go scot-free. This
the Prophet does elegantly, preventing that Opinion which deeply possesses
the minds of impenitent sinners, scilicet, That Gods Judgments in former
times, and his Ministers preaching to ages past, do not a whit concern
posterity; that which is past, is gone, and no more to be heeded. This he
refuteth, 1. By a Concession in part: that it is true, their Fathers were but
men, and dead they are, nor can they now tell us how it fared with them. [Your
Fathers where are they?] id est, they are not. And for the Prophets themselves,
they were no more than men, and cannot live always to teach and preach, or to
see that fulfilled which they prophecy of. [And do the Prophets live for
ever?] They do not: or, Shall the Prophets live for ever? [(...)] Zachariah
including himself, and others then living in the same condition, with the
former Prophets; and, if Sanctius be not deceived, secretly implying the defect
of Prophecy shortly to ensue in the Jewish estate. Some expound this Verse
Dialogue-wise; as if the latter question touching the Prophets, were made by
the People in answer of Gods question touching their Fathers. But so, the
sense and connection of this Verse with those following, is obscured; as it is
likewise, if it be interpreted of the false Prophets. The former sense is
clear, and drives at this, That the power of Gods Word depends not on any men's
persons, nor is limited to any one age, Verse 5. 2. By a vehement Instance and
Opposition. Your Fathers are dead, yet their punishments are not to be
forgotten: and the Prophets are dead too, but the truth of their Prophesies was
not buried with them; but was in every point fulfilled, according to their
preaching. Which appears, 1. By the experiment, and manifest proof of Gods
Judgments inflicted on them; so easily to be discerned, that Posterity could
not choose but take notice and example of it. [But did not] He appeals to their
own consciences and observation to judge of it [my words and my statutes] my
decreed and fore-appointed Judgments (...) [which I commanded by my servants
the Prophets] viz. to be published by them, and heeded by your Fathers, [take
hold on your Fathers? [(...)] over-take and catch them (as Hunts-men the prey,
or one 1. King. 18.27. 2. King. 25.5.
Enemy another, in flight) though they sought means to make their escape. 2.
By their own Confession, which the feeling of Gods hand upon them, did draw
from them: viz. That they were punished according; first, as God threatened
before; and secondly, as themselves deserved, [And they returned] it may be
repented, or rather, were better advised, and came to the right knowledge of
their state, as Malac. 3.18. [and said, as the Lord of Hosts, etc.] Verse 6.


So much of the first Sermon: Now follows the second; which, with the rest,
for the most part, is

2. Prophetical: Consisting of eight distinct Visions, touching the
restoration and reformation of the Church and state. All which being, as it
seems, shown unto Zachary successively, without interruption, were likewise
declared unto the people in one Sermon. Wherein, as in the former, we have,

1. The Circumstances, the same that before, Verse 7.

2. The Matter of it; namely, the Visions themselves: which, without any
further Analysis, and strayned Cohaerences, we will consider in order, as they
lie before us.

Vision 1. The scope of this Vision, is to let the Jews understand the
providence and care which God had of them in this their miserable estate, when
God seemed to neglect and cast them off. Here we are to note,

1. The Description of the Vision, Verse 8. [I saw by Night] I had a Vision in
the Night; a time fit, and usual for such revelations: [and behold a Man
riding] an Angel in man's shape; even Christ, the Captain of the Lords Host,
Josh. 4.14. and foremost of the Troop; in likeness of an Horseman, ready
appointed to make out for his peoples good: The same, that Dan. 10.13.21. is
called Michael, Prince of the Jews. [Vpon a Red Horse:] Why Red? In the same
sense, that this color is given to his Garments, Esa. 63. 1, 2, 3, etc. and to
the Angels Horse, Rev. 6.4. Iunius interprets it Fiery, for protection of the
Church, and consumption of the Enemies. [And he stood among the Myrtle Trees]
in a shadie Grove, and that [that were in a Bottome] not lying to open view:
both shadowing out, how small appearance of help there was at this time for
the Jews, who could hardly discern where and whence succor might arise, for
their relief: which yet was ready for them, though as it were lying in
ambush, to break forth upon opportunity. Interpreters conceive in the Myrtles
a Type of the Church, and the godly that were left among the Jews, of whom God
had a care, sed quaere. [Bottome] (...) ordinarily taken for the bottom of
Waters: and therefore Ribera understands by it, a River, which had Myrtles on
both the Banks; alleging that of Virg. Georg. 4. -- Et amantes littora
Myrtos. Further grounding upon the interpretation of the Paraphrast, who here
renders (...) a flat Country, full of Rivers and low Grounds; supposing this
Vision to have been showed, as in Babylon. But we need not believe the
Chaldaean here, more than in Es. 44.27. where he likewise paraphrases (...) to
be (...) contrary to the meaning of the Text. It is not much material,
whether there were a River there, or only an hollow Valley and Bottom among
some For there also Myrtles grow. Plin. l. 16. c. 18.
Mountains, where this Vision seemed to appear; it may be there was both.
[And behind him] as the Captains, Attendants, and Curriers [were there Red
Horses, speckled and white.] Who these Horsemen were, is interpreted, Verse 10.
viz. Angels waiting on Christ, deputed to several Offices and Executions for
Judgment, for Mercy, or both; shadowed by the diverse Colors of their Horses.
Not, as some, Angels Guardians and Governors of diverse Provinces and States;
some bloody, some peaceable, some wavering and changeable.

2. The Interpretation and Application of it to the comfort of the present
state: Which is expressed Dialogue-wise. The Speakers are five:

1. Zachary the Prophet; confessing his ignorance of this Divine Revelation,
and desiring information from the Angel; by whose Ministry, this Vision was
showed to him. [Then said I: O, my Lord, what are these?]

2. An inferior Angel, sent to instruct the Prophet about this Vision; who
willingly applied himself, to teach the Prophet where he was ignorant. [And
the Angel that talked with me] showed me and bad me take notice of the Vision
[with me] (...) not (...) within me, say Rib. and Sanctius. Hence disputing,
how Angels reveal things to men, by working on their Fantasies and Spirits.
For the manner how such inward revelations are wrought, it is not necessary to
enquire; the thing it self may well be granted, the Scripture elsewhere using
like phrase, Heb. 1.1. (...), and 1. Pet. 1.11. although (...) does signify
[Ad] as well as [In] as Psalm. 19.5. and 91.12. [said unto me, I will show thee
what these be] what is the meaning of this Vision. Verse 9.

3. The Prince and Captain of Angels: who, being asked by that other Angel,
gives him instructions touching the meaning of this Mystery; (for even Angels,
in these things, get their knowledge from Christ) [And the Man that stood among
the Myrrh Trees answered] being asked by the foresaid Angel [and said] to the
Angel in Zacharies hearing [These] on the Red Horses specked and white [are
they] those ministering Spirits [ which the Lord has set to walk Job 1.
to and fro through the Earth] as Agents and Spies, to give intelligence of all
things done in the World, and to receive and execute the Commands of God, for
Mercies or Judgments. Not that God, without them, is either ignorant, or
weak; but it serves for the honor of his Majesty, and comfort of our
infirmity, that he have such Ministers. Hereby he teaches the Jews, that
God was not idle, nor they forgotten; but that his providence was awake, and
working for the Churches good. Verse 10. After that Christ has thus showed
what Office these his Attendants had, let us hear in the fourth place,

4. The Angels waiting on Christ among the Myrtles, making report unto their
Chief, of the Execution of their Office, [And they answered] being commanded
by Christ to make relation what they had found [the Angel, etc. and said] their
report is double: First, of their Industry and Diligence, [Wee have walked to
and fro through the Earth] we have took a survey of the state of every
Country, [the Earth] especially of the Babylonians, and other Enemies of the
Church and state of the Jews, as appears by Verse 15. and 19. infra.
Secondly, of their Observation: They find, that the Enemies of God are in
better case than his People: [and behold] a thing very much to be pittyed [all
the Earth] the adversaries of the Jews, further we need not extend it
[sitteth still, and is at rest] as of Laish, Judge. 18.27. Whether there were no
Wars abroad at this time in any Country about Iudaea, Stories cannot inform
us: it suffices, we believe the Angels report, That the Babylonians and others
abroad enjoyed more peace and security than the Jews. Verse 11.

This news being brought unto Christ, he is much moved with it, and as
Mediator prays unto his Father for his afflicted Church. [Then the Angel of
the Lord] id est, Christ, our Mediator and Intercessor: though some think it
was the Angel that talked with Zachary; because, upon this prayer, answer is
made unto him, Verse 13. seq. Hence concluding, that the Angels pray for the
prosperity of the Church. [answered, and said] This prayer is made in form of
a vehement and passionate expostulation (like that, Rev. 6.10.) The petition
is, That God would now at last put an end to the Miseries of the Jewish Church,
[O Lord of Hosts, How long will thou be unmercifull to Jerusalem and the
Cities of Iuda] id est, be at last merciful, to repair the desolations of
that Church and state. Which request is fortified with a double reason, to move
mercy and pity.

1. It is Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah, that favor is begged for; Gods
own people, and place of his worship: And what pity, yea, indignity is it,
to see the Heathen round about to flourish in plenty and security, and both
Church and Commonwealth of Israel to lie waste, troubled, and afflicted?

2. It is not yesterday they came under this Misery; 70. years has this
burden layne heavy on them, and that was the time prefixed for their
punishment: Which now being ended, it is time to fulfill the promise, of
Restoring them to their former estate, [ against which thou have had
indignation these 70. yeeres] according to the Prophecy of Jeremy, chap.
25.11. and chap. 29.10. Verse 12.

But much ado here is about this number of 70, how it may be said at this
time, that God had been angry with Jerusalem 70. years. The former exposition
seems to give the scope of the place; but yet we may touch upon the doubts
that are made, and so pass on. The Question is, what account Zachary here
follows, and how the 70. here mentioned can agree with the Prophecy of
Jeremy, and its accomplishment. By which it is manifest, that the 70. years
of Captivity had their ending in the first of Cyrus reign, wheresoever they
took their beginning. Now from the first of Cyrus to the second of Anno 2.
Imperij Darij Hystaspis ac 1. Olympiadis 65. repetitum est opus
reaedificationis Te^pli Prophetentibus Haggaeo, and Zacharia Zorabeli Praeside
and Iehoshua summo Sacerdote: Postquam impeditum fuerat quasi a 3. anno Imperij
Cyr. plusquam 12. annos, ac plane omissum ab Imperio Magi. Sunt enim a coepta
postrema obsidione Hierosolymorum Babylonica ad hoc usque tempus 70. anni,
iuxta Zacharium, c. 1. v. 12. Lydiat. Emend. Temp. Anno Mund. 3485.
Darius, wherein Zachary prophesied; if Darius Hystaspis, there are 12.
years; if Darius Lothus, there are 108. years passed between: Yet Zachary in
this Verse says, that God had been angry with Jerusalem (...) jam 70. an. now
70. years, as Iunius and the old Translators render it; whereas it was at this
time either 82. or 178. years that all had lain waste. Ribera and Sanctius
unloose this Knot, by distinguishing of a double 70, one beginning at the first
of Nebuchadnezzar, and ending at the first of Cyrus, which Jeremy spoke of;
another, beginning at the 19. of Nebuchadnezzar, and ending at the second of
Darius Hystaspis. Thus

Nebuchadnezzar 45 Ex 2. King. vlt. v. 8. cum v. 27. and chap. 24. v. 12. Ex
Seder Olam, c. 29.
Evilmerodach 23 Belshazzar 3 Dan. 8.1.
71 According to Ieremies account.


Again,

Nebuchadnezzar, beginning at his 19. year 26 Evilmerodach 23 Belshazzar 3
Cyrus 7 Xenoph. l. 8. Cyrop.
Cambyses 8 Herod. l. 3.
Darius Hystaspis 2 69 According to Zacharies account. For the odd year, they
stand not upon that.


But this account of the Jesuits carries little show of good reason with it:
For, first, they begin the Captivity at the first of Nebuchadnezzar, and the
third of Iehoiakim, when the City was first taken, 2. King. 24.1. Dan. 1.
which ought with much better reason begin at the eight year of Nebuchadnezzar,
when Iechoniah was carried away captive: or Sir W.R. Hist. l. 3. c. 1.. 3.
best of all, at the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, when all, Temple and
City, was ruined, 2. King. 25.2. Chron. 36.21. Secondly, their Arithmeticke is
not good, for the reign of the Kings between Nebuchadnezzar and Cyrus. That
but only two succeeded between, viz. Evilmerodach and Belshazzar, is plain
by Ier. 27.7. but how long each reigned, is uncertain: yet most agree, the
formn reigned 23. the next, not 3. but 17. as Joseph. Antiq. l. 10. c. 12. and
so their Reckoning, for Zacharies 70. falls out far amiss. Thirdly, they
take it for granted, that Darius, here spoken of in Zachary, was the son of
Hystaspis; which is very doubtful: for, first, How shall the order of so many
Kings be salved up, who are reckoned between the time of Cyrus and Darius, in
whose time the Temple was finished? which Catalogue we have, Ezra 4. Secondly,
What shall be said to the Jews, John 2. who affirm the Temple was 46. years
in building? speaking of this Temple, not of Herod's, which was but 10. years
in trimming, Joseph. 15. Antiq. c. 14. Now between their deliverie, the first
of Cyrus, to the finishing of this Temple, the sixth of Darius Hystaspis, is but
16. or 17. years. Shall we say boldly as Ribera does, that the Jews either
told a lie of malice, or spoke like ignorant fools?

On the other side, if we take the account of Iunius, Helvicus, etc. who
think, Zachary prophesied in the second of Darius Nothus, the difficulty is
as great, seeing the Desolation had continued at that time not 70. years
only, but even 180. years. Now there are presumptions and probabilities
against this also, that the time of this Prophecy was not in Nothus reign.
First, it seems not likely, that the Temple should remain unbuilt, and the
City unrepayred, for so long a time as 108. years after the peoples return
home: Strange, that there was never a Prophet to admonish them: that Zerubbabel
and Iehoshua would for all that time be so careless, and that the continual
Plague of Famine and Penury would not quicken them to their duty. Secondly,
Nehemiah, 33. years after the prophesying of Zachary and Haggaie, comes to
Jerusalem, in the 20. year of Artaxerxes Mnemon, and then he finds, Neb.
7.4. that the City was large and great, the People in it few, and the And yet
Haggaie complains of their too much forwardness in brave Buildings for their
private. Hag. 1.4, 9.
Houses not builded. A very strange matter, that in the compass of an 140.
years after their return, the Jews, being at their return Ezra 2.64.
42000, and upwards, had increased into no greater multitudes to people the
City, considering the natural fruitfulness of that Nation, and those
infinite multitudes whereunto, notwithstanding the continual Wars that
consumed them, they grew within 400. years after this time, till unto the
coming of Christ, and final destruction of that State. Which is further
manifested by Neh. 11.1. where, by reason of the scarcity of Inhabitants, the
Tenth of the people were taken out of the Towns and Villages about, to dwell
in Jerusalem. This Tithe amounts to about 3000. which, deducting the
Inhabitants that before this Tithing might already dwell in Jerusalem, is in a
manner but the Tenth of the whole Congregation which came up, in the first of
Cyrus, with Zerubbabel. Thirdly, besides, is it credible, And Zerubbabel must
have been, by this account, at least 140. years old at the finishing of the
Temple, supposing him to be 20. when he was Captain of that Return. Vide Lyd.
Emend. Temp. A. M. 3485. Vide Can. Loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 5.. obijcitur primum.
that even half of those that returned with Zerubbabel should live till they
were 200. years old, and behold both Temples? Thus, From the end of the
Captivity, to the sixth of Darius Nothus 112 The Captivity 70 Before the
Captivity, we may well conceive them to be almost 20. years old, to observe
the beauty of the first Temple. But say 15 197, too great an age for so many
to live. Some one might have lived to it: but at the foundation of the Temple,
it was hard to discern which number or noise was the bigger, of those that
wept, or them that rejoiced, Ezra 3.12, 13. But who will not loose himself in
the Chronologicall Labyrinths of these Times? It shall suffice me, till I meet
with some Ariadna's Thread, that the 70. years of the Captivity, determined
upon this people, was now at an end when this Angel prayed: and therefore that
God, who before that time would by no means be entreated, might now be sued
unto, to show favor to this People, according to his promise: Which perhaps is
all that is here meant. Verse 12. Come we to the fifth Speaker in this Vision,
and that is

5 God himself; who hears the prayer of his Son in behalf of his Church,
and returns him a gracious answer: which is here directed to the Angel that
talked with Zachary, and was to reveal it to him. [And the Lord answered the
Angel that talked with me.] This Answer of God is set down,

1. Summarily, in short comprising the nature of it, viz. that it was all of
favor, mercy, and comfort toward this people, [with good words and
comfortable words] those for the future, this for the present necessity, says
Jerome: or, good, id est, comfortable words; such promises as tended to the
relief of the present Miseries they were in. Verse 13.

2. Distinctly, and in the parts of it: And this is done by the Angel, who tells
the Prophet what God had answered him, and bids the Prophet publish it to the
people. [So the Angel that communed with me, said unto me, Cry thou, and
speak, Thus says the Lord of Hosts.] The Answer consists of two parts; both
comfortable:

1. Touching his Love to the Church: Which he was so far from casting off, as
that he bare an extraordinary affection to her, even as a man to his Wife [I
am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion] and that in more than an ordinary
manner [with a great jealousie] and therefore must needs be offended, if
either she offer me any dishonor, unbefitting an obedient Spouse; or the
Enemy offer her any injury, which may redound to the impeachment of my glory.
Verse 14. 2. Touching his Anger against the Enemies of the Church [I am sore
displeased with the Heathem] or, the Nations [that are at ease] that have and
do molest the Church, and are at quiet themselves, according to the Angels
report, Verse 11. They prosper and live at ease, yet I am extremely displeased
with them (as Prosperity no sign of Gods favor;) and per tacitam antithesin,
You are troubled, yet I love you (as Adversity no token of Gods hatred.) The
reason of Gods just displeasure is added, drawn from the ambitious, covetous,
and over-cruell execution of Gods judgment upon his people [I was a little
displeased] meaning to correct in judgment and measure, [and they helped
forward the affliction] but they, beyond all measure, enraged with hautie,
revengefull, and malicious desires, did what they could to lay on more load,
and bring my people to the utmost extremity. This made God as angry with those
he set a-worke, as them against whom they were employed; so hateful is
cruelty and ambition to him, and so different is his mind, and man's, in
inflicting the same punishment. Compare with this, Es. 47.6. Es. 10.5. etc. 2.
Chron. 28.9. Psalm. 69.26. Also with Ezekiel. 25. of the Ammonites, Moabites,
Edomites, and Philistims, especially Verse 12. and 15. Obad. verse 10. and
sequen. Of Tyrus likewise, Ezekiel. 26.2. All these, besides the Babylonians,
added to the afflictions of the Jews, and were in the end all plagued. Verse
15.
Now both these Affections in God, toward his Church and the Enemies thereof,
are here further amplified by their several effects.

1. Of his Love and favor to the Church: the effect whereof is in general,
The restoring of his people to their former estate, out of the desolations and
distress they were then in [I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies:] I went
away, and hid me from it, in my anger, Hos. 5.15. but am come again with many
comforts and tender mercies (...) to relieve it. This general is set forth in
three particulars:

1. Re-edification of the Temple, and restoring of the Worship of God [my House
shall be built in it.] 2. Reparation of the City, and restitution of the form
of the Commonwealth, set out figuratively by the Instrument of Architecture [a
Line shall be stretched forth upon Ierusalem] to describe the Streets, to raise
up the Walls, etc. Verse 16. 3. Prosperity and Abundance, both of Men and
Maintenance. Which seems to be set down by way of prevention, to an Objection
the people might make: Well it may be, that the Temple and City may be
repaired; yet for all that, we are brought so low, our number is so few, our
poverty so great, that there is no hope of any flourishing and prosperous
estate to be looked for. To this, the Angel bids the Prophet answer as it
were with another Proclamation [Crie yet] moreover, [Thus says the Lord of
Hosts: My Cities, through prosperity, shall yet be spread abroad:] [My
Cities] not this only of Jerusalem, but others also round about, of inferior
mark, [through prosperitie] (...) plentiful increase of Men, Cattle, and all
manner of Fruits of the Earth, as Chap. 2. v. 4. [shall yet] notwithstanding
the mean and poor estate the whole Country is now in [be spread abroad]
(...) diffundentur, diffluent or effluent. Targum (...) replebuntur: a Metaphor
from Vessels; so filled, that they run over; or Fountains, that swell over and
run abroad, Prove. 5.16. (...). Iunius understands this, of the spreading of the
Church beyond the limits of Iudaea, to all Countries of the Gentiles, ex Isa.
49.19. and sequitur. Sed quaere.
Now the means of procuring all this good unto this people, depends not on
man's either

Power, [and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion] He only will and can do it. No
State stands on such desperate terms, but he can set all to rights; and will
do so for this people.

or Worthiness. God respects himself, and his own free election of Grace:
And because he has chosen the Jews to be his peculiar People, therefore he
means them all this favor, [and shall yet] neither their Sin, nor their
Misery, shall make void his Election [chuse Ierusalem] above all other places,
wherein to be honored and worshipped, and whereupon to bestow his favors.
Verse 17.

2. Of his Wrath and Indignation against the Enemies of his People: the effect
whereof, is their overthrow and destruction; described unto us in the second
Vision shown unto our Prophet, which we are next to consider of.

Vision 2. Which has two parts.

1. Concerning the Enemies themselves; represented unto Zachary under the
similitude of four Horns. [Then I lift up mine eyes, and saw, and behold,
four Horns.] Verse 18. Who these were, is interpreted by the Angel, Verse 19.
[And I said, etc. These are the Hornes] id est, Enemies, figuratively from
fierce Beasts, whose strength and wrath lies in their Horns, [which have
scattered] (...) Ventilarunt, tossed them up in the air, as furious Beasts do
with their Horns [Iudah, Israel, and Jerusalem.] Why all three? And Israel, as
well as Judah? And why Judah and Jerusalem? Quaere. 2. Concerning the Means of
their Destruction; here shadowed by four Carpenters, or Smiths, [And the Lord
showed me four Carpenters] (...), any kind of Artificers, but here most
likely, Smiths; as, 1. Sam. 13.29. where also the word is used, without any
Epithet of distinction. And we may well think, that as those Horns were of
Iron, so these Smiths came with Iron Instruments to batter and break them.
Whether one or other, we have in the next Verse 21. the Employment they came
about, declared unto Zachary, upon his question and desire to know what they
were. [Then said I, What come these to do? And he spoke, saying,] The
interpretation of the Vision is set down by opposition of both parts, four to
four, on the one side, [These are the Horns which have scattered Judah, so
that no man did lift up his head:] He continues the Allegory, from strong
Beasts, that so gore and bear down the weaker, that they dare not turn head
against them: And in such sort had the Nations round about oppressed and
overrun this People, as they had no means to make resistance. On the other
side, [But these are come to fray them] to repress and restrain their
violence: He goes on in the Allegory, [to cast out the Horns of the Gentiles]
so to terrify the Enemies, as to break their power, and to drive them out of
the Enclosures of the Church; over which they had broke in, like wild Beasts,
to devour and disturb all: [which had lift up their Horn over the Land of
Judah, to scatter it.] Verse 21.
CHAP. II.
I Lift up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold, a Man with a measuring
Line in his hand.

2. Then said I, Whither go thou? And he said unto me, To measure
Jerusalem, that I may see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length
thereof.

3 And behold, the Angel that talked with me, went forth: and another Angel
went out to meet him,

4 And said unto him, Run, speak to this young man, and say, Jerusalem shall
be inhabited without Walls, for the multitude of men and cattle therein.

5 For I, says the Lord, will be unto her a Wall of Fire round about, and will
be the glory in the mids of her.

6 He, be, come forth, and flee from the Land of the North, says the Lord: for
I have scattered you into the four Winds of the Heaven, says the Lord.

7 Save thy self, O Zion, that dwell with the Daughter of Babel.

8 For thus says the Lord of Hosts: After this glory has he sent me unto the
Nations, which spoiled you: for he that touches you, touches the apple of
his eye.

9 For behold, I will lift up mine hand upon them: and they shall be a spoil
to those that served them, and ye shall know, that the Lord of Hosts has sent
me.

10 Rejoice, and be glad, O Daughter Zion: for lo, I come, and will dwell in
the mids of thee, says the Lord.

11 And many Nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my
people: and I will dwell in the mids of thee, and thou shall know that the
Lord of Hosts has sent me unto thee.

12 And the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy Land, and shall
choose Jerusalem again.

13 Let all flesh be still before the Lord: for he is raised up out of his holy
place.

THis Vision, Vision 3.
as the former, contains matter of Comfort to the now-distressed Jews;
promising unto them the restoration of their State, the re-edifying and
re-peopling of Jerusalem, and the rest of the Country. In scope, it differs
not much from the first: And surely, great need there were, by strong and
often-repeated Comforts, to strengthen this Peoples Faith, and bring them to
some good hope and courage, who even despayred for their forlorn estate at
this time. The scope is, to show, That how strait and miserable soever the
Condition of the Jews was now, yet they should be restored to an Ample,
Peaceful, and Glorious Estate. A Doubt is made, when this was performed, and
whether it be at all to be meant of the Temporal Jerusalem, or only of the
Mystical, the Church, and Evangelicall Promises thereto belonging. But I
suppose there is nothing hinders us, why we may not take it literally and
Historically touching the present state of the jews; for the Comfort of whose
present Distresses, this Vision was showed. Yet if, under this, there be also a
Typical praefiguration of the Church, not long after this, to be collected
among the Gentiles, we may take that too, and both senses may have their due
place. To come to the Vision; we are to consider of,

1. The Declaration of it, what it was, in the first and second Verses, [I lift
up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold, a Man with a measuring Line in his
hand.] A Master Builder passing along, ready furnished with his Implements, to
take the Plot of something, Verse 1. What he went about, himself being asked
by the Prophet, tells us, [Then said I, Whither go thou? And he said to me,
To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof and the length
thereof] to lay out the Plot of the City, and the Ichnographia of the Building
thereof; or, to see whether the City had Room enough, in length and
wideness, to contain the Inhabitants that should re-people it; as the verse
4. seq. gives the sense.

2. The Interpretation of it: which is,

1. Set down in brief and plain terms, verse 3, 4, 5. containing,

1. The Persons, by and to whom this Interpretation was made: which are three;
two Angels, and Zachary. [And behold, the Angel that talked with me] that
attended on Zachary all this while, to instruct him in these Visions, [went
forth] to meet that other Angel which came toward him: [and another Angel,
etc.] Christ, (as is very probable, both here and in the first Verse) who being
the Architect, and Master-Workeman of his Church, after he had measured the
City, comes back to tell Zachary, who stood afar off looking on, The
Angel tells the Prophet, but the Prophet must tell the people: God using not
the Ministry of Angels, but Men, (Earthen Vessels) to deliver his Messages to
his people. Vid. Act. 8.26. Act. 16.9. -- 9.6.
what he meant by it: But Zacharies Angel seeing him come against him, goes
forth, presents his service, and receives instructions to give unto the
Prophet. Verse 3. [And said unto him, Runne] Christ commands, and Angels do it
with speed [Speake to this young man] it may be Zachary was now a young man,
though a Prophet; nor does Youth hinder the bestowing of Gods favor in this or
other kinds: Albeit we may take it in that other sense which is also usual
in Es. 37.6. Est. 22. Luc. 1.69.
Scripture, for a Servant or Minister ((...) pro (...)) because young men are
most apt for service; or, because the less serves the greater. But there is no
need to go from the plain meaning of the Word. 2. The Interpretation it
self; which consists of three Promises: 1. Of a Populous and plentiful State.
[ Jerusalem shall be inhabited as Towns without Walls ((...)) for the
multitude of men and cattle therein.] For the understanding of this place, we
are to know, that the Jews were at this time few in number, their Cities
barely and nakedly inhabited, even Jerusalem it self; the Country destitute
also of Cattle as well as of Men. Which came to pass, by reason of the
ungrateful slacknesse of the greatest part of the Jews; who refusing the
benefit of their deliverance, chose rather to remain at ease in Babylon: so
that of great multitudes, only between forty and fifty thousand returned: A
poor number, to replenish a large Country, and great Cities, which in the
time of the Captivity had been utterly wasted and overrun at pleasure by all
the neighboring Nations. For as touching that Report which Josephus makes
(...). l. 11. c. 4. and Sanctius approves, viz. that (...), id est, that of the
Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, there returned 4628000. of such as were at least
fourteen years of age; besides of Levites, Women, and the promiscuous
multitude, a great number, which he there reckons up. I dare say of this
Relation, that it is a loud Lie, as many other in the same Writer are; no way
agreeable either to Scripture, or likelihood of reason. Who can believe, that
the two Tribes, wasted and consumed by their Captivities, 2. Kin. 24.
(wherein we find but small numbers carried away neither) should in 70.
years multiply to almost eight times as many as the whole twelve Tribes were,
at their coming forth out of Egypt? Had not an Army of almost five Millions
of men been able both to overrun the Babylonians, and all parts of the
Eastern World besides, and also to re-people not only two no very great
Provinces, Judah and Benjamin, but even all from Dan to Beersheba, had the
country of Canaan been as big again as it was? and why then does Nehemiah
after this time complain, chap 4. that the City was naked of people? and
tells us, that they gave thanks to such as upon the Tithing were willing to
dwell in Jerusalem the Head City, chap. 11.2. Besides, the Scripture is
plain, that the number of men which returned with Zerubbabel, was but 42360.
besides servants etc. Ezr. 2.64. Now among many other discouragements this
people had, this their thin and small number, joined with the desolation and
wastnesse of the country, was a maine cause to quail their courage, and dash
their forwardness in building the Temple, or any other public enterprise.
Wherefore in these words God promises, that there shall be such increase both
of men and cattle, as not only Jerusalem and wailed Cities; but villages and
unwalled towns shall be replenished with them. Jerusalem is found by the
Angels measure to be too little to contain so great multitudes. So that the
meaning of the words lies plainly, as I conceive, thus [Ierusalem] i.e. by a
common Metonymie, the citizens of Jerusalem, and people of the Jews [shall be
inhabited] (...) taken many times passively, as Ezech. 26.20. but here read it
actively, as properly it signifies, shall inhabit, [as towns without walls]
leg. in, or, the, [shall dwell in Towns without walls, or, Villages] This
cannot be meant of the safety of their Habitation, seeing Walled Towns are
more secured from Enemies, than Villages; nor can it be taken properly of
Jerusalem, which was not inhabited in this sort: For though all lay open now,
yet shortly after, by Nehemiah, and in Ages following, the Walls were repaired
double and treble. Therefore understand it, as the reason following enforces,
of such an increase of Men and Cattle, as they should spread over the whole
Country, and inhabit as well the Villages as the walled Towns, though now
they lay unfrequented and desolate, as they did, Judge. 5.7. and do always, in
times of War and common Danger [for the multitude of Men and Cattle therein]
which must have more room, etc. But why makes he mention of Cattle in
Jerusalem? Do men feed Herds and Flocks in Cities, especially capital
Cities, as Jerusalem? I suppose he aims at that Custom which is usual in
all Countries infested with Enemies and Boot-halers; where, in the Daytime
they feed their Cattle abroad about the Cities, and at Night drive them
within the Walls, for safe-gard. This of the first Promise. The second is, 2.
Of a Secure Estate, through Gods protection over them. Which is also brought in
as an encouragement upon the former Promises, not to be dismayed, although they
should dwell in undefenced and unfortified Towns; God would make them dwell in
safety, though other means failed. [For I, says the Lord, will be unto her a
Wall of Fire round about] Jerusalem, the Wall whereof at this time was not
built, and other undefenced places, shall be safely inhabited; God will be in
stead of all Munition, he will be a Wall, and that of Fire, to consume the
Enemies, as well as to defend his own People; Psalm. 125.2. Esa. 26.2.
and a Wall round about; no place being left open, for invasion. He alludes, I
take it, to the Custom common in those Eastern parts, and elsewhere; where,
by reason of the great number of wild Beasts, Shepherds and Travelers do
guard themselves, by making great Fires round about their Night-Lodgings, to
keep off the approach of wild Beasts. 3. Of a Gloricus Estate, [and will be
the Glory in the midst of her] Not only that Jerusalem should bring Glory to
God, but also God bestow Honor upon her. His Presence, his Worship, his Grace,
his Protection should be that, which should make Jerusalem honorable and
admirable in the sight of the World. Verse 5.

If it be now demanded, When these Promises were fulfilled? Stories show unto
us, That in the 500. years passing between their return from Captivity, and
their final Desolation, the Jews did grow both a populous and potent People;
such as were mightily defended from the extreme rage of all neighboring
Nations, especially the Oppression of the Kings of Syria and Egypt; and among
whom, the Worship of God and true Religion being established, together with the
re-building of a beautiful Temple, made the Jews truly honorable and
renowned.

This of the Interpretation of the Vision: We are to see in the next place,
how it is

2. Amplified, and applied. Which is done in a triple Apostrophe.

1. To the Jews remaining in Babylon, who made little haste to return into
their own Country. To these, upon the former Promises, Proclamation is made,
that they speedily hasten their return home. [He, he, come forth, and flee
from the Land of the North, says the Lord:] A strange Exhortation: And one
would wonder the Jews should be so backward, to come home out of Captivity.
But so it was; not half, as may be probably thought, returned: and the rest,
by tarrying behind, were no small prejudice to the Jews returned; as
condemning them of rashness and weakness, in putting themselves upon
needless hazards, and attempting such things as they were not able to effect.
We may guess, some Reasons of their backwardness were these. First, the
continuance of Time: Seventie years had, by degrees, worn out the remembrance
of their former State and Country, and made a foreign Country even as
natural to them; especially in such as were carried Captive very young, or
borne in Babylon afterward, Secondly, the Riches, Pomp, Ier. 29.5, 6, 7.
and Pleasures of those Eastern Kingdoms, together with the security and
quiet wherein they lived, made their Captivity seem less burthenous unto
them. They were at quiet, enjoyed their Religion and Customs, got Wealth, had
Favorites at Court; and what should they trouble themselves to remoove?
Thirdly, their Unbelief, and Opinion, that things were now in so ill a case,
that they could not be set to rights. For Prophesies and Promises, they took
no great heed to them: It was 70. years ago; all was lost; the Country lay
desolate; the Nations about, were their bitter Enemies, and would plot all
mischief against them: and therefore they would even sit still, and see what
would become of those that were so venturous, to return. These, with other
Causes, made most of the Jews to abide in Babylon; whom God here calls home,
by a threefold persuasion.

1. Babylon was the place of their Captivity; whither God had banished them in
his Wrath, out of the Land of Promise. And would they live in Thraldom and
Banishment, bearing on them the Marks of Gods Vengeance, rather than return
to their former Estate? [For I have spread you abroad as ( leg. in, (...) into)
the four Winds of Heaven, says the Lord] id est. I have scattered you into
all Quarters of the World, out of your own Land. And if it be a Judgment to
be banished, it is a Mercy to be restored. Here is to be noted, that although
the Jews, at the ruin of their State, were, for the greatest part, carried
captive into the North, to Babylon; and so, are from thence principally
recalled: yet were they also dispersed at that time into other parts, according
to the Prophecy of Ezekiel, Chap. 5. Nor could it be, but in so general a
disturbance of the whole State, every man would shift for himself, when they
saw how matters were likely to go; some into one Ier. 40.11.
Country, some into another, rather than stand to the Enemies mercy. And
after the taking of the City, we see how they shifted into Egypt. 1. Kings
ult.
Iunius understands the words thus, [I have spread you abroad, etc.] id est, I
have made way for you, who were as a Bird in a Cage, to fly away and escape.
Sed q. Verse 6. 2. He puts them in mind of the excellency of their Vocation:
They are the Inhabitants of Zion; of the Church. And what fellowship has Zion
with Babel; Psalm. 137.
the Church of God, with the Synagogue of Satan; the People of God, with
Infidels and Idolaters? [Deliver thy self, O Zion, that dwell with the
Daughter of Babylon] id est, among the Babylonians, in the Territories Ezekiel.
16.46, 47.
subject to that Empire. Verse 7. 3. He promises them safety and deliverance
from those that had been and were likely still to be their Enemies. It is
true, might they say, we would gladly be at liberty, but we run upon
inevitable hazards: We see in what distress our Brethren, returned, are; the
Samaritans, and others about them, vex and disquiet them; the Kings of Babylon
are incensed against them: And how shall we, or they, be able to make our
party good? Wherefore Christ, the Angel that interpretes this Vision,
declares, for their comfort, that he has a double Commission given him of God:
first, for the Church, and its advancement and protection: secondly, then
against the Enemy, for his ruin and just punishment. [For thus says the Lord
of Hosts: After the Glory] id est, the Church and People of the Jews (as Esa.
4.5. Romans 9.4. and alibt) whom God, in the first place, is mindful of, for to
give comfort and relief unto them: in the next, [Hee has sent me to the
Nations] or, against the Nations; for it is a sending in judgment, as the
description of them shows [that spoiled you.]
This, in sum, is Christ's Commission: Which is further explained by certain
particulars.

1. The Cause moving God to send, and him to come, upon this Errand: and that
is, Gods singular love and care over his People, set forth in a rare
similitude, of that care which a man has in preservation of his bodily eyes.
What part is more sensible of the least touch, than the Eye? Or, being hurt,
causes greater smart and rage? Or, if put out, brings more deformity to the
Face? God is as tender of his Church, as we can be of our Eyes, [For he that
touches you] id est, to do you harm and wrong, Psalm. 105.15. [toucheth the
apple of his Eye] aymeth not at any inferior part, but strikes God in the
Face, and seeks to hurt the tenderest piece of the most precious part thereof,
his Eye, and the apple of his eye. (...) the same that (...) Psalm. 17.8. Deuteronomy.
32.10. Pupilla, the Crystal humor or black little Ball in the Eye, the
proper Instrument of Seeing, strongly guarded by Nature in that place. Verse 8.
2. The Effect of it, upon the Enemy. He will so quell them, that they shall
not prevail. [For behold, I will shake mine hand over them] wherein there is a
Rod of Iron, to rule and crush the Nations, Psalm. 2. [and they shall be a
spoil to their servants] The Jews, that were brought in Thraldom by these
Nations, shall get the upper hand, and spoil those that spoiled them. But when
was this fulfilled? Story is defective: Yet it is apparent enough, in the
times between the Captivity, and Christ, how many glorious Victories the
Jews had over all their Enemies, on every side. Besides, in Babylon the Story
of Ester shows, how notably they were avenged of their Masters that held them
Captives, and conspired their utter extirpation, Est. 9. For, touching the
Jews taking the Gentiles Captives, as it were, and spoiling them of
Gentilisme, by the preaching of the Gospel, it is a harsh and unwarrantable
interpretation. 3. The Event of it. Howsoever they were now incredulous, and
could not believe that God would bring to pass all this good for them; yet
they should then plainly see, that these Promises were not vainly made, [and
ye shall know, that the Lord of Hosts has sent mee] to declare and perform
these Promises, as Mediator and Protector of the Church. Verse 9. This of the
first Apostrophe. The second,
2. Apostrophe, is to the Jews at home in their own Country: whose afflicted
estate he again comforts by more Spiritual Consolations, as he did before
with Temporal. Though their Brethren, the Jews in Babylon, should refuse to
return home to them; yet for all that, let them take comfort, they should not
be left alone, and forsaken; God himself would take up his dwelling amongst
them: and in stead of their own Contrymen, People of other Nations should
join themselves unto their society, and both together shall be favored as
his peculiar People. We have then, in this Apostrophe,

1. An Exhortation to the Church of the Jews, to rejoice and take courage,
notwithstanding their present calamities. [Sing and reioyce] id est, Sing for
joy, be joyful, and show it [O Daughter of Zion] O Church and People of the
Jews.

2. The Reasons to persuade them to joyfulnesse, which are three.

1. From the promise of his special presence and abode with them. Whose
company soever they wanted, and how naked soever the Cities were of
inhabitants, yet God would dwell amongst them; whose presence and favor would
countervaile all other scarcities and inconveniences. [For lo, I come, and I
will dwell in the midst of thee, says the Lord.] He had forsaken them, and
was as a stranger that passed by, or lodged among them but for a Night; but now
he would return, and be as an inhabitant and dweller amongst them. But how,
and when was this fulfilled? I answer: It was fulfilled partly presently,
partly in time succeeding. Presently, upon the building of the Temple, the
House of Gods dwelling; and the re-establishment of his Worship, the manner of
his entertainment. For, although this Temple wanted both the Arc and the Ezekiel.
10.4. and 11.22, 23.
Cloud, the two chief visible tokens of Gods presence; yet was the Place, and
Worship therein, a sufficient testimony, that God was in a special manner
present, to favor and assist this People. But much more was this fulfilled,
when, in the fullness of time, the Son of God taking Flesh, dwelt amongst
Men, and for 33. years space graced this People with his bodily presence.
Verse 10. 2. From the association of Forreiners unto the Church of the Jews.
Their Estate and Religion should so flourish, that many of the Nations round
about should be won over, to join with them. [And many Nations shall be
joined to the Lord in that Day] In what Day? Whether the time before Christ's
Death, or that afterward; when the Partition Wall being broken down, the
Gentiles were admitted to the Society of the Church? Of the former time, there
is no doubt, but that, after the establishing of all things, until Christ's
Death, the number of Proselytes, out of diverse Nations, was not small; both for
that by reason of the many dispersions of the Jews, and commerce with other
Nations, their Customs and Religion was more commonly known; and because
these Times were to be as a Preparative to the general Calling of the
Gentiles. We see, that upon the good escape of the Jews in Babylon, Est. 8.17.
many turned to their Religion; and the Stories of the Evangelists, and Act.
2.10.
Acts, show us many examples: yea, it seems the Jews, especially the Matt.
23.15.
Pharisees, took a pride in converting others to Iudaisme. And Sanctius
inclines hereto: because the Text speaks not simply of The Nations, but Many
Nations; not implying a general Conversion as yet. If we understand it of the
general Conversion of the Gentiles to the Gospel, it may be demanded, How
this could make for the comfort of the Jews now, who were always stiff in
the maintenance of Moses Ceremonies; all which, with the Temple and State,
were to be taken away at the Gentiles Conversion? Ergo Quaere. [and shall be my
People] as well as the natural Jew, according to the Law, Exodus 12.49. [and I
will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shall know, that the Lord of Hosts
has sent me] as before, Verse. 9. and 10. here repeated for their further
assurance. Verse 11. 3. From the Covenant of Grace and Election made with this
People. They are Gods Inheritance of ancient Descent, his only Portion, and
such as belong to his Election: And though there were some interruption, in
showing of favor for a time, yet was there no intercision and utter breach of
Covenant, nor is to this time, as the Apostle shows, Romans 11.28, 29. [And the
Lord shall inherit Iuda] And who can put him by the Claim and Possession of
his own Inheritance? [his Portion in the Holy Land] It implies a double
Prerogative: First, Other Nations there were that dwelt in the Land of Canaan,
but Judah only is his Portion; they are under his general jurisdiction, his
Church enjoyes his special and gracious protection. Secondly, God will have
his possession lie not in Babylon, or other foreign Lands of their Captivity,
but in Canaan, the Holy Land, the ancient Seat of their Fathers, and of his
holy Worship, [and shall choose Jerusalem againe] therein to establish his
Service and Worship, after he has so long time seemed to reject it. Verse 12.
3. The third Apostrophe is general to all: whether Enemies, that might boast
of their Power, and threaten the perpetual overthrow of the Jews happiness;
or unbeleeving Jews, that would distrust Gods Promises, and argue unlikely
hoods and impossibilities of their performance: Both these have their mouths
stopped by an awful command, that enjoynes also their hearts to reverence and
obedience, as well as their tongues to silence, [Be silent O all Flesh, etc.]
(...) st, brag not, threaten not, dispute not, doubt not. The reasons are three:

1. They are but Flesh [O all Flesh] weak and ignorant Men, who may not
compare their wisdom, or oppose their strength to Gods. 2. He is JEHOVAH
[before the Lord] able and well-skill'd to bring to pass all his Promises. 3.
He is already come forth, to show himself, for the salvation of his People:
And who dares quatch in his presence, how-ever they durst make bold, when he
seemed to be absent, and out of hearing? [For he is raised up] (...) awaked,
as a man out of sleep, Psalm. 44.23. [out of his holy Habitation] id est,
Heaven; as it is interpreted, Deuteronomy. 26.15. from whence, God would now send
help for his People: Or, the Temple; which was likewise Gods 1. Sam. 2.29.
Habitation ((...)) And though now it were contemptible, not half built, etc.
yet was it holy: and thence, as out of a strong Fort, God would show himself,
for the defense of his Church. Verse 13. That place of Habacuk 2.20. carries
another meaning with it.
CHAP. III.
ANd he showed me Iehoshua the High Priest, standing before the Angel of the
Lord, and Satan stood at his right hand, to resist him.

2 And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord reproove thee, O Satan: even the Lord
that has chosen Jerusalem, reproove thee. Is not this a Brand taken out of the
Fire?

3 Now Iehoshua was clothed with filthy Garments, and stood before the Angel.

4 And he answered and spoke unto those that stood before him, saying, Take
away the filthy Garments from him. And unto him he said, Behold, I have
caused thine iniquity to depart from thee, and I will clothe thee with change
of Raiment.

5 And I said, Let them set a fair Diadem upon his head. So they set a fair
Diadem upon his head, and clothed him with Garments, and the Angel of the Lord
stood by.

6 And the Angel of the Lord testified unto Iehoshua, saying,

7 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, If thou will walk in my Ways, and keep my
Watch, thou shall also judge mine House, and shall also keep my Courts, and I
will give thee place among these that stand by.

8 Hear now, O Iehoshua the High Priest, thou and thy fellows, that sit
before thee: for they are monstrous Persons: But behold, I will bring forth
the Branch, my Servant.

9 For lo the Stone that I have laid before Iehoshua: upon one Stone shall be
seven Eyes: behold, I will cut out the graving thereof, says the Lord of
Hosts, and I will take away the iniquity of this Land in one Day.

10 In that Day, says the Lord of Hosts, shall ye call every man his
Neighbor under the Vine, and under the Figgetree.

WHat the scope of this Vision is, Vision 4.
is somewhat doubtful. Some think it to be proposed as a comfort to the
People, who took discouragement at the meandness and baseness of the
Priesthood; whose outward Pomp and Dignity was not like unto that, before
the Captivity. True it is, the Priests in this Temple wanted some Ornaments
they had in the first; but yet it may be questioned, whether, all things
considered, their state and splendour were not as much in the last, as the first
Temple: But of this we shall see further in the sixth Chapter. Mean while, the
Circumstances of this Chapter being laid together, the maine scope of the whole
seems to be this: That whereas there were many outward Enemies and corporal
Distresses that hindered the Peoples prosperity, whereof they much complained,
and against which, they received comfort by the former Visions; there are,
besides them, spiritual and invisible Enemies, less sensible indeed, but much
more powerful to procure the hurt of the Jewish State: These are, the Sins
of People, and Priest; and Satan, the Accuser, vehemently urging them against
both, to the hinderance of any Blessing they might expect, and furtherance of
their Punishments. Against these, God gives the Jews comfort by this Vision;
namely, That although their sins might be objected against themselves and
their Intercessor, the High Priest; yet they had another High Priest, who would
plead their Cause, pardon their Sins, build up the Temple, and give Peace to
his Church. This Vision has two parts.

1. Touching the Type; Iehoshua, the Jewish High Priest: against whom
principally, Satan bends his Accusation, as that Person who stood between God
and the People, to make intercession and atonement for them; though also,
through his side, he strike at the welfare of all the Church. In this part
therefore we have to consider,

1. The party accused; Iehoshua, the chief Priest. [And he showed me Iehoshua
the High Priest.]

2. The party to whom he is accused; that is, Christ, [standing before the
Angel of the Lord] What? as a Prisoner, arraigned and brought to the Bar by
Satan? That may be: But rather [standing] id est, 1 King. 10.5.
executing his Office, in offering Sacrifices and Prayers for the People. Such
is Satan's malice and impudency, to hurt and hinder us most in our best
employments, and to accuse the Saints even to their best Friend, Christ Jesus:
For he is here meant, by the Angel of the Lord; not any inferior Angel,
deputed as a Judge in this Business, as some needlessely imagine.

3. The party accusing; that is, the Devil, [and Satan] the Enemy, the
Adversary and Accuser of the Brethren [stood at his right hand] Why? Because
the Accusation was as true, as vehement; and so Satan had the upper hand: Psalm.
109.6.
So, some. But rather metaphorically, Satan was as ready to hinder, as
Iehoshua to set forwards the prosperity of this poor People; present at all
turns, to cross his endeavors, and to take the advantage of him. Now, the
right hand being the proper instrument of doing any thing well and orderly,
that side best fits him who is minded either to hinder or help Psalm. 16.8. and
109.31.
forward ones business, [to resist him] to frustrate his prayers and
intercession, by interposing his most bitter Accusation against him and the
Jews. Verse 1. What this Accusation was, appears plainly by the third and
fourth Verses.

4. The Apology and Defense that is made in behalf of Iehoshua; which
consists of three parts.

1. A severe Rebuke of Satan's malicious importunity. [ And the Lord, IEHOVAH]
id est, Christ, the Patron as well as Judge of his Saints [said unto Satan, The
Lord reproove, or rebuke thee, O Satan] (...) Matthew. 8.26.
(...), restrain thy malice and fury, and stop this thy malicious Accusation.
He does not vouchsafe to argue the cause with Satan, but cuts him off short,
with a vehement check and reproof. For, how-ever the Accusation might be
true, yet by him it was maliciously and unseasonably urged. Which appears by
two Reasons Christ uses, why this Bill of Indictment should be presently
thrown out of the Court of Heaven. 1. From Gods Election of this People,
amongst whom to establish his Church; which Satan most eagerly sought to
annihilate, and so to work their final rejection at this present. [even the
Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, reproove thee.] A most emphaticall speech, and
powerful, to cut the sinews of Satan's Accusation. God had chosen Jerusalem,
notwithstanding the many sins thereof: And should then their sins now make
that void, which could not at first hinder Gods Choice? 2. From the Punishment
which Iehoshua and Jerusalem had already borne for their Iniquities. Had they
escaped scot-free? Nay: They have been thoroughly punished for their sins, by
70. years misery, whence they are but newly escaped. [Is not this a Brand
plucked out of the Fire?] half burnt and wasted by the heat of Gods wrathful
displeasure; but yet a Piece, Amos 4.11.
a Remnant preserved in mercy, from utter consumption. How cruelly then, and
unjustly, do thou, O Satan, seek to re-kindle the fire of Gods Anger
against this People; and to throw them again into the Flames, who were but now
plucked out of the Burning? Verse 2.
2. The Absolution of Iehoshua, from Satan's Accusation. He did truly lay many
sins to his charge; but Christ acquits him, by pardoning him. Iehoshua's
guiltiness is set down in the third Verse, [Now Iehoshua was clothed with
filthy Garments] (...) Understand it, not of course and mean Attire, not so
glorious as the Garments of the Priests before the Captivity; for homely
Apparel may yet be handsome: but of unclean Apparel, defiled with dirt
and other filth; for so (...) signifies: under which similitude was figured the
sins and corruptions of Iehoshua himself, and the People, which also lay
upon the High Priest. And, as filthy, stinking, rotten Rags make the
company of one man loathsome to another; so Satan hoped to render Joshua and
his Office abominable before Christ. Notwithstanding yet, that he was so ill
clad, we may see that [He stood before the Angel] Christ did not abhor his
presence, nor reject his service: so gracious is he to respect his Saints,
notwithstanding their many infirmities; and to accept their obedience, though
mingled and stained with much corruption. The Chaldee paraphrases this place
thus, (...) that is; Iehoshua had sons who took unto them Wives, that were
not lawful for the Priests to take. And accordingly, in the next Verse, he
expounds the taking away of the filthy Garments, the putting away of those
Wives, (...) etc. But this is not all, though it may very well be one of those
filthy Rags and principal Sins objected by Satan, whereof both Priests and
People were guilty; as appears in Ezra, Chap. 9. and 10. And in the 18. Verse
of the 10. Chapter it is plain enough, that the sons of Iehoshua had married
strange Wives: A fault in the father, to suffer them; if not much more a fault,
that he himself had one: which, as Jerome says, is the opinion of the
Hebrews. Thus we see Iehoshua is not guiltless: we have therefore his
Pardon in the next, Verse 4. whereof there is double declaration made unto him.
1. In a Type and sign of it: As the Sins were shadowed out by the filthy
Garments; so the Pardon, by the taking of them away. [And he answered and spoke
to them that stood before him, Take away the filthy Garments from him.] Christ
commanded the Angels that waited on him, to strip Iehoshua of his Rags. 2.
Plainly, and in the Truth. Now the favor showed him, is twofold: 1.
Remission of Sins, [Behold] viz. by that visible sign, [I have caused thine
iniquities] the guilt and punishment of sin [to pass from thee] to be done
away. 2. Sanctification, in the bestowing of all sufficiency of Grace, [and I
will clothe thee with change of Rayment] (...) mutatorijs. (...) differs not
much from (...) This signifying more generally any Suit of Apparel, or, as we
speak, Holy Day Apparel, more costly than others, worn but seldom. Genesis
45.22. Judge. 14.14. That properly signifies clean and new Raiment, put on when
others are put off.
Targum (...) puritatibus, justitijs, following the sense: in stead of the
filthy Garments of Sin, the pure and clean Robe of Holiness should be
given unto him. Now in Scripture, the Graces of Sanctification are often
compared to a Robe, or Garment. Some here, by change of Raiment, understand the
Priests Garments, which were put on Iehoshua: but it stands not with the
Antithesis in this place, nor with the next Verse, where his investiture in the
Priestly Robes, is expressed.

3. The establishing and re-installing of Iehoshua in the Office of High
Priest. He is not only pardoned, and furnished with Grace for himself, but
has a further favor bestowed on him, to be invested in the Robes of his
Office; and therewithal endued with such abilities, as might fit him for the
execution thereof, to the common good. And so, is Satan's Accusation quite
frustrate, and takes no hold on the Priest, or People, to their hurt. Here we
are to note, 1. The Ceremonies of his Investiture: which are performed, 1. At
the motion of Zachary: who wished, that unto the former Garments, the Priestly
Robes might also be added. [And I said] (...) Iunius renders it, Therefore I
say; as a continuation of the Angels speech: and Piscator, to the same sense,
reading (...) here for (...) as on the contrary, Chap. 4. verse 2. (...) for
(...) But the Prophet, taking occasion on the last words of the Angel, verse 4.
might well interpose his hearty wish and desire, for the bestowing of the
Priestly Ornaments: And the Angel graciously yeeldes unto it. [Let them set a
faeire Mitre upon his head] The former Translators read, Diadem; but that is an
Ornament for a King, the Mitre (...) is for the Priest. 2. By the ministry of
Angels, [and they set a fair Mitre upon his head, and clothed him with
Garments] viz. the rest of the High Priests Attire. 3. In the presence of
Christ: who is Master of these Ceremonies, the giver of this Honor to his
Servant, the effect of this Leviticall Office. [and the Angel of the Lord stood
by] to give order for what was to be done, to allow and ratify the doing of
it, to protect and assist his Servant against Satan's fury. Verse 5.
2. The Patent of his Office: which is here declared and delivered to him
before Witnesses, [ And the Angel of the Lord testified, or, protested to
Iehoshua, saying,] (...) called as Genesis 43.3.
Witness upon his words, the Angels, and the Prophet there present, before
whom he makes this declaration to the High Priest. Verse 6. The Patent consists
of three Heads. 1. The Duty and Condition to be performed on Iehoshua's part;
which has two Branches: 1. The Observation of the Moral Law, in general
duties of Piety and Holiness. [Thus says the Lord of Hosts, If thou-wilt
walk in my ways.] 2. The Observation of all Leviticall Constitutions and
special Services of the Priesthood, [and if thou will keep my Charge] 1.
Chron. 9.27. Number. 8.16.
(...) all things belonging to the Office of High Priest. A Minister must look
equally to himself and to his Charge.
2. The Dignity which Iehoshua should enjoy: that is, the Government of the
Temple, and chief administration of all things belonging to Gods Worship,
[then thou shall also] or, even thou also shall [judge my House] id est, rule
in the Temple; the inferior R. D. Kimebl, and Targ. (...)
Priests being to do every thing according to the command of the High Priest,
who was to look that every one did his Office. Whether the authority of the
High Priest in Civil matters, Deuteronomy. 17. be here intimated, or no, Quaere. [and
thou shall also keep my Courts] The same that the former, Synecdochicws; the
Courts of the Priests and People being accounted a part of the Temple. How
great a Dignity the Office of the High Priest was, both before and after the
Captivity, easily appears by 1. Sam. 2.27. Heb. 5.4. 2. Chron. 22.11.
Scripture, and other Stories. 3. The Reward of Iehoshua, for the faithful
execution of his Office: and that is, Eternal Life; a place among the Angels
in Heaven. [And I will give thee Places to walke] (...) Targ. (...)
Itinera, Ambulationis; allusively, to the Walks and Galleries that were about
the Temple. Not (...) Ambulantes, as many read it, making the sense thus; I
will give thee, from among these Angels, some to by thy Companions and
Guardians, [among these that stand by] i.e. as the Chald. Paraph. (...) among
these Seraphins, or glorious Matthew. 22.30. Heb. 12.22.
Angels, here present.


Thus of the Typical part of this Vision: We come to the second part of it.

2. Touching the Antitype. After Iehoshua, thus impleaded by Satan, is not
only pardoned, but moreover, singularly graced with many favors, for his
private and the common good; the Angel proceeds to declare unto him, what was
the Fountain of all this Mercy, whereunto tended this his Office, by whose
means both Priesthood, Temple, and People should be restored and preserved.
Now, this Person is our great High Priest, JESUS CHRIST, the Messiah; of whom,
Iehoshua, and every Leviticall High Priest was but a shadow: He it is, by
virtue of whose intercession the material Temple and mystical Church shall be
reared up, and defended. In this the Angels Prophetical Enarration touching
the Messiah, we are to note,

1. The Persons to whom it is made: They are, Iehoshua, and the other Priests.
Who, though they are not said to appear in this Vision; yet, seeing the matter
concerned them also, and for that Zachary was to publish this Vision in the
hearing of all the Priests and People, the Angel therefore directs his speech
to the whole College of Priests, though only the Chief now stood attyred
before him. [Heare now, O Iehoshua the High Priest, thou and thy fellowes]
(...) Amici, as Iunius; Targum (...) Socij tui: that is, as Kimhi, (...) the
rest of the Priests; who, though inferior in Office, yet were fellows in
service, and Types of Christ too. [that sit before thee] in Assemblies and
Meetings, as Assessors before the President. The reason why he speaks unto
these, is expressed in the next words, [for they are men wondered at] A
difficult Clause. (...) Some construe it thus; Men that seek Signs and
Wonders; others, Men that are Signs and Types of future things; others,
Monstrous persons, id est, Men wondered at, as Monsters; for that contemning
the Opinion of the World, they believed God, and obeyed his Word, in those
desperate Times: as Psalm. 71.7. Esa. 8.18. Others, Men that have the gift of
Prophecy, and foretelling things to come. The third Opinion seems probable:
and so, this shall be for the strengthening of their Faith. Happily it may be
thus interpreted: These Priests were (...) that is, such as should be, by
reason of their Place and Calling, skillful in the knowledge of Figures and
Types of things to come, and well to understand the meaning of those Ceremonies
they were frequently busied about And then we must take (...) for (...) not
Portentum, but Signum as it is also used, 2. Chron. 32.24. for (...) there we
have (...) 2. King. 20.8. and Es. 38.7. But usually this word is taken for
prodigious and miraculous Signs; as Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. Ergo quaere.

2. The Description of CHRIST: Who is set forth,

1. By a double Title given unto him: Which are,

1. Of a Branch. [For behold, I will bring forth my Servant, the Branch.] So
called, because out of the dead and withered Stock of David's House he sprang
forth on a sudden, like a Branch or Sience out of a dry Tree. Though that
Family was obscure, and all the glorious Branches out off, even to the (...)
as in Nabuchad. Dream. Dan. 11.12.
Stumpe; yet a Remainder there was, and Sap enough therein, which in due time
should sprout forth into this Glorious, the last and greatest Ornament of that
Kingly Family. See Es. 11.1. and 4.1. Ier. 23.5. and 33.15. God, in most
unlikely Times, and by most unlikely Dan. 2.34.
Means, can bring his purpose to pass. (...) here is translated by the
Seventie, (...): and Rib. would have that place, Luke 1.78. to allude to that
Translation. But it signifies properly (...), or (...), the same that (...) Es.
11.1. [my Servant] though a Son by Nature, yet a Servant by Office of
Mediation for our sakes. Verse 8.

2. Of a Stone. Which Title is attributed to Christ, because he is the
Foundation and Corner Stone of his Church, Es. 28.16.
whereupon the whole Building is reared and coupled. [For behold the Stone that
I have laid before Iehoshua] The Anagoge to Christ, is here taken from the
Temple now in building, whose Foundation was now laid before Iehoshua and
Zerubbabel, the chief Hag. 1.14.
Overseers of the Work. The Angel then pointing to some principal Stone
therein, informs Iehoshua, that there is a further Mystery in it: the
Groundwork of the Material, signifies the Foundation of the Spiritual
Temple; not to be laid by the industry of Artificers, but by Gods
handie-worke. [I have laid.]

2. By a twofold Property, in reference to the latter Title.

1. Providence and Esa. 11.2, 3.
Wisdom in the Government of his Church. Christ is a Stone, for strength and
firmness, yet not a dead and senseless (as those of the Temple) but a living
Stone, full of Eyes, and endued with the sharpest Sight. [upon one Stone shall
be seven Eyes] Some understand it passively; All men's Eyes shall look toward
Christ; or, Sanct.
God shall with curious diligence polish this Stone, referring it to the next
Clause: But these senses fit not this place: It is more natural, and clear,
to take Eyes, for Providence; and Seven, for Perfection and Sufficiency: so
the meaning shall be; 25 Rev. 5.6.
Christ has all sufficiency of Wisdom and Council, not only to lay a
Foundation, but also to build up his Church, and to rule it in the best order.
2. The absolute Perfection of all Grace in himself, who had the Spirit without
measure. Though men might judge this Stone too too rude and rough to be put in
the Building, and therefore reject it; yet God would make it not only the Head
of the Corner, but so polish it, that it should be, as the Principal, so the
most Beautiful Stone of the whole Building. [Behold, I will engrave the
graving thereof, says the Lord of Hostes] An allusion to the graved and carved
Stones of the Temple, whose costly workmanship did in some sort shadow out the
excellency of Christ's Endowments: but yet these do so far exceed the
other, as God is a more cunning Workman than man; [I will grave it] as Psalm.
45.7. Some interpret this Graving, of the Wounds of Christ, which are (...)
caelatura corporis ejus pulcherrima. But this is not the full meaning of the
place, though the next Clause do in part imply it.
3. By two Apotelesmata, and effects of the Priesthood of Christ.

1. Remission of Sins, by the Sacrifice of Himself. [And I will remove the
Iniquitie] Guilt and Punishment of Sin [of that Land] (...) Which Land? The
Church; typified by the Land of Canaan: to the inhabitants whereof, pardon is
now promised [in one Day] by one all-sufficient Sacrifie, once offered, in
opposition to the Legal Sacrifices, every day repeated. Verse 9.

2. Peace of Conscience, through justification by Faith. [In that Day, says
the Lord of Hosts, shall ye call every man his Neighbor under the Vine, and
under the Fig Tree.] These Trees have broad leaves, and yield a cool shadow,
very pleasant in those hot Countries: and therefore under them they had their
Arbors, wherein they made their banquetings and invitations of their
Neighbors, in the times of public peace, of security of the State; as 1.
King. 4.24, 25* Under which Figure, is represented the true ^^^^ituall Peace of
the Church, which it enjoys with God, through the Reconciliation made by
Christ. See Hag. 2.9. Micah 4.4. Is. 2.4. Hos. 2.18. Albeit we need not quite
reject the literal meaning; considering that Christ, the Prince of Peace, when
he came into the World, brought with him, as Peace for the Church with God, so
quietness for the State, from Wars and Troubles, both to Iudaea and other
parts of the World. Further, the words seem to imply another effect in the
Godly, viz. Charity toward others; themselves being converted and reconciled
to God, shall study to convert others. [Ye shall call] Sed quaere.

CHAP. IIII.
ANd the Angel that talked with me, came again and waked me, as a man that is
raised out of his sleep.

2 And said unto me, What see thou? And I said, I have looked, and behold, a
Candlestick all of Gold, with a Bowl upon the top of it, and his seven Lamps
therein, and seven Pipes to the Lamps, which were upon the top thereof.

3 And two Olive Trees over it, one upon the right side of the Bowl, and the
other upon the left side thereof.

4 So I answered, and spoke to the Angel that talked with me, saying, What are
these, my Lord?

5 Then the Angel that talked with me, answered, and said unto me, Know thou
not what these be? And I said, No, my Lord.

6 Then he answered, and spoke unto me, saying, This is the word of the Lord
unto Zerubbabel, saying, Neither by an Army nor strength, but by my Spirit,
says the Lord of Hosts.

7 Who art thou, (...) Mountain, before Zerubbabel? thou shall be a Plain,
and (...) shall bring forth the Head Stone thereof, with shoutings, crying,
Grace, grace unto it.

8 Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

9 The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the Foundation of this House: his hands
shall also finish it, and thou shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me
unto you.

10 For who has despised the day of the small things? but they shall rejoice,
and shall see the Stone of Tin in the hand of Zerubbabel: these seven are the
Eyes of the Lord, which go through the whole world.

11 Then answered I, and said unto him, What are these two Olive. Trees, upon
the right and upon the left side thereof?

12 And I spoke moreover, and said unto him, What be these two Olive Branches,
which through the two Golden Pipes empty themselves into the Gold?

13 And he answered me, and said, Know thou not what these be? And I said,
No, my Lord.

14 Then said he, These are the two Olive Branches, that stand with the Ruler
of the whole Earth.

Vision 5. THe Scope of this Vision, is to show, that Gods grace only is
sufficient for his Church, to repair and maintain the same, without all other
means, against all opposition of Man. A Vision needful for the Comfort of
this poor People, whose Weaknesses and Dangers were so great, that it made
them doubt, how it was possible for their State ever to be restored; or if
restored, how it should be defended. Wherefore, in this most heavenly
Revelation, God makes it appear to the Prophet, and by him, to the People,
That it is not Iehoshua's nor Zerubbabels, nor all their strength, which must
rear up the Building of his Church and Temple; and, that it is not the force
of any Enemy which shall hinder it. Gods gracious Power would advance this
Work, by the weakest Means, against the strongest Resistance. Which is set
forth under the similitude of a Candlestick, whose Lights are kept burning
without any artificial means, by such Oil as naturally flows from two
ever-living Olive Trees, that stand over the Candlestick. To come to the
explication of this Vision, we have to note in this Chapter three parts.

1. A preparation of the Prophet, to attend and heed this Vision: Who either,
through humane infirmity, was now grown weary and dulled with continued
Visions; or, having his mind wholly taken up in the contemplation of the
excellent Mysteries of the three former, had need be as it were jogged, and put
in mind to turn his thoughts, to consider of this fourth Revelation. [And the
Angel that talked with me, came againe] id est, the fourth time admonished me
to behold another Vision of God, [and waked me, as a man that is wakened out of
his sleepe] id est, rowsed up my weary and distracted thoughts, to fresh and
further attention. These Visions were shown to Zachary in the Night, when he
was asleep, as touching his body. See then how weak and ill-disposed even our
most noble and immortal part is, to be long employed in heavenly matters, even
then when it is least busied in earthly affairs. Verse 1. [And said unto me,
What see thou? and I said, I have looked] carefully viewed the sight, [and
behold] the Vision is thus. 2. The Vision it self: which is plainly expressed
in the second and third Verses. [a Candlesticke] The Church in Scripture is
often compared to a Candlestick, by allusion to the Candlestick in the
Tabernacle and Temple, which was a type of it, [all of Gold] without mixture of
baser Metal; a type of the Churches purity, in Doctrine and Manners. [with a
Bowle] He describes the parts of the Candlestick: first, the Bowl, which was
on the top of the shaft of the Candlestick, [a Bowle] (...) properly signifies
Cant. 4.12. Judge. 1.15.
Scaturigo, or Fons; metaphorically, Eccles. 12.6.
Phialae, Lecythus, Peluis, an Oyle-Vessell, a Chrismaterie, or Oyle-Cruet;
whence, as out of a Fountain, Oil or other Liquor is powered. Some render it
Lenticula, and Discus rotundus, and that properly enough. Sanctius, who
follows others, is here, with them, foulely deceived, in rendering this word,
Lampas; imagining, that there were eight Lamps upon this Candlestick, seven
in a circle round about, and one in the midst, upon the top of a Bowl:
whereas the Text clearly speaks but of seven, [upon the top of it] viz. of
the Scapus, or Shaft: the other parts follow, [and his seven Lamps thereon,
and seven Pipes to the soven Lampes] Pipes (...) Evacuatoria, Infusoria, or
Infundibula, though not so properly here, as the first: these Pipes emptied the
Oil out of the Bowl, and conveyed it to the Match or Wieke of the Lamp,
[which were upon the top thereof] round about the Bowl. This of the
Candlestick: The next part of the Vision, is of the Olive Trees. [and two
Olive Trees by it] Sanctius makes much ado here, what Olive Trees these were,
and how situated. He imagines, that these Olive Trees shown to Zachary,
appeared not in the true nature and color of the Olive Tree, but were all of
Gold, as the Candlestick was; and that they were not situated severally from
the Candlestick, but were wrought in and upon the Bowl, after the fashion of
embossed Work (Emblemata) as Goldsmiths of As in Anacreons drunken Cup, Ode
17. (...), etc. Virg. Eclog. 3. Pocula ponam, etc. Mart. Ep. l. 8.50. l. 3.26.
Treh. Poll. in Claudie.
ancient and later times use to do upon Cups, and other Vessels, whereon they
frame the shapes of Vines, and other Trees or Beasts, etc. But he troubles us
with needless Speculations, and not consonant to all the Circumstances of this
Vision: For by the twelfth Verse it appears plain enough, that these appeared
like true Olive Trees, in their native hue, dropping down Oil into the Bowl:
And that the Branches of these Trees hung over the Candlestick, and were not
graven or imbossed on the side of the Bowl, appears by the two Golden Pipes
on the top of the Bowl, which received into them two streams of Oil, falling
down from the Berries of the Olive Trees. These two Pipes Sanctius leaves out,
in his description of this Candlestick: and so, by mistaking here, and before,
by adding one Lamp more to the seven, quite darkens the Light and clear
declaration of this Vision; as may be seen by his Explication and Type or
Pattern he makes of the Candlestick. We need not pervert the plain
meaning: There were two Olive Trees, (...) either (juxta) hard besides the
Candlestick, which stood in the midst, between two Olive Trees, growing on
each side; and so the Article shall be referred to (...) not (...) Or (super)
the Bowl, the Olive Trees appearing to grow out upon each side, [one upon the
right side of the Bowl, and the other upon the left side thereof.] The former
interpretation I rather choose, which referres the Article (it) to the whole
Candlestick, not to the Bowl, agreeably to the eleventh Verse follwing. That
all may be the more clearly discerned, I have caused the Type of this Vision
to be drawn forth, so far as we may guess at that which Zachary plainly
saw: As it appears in this next Leaf infolded.
And this is the Vision: next follows,

3. The Interpretation of this Vision. Wherein we may go no further than the
Angel has gone before us, nor ought to seek out curious Explications of
every part of the Candlestick, his Bowl, his Lamps, his Pipes, etc. but rest
we in that Interpretation which is made touching the maine scope, without
venturing any further. The Interpretation then is,

1. General, of the whole Vision, to the eleventh Verse. In which part we have
expressed,

1. The Occasion of it: First, in Zacharies question, desiring to know the
meaning of the Vision. [So I answered, etc. What are these, my Lord?] Verse 4.
Secondly, in the Angels answer, by way of another question, as it were blaming
his ignorance, and stirring him up to heed the interpretation. Then the Angel,
etc. Know thou not what these be?] Whereto we have Zacharies ingenious
confession of his ignorance, [And I said, No, my Lord.] Verse 5.

2. The Interpretation it self, Verse 6. [Then he answered, etc. This is the
word of the Lord] id est, The Vision of the golden CANDLESTICK, etc. mentioned,
Zach. 4.

Explained by William Pemble.

Place this at Folio 50.

this is that which God means and promises by this Vision [unto Zerubbabel]
the chief Magistrate, whom it specially concerned to see the Temple reedified
[saying, Not by Might,] Others, by an Army (...) the power of many together,
[nor by Power] the strength and wit of any Man alone; or, to take these terms
for Synonima's, [Not by Might, nor by Power] id est, by no humane Force and
Policy, one or other, [but by my Spirit] my Power, Providence, and gracious
favor [sayth the Lord of Hostes] who is therefore able of himself, without
other help, to do all things. Which opposition between man's help, and Gods,
is not generally to be taken, as if they never were subordinate; but with
reference to the Jews opinion, or any other of their mind, and in their case:
who imagine, that when outward means fail, all must go to wrack; or, that
Man can do somewhat, without God; or, at least, must do as much as He. Thus
then have we, in three words, the scope of this whole Vision, That as the
making and maintaining of this Candlestick and his Lamps was without the art
and cunning of Man, by means supernatural; so Gods Spirit, without and above
all humane helps, So, in publishing the Gospel, etc.
should suffice for the re-edification and preservation of the Material
Temple, and true Church.

This brief and general Promise is branched forth into two parts.

1. The Removal of all impediments of the restoration of the Church: Which,
though to the Jews they seemed invincible, should yet by Gods Power be
overcome and taken away. This is expressed by an interrogative Apostrophe to
the Enemy, [Who art thou, O great Mountain?] A Question full of scorn, and
contempt of the Enemies Mightiness; who thought themselves, and were so deemed
by the Jews, to be great Mountains, unpassable, Such were Sanballat, etc.
Neh. 4.1, 2, 3.
inaccessible, such as could over-looke and overtop the low and poor estate
of the Jews. But yet what are they, when they oppose God and his Servants,
armed with his Power? There is nothing so highly advanced, but he will abase
it: as it follows in the next Clause, containing a Threatening against the
Adversary, [before Zerubbabel] assisted with Gods Spirit [thou shall become a
Plaine] as easy to pass and march over, as a Plain and even Champaigne (...)
Some put the Note of Interrogation after Zerubbabel, [Who art thou, O great
Mountain, before Zerubbabel? etc.] but the sense is the same. 2. The
accomplishment and finishing of the Work then in hand, viz. the re-edification
of the Temple: which went but slowly forward; so many Lets, so few Helps there
were then. Notwithstanding all that, God promises, by his help it shall be
finished, to the last Stone. [And he] Zerubbabel, the chief Over-seer of this
Work [shall bring foorth] lay on; or cause to be laid on, in open view. Happily
there is an allusion to that Custom, when at the Foundation and finishing of
great public Buildings, the chief Magistrate is present at the laying of the
first and last Stone; and it may be, does it himself. [the Head Stone
thereof,] or Top-Stone; which being laid on, the Work is finished, [with
shoutings] Job. 39.10. Es. 22.2.
(...) Acclamations and joyful Outcries should be made by the People, at the
finishing of the Temple. Sanctius, As he does generally, and so troubles his
Readers with a number of frivolous and wrested interpretations.
striving to make good the Translation of the Seventie, and Jerome, who render
the words (...), and exaquabit gratia^^, runs himself into needless
Conceits, about the equality of this Temples Glory, and the first; and the
equality of Grace, under the Gospel, with that under the Law, etc. things not
meant here: Where, the intent is to show, that the Jews should rejoice, when
they should see the Temple finished; and testify this their gladness, by As
men do at Threatres, in Harvest, and other like public occasions: and as this
People did, at the laying of the foundation of this Temple, Ezra 3.11.
shoutings and hearty wishes for the prosperity of that Place, [ crying,
Phrasis in samiliaribus Iudaorum scriptis ufitatissima quando summas alicui
gratias agere volunt, says Bundorf. verb. (...)
Grace, Grace unto it] Faeliciter, All happiness betide it, Peace and
prosperity abide with it, Long may it stand, and flourish: or thus; Gods
Favor and Grace maintain and preserve this House, as his Grace, and not our
Strength, has finished it. Verse 7.
This second part of the Promise, touching the re-building of the Temple, is
further amplified and confirmed to these distrustful and unbeleeving Jews.

1. By a second and most plain Repetition of the Promise it self. [Moreover,
the word of the Lord came unto me] to Zachary, [saying, The hands of
Zerubbabel have laid the Foundations of this House] Ezra 3. [and his hands
shall finish it,] Ezra 6.15. And this Promise now is so plain and clear, as
none ought to doubt of it, [and thou shall know, etc.] as Chap. 2.11. Verse. 8,
9.

2. By an Argument drawn from the Providence of God, and his perpetual Care,
in the preservation of his Church: which is set down, in opposition to the
Jews distrust and infidelity. If Gods Eye be watchful over you, for the
advancement of your welfare, you ought not (as you do) take occasion of
distrust and discouragement at the unlikely beginnings of things, which shall
in time grow to great perfection. But, etc. This is the Argument and scope of
the Verse, though the Propositions are somewhat inverted: For the
Interpretation, take we the parts as they lie.

1. The Jews Unbelief, with its Cause, set down in a Question, which is left
to themselves to answer, [For who has despised the day of small things?] Why,
that had many: They were clearly guilty, and could not but confess it, Ezr.
3. how unseasonably and immoderately they took on, weeping and lamenting at
the laying of the Foundation of the Temple. This their sorrow, was a fruit of
their distrustful and unbelieuing hearts; mis-giving them, that these poor
beginnings would come to nothing in the end. And therefore their grief was
also mingled with contempt and disdain, they As appears also, Hagg. 2.3. Is
it not in your eyes as nothing?
slighted and made little reckoning of that which was yet done in the Work of
the Temple. Rightly then are they here questioned in this term, Who has
despised? though we find directly, they did but grieve. God judges otherwise
of our carnal affections, than we our selves. The reason of their fainting,
is in the next words, [the day of small things?] (...) foemin, pro neutro,
parvorum, viz. principiorum; the mean and poor beginnings of the Temples
Foundation, which they conceived would never come to any perfection, and
glorious accomplishment: mistaking the manner of Gods proceeding, who out of
meanest principles rayses matters of greatest moment.

2. The Joy which even those discouraged Jews should conceive, by the
progress and finishing of this Work. [ (But) not (for) as the former
Translat. and the Antithesis shows.
But they shall rejoyce] as much as they sorrowed; and, notwithstanding their
Unbelief, [shall see the Plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel] id est, shall see
the Work go forward, and finished, by the command and direction of Zerubbabel
their Prince; whom here he compares to an Architect, with a Plummet,
Plumbe-Line, or Level, busily employed in laying of Stones square, level, and
perpendicular: For Overseers and Commanders do as much as the Workmen
themselves, in any business. Iunius reads it, [Lapidem perpendiculum,] and by
it, understands the Top-Stone, mentioned before, Verse 7. But I rather follow
our last Translators, rendering it [Plummet] according to the Chaldee and
Kimhi, who interpret (...) by (...) and (...) Libramentum, Perpendiculum,
Amussis. The former Translators turn it verbatim, (...) [ the In the same
sense, that (...) a Stone, is often taken for a Weight, or Measure. Esa. 34.11.
Deuteronomy. 25.13.
Stone of Tinne] because the weight of Plumbe-Lines are usually made of Tin,
or of Lead.

3. The Cause of their Joy, and the Temples Restoration, viz. Gods watchful
Providence, always employed for the good of his Church and People; [with those
Seven] they should see the Temple reared up, by the command of Zerubbabel; but
it should come to pass, by the aid of those Seven: What Seven? The next words
tell us, [They are the Eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the
whole Earth:] his All-seeing Providence; from which, nothing is hid that is
done, from one end of the Earth unto the other. Not Zerubbabels Policy, but
Gods Wisdom, should finish the Building of Gods House. This Verse has
reference to the ninth Verse of the third Chapter, as is not to be applied, as
I take it, either to the seven Lamps of the Candlestick; or to seven Angels,
the Ministers of Gods provident Government of the World; who, as Magistrates of
Kings, so they shall be called Hesych. verbo (...).
(...).

And this of the general Interpretation of the whole Vision: now follows,

2. The Particular Explication of the second part of this Vision, touching the
two Olive Trees: wherein we have, as before,

1. Zacharies Question, requiring a more particular Explication, 1. Of the two
Olive Trees, [Then answered I, etc. What are these two Olive Trees, etc.] Verse
11. 2. Of the two Olive Branches, bigger and more notable than the rest, from
whence the Oil dropped, [and I answered, and said, etc. What be these two
Olive Branches] (...) Spicae Olearum, that is, as Kimhi, (...) two little
Boughs or Branches of the Olive, (...) hanging over the two Golden Pipes:
Which are * compared to two Ears of Corn, (...) Kimhi in locum.
because they were full of Olive Berries, as these are of Grains. Iunius
renders it (Baccae) Berries: Which Interpretation, Bundorfius verb. (...)
allows of, and confirms, from the different Vowell, which in (...) for
Spicae, is always Chateph Camets; but here, for Baccae, is with Chateph
Patach, (...) It is not much material, which Translation we follow: if
Branches, the Oil came out of the Berries; if Berries, they hung upon the
Branches: [which through] (...) Sanctius reads it, ad latus, by the fides, as
the word is sometime taken: and thence, erres in his description of the
Candlestick.
per Manum, id est, Ministerio, by the help of [the Golden Pipes] (...) Tubi,
Canales: A word only used in this place; but it seems plainly to be derived
from (...) Emissarium, Canalis, a Pipe, through which Water is let forth, Psalm.
42.7. 2. Sam. 5.8. The Targum (...) Rostra, (...), as the Seventie, Emunctoria:
but not so properly; because these Pipes were to convey Oil into the Vessel,
and not out of it. [emptie the Golden Oyle] Heb. (...) the Gold, that is, (...)
Rab. Schelomo on this place.
* the Oil; of a bright, clear, and glistering color; as in the like sense,
the word (...) is used, Job. 37.21. Gold comes out of the North; id est,
fair and clear Weather: [out of themselves] by a supernatural defluxe,
without artificial means. Verse 12.
2. The Angels Answer: 1. Exciting Zachary to attention, by questioning his
ignorance. [And he answered, etc.] Verse 13. as before, Verse 5. 2.
Interpreting unto him both parts of his Question, in one Answer. [Thou said
he, These are the two anointed Ones.] Who these are, is much doubted. Some
would have them to be the two Witnesses, Rev. 11. viz. as they interpret,
Enoch and Elias: others, Zerubbabel and Joshua, the Prince and Priest, both
anointed with Oil; as Rab. Schelomo, and Kimchi: others, Peter and Paul:
others, the Churches of the Jews and Gentiles. But they err all from the
right meaning: Nor can any of these be the cause of the Churches preservation,
as these Olive Trees were of the maintenance of these Lamps in the
Candlestick. Shall we rest on Iunius exposition? thus, [These are two
anointed ones] duae What? Bacc^^, or Oleae, or both.
Oleosae, id est, the diverse Graces of Gods Spirit, which, from God, are
continually powered on the Church, through Christ, by [Pipes] id est, such
means as he best pleases. [that stand before the Lord of the whole Earth]
quae permanent, that remain, says Iunius, id est, which Graces are and abide
in Christ in all fullness; and out of him, flow forth upon the Church, in such
a measure as befits every part. A probable exposition. Yet it may be doubted,
whether here be not to be understood by these (...) Filios Olei, some Persons,
and not Graces, which we cannot so well call [annointed ones] as our last
Translators read it, being properly a part of that anointing where of S. John
speaks, 1. Ioh. 2.20. and the rather, for that some kind of Ministration of
these Persons anointed, is employed; in that they are said to stand ((...))
before the Ruler of the World: as after, Chap. 6. verse 5. But then, who these
Persons are; whether Christ, and the Comforter; or, Christ in his two Natures;
or, Christ in his two Offices, of King, of Priest of his Church; or how else,
Quaere.

CHAP. V.
THen I turned me, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, a flying
Book.

2 And he said unto me, what see thou? And I answered, I see a flying
Book: the length thereof is twenty Cubits, and the breadth thereof ten
Cubits.

3 Then said he unto me, This is the Curse that goes forth over the whole
Earth: for every one that steals, shall be cut off as well on this side, as
on that: and every one that swears, shall be cut off as well on this side, as
on that.

4 I will bring it forth, says the Lord of Hosts, and it shall enter into
the house of the Thief, and into the house of him that falsely swears by my
Name: and it shall remain in the mids of his house, and shall consume it,
with the Timber thereof, and Stones thereof.

5 Then the Angel that talked with me, went forth, and said unto me, Lift up
now thine eyes, and see, what is this that goes forth.

6 And I said, What is it? And he said, This is an Ephah, that goes forth.
He said moreover, This is the sight of them, through all the Earth.

7 And behold, there was lift up a Talent of Lead: and this is a Woman that
sits in the mids of the Ephah.

8 And he said, This is Wickedness, and he cast it into the mids of the
Ephah, and he cast the weight of Lead upon the mouth thereof.

9 Then lift I up mine eyes, and looked: and behold, there came out two women,
and the wind was in their wings (for they had wings like the wings of a
Storke) and they lift up the Ephah between the Earth and the Heaven.

10 Then said I to the Angel that talked with me, Whither do these bear the
Ephah?

11 And he said unto me, To build it an House in the Land of Shinar, and it
shall be established and set there upon her own place.

Vision 6. THe former Visions, were Revelations of Gods favor and mercy to
this People: this, and the next, are denunciations of Judgment. For, albeit
God, for his Mercy and Elections sake, did purpose to establish his Church
amongst this People, and to restore their State again; yet he gives them to
understand, that he favors not the finnes and corruptions wherewith they were
then infected, but would severely punish them for the present; and, if they
grew more rank and ripe in Rebellion, would utterly subvert them, when they
had fulfilled the Measure of their Iniquity. This, I take it, is the Scope of
these two Visions, in this fifth Chapter. Let us consider them severally. For
the former, we have its,

1. Description: There is presented to the Prophets view a flying Roll, of a
great length and breadth; which he, turning himself about, first sees, Verse
1. and then more exactly observes the fashion of it, Verse 2 [And he said, etc.
I see a flying Rowle] (...) Volumen, the Book of the Law, wherein the Curse
and punishment of sins was set down. Which Book was not written as ours
are, in several Leaves, but according to the Psalm. 40.7. Ier. 36.2. Luke 4.17.
(...). Ezekiel. -- 9, 10.
Customs of those Times, in one large Scrowle of Ergo Aquila and Theod. render
it (...).
Parchment, or other matter, which was rolled up together, like the Web upon
the Pin. The Seventie turn it (...), Falx, a Sithe; mistaking it, for (...)
[Flying] (...) Targum (...) it appeared in the Air unfolded and spread abroad,
fleeting along swiftly, like a Bird ready to seize on her prey. [The length
thereof is twenty Cubits, the breadth thereof ten Cubites] A large Roll, ten
Yards long, and five broad: but it is to show, the Law has Curses and
Punishments enough for every sin and sinner: there is no escaping, it is long
enough and broad enough to meet with transgressors every way. Some understand
this, of the measure God keeps, in punishing proportionably to the sin.
Verse 2.

2. Exposition of the Vision, briefly delivered in these words, [Then he said
unto me, This is the Curse,] id est, the Punishment threatened by the Law. For
the Curse of the Law, is the Punishment it denounces against offenders [that
goes foorth] is to be executed [over the face of the whole Earth] either upon
the whole Land of Israel, or more generally, upon the whole World: The
Gentiles, that sin without the Law, being yet liable to the Punishments of
the Law. This Curse is particularly amplified,

1. By instance of some special sins; against which, the Curse is
particularly threatened. Many other foul Enormities there were in the Jewish
State at this time; as, Marriage of strange Wives, unlawful and cruel
Divorces of their Wives, Molachie per tutum.
Sabbath-breaking, and open contempt of Gods Worship; Nehem. 5.
Cruelty and unmercifulness toward their poor Brethren, etc. but two only
are named, though foul and gross ones.

1. Theeverie, and Sacrilege: For this kind of Robbing I take to be
principally meant here, whereof also Malachie complayneth, Chap. 3.8. and
Nehemiah, Chap. 13.10. though all kind of unjust defrauding be not to be
excluded. [For every one that steals, shall be cut off] (...) excindetur,
vacuus erit, sive eversus; as, Es. 3.26. Jonathan, (...) Percussus, Caesus: and
the Seventie, (...), [as on this side, according to it] (...) There may be
given two interpretations of this Phrase: either thus; The Thief shall be cut
off, (...) id est, from hence, out of this place, out of Jerusalem; God will
not spare his own People, if they sin more than others: Or thus, taking in
the next Clause; The Thief shall be cut off, So (...) Hinc inde. Exodus 17.12.
(...) on this side, and the Swearer (...) on that side, id est, one as well as
another, all shall be punished (...) according to it, viz. the Volume, and
Curse therein described. This latter sense and construction I rather follow:
For, as touching Kimhi's interpretation, That the Roll was written on the one
side against the Thief, on the other against the Swearer, etc. it is a
Rabbinicall Toy. The Translation of learned Iunius in this place, sounds
somewhat harsh, [ Quia quisquis furatur (...) ex hoc [Populo] ut illa,
innocentem se asserit, etc.] Who so steals amongst this People, The French
read it almost the same way, but yet to better sense, [Car qui conque d'c^tre
ce peuple-ci d^s^obbe, est aussi net qu'^lle, etc.] id est, Whosoever among this
People, steals, is even as innocent as that or they, viz. the Gentiles
dwelling in other parts of the World: taking (...) passively in Niphal, and in
its usual signification. Et de hoc quaere.
counts himself guiltless, as that, viz. as other Nations, who defend and
justify their sins. Which rendering seems not justifiable, neither by the
scope of the Text, nor by the Times; which, though they were corrupt, yet we
cannot think were come to that height in sinning, as to count Sacrilege and
Perjurie no sins: Neither did the Gentiles so esteem of them. 2. Perjurie
and false Swearing, [and he that sweareth] viz. falsely, by the Name of God,
as Verse sequ. [shall be cut off, etc.] as before. Verse. 3.
2. By the Author and Executor of this Curse, viz. God himself, [I will bring
it forth, says the Lord of Hostes] God will see his own Law executed.

3. By the Manner of inflicting this Punishment: which has three degrees.

1. [It shall enter into the house of the Thief and Swearer,] It shall
inevitably seize upon them; even there, where they think themselves most
secure. 2. [And it shall remain in the midst of his house,] He shall neither
keep it out, nor drive it out, so long as the sin remains unrepented, and
unreformed; Gods judgment, that has seized on his Person, or Family, shall
abide upon him and them. 3. [And shall consume it, Vid. Chrysostom. Ho^n. 15. ad
Pop. Antioch.
with the Timber thereof, and Stones thereof.] Shall bring to utter ruin them
and their whole Estates, which they have got together by Rapine, Sacrilege,
and Perjurie. Verse 4.
Vision 7. Not to reckon up the diverse Conjectures of Interpreters, touching
the Scope of this Vision; that which I take to be most plain, and directly
intended, is, The extirpation and final dispersion of the Jews out of their
own Land, when the Measure of their Iniquities and Rebellions should come to
the full. The former, threatened Punishment to particular Persons; this, to the
whole State. The Vision is obscure and dark: yet all Circumstances pondered,
that appears to be the drift of it. Which, it seems, is purposely set out in
hard and mysterious Figures, lest the plain denunciation of the second
overthrow of Temple and State, might discourage them too much, to go forward
in the present restoration of both. Let us come to the Vision it self: which
is described by its parts and several interpretations, joined thereto.

1. Of the Ephah. The Prophet, admonished by the Angel, looks, and sees
somewhat mooving, but knows not what it is, Verse. 5, 6. Whereupon the Angel
tells him,

1. What it is: [And he said, This is an Ephah, that goes forth:] An Ephah;
properly the greatest dry Measure among the Jews, containing ten Homers,
Exodus 16. vlt. And generally, for any Measure whatsoever, Deuteronomy. 25.14. It may
here be taken either way. [goeth foorth] appears to moove forwards.

2. What is meant by it: [Hee said moreover, This is their resemblance
thorowout all the Earth,] (...) A Clause that much troubles Interpreters: who
yet, for the most and best part, understand this, Oculus earum, passively for
the Eye of Gods Providence and Knowledge, So Calv Pise. Iunius, and the French,
[Cest Coe^^ q^^ j'ay sur eux^^t^te (...) and our old Translators, to the same
sense.
whereby he takes an exact account of all Wickedness committed: and, however
wicked men would sin without measure, prescribes unto all, Limits and Bounds,
beyond which they shall not pass; whereunto when they are come, they shall be
surely punished. So the interpretation shall be thus: [This] viz. Ephah, [is
their Eye] id est, the Measure of their Iniquity, determined upon the Jews,
by the all-knowing and all-disposing Providence of God, whose Eyes are upon
them [in all the Earth] in every Coast and Quarter observing their doings, and
how every ones sins fill up the common Measure. This interpretation, though
it contain no absurdity, and is consonant to other Genesis 15.16. Matthew. 23.32.
Esa. 1.4. 1. Pet. 3.20. cum Genesis 6.3.
Scriptures; teaching us, that God long expects a sinner, or sinful States
amendment, proceeding not to Punishment, till Iniquity come to its full
Ripeness: yet me thinks, in this place, it sounds scarce full enough. And our
last Translators give occasion to look further: who render (...) [their
Resemblance] taking (...) in that signification which is not usual, viz. for
an outward shape, color, appearance, or likeness of any as Lev. 13.55. Ezekiel.
1.27. (...)
thing. But how was the Ephah a resemblance of the Jews? Happily thus: The Ephah
is an Instrument used in Buying and Selling; and so may by a Synecdoche
speciet, signify all manner of unrighteous dealing, which the Jews commonly
used throughout that whole Country. Some likelihood there is for this, if we
have relation to the former Vision, touching their The every and Perjurie. And
because the Targum thus paraphrases it, (...) id est, These are the People
which bought and sold by false Measures. But yet this satisfies not. Ergo
quaere.

2. Of a Talent of Lead, [And behold, there was lift up a Talent of Lead] (...)
which we take either properly for a Talent, which weighed 3000. Exodus 38.25, 26.
Shekels, or 125. pound; or more generally, for a Piece or Mass of Lead, made
broad and flat, to cover the Ephah. This Weight of Lead was lift up, and hung
over the Ephah.

3. Of a Woman sitting in the Ephah, [And this is a Woman that sits in the
midst of the Ephah.] Verse 7. What this Woman was, and wherefore the Talent
of Lead served, the Angel shows in the next Verse. [And he said, This is
Wickednesse] (...) Affliction, say some: who thereupon take the Scope of this
Vision to be the Translation of the Jews Afflictions, and Troubles, which they
had long endured, from them unto their Enemies, especially the Babylonians. But
besides, that the acception of (...) for Trouble and Disquietnesse, is very
Job. 34.29. 1. Sam. 14.47.
rare in the Scriptures, it agrees not well with all the Circumstances of the
Vision. Wherefore take we it in the ordinary signification, for Wickedness,
Impiety, Sinfulness; and then, this Woman is a Figure of the whole sinful
Nation of the Jews; whom God would punish, for their extreme Impieties and
Corruptions. It is but curiosity, to enquire, why Wickedness, or a wicked
People, The two states of Israel and Judah figured by two Women. Ezekiel. 23.
is represented by a Woman. Sin came by a Woman, Women are more sinful than
Men; Sin takes away the strength of States, and makes them weak as Women:
But these are but Ghesses, not Reasons. Let us see what is done to this Woman,
[and he cast it into the midst of the Ephah] she sat upright in the Ephah,
Verse 7. Here the Angel takes her and throws her down in it, taking away
all power to resist and defend her self; and then, [He cast the Weight of Lead
upon the Mouth thereof,] He covered the Ephah close and sure, with a broad
Weight of Lead, which she should not be able to remoove. Figuring the severe
and heavy Judgment of God upon this People: which, when they had filled up
the Measure of their sins, should over-whelme them, and keep them so fast
and sure under, as they should never be able to get free of it: like one
crushed together in a narrow Vessel.

4. Of two Women, which carried away the Ephah with the Woman in it, and Talent
upon it. Now, this fourth part of the Vision declares what manner of Punishment
God would lay upon this People; which is no less, than their final
dispersion, and scattering abroad from their own Land; figured, by this
carrying away of the Ephah into the Land of Shinar. Which is described to us,

1. By the Instruments that conveyed it away, two winged Women: [Then I lift up
mine eyes, and looked, and behold, there came out two Women,] that is, says
Iunius, the Church of the Jews, in respect of two several Times; first, under
Ezra, who purged and reformed the Church, Ezra 9. and 10. secondly, under
Nehemiah, who again reformed the abuses thereof, Nehem. 13. So, that in
effect, the two Women here, are Ezra and Nehemiah, the principal authors of
Reformation, though they used the help also of the other Rulers. But, pace
tanti viri, this exposition seems not allowable: First, for that these were
times of Reformation, wherein we find none thrown out of the Church, but
upon Repentance and present amendment of that general fault, viz. Marriage of
strange Wives, more firmly united thereto. But this Vision seems not to
intimate any general Reformation of Wickedness, but a general Punishment,
for default of Repentance and amendment; as appears by the order of the
Vision: the wicked Woman is cast into the Ephah, covered with Lead, then
carried away into another Country. Secondly, it stands not with the last
Verse; which most clearly shows, that this wicked Woman should bear the
punishment of her Iniquity, not at home in Iudaea, but in perpetual
Banishment in foreign Countries. And Iunius interpretation of this Banishment
into Shinar, (to be the adjudging and enwrapping of the wicked Jews at home,
in the same If by the same judgment he mean Perpetual, it is true in some
sort, albeit those in Babylon were not banished as yet from the Jews Society,
but might return home, if they would; yea, did once a year ordinarily come up
to Jerusalem.
Condemnation with their wicked Brethren, residing in Babylon) is intricate,
and falls short of the full meaning of that Verse, as we shall see. Wherefore
I conceive, that by these two Women is meant nothing else, but those
Instruments and Agents whom God would employ in the speedy execution of his
Wrath upon the Jewish Nation; who are resembled by Women: not for that God
would bring it to pass by weak means (for that is not so, the Romans by
strong hand overthrowing the Jews Commonwealth) but only to keep proportion
with the rest of the Vision, that the parties punishing might be correspondent
to the party punished: she appeared like a Woman, and so did they. [ And the
wind was in their (...) A Masculine Article, referred to a Feminine Nowne
(...), but, as it were, intimating, that these Women were indeed types of Men.
wings, for they had wings like the wings of a Storke.] This figures the swift
and violent execution of Gods Judgment on this Nation. The Women had wings,
and those large and great, like the wings of a Storke; and they were helped
forward with the wind, which bore them up, and drove them on apace, like a
Bird that flies before the wind. All which sets forth the swift approach and
speedy execution of Gods Vengeance to be accomplished by the Romans, who with
great celeritie and violence destroyed the Jews State. Iunius and Piscat.
understand it of the swift and courageous proceeding of Ezra and Nehemiah
against the Corruptions and Abuses of their Times: And true it is, that first
Reformation was speedily performed, within the space of two months, Ezra
10.16, 17. But I take the scope of the Vision looks not that way.

2. The Manner of it: They took up the Ephah from the ground, and lifting it
aloft in the Air, carried it away betwixt them. [And they lift up the Ephah
between the Earth and the Heaven,] id est, say Iunius and Piscat. by the
Sentence of Excommunication publicly denounced, Ezra 10.8. for to that place,
I suppose, they have reference. But, I take it, this lifting up between the
Earth and Heaven, is only a mere circumstance of the transportation of the
Ephah. The Women that bear it away, had wings, and fly they did; wherefore it
was necessary they should take up the Ephah, and mount with it aloft into the
Air. That which is to be observed in it, is the manner of this Punishment,
viz. it should be a removal and deportation of them out of their own
Country. Which further appears by the next Circumstance.

3. The Place whither this Ephah was carried, and where it was left: Which, by
occasion of the Prophets Question, Verse 10. the Angel tells, Verse 11. [And
he said unto me, To build it an House] id est, to appoint it a place of
continual abode, Ier. 29.5.28.
as in a settled Dwelling, [in the Land of Shinar,] id est, Babylon, or
Mesopotamia and Chaldaea, Genesis 10.10. and 11.2. For, although the Jews were by
the Romans scattered into all parts of the World almost, yet they did and do
principally reside in those Eastern parts of 1. Pet. 1.1.
Asia the less, Chaldaea, Mesopotamia, and Babylon. Wherefore this Land of
Shinar is here specially mentioned: first, because it was the place of their
former Captivity; and the mentioning thereof, was As says Sanctius, Qui ex
no^^ris Argerij captivi suerunt, natali solo restituti, cum Argerium audinnt,
vincula audium, etc. and Hos. 9.3. Captivity is threatened to the ten Tribes,
under the name of Returning into Egypt, though they were captived, not into
Egypt, but Assyria.
sufficient to give them notice what they should expect, even the same
Condition of Banishment they were in before, in Shinar: secondly, because their
Brethren despising the mercy of their deliverance, still remained there, in
wilful exile; with whom, those at home are also doomed to perpetual
Banishment. And it is most probable, the remaining of those Jews in Babylon,
was a great occasion to draw thither a great number of these scattered Jews;
who, upon their flight and dispersion, resorted thither for entertainment, [and
it shall be established and set there upon her own Base.] This signifies the
perpetuity and firm continuance of the Jews Punishment: This wicked Woman
had been before carried Captive, but it was but for 70. years: she should
yet again be carried away out of her own Country, and be surely settled to
abide for ever in the Land of her Banishment; like as a House upon its
Foundation, or Pillar, strongly fixed upon a firm (...) A place fitted for any
thing, a Base: as of the Altar, Ezra 3.3. of the Lavers, 1. King. 7.27.
Base; where it will stand sure, long to remain. Thus then, these wicked Jews
being compassed in with their Iniquities, and imprisoned under the heavy
Burden of Gods dreadful Vengeance, should by the instruments of Gods Justice
be driven out of their own Country, and made to bear the punishment of their
Rebellion in foreign Countries, whither they should be banished, from
generation to generation: as we see it fulfilled to this day, since their
first overthrow of their State by T. Vespasianus; and their final dispersion,
by Aelius Adrianus. And this I take to be the meaning of this place. There is
to be noted in the Original, a changing of the Gender (...) whereof the former
may be referred to (...) of the Masculine; the latter, to (...) of the Feminine
Gender.

CHAP. VI.
Again, I turned and lift up mine eyes, and looked: and behold, there came
four Charets out from between two Mountains, and the Mountains were
Mountains of Brass.

2 In the first Charet were red Horses, and in the second Charet black Horses.

3 And in the third Charet white Horses, and in the fourth Charet Horses of
diverse colors, and reddish.

4 Then I answered, and said unto the Angel that talked with me, What are
these, my Lord?

5 And the Angel answered, and said unto me, These are the four Spirits of
the Heaven, which go forth from standing with the Lord of all the Earth.

6 That with the black Horse went forth into the Land of the North, and the
white went out after them, and they of diverse colors went forth toward the
South Country.

7 And the reddish went out, and required to go, and pass through the World,
and he said, Go pass through the World. So they went thorowout the World.

8 Then cried he upon me, and spoke unto me, saying, Behold, these that go
toward the North Country, have pacified my Spirit in the North Country.

9 And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

10 Take of them of the Captivity, even of Heldai, and of Tobijah, and
Iedaiah, which are come from Babel, and come thou the same day, and go unto
the house of Ioshiah, the son of Zephaniah.

11 Take even Silver, and Gold, and make Crowns, and set them upon the head of
Iehoshua, the son of Iehozadah the High Priest,

12 And speak unto him, saying, Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, and says,
Behold the Man whose name is the Branch, and he shall grow up out of his place,
and he shall build the Temple of the Lord.

13 Even he shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the
glory, and shall sit and rule upon his Throne, and he shall be a Priest upon
his Throne, and the Council of Peace shall be between them both.

14 And the Crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Iedaiah, and to
Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the Temple of the Lord.

15 And they that are far off, shall come and build in the Temple of the
Lord, and ye shall know, that the Lord of Hosts has sent me unto you. And
this shall come to pass, if ye will obey the voice of the Lord your God.

Vision 7. TOuching the Scope of this Vision, there are two Opinions of
Interpreters. The first is, of those who understand by these four Chariots the
four Empires, with relation to the Church of God; whose Beginning and
Progress, Actions and Successions, were from time to time ordered by Gods
supreme Will and Providence: So, that whatsoever his Church and People had, or
should suffer under them, was foreseen and fore-appointed by God himself.
And as in Daniel, Chap. 2. and 7. after the Vision of the four Monarchies,
Christ's eternal and spiritual Kingdom is presently described, which should
be more large and lasting than any of the former; so likewise is it in this
place.

The second is, of those who by these Chariots understand the Angels, who are
speedy Ministers of Gods manifold Decrees: Which provident government of God,
by the Ministry of his Angels, is here declared for the comfort both of the
Jews that were returned, and of those that yet abode in Babylon; whose case
was not yet so desperate, but that God had amongst them a Remnant, of whom he
took care, to save them by his Grace and Mercy. An effect of which care of
God toward them, is afterward set down by an Example, of the Conversion of
some of them: Upon whose coming to Jerusalem, to Offer their Present, occasion
is taken, by a visible Ceremony and Solemnity, to confirm their Faith, and
the Faith of the rest of the Jews, in the Promise of the Messiah, and his
Kingdom.

Which of these Opinions to take to, or whether we may rest on either of them,
I cannot say, nor dare define: both have their probabilities, and neither of
them much more, for ought I see. I think we must be content to be ignorant of
the through meaning of this Vision: I will relate what others think, and so
proceed. We have here then,

1. The Description of the Vision:

1. Generally: [I turned and lift up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, there
came four Charets,] not without their Drivers, though they be not named, [out
from between two Mountains,] Allusion to the custom of those Times, of
running Races with Charets, where the Horses and Charets stood ready for the
Course, enclosed within the Carceres, or barred Lists, from whence, upon the
sign given, they loosed, [and the Mountains were Mountains of Brass.] By
these Brazen Mountains, all understand, Gods provident Decrees and Councels;
which, as they are most firm and immutable in themselves, like unremovable
Mountains of Brass, or Steel, so are they the Beginnings of all Actions and
Effects in the World. And therefore these Charets are said to come forth from
between these Mountains, Gods Providence appointing them their course. Verse
1. 2. Particularly: describing by what Horses every Charet was drawn, Verse 2,
3. [In the first Charet were red Horses, and in the second Charet black
Horses, and in the third Charet white Horses, in the fourth Charet grizled and
Bay Horses.] They that thereby understand the four Monarchies, are much
troubled in the interpretation and application of these several Colors. Some
ridiculously take it for such Colors as those Nations most of all used; as the
Chaldaeans, Red, etc. Others, with reference to the Jewish estate, for Types of
that dealing which they used toward the Jews: as the Chaldaeans, Red, because
they were bloody; the Medes and Persians, Black, because under them it was a
sorrowful time to the Jews, by reason of their Captivity; and the Graecians,
White, because the Jews were well handled by them; as by Alexander, at his
coming to Jerusalem: the Romans, grizled, or of diverse Colors; because, of
their Emperors, some used the Jews well, and gently; some ill, and cruelly.
But these are Conceits, not only frivolous, but false, if they be thoroughly
scanned. And be it so, that by the Charets are meant these Monarchies, yet it
will be too much presumption, without the help of the Angels interpretation,
to give a reason of these Colors, which happily were only for distinction sake,
to know one Charet from another, without further signification. They that go
the other way, Which also have appeared like Charets and Horses, 2. King. 6.17.
and 2. King. 2.11. and most plainly Psalm. 68.17. Targ. (...) Maculosi.
make shorter work, and hereby understand the diverse Ministrations of the
Angels, deputed to several employments; and nothing else: which is also
according to that in the first Vision, Chap. 1. verse 8. About the Colors of
the last Horses, there is some difference in the reading, [Grizled] (...)
Grandinei, or Grandine guttati, Maculis albis respersi, spotted with white
spots like hayle-stones, upon Black, or other Color. Jacobs spotted Sheep
are so termed, Genesis 31.10. which, Chap. 30. verse 39. are called (...) The old
Translators render it [of diverse colors,] the French [Cendres] ash-colored.
[and Bay] (...) pro (...) Es. 63.1.
Tincts, infecti, by the change of the Gutturals (...) The Targum (...)
Cinerei, ash-colored, of (...) Cinis, Genesis 18.27. The old Translators
[Reddish] The Seventie, (...), Sturnini, Stare-colour. French, (Mouschetes.)
Iunius takes (...) in the usual signification, for Roborati, confirmati,
strong, or strengthened, viz. by God, for the execution of his Will; and so may
be as a common Epithet to all (these Horses, i.e. Angels employed in Gods
service.
2. The Interpretation: which the Angel, being asked by Zachary, Verse 4.
gives of them, in a threefold description of these Charets and Horses.

1. Their Nature, what they were, [These are the four Spirits of the Heavens.]
Here lies all the doubt, touching the meaning of this word Spirits, ((...))
whether it should be rendered And so the French Translators (Quatre (...)) and
Iunius, who yet interpretes it of the Angels.
Venti, [the four Winds of the Heavens] as Sanctius and the rest that
interpret the Vision of the Monarchies, expounding this place by that, Dan.
7.2. where those Monarchies are set forth by the four Winds striving on the
great Sea; to which place, well known to Zachary, the Angel (say they)
alludes: Or, Spiritus, [the four Spirits of the Heavens] as the old and new
Translators: and so to expound it of the Angels, who are sent from God into all
the Quarters of the World; and from thence, repair again unto his Presence.
[which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the Earth.] Whether of
the former senses we take, this Clause seems well to agree to both; but most
fitly to the latter, of the Angels, who stand in the Presence of God, waiting
his Commands, ready to go forth in the speedy execution of his eternal
Councels and Decrees: as is most plain, Job 1.6. and 2.1. 1. King. 22.19. Dan.
7.10. and supra Chap. 1.10. and Heb. 1. Matthew. 18.10. But yet if we understand
it of the Monarchies, the sense is not improbable: for they likewise were, in
their times, raised up out of their several Stations, according to Gods
everlasting appointment; and sent forth into the World, to execute Gods most
holy and righteous purposes, as well upon his People, as one upon another: as
the Assyrians, to punish the Israelites; the Medes and Persians, to plague the
Assyrians; the Graecians, to afflict the Persians; and the Romans, to undo
all, both one and other. Verse 5. 2. By their Employment: setting down the
places whither these Charets ran. [The black Horses which are therein,] viz.
in the second Charet, [goe forth into the North Country,] id est, the Medes
and Persians shall over-runne the Babylonians, whose Country was North unto
Iudaea: [and the White go forth after them,] id est, the Graecians, who
again overcame the same Countries which the Persians before them had done; as
appears by Alexanders Expeditions; [and the Grizled go forth toward the
South Country,] id est, the Romans shall over-runne Egypt, which lay South to
Iudaea. But why Egypt? Ribera, and Sanctius out of him, give the reason:
Egypt is only mentioned, because of all the Grecian Empire, that Country
was the last which was won by the Romans; who, in Augustus Suet. August.. 17,
18. Flo^us, lib. 4.
time, conquered it, and made it a Province: at which time, was the So
Torniell. An. ad Ann. M. 3723.
last Period of that Empire. Verse 6. [And the Bay went forth, and sought to
go, that they might walk to and fro through the Earth.] Here Is another Knot,
hard to be untied, who these Bay Horses are. The Bay and Grizled drew both
together in the fourth Charet, viz. of the Romans; now they are severed: the
Grizled go toward the South; the Bay, thorowout all the Earth. Wherefore
either we must say, that by the Bay and Grizled is only meant the Romans, who
should not only overcome the Grecian Empire, as it is verse 6. but also
should extend their Dominion to all places of the World besides, verse 7. Or
else we must take these Bay Horses for some other Kingdom, which having
sometime been a part of the Roman Empire, should afterward over-runne the
whole World. Ribera rejects the former, because the Romans had conquered all
the World, before the subduing of Egypt; as appears by Story, and Augustus
Taxation, Luke 2. Wherefore, what need they, after that their going into the
South Country, to desire to go over all the Earth? Therefore he understands
by them, another Kingdom. But what? The Goths, Vandals, and Northern
Nations, who being first subjects to the Romans, and part, as of their Empire,
so of their Oros. l. 7. c. 20.
Armies, afterward rebelled, divided themselves from the Romans, and by many
Eruptions [sought to goe] and get abroad, which yet were a long time hindered
by the Romans: yet afterward they had leave from God, [and he said, Get ye
hence, etc.] and, [So they walked to and fro through the Earth,] over-ranne the
whole World, scarce any Country being free from their invasion and tyranny.
To this interpretation of Ribera, Sanctius subscribes: but Spaniard-like, out
of admiration of his own Nation, adds a ridiculous Conceit of his own, That
non long erraret ab optima conjectura, qui crederet hanc Prophetiam ad
Hispanos quoque pertinere; who being descended of the Goths, have spread their
Arms and Fame far and wide through the World. Iunius, and those that
interpret this Vision of the Angels, understand no more but this, That these
Angels are appointed to several Countries: the second and third Charet sent
to Babylon, to take care of the Jews residing there; the fourth sent into the
South Country, id est, into Iudaea, to over-see those Jews that were
returned, Verse 6. and all of them being [ confirmati (...)] armed with Power
and Authority from God, [sought to go, that they might walk through the
Earth,] were ready and desirous to be gone upon their Errand and Commission
(so willing is the Angels service and obedience: Matthew. 6.10.
) and then, upon leave given, they fly abroad with all speed, to dispatch what
God had given them in Command, Verse 7. [they walked to and fro] (...)
obambulabant equae Terram. Iunius puts in that Particle [ equae, Mares,]
because the Verb is the Foeminine Gender, and Mares run swiftest: but it
needs not, seeing we may as well refer the Verb to (...) Charets of the
Foeminine Gender too; and both Charets and Horses went together. Now, touching
the Courses of these Charets, here is yet one doubt, Why there is mention made
of the first Charet, wherein the Red Horses were. Ribera says, it was because
the Chaldaean Empire was at this time overthrown, and so their Race was run.
Wherefore the Angel speaks nothing of them. Iunius is silent touching this
point. Ergo quaere. 3. By an Effect, wrought by their Ministry and
Employment: Which the Angel delivers with some vehemency, to breed more
attention in the Prophet. [Then he cried upon me,] called on me with a loud
voice, [and spoke unto me, saying, Behold,] See (...) [these that go toward
the North Country, have quieted my Spirit in the North Country.] An obscure
place. (...) Tranquillarunt, Requiem dederunt, (...) Quiescere facit; not (...)
Statuit, Collocavit, Manner fecit. (...) id est, (...) aut (...) as Kimhi and
Schelomo, (...) and so (...) sometimes Es. 30.28. Proverb. 16.32. (...)
taken for Wrath. The meaning then, according to the first interpretation of
the Vision, is, [they have quieted my Spirit,] id est, pacified my Es. 1.24.
Wrath, done a pleasing and acceptable Work, in executing my revenge upon the
Chaldaeans and Persians, who had cruelly vexed the Jews above measure, as
Chap. 1. verse 15. Now the Persians had already punished the Assyrians, and
the Graecians should shortly afflict the Persians; both by Gods appointment,
for the oppression of his People. The Paraphrast to the same sense, (...)
perfecerunt voluntatem meam. Iunius and Piscator understand it of the
conversion and repentance of the Jews in Babylon, wrought by Ministry of
Angels, thus: [They have quieted my Spirit in the North Country,] id est,
appeased mine Anger toward the Jews dwelling in Babylon, and neglecting Gods
favor, in their deliverance. But how is this done? By bringing some of them to
Repentance; whom therefore God would not cast forth of his favor: wherein God
ascribes the work of his own spirit to his Ministers, the Angels, for their
greater honor. Which exposition gives occasion of some doubts: as first, How
the Angels are workers of Repentance in Men? Secondly, Whether these penitent
Jews did still tarry in Babylon, or returned home to their own Country? If
they tarried, how did they repent? seeing their tarrying there, was one of
their great sins. If they returned, when was it? We find indeed, that at
the coming of Ezra, which was after this time, many Jews repenting (belike)
their former slothfulness, joined themselves with him, and returned home, as
is described at large, Ezra 7. and 8. And perhaps, that is somewhat here aimed
at. But thirdly, Whether does not this Rest, given to Gods Spirit in the North,
seem to be of a larger extent, than only in some few particular Converts?
with whom, though God was well pleased, upon their Repentance and Return; yet,
for the generality, he was still highly displeased with them who forgot Sion,
and sat still by the Rivers of Babylon.
And so we come to the second part of this Chapter; containing not a Vision,
but an Historical Praediction of what was really to be done, viz. the Oblation
of the Jews that came from Babylon, and the typical Coronation of Iehoshua
the High Priest. How this follows upon the former Vision, is doubtful: But
there are two ways generally followed: either thus; The Vision sets forth
unto us the administration of all Kingdoms, by the direction and providence of
God; who, though he had suffered these Monarchs to invade and spoil his
People, yet would so order the matter, that the Kingdom and Priesthood should
flourish again in Judah, notwithstanding the Power of those Earthly But yet
after a new and unusual manner, one Man should have them both: typified in
Joshua, fulfilled in Christ.
Monarchies; when, in due time, according to the Promises, the Messiah should
come, and take upon him the Rule of his Church, among the Jews and Gentiles:
Or thus: In the Vision is showed the Care of God over the Jews of Babylon, to
save his Elect among them. In this Story is set forth an Effect of that Care,
in an Example of some Converts; who, as Ambassadors from the rest, come to
Jerusalem, to make public profession of their Faith, and to Offer unto the
Lord: unto whom God vouchsafes this favor, to give them a visible testimony
and confirmation of the promised Messiah.

The sum then, is a declaration of the Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ, and
of the re-establishment and enlargement of the Church under him. Where we are
to note these particulars.

1. The external Representation of this, by a visible Type, performed by the
Command of God, given to Zachary: [And the Word of the Lord, etc.] Verse 9. It
is set forth by four Circumstances.

1. The Parties, before whom it must be done: Which are some of the Captivity,
come from Babylon. 2. The Time: the same day that they came. 3. The Place: in
the House of Josiah, the son of Zephaniah. These Circumstances are expressed,
Verse 20. [Take of them of the Captivity,] such as have been carried Captive,
and are now returned, [even of Heldai, of Tobiah, and of Iedaiah,] three
principal Men, [which are come from Babylon:] How? As private Men, bringing
their own Free-will-Offering to the House of God; or, as public Ambassadors,
in the name of the other godly Jews in Babylon, to make known their
Profession and Zeal, and to bring their Gifts. And thus Iunius says, but the
Text prooves it not. Again, when came they? At this time of Zacharies
Prophecy; or before, with the first Return from the Captivity. The Text
seems to determine neither, and (...) may be rendered as well [ which have
come, or, Came,] of the time past; as which are, viz. now come, of the present.
Though this, of the present coming, seems more probable by the next
circumstance. [And come thou the same day,] (...) What day? Why, most likely,
that same day these men came from Babylon. No time should be fore-slowed, for
the confirmation of their Faith, and to testify the acceptance of their
service. And the Relative (...) in the last Clause, may not unfitly be referred
to (...) as well as to the persons before named, reading it thus, [Goe thou the
same day that they are come from Babylon, and go into the House, etc.] and so
the Hyperbaton will not be so long and hard. Unless we may venture with
Sanctius, to refer it to the next persons spoken of, viz. Josiah the Father,
and Zephaniah the Son, who came from Babylon; and so make no Hyperbaton at
all: which is hardly allowable in this place; and I rather take the former
construction. Where further, by the Time we are to note, that this (...)
implies, Sunt 70 anni ab ^versione urbis and Templi Dei ad ann. 4. Darij, quo
videtur confirmatum a Dario Decretum pro Templi reaedificatione juxta
Zachariam, c. 6. v. 9. ad finem 8. cap. Lydiat. Emend. Temp. Ann. Mund. 3485.
that Zachary had this Command from God, before these Captives were come, to
be executed and put in practice at the very day of their coming: which was,
no doubt, accordingly fulfilled. [And go thou into the House of Josiah, the
son of Zephaniah.] Who was he? it is not known: But very likely it is, that
either he was a Treasurer for the Temple, who received the Oblations that were
made for the repayring thereof; and so the Prophet must go thither with the
Captives, to receive Gold and Silver of them in the Treasurers House, whither
they would bring it: or else, a Goldsmiths, or Founder, dwelling in Jerusalem,
Sed qu. of this whole Verse.
who should make the Crowns next spoken of. Verse 10. 4. The Manner of this
Representation: It must be in the fashion of a solemn Inauguration of
Iehoshua, by setting a double Crown upon his Head. [Then take Silver and
Gold,] viz. of Heldai and the rest, which they have brought from Babylon, to
Offer in the Temple. So Aben Ezra, R. David, and Salomo, with the rest that
follow them; though, me thinks, the Text says not so. [and make Crownes]
What? of Gold and Silver mingled together? So Ribera judging the Plural to be
put for the Singular, as (...) pro ingenti bestia, Job. 40. (...) pro singulari
sapientia, Prove. 1. So here (...) pro Magna Corona. But there is no cause so
to interpret the That which most seems to prove it, is that this Plural
Nowne is joined with a Verb singular (...) v. but in a common enallage.
place; and the diversity of Metalls, shows there were more Crowns made than
one: one of Gold, for the Kingly Dignity; another of Silver, for the
Priesthood, says Piscator. But whether that distinction be needful, it would
be enquired; seeing the High Priest, besides his Miter, did wear a Crown of
Gold upon it: the fashion whereof is described, Exodus 28.36. and 29.30. That
Crown was an Ensign of the High-Priestly Dignity, and it was to be of pure
Gold: How then shall a Silver Crown represent it? unless we say, that the
Silver Crown, as it was of another fashion, so it was of another Metal, for
an extraordinary use and special representation of the Priesthood at this
time. [And set them upon the Head of Joshua, the son of Iosedeck, the High
Priest.] Not one upon the Head of Joshua the Priest, another upon the Head of
Zerubbabel the Prince, as R. David would have it; and therefore says, that he,
before this Coronation, was called but (...) Dux, afterward he was styled (...)
Rex. But both Crowns, Kingly and Priestly, were one after another set on the
High Priests Head: who, although he were not a Priest after the Order of
Melchisedech, but of Aaron, and therefore had not, nor could have, both these
Dignities joined in his Person, as touching the real execution and
administration of both (as Melchisedech had;) yet, for an extraordinary
Representation, both these Dignities were at this time laid upon him: which he
bare as a special Type of Him, Joseph. lib. 11. A^tiq. cap. 4. (...).
in whom both Kingdom and Priesthood should fully meet together, and be really
executed. If after the Captivity, the High Priests did by degrees encroach
upon the Civil Authority, and carried themselves like supreme Magistrates in
the State, as well as chiefest Ministers in the Church: I suppose they had no
warrant for their so doing; to join those Offices, which God in that Polity
had severed. In the defect or negligence of other Governors, they happily took
that Authority, or had it put upon them by the People, as persons most eminent
for their Place, and such as would have most regard of the common good, for
their Piety. And it may be, this Coronation of Joshua might give his
Successors some occasion to take up that practice; yea, and to the People also,
to think that they ought so to do: who either seeing this Solemnity done in
For, so it is most agreeable, that it was not in private, in the house of
Josiah, the son of Zephaniah, but in the open view of the People, and in the
presence of Zerubbabel the Prince too: who yet was not offended at it, knowing
by the Prophets Sermon which he made at this Solemnity, that all this tended
not to the derogation of his Honor, or Authority, but to another end, and for
a further signification.
public, or reading the description of it in this Prophecy of Zachary,
might easily mistake the matter, and judge it to be de jure, a good warrant for
an ordinary practice in all, which was but de facto, a special Ceremony used
about one, for Representation sake. How-ever, here is no ground for Usurpation:
and the Times between the re-edifying of the Temple, and Christ, are so
corrupt, and the High Priesthood did so strangely degenerate from its first
institution, that no good Example can be taken therefrom. And yet,
notwithstanding the access of Civil Authority in these corrupt Times, the
Dignity of the Priesthood was far inferior to that in former and purer Ages.
And so much for the first part, viz. the Type and Ceremony of Iehoshua's
Coronation: we come to the second Particular.

2. The signification of these Ceremonies: Which the Prophet declares, in a
speech that he makes unto Joshua after that he had set the Crowns upon his
Head: showing him whereat this Solemnity aimed; and that this Honor was in
him but typical, which should be really accomplished in the Messiah, of whom
he was but a figure. This application of the Type to the Antitype, is,

1. Generally made, between person and person. [And speak unto him, saying,
Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, Behold the Man whose name is the Branch,] id
est, See in Joshua, thus adorned with Priestly and Princely Ensigns, a plain
similitude and representation of the Messiah, hoped and looked for by all that
expect salvation in Israel. Of this word Branch, we have spoken, chap. 3. verse.
8. where likewise, upon Joshua's investiture with the Priestly garments, the
like application to Christ is made.

2 Particularly amplified by several properties in the Antitype.

1 [He shall grow up out of his place] The promise of his coming shall be
fulfilled, when, as a branch out of a dry stock, he shall spring up [(...)] De
sub se (de dessous soy, Gall.) out of his place, id est, either Propria
virtute, without all help, beyond all likelihood, when David's family seemed
extinct; or, ex Propria gente and sede, viz. Yet we find no mention of that in
the Prophets, unless by allusion, Christ being called (...) as Es. 11.1.
Nazareth or Bethlehem, so long before prophesied of.

2 [He shall build the Temple of the Lord.] And again for further certainty
[Even he shall build the Temple of the Lord.] What Temple? Both: The Material;
which not Joshua's nor Zerubbabels skill and strength could finish, without the
aid and protection of Christ, Chap. 4. verse. 6. and the Spiritual, the
Church, far more excellent than the Material; that should Christ rear up
upon himself, by the power of his Spirit, in his Prophets and Ministers of the
Gospel.

3 [And he shall bear the Glory.] Not thou Joshua, Gal [Sera remplie de
Maiesie.)
albeit thou now wearest these Crowns. The dignity and honor of the Church
is only in the Head Jesus Christ, and from him communicated to the members.
Again, The Jews were now to look for no such outward pomp and splendour,
either in the Prince or Priest, as they had before the Captivity: all things
were abased, that they might the more earnestly look after the Messiah, the
brightness of the Glory, and the excellency of honor. in whom, though not in
outward appearance, should meet in all perfection of both dignities, which
either the Priests had of the family of Aaron, or the Kings of the limage of
David: both which were now almost laid in the dust. But Christ should lift them
up again (...):

4 [And he shall sit and rule upon his Throne, and he shall be a Priest upon
his Throne.] Here is the substance of Joshua's ceremonious inauguration, and
the manner how Christ should bear the Glory, viz. by the glorious conjunction
of two supreme dignities in his most excellent Person, the Kingdom and the
Priesthood; that expressed in the former clause, this in the latter. Here is no
mention of the Prophetical Office of Christ, which, it may be, is but an
appendix of his Priesthood.

5 [And the counsel of Peace shall be between them both.] Not properly
between Joshua and Zerubbabel, who, as Kimhi speaks, (...) should not envy
one another, but (...) consent together as one, in that which they should
undertake; which though it be likely to be most true, yet is not here meant.
Nor yet between the type and antitype, Joshua and Christ; between whom, says
Sanctius, there should be the counsel of peace, id est, an agreement and
likeness, as between the work and the model, the picture and the face. But
this is frigidum nimis and dilutum; I take it, with Iunius, for the general
Apotelesma or Effect, which this sacred conjunction of both Thrones and Offices
of the Kingdom and Priesthood in Christ's Person, should produce in and toward
the Church, viz. Peace and Reconciliation with God, Ephe. 2.13. etc.
together with Safety and Deliverance from all our Spiritual enemies; which
is the benefit we obtain by Christ's Sacrifice and Sovereign authority. And
it is here called the [counsell of Peace] by allusion to the former government
of the Jews State, wherein the King and Priest, several Officers, did take
counsel one with and of another, for the maintenance of Peace and Prosperity
in Church and State. Now likewise the Churches peace should be wrought, though
not by two several persons, yet by virtue of two several Offices meeting in
one: Christ purchasing all peace to his Church by his Priesthood, and
maintayning and defending it by his Kingdom. Verse. 12. So we have the
Ceremony and its meaning: now follows the third particular, viz.

3 A public Memorial and Remembrance of this Solemnity, by the consecration
of these Crowns among other Anathemata, or gifts given unto the Temple: [And
the Crowns shall be to Helem] called verse. 10. Heldai [and to Tobiah, and to
Iedaiah, and to Hen the son of Zephaniah] called verse. 10. Josiah. They were
binomines: and it is but a (...) faith R David.
groundless conceit, that Helem and Hen were put for Heldai and Josiah, as
shorter names, and so fitter to be engraven in the Crowns that were
consecrated. Whether they were engraven or not, is most uncertain; and it
seems sufficient that God had registered the names in this Prophecy, without
further engraving upon the Crowns. [For a Memoriall] (...) a public Monument
and Remembrance; but of what? whether of their Liberality and Piety ((...))
in offering Gold and Silver unto Christ and for the Temple? or of their And so
Calvin, that this was convictio and damnatio Incredusitatis, as well as
testimonium Liberalitatis.
Incredulity and hardness of heart, who would not believe the Promises
without such a visible assurance? or of the former action only, scil. the
typical Coronation of Joshua, that the Crowns, as they were set upon his head
for to signify the Messiah, so should they be hung up in the Temple for a
monument, to put all Spectators in mind of what was promised, and to be
expected shortly? or, as Iunius, to be a testimony and confirmation of Gods
favorable acceptance of all such as should come from afar to worship in the
Temple, and join themselves to the people of God; whether from Babylon, as
these Jews here named, or elsewhere from among the Gentiles, as is inferred in
the next ver. Any one of these ends taken alone, are not large enough to
express the effect of this Monument; as will appear, if all be considered:
wherefore I take the two last purposes to be principally aimed at in this
consecration of the Crowns, though the two first may likewise be included. [In
the Temple of the Lord] How? kept in some Treasury and Cabinet, or hung up in
open view among other costly Donaries and Anathemata's of the Temple. This
rather: as R. Schelomo and Kimhi relate out of the Talmud; that these Crowns
were (...) id est, Suspensae in fenestris versus summitatem Templi. Which, is
probable, was done after the finishing of the Temple. verse, 14.

The last particular in this Prophetical Declaration, is

4 A Promise of access of strangers and far dwellers, unto the people of God
in Iewry, who should help forwards the building of the Temple. [And they that
are far off] How? in Place or in Religion? the Jews in Babylon, or the
Gentiles in all parts? I answer, Both are to be understood by [those afar
off.] Which will appear, if we consider that this Promise and Prophecy has a
double meaning and accomplishment: one in the Material Temple, another in the
Spiritual. Touching the Spiritual Temple, the Church under the Gospel; Vid.
Esa. 60.
it is manifest that all, both near and far off, distant as in Place, so in
Religion and Affection, both Jews and Gentiles, did come together, as living
stones, to build the true Temple, whereof Christ was the foundation. This was
fulfilled at the coming of Christ in the flesh: but this is not all here
meant. Something there must be for the present comfort of the Jews; and this
is a promise of aid in the building of the Material Temple, which the Jews
at home should receive from strangers afar off. And these were partly their
Brethren the Jews residing in Babylon, amongst whom many, out of zeal to
Religion and Gods House, did, after the example of Heldai and the rest, either
bring or send their gifts, and by their presence or purses helped forward the
building: Partly the Gentiles, who either converted, joined with the Jews, as
in their Religion, so in this work (though, I think, but a very few did so in
these miserable discouraging times, till things were better amended) or else
not converted to the Jewish Religion, did nevertheless, moved by Gods Spirit,
greatly further the re-edification of the Temple. And such were the Kings of
Persia, who, immediately after this Prophecy of Zachary, notwithstanding the
bitter accusations of the Jews enemies, did by their command and proper costs,
set forth this Work, as is notably related, Ezr. 6.6. and seq. and chap. 7.20,
and seq. And in after times the Temple was much beautified, even by strangers,
especially Herod the Great, of whose time (...)
Kimhi thinks this is to be meant. Thus then the meaning of the next clause
is plain, [shall come and build in the Temple of the Lord] Either as converted
and truly called from Gentilisme to Iudaisme, or from both to Christianity,
should grow up into an holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.19. etc. or whether
converted or not converted, should afford external aid and assistance to the
Jews, in repairing of their State and Temple. And these are said to build in
the house of God, because they that by their authority or expenses further the
work, may justly be said to build as well as the workmen that lay the stones
and timber. This Promise is amplified two ways.

1. By an Event in the performance of it, viz. the Justification of Zacharies
calling, by the fulfilling of his Prophecies, [And ye shall know that the Lord
has sent me unto you] By what? and when? Not so much by the calling of the
Gentiles and their association to the Church, which was a long time after this;
and the Jews, to whom Zachary speaks, lived not to see it, though Zachary
were also a true Prophet in that too: as in the present help they should have
from such as they little looked for it at their hands. And this was a singular
encouragement to the Jews, and strong confirmation to them that Zachary was a
true Prophet, when they so speedily felt the comfort he foretold them. 2 By the
Condition of its performance; which is their Obedience to Gods commandments.
[And this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the
Lord your God.] This shows, that the former promise is not principally meant
of the Vocation of the Gentiles, or conversion of impenitent Jews in remote
parts. For could the Infidelity and disobedience of these Jews at home,
hinder the working of Gods grace, either in the one or other? It neither did
nor could. But it might hinder the building of the Temple, and cause God to
turn the hearts of men from favoring and forwarding this work: as already it
had done a good while, and might have done longer, upon their obstinacy and
rebellion against the Word of God, delivered by Haggai and Zachary. Verse. 15.
CHAP. VII.
ANd in the fourth year of King Darius, the word of the Lord came unto
Zechariah in the fourth day of the minth month, even in Chisleu,

2 For they had sent unto the House of God Sharezer, and Regem-melech and their
men to pray before the Lord,

3 And to speak unto the Priests, which were in the House of the Lord of
Hosts, and to the Prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month, and
separate my self as I have done these so many years?

4 Then came the Word of the Lord of Hosts unto me, saying,

5 Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the Priests, and say, When
ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even these seventie
years, did ye fast unto me? do I approve it?

6 And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did ye not eat for your
selves, and drink for your selves?

7 Should ye not hear the words, which the Lord has cried by the ministry
of the former Prophets when Jerusalem was inhabited, and in prosperity, and
the cities thereof round about her, when the South and the plain was inhabited?

8 And the word of the Lord came unto Zechariah, saying,

9 Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying, Execute true judgment, and show
mercy and compassion, every man to his brother,

10 And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger nor the
poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.

11 But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped
their ears, that they should not hear.

12 Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the
Law and the words which the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit by the ministry
of the former Prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of hosts.

13 Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear,
so they cried, and I would not hear, says the Lord of hosts.

14 But I scattered them among all the nations, whom they knew not: thus the
land was desolate after them, that no man passed through nor returned: for they
laid the pleasant land waste.

THus of the first Sermon of Zachary: we are come to the second, contained in
the seven and eight chapters; wherein the Prophet at large resolves the Jews,
in a case of Conscience which was proposed to him and other Ecclesiastical
persons, to be decided, touching Fasting. The Sermon is large, and, besides the
resolution of the maine Question, contains many most excellent instructions,
consolations and promises unto this people, as we shall see in order. In these
two chapters therefore, containing one Sermon, we are to consider three things.

1 The Time when this Sermon was preached; which was two whole years and a
month after the former. That was in the eightth month of the second year;
this in the ninth month of the fourth year of Darius. A long vacation. Verse
1.

2 The Occasion, which is an Embassage sent unto the Temple, to consult about a
scruple of Conscience. Where we have to note,

1 The Ambassadors, and the place whither they are sent. [When they had sent]
Who? The persons that send this Embassy, are doubtful: (...) singular for the
plural, says Kimchi, as afterward (...) should I weep, for, should we weep.
whether the whole body of the Jews returned, or the Jews that were in
Babylon, or some particular man not named. Kimhi, Schelomo and Aben Ezra
expound it of the Jews of Babylon, who sent these chief men, with their
traynes, to Jerusalem, to be informed of this matter. Iunius understands it of
the Jews in Iudaea, and so renders it [Quum misisset populus.] And his reason
is most probable, because the Temple being now almost finished, this scruple of
fasting for its overthrow, did more concern them at home, than those in
Babylon: and therefore in a public case they take a good course to send some
worthy persons to the Priests and Prophets, to crave resolution in the name of
all the people. We need not be curious about it: and if they were the Jews of
Babylon that sent, the answer that was given to the messengers, was made unto
them in public, in the * hearing of the Jews at home, Verse 5.
and so fitted them too. [Vnto the House of God] which was now in a good
fowardnesse, and brought to some reasonable perfection; though it were not
finished till two years after this time, viz. in the sixth year of Darius.
Ezr. 6.15.

[Sharezer and Regem-melech.] Here is a strange coil about these men's names,
and the Seventies Translation makes all the trouble, who read it thus; (...).
putting into the Text that which is not there, and making an appellative of a
proper Et e contra in (...).
name. It may be they read (...) backwards, and taking (...) for (...) turned
it (...). It puts Sanctius to his trumpes, to clear the matter, and justify
the Seventie: He thinks the Copies were otherwise which they followed, than
those we have. and for Regem-melech, he supposes, from the similitude of the
sound, that (...) was written in the margent as the the Latin of (...), and
after crept into the Text, and joined with the other. Again, whereas by the
Seventies Translation one of these Ambassadors Or, at least he that sent them
is so styled.
is called (...), it troubles him much to find out how the Jews in Babylon
(from whom he takes this embassy to be sent) should have any Kings among
them in their captivity. And so it may well: for these conceits are strange
and needless. I suppose the Seventies translation is not so authentical, but
it may be called in question, and corruption rather laid upon it than the
Hebrew Original: And for that which we now have, it is so full of errors,
that we may justly think, either we have not the right Translation of those
Seventy, or that its false of them, that Divino spiritu afflati in Graecum
sermonem Scripturam converterunt, De Doct. Christ, l. 2. cap. 15.
as Sanctius affirms they did, out of S. * Austin. Let us take the names as
they lie plainly in the Original and Chaldee Paraphrast, for the names of two
worthy men that were chief in this Embassage. (...) Viros ejus, referring it
to Regem-melec next before. Iu^. Viros suos, with reference to both, and so we
Transl. [their men] for (...) as Chap. 9.7.
[and their men] which accompanied these two principal personages in this
honorable employment.

2 The Cause of their Coming; which is double.

1 To perform their solemn Worship of God in the Temple [to pray before the
Lord] id est, to offer sacrifice, and therewithal their prayers, unto God.
Both meant by that phrase (...) as 1. King. 13.6. by prayers. 1. Sam. 13.12. by
sacrifice. and passim. And though the Temple were not finished at this time,
nor the whole course of Gods worship set in order, yet the Altar of burnt
sacrifices was set up at the very first return, and the order of sacrificing
thereon observed, as it is Ezr. 3.1. and seqq. Verse 2.

2 To be resolved in a Case of Conscience. In their inquiry, we have set down
to us,

1 The Persons to whom the Question is proposed: they are the Priests and the
Prophets, who ought in such cases to be Mal. 2.7.
consulted. [And to speak unto the Priests that were in the House of the Lord
of Hosts] attended on the Service there, and also dwelt within the circuits of
the Temple. [and to the Prophets] viz. Haggai, Zachary, and Malachy, says
Kimhi: if Malachy lived in these times.

2 The Question it self is touching a point of religious practice, in the
Observation of a Voluntary Fast, which the Jews had taken up and used a long
time, in memory of the burning of the Temple. [Should I weepe] id est, Fast,
by a Metonymie of the Adjunct; Weeping being always a part of such
humiliation. [In the fifth moneth] wherein the Temple was burnt, viz. the tenth
day of that month wherein the Temple was consumed to ashes, Ier. 5.12. three
days after the coming of Nebuzaradan, 2. King. 25.8. This tenth, or, as
Iunius says, the ninth, the day before it, the Jews kept as a sorrowful day.
[ (...) Sanct. drawn it to the vows of Nazaretes, dreaming, I believe, of a
Monks Cowle.
Separating my selfe] (...) from meat, drink, and other delights, says
Kimhi: abstaining from all bodily comforts, the more vehemently to afflict my
soul. See the manner of a Fast, Joel 2.15. etc. [As I have done these so many
yeares] viz. seventie years, as it is verse 5. Or, all the time since the
Temple was destroyed: of which, Chap. 1. And old Customs would not be left
off. Here is then the sum of the Question, Whether the Jews, having by
agreement among themselves, for a long time observed a day of Fasting, in
remembrance of the Temples destruction, ought now, the Temple almost repaired
and finished, to lay down this custom, or observe it still? Concerning which
Question, we are to observe two things: 1. That whereas the Jews observed
four days of fasting, in memory of their ruined State and Temple, they only
propose the question touching one, viz. That for the Temple. The Reason I
guess at, is, Because the Temple only was in greatest forwardness toward
perfect restoration: but for the re-building of the City of Jerusalem, and
re-collection of their dispersion, they were things unlikely to come to pass
yet; and therefore they thought that it was not amiss to fast still in that
respect. The Prophet in his answer includes them all four, there being the
same reason of one as of another. 2. That whatsoever solemnity or show of
Conscience these used in the proposal of this Question, the Prophet seems to
slight them, as making much ado about a trifle. And by his answer, we may
plainly gather, that these Casuists were in this matter guilty of a double
fault: 1. Hypocrisy, sending a serious Embassage about a needelesse Ceremony,
neglecting in the mean time the substance of Mercy and Piety. 2. (...) says
Kimchi.
Incredulity and Distrust of the fulfilling of Gods Promises, touching the
restoring of their Church and State: Which is apparent by their Practice; else
why did they make any doubt to surcease fasting for the ruin of the Temple,
if, when now they saw it before their eyes well nigh finished, they had yet
believed it would shortly have been fully repaired? Would not reason teach
them, that it was unreasonable to fast for the old, when they had a new;
especially their fasting being but a practice of their own devising? Again,
why were they silent of the other fasts, and touch only upon this? there is a
Core in that. Certainly, had they fully believed the Promises which God had
made unto them, by the preaching of Haggai, Zachary, and other Prophets
before, they might have seen more cause of joy, than of grief at this time.
These things will more clearly appear in the opening of the Prophets answer.
Come we (therefore in the third place to

3. The Sermon it self. Where, besides the Preacher and his authority, verse.
4. we have

1. The Auditors, the People and the Priests [And speak unto all the People of
the Land] Whosoever were the Ambassadors, and from whomsoever. We see, as the
Cause was common, so the Answer was public, in the hearing of all the People
in Iudaea: And not to them only; but speak also [to the Priests] They that
should have given Resolution to the People, must themselves have Reformation
from the Prophet. They belike had been the Authors of these Customs to the
People, and were themselves observers of them; and so knew not what to say in
the matter.

2. The Substance and Matter of the Sermon: Which divides it self into two
general parts:

1. The Preface unto the maine Answer it self: which is large, stretching it
self to the 16. verse. of the Chapter: the Prophet, even by the manner of his
answering, teaching the People, that there were other things of greater moment
to be looked unto, than their Ceremonious Fastings. Of which he discourses at
large: of these but in a word or two. This Preface contains excellent Matter,
and that of two sorts:

1. Reprehension of their preposterous Course, in standing much upon their own
Inventions and outward Observations, but neglecting Gods Commandment, and
their Obedience unto it. And this reaches to the end of the seventh Chapter:
wherein the Prophet discovers the Hypocrisy of this People, who seemed to
make a Conscience of their own Institutions, but cared not for Gods Precepts;
and who thought, that God would be well pleased with such outward Sacrifices
and Ceremonies, though his voice was not obeyed. This Reproof consists of
two Branches:

1. A plain Denial, that their Fasts were either commanded by God, or
acceptable to him. [When ye fasted and mourned in the fift] for the Reason
before: [And in the seventh Moneth] for the slaughter of Gedaliah: Upon whose
death followed the utter dispersion of the Remainder of the Jews, into Egypt
and other Parts, 2. Kings 25.22. etc. and Jeremy 41. [Even those seventie
yeares] during the time of the Captivity, and since, until this time [Did ye
fast at all Pour l'amour de moy voire, pour l'amour de moy. Gall. i.e. For my
sake.
unto me?] A vehement Interrogation, for a vehement Denial, [Yee did not at
all fast unto me.] And this again by an Emphaticall Repetition and
Provocation to their Consciences; Did ye fast to me? [Even unto me?] No, ye
did not. To whom then? to your selves. Which will appear, if the meaning of
this Phrase [unto me] be explaned. To fast unto God has a double Meaning: 1.
Either for the Time, to observe such a day of solemn humiliation, as Gods
Commandment somewhere or other has limited unto us. 2. Or for the Manner,
(which is the principal) when we observe a day of fasting by such Exercises,
with such Affections, and for such Ends, as Gods Word prescribes unto us,
albeit the time be of our own appointment. Now these Fasts of the Jews, were
neither for the one or other Unto God. For neither had God any where commanded
them to observe such Days of Fasting, neither did the Jews observe them in
that Manner, as such times of Humiliation should be spent. They grieved for
the Destruction of the Temple, they wept, and took on for the Ruin of their
State, and sighed under the burden of their present Misery: But all this was
no occasion either of Remembrance and Repentance for Sins past, or Amendment
for after times, whereby to remove Gods wrath that lay on them. These Fasts
were occasioned by some calamities about the time of their Captivity. Hieron.
in Zach. 8.18, 19. and do continue amongst the Jews to this day. Bux dorf.
Syn. seduct c. 25 Genebr. calend. Hebr. Sept. 3. December. 10. Iun. 17. and Iul.
9. Haec Iejunia asserit Propheta non multum probari Domine quod ea non
instituisset, illaque observarentur a Iudae is ipsis citra pietatem Vatupl.
Ieiunia quae apud Zachariam cap. 7. commemorantur; nec a Deo Imperata, nec ei
valde grata, aut rata; sed temporaria dunta xat fuerunt, luctuosissimo illo
captivitatis tempore usurpata. Tilon. not. in Bell. de Pont. lib. 4. c. 16.
Not. 84.
Such carnal and worldly Sorrow little pleased God: And therefore the Prophet
tells them, they fasted not unto God, but unto themselves: As their own
Authority without Gods Command had set up those Fasts, so their own Ends, not
Gods, were aimed at in such Exercises. The truth is, these Fasts (appointed by
the Jews upon such singular occasions) were in themselves good and lawful,
had they been observed as Exercises of Piety and Repentance: but as they kept
them in satisfaction to their Carnal humors (going no further than the
outward Ceremony) they were not pleasing unto Ged. Verse 5.

This the Prophet further proves by Comparison with the Contrary: You aimed at
Gods glory in your Abstinence, even as much as you did in your Eating and
Drinking. But you did eat and drink for your selves, when, and in what manner
you liked best, for your own health or pleasure: so was your Fasting a Matter
to give your selves Contentment, without any further respect of Gods Glory, or
increase of your own Piety. [And when ye did eat and drink etc.] Verse 6.

2. A plain Declaration of the Reason, why God cared not for their Fastings,
by showing their neglect of that which was most commanded by God, and
acceptable to him: and that is in one word, their Obedience to God. The neglect
whereof is so described by the Prophet, as he shows it was not only the Cause
why now their Fasts were not commen dable, but also the Occasion that brought
them to this course of Fasting, by ruining their State, in remembrance whereof
they sorrow; which they need not have done, if they would have obeyed the voice
of God. This brought them to Misery, and in it makes them more miserable. The
Prophet therefore touches them to the quick, and opens their Ulcer of
Hypocrisy and Disobedience, that were plaistered over with Ceremonious shows
of Fastings and other pious Exercises. This he does two ways:

1. In a short and round Reproof, summarily thus; You remember your miseries,
but you forget your rebellions, that have caused it; you mourn for your
afflictions, but you think not on your Duty that should remove them. Its not
your Fasting that God regards: Where Is your Repentance for former Disobedience?
Where Is your present Obedience to his Word? [Should ye not hear the words?]
(...) A concise and short kind of speaking, well befitting a sharp Reproof.
The Vulgar and the French made it otherwise [Are not these the words?] As if
the Prophet had said, (Ne sont ce pas les paroles)
You need not come to us now for Resolution in the Point of Fasting, the
Prophets As Esaias 58.
before us have showed you, what Gods will is touching that Point; and we tell
you but what they have already said, though you have not heeded it. But I
conceive the sense runs much smoother the other way; and (...) the Article of
the accusative Case, shows an ellipsis of a Verb, which the sense of the
place easily supplies. [Which the Lord has cried by the former Prophets]
exhorting to Repentance and Obedience, threatening Destruction for Rebellion.
You should have obeyed Gods Command by them, who by preaching and writing have
showed you what is acceptable and well-pleasing; even to humble your selves,
and walk obediently, etc. Neglect this, and all your Fasting is to no purpose.
Which the Prophet further shows, by a close Comparison of the present Estate
of things, with the former times wherein those Prophets lived. The Temple and
Commonwealth then stood, and flourished; but the People were wicked: Justice
and Religion were forsaken, except in show and ceremony: the Prophets cried
out against those courses, but there was no amendment. And therefore all is
now brought to ruin, as you see before your eyes. So little does God care for
outward formalitie, where true Piety and goodness is wanting. [When Jerusalem
was inhabited] Not thinly and poorly as now, but populously: And more than so,
[in prosperitie] too, or peaceably, as now it is not [And the Cities thereof
round about her] Throughout the whole Country, ven in those places that were
most dangerous, and least defenced [When men inhabited the South of the Plaine]
Or, the South, and the Plain (...) 2. In a larger Amplification of their
Disobedience, the Cause that made their Fasts not acceptable. The Prophet had
briefly told them, that their hearkening to the words of the Prophets was that
which God more looked for, than their fastings; and that their Disobedience in
that kind had brought Desolation upon them, notwithstanding all their
religious observations in this But they would be apt to mis-understand him:
wherefore he comes to particulars with them, and in their Fathers Example, lets
them see what themselves were, and what they should likewise expect, if they
amended not. He therefore sets before them
1. The Commandment and Word of God by the former Prophets: whereunto God
required the Peoples Obedience; and that was summarily, To be just and
charitable toward their Neighbors. Not but that God did command the Duties of
the First, as well as of the Second Table: But those are nothing worth without
these; and the true Observation of the Last, is a Trial of the holy
Performance of the First. [And the Word of the Lord etc.] Verse 8. [Thus
speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying] The Commandment concerns general Duties
toward our Neighbor:

1. External, in the outward work: either 1. Public in Magistrates [Execute
true judgment.] 2. Private in each toward other. 1. Doing good out of a
Willing mind [Shew Mercie] (...) kind and favorable Dealing: and this out of
the Bowels of a tender affectionate Love to our Brethren, (...) [And
Compassions every man to his Brother] or Neighbor, who is our Brother, and so
to be loved, and well used. Verse 9. 2. Forbearing to hurt there especially,
where we have most advantage, by reason of others weakness and inabilitie to
save themselves harmless, or offend us [Oppresse not the Widow, nor the
Fatherless, the Stranger, nor the Poor.]

2. Internal, in the inward thought of the Heart, the root and beginning of
outward violence and wrong [And let none of you imagine evil against his
Brother in your heart] Verse 10.
2. The Disobedience of the Jews to this Commandment, set forth by its worst
quality, viz. it was wilful Disobedience, obstinate Stubbornness and
Intractablenesse. Which is expresled by diverse Similitudes, all tending to one
purpose: [They refused to hearken] [They pulled away the shoulder] As Oxen that
shrink back from the yoke: Or as he that should carry a Burden, but pulls
away his shoulder when he should take it on him, and lets it fall. So did
these Jews deal with the easy yoke, and light burden of Gods Commandments,
[And stopped their ear, that they should not heare] An Argument of extreme
Contempt, and Hatred of the Speaker, for the Hearer to stop his ears at him.
They stopped] (...) aggrauarunt, made heavy their ears. A Metaphor from some
Weight, hung upon the hands or feet, which make a man unfit for service: and
thence generally taken for any So Exodus 4.20. Ezekiel. 2.5. (...) Gravis lingua.
impediment, which hinders the execution of any thing. And therefore may well
be rendered here, [stopped] Verse 11. The cause of all this untowardnesse comes
from within [Yea, they made their hearts hard as an Adamant] There was in them
a stiff and wilful Resolution to sin: Which they increased to the height of
a malicious Stubbornenesse, by continual opposition against all means of
Repentance: Vide Ezekiel. 11.19.36.26.
whereby their Hearts became as hard and intractable to any goodness, as the
hardest sort of Stones, Flints, or Diamonds, are to be wrought by the Tool
into any Fashion we desire. [As an Adamant] (...) Iunius renders it, Lapis
perdiuturnus, quasi servabilis; A Stone of long continuance, viz. by reason of
its hardness. The Targum (...) of the same Derivation: but by it the word
(...) Silex, a Flint, or hard Rock is rendered. Psalm 114.8. (...) Targum
(...) and Job 28.9. (...) Targum (...) So that we may take it for a Flint as
well as a Diamond: though generally it is rendered Diamond, Adamant, in this
place, and Ier. 17.1. also Ezekiel. 3.9. Because it is the hardest of Stones (...)
harder than a Flint, as our last Translators read it. Targum (...) quam Petra.
R. David takes it generally for a hard Stone that cannot be graven with iron;
(...) And that is sufficient to the meaning of this place, viz. That Gods Word
would make no impression of Remorse and Reformation in them. [Lest thou
should hear the Law] To the end they might not obey, either the Law
delivered by Moses, and proved for the first and general Instruction of the
Church; or else the particular instructions which were given unto the Church by
the Prophets in after times, sent by God as occasion required. [And the words
which the Lord of Hosts has sent in his Spirit by the former Prophets] who
spoke as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost. And so the Disobedience which
these Jews showed to their words, was not only the despising of the Prophets,
but a Rebellion against the Spirit of God: as Acts 7.51.

3. The Punishment that came upon the Jews for their Rebellion: which is

1. Generally, expressed in these words [Therefore there came a great wrath
from the Lord of Hostes] A great Punishment, the effect of great anger and
displeasure. Verse 12. 2. Particularly amplified, 1. By the Justice and Equity
of it. When their Misery came upon them God neglected them, Vide Pro. 1.20
(...) seq.
because in heir Prosperity they had neglected him. [Therefore it is come to
passe] by a most just and equal Retaliation [That as he cried] by his
Prophets early and late calling upon them to repent and amend, [And they
would not heare] obey his voice, and reform their manners, [So they cryed] in
their calamities for help and succor, [And I would not hear, says the Lord
of Hosts] to releeve and comfort them; but left them helpelesse in the hands of
their Enemies. Verse 13. 2. By the Nature and kind of it: A Violent driving
them forth into Banishment into strange Countries [ But I (...) a word (...)
says Kimchi, that follows not any Rules of Grammar. He, following his Father
Joseph Kimchi, expounds it thus, (...) i. e. (...) turbabor cum ipsis, or, that
is (...) ego turbatus sum cum eis in captivitate: Noting Gods compassionate
feeling of their Misery; according to that (...) in their affliction he was
afflicted: which is spoken (...) to our capacity. The Paraphrast takes it
actively, for (...) and renders it (...) dispergans cos.
scattered them with a Whirl-winde] violently and suddenly. And it appears by
the Story, how quick a dispatch Nebuchadnezzar and his Captains made with
this Nation, sweeping them away like a violent Tempest. [Among all Nations whom
they knew not] Assyrians, Egyptians, Edomites, Moabites, etc. strangers to the
Jews in affection and in Religion. 3. By the Consequent of it: An utter
Desolation of the whole Country after such time as the People were emptied out
of it. [Thus the Land was desolate after them, and no man passed through or
returned] Which passage is very remarkable and strange, giving us to
understand, that this Country of Iudaea, wherein the Tribes of Judah and
Benjamin inhabited, after the People were carried into Captivity, lay utterly
waste, without any Inhabitant, for the space of seventie years. Insomuch, that
after the slaughter of Gedaliah, when all the remainder of the People, Man,
Woman and Child, fled into Epypt, there was not a lew left in the Country.
And, being thus left empty of its natural Inhabitants, we find not, that
there were any Colonies sent from other Countries by the King of Babylons
Command, to plant themselves in the Jews room; as in the Captivity of the
Ten Tribes there had been by the Command of the Assyrian Monarch: or that
the neighboring Nations, though happily they might make inrodes to spoil the
Country of the Riches that was left, did come and dwell in the empty Cities.
Nor do we find, that at the return of the Jews, there were any displaced
to make them room, either by force, or fair means, A wonderful Providence,
that a pleasant Country (left destitute of Inhabitants, and compassed about
with warlike Nations) was not invaded, and re-planted by Forreiners for
seventie years space. But the Land, though it had cast out her Inhabitants for
a while, would not yet admit of strangers, till it had finally vomited them
out, as now it has done. The Naturals were within seventie years to return,
and God keeps the room empty all that while for them, and Forreiners desired
not their Country. And this indeed was that which God threatens, that for
seventie years, the Land should enjoy her Sabbaths, resting from tillage, 2
Chro. 26.21. Ler. 26.3^, 35.
and all other employments, whereunto Inhabitants use to put it.

Now the blame of all this, is laid where the fault was: it was not the
Babylonians, but the Jews, that wasted their own Land, their sin did more
spoil, than the others armies, [For they laid the pleasant Land desolate] i.
e. Palaestina: which was laid waste through Gods anger, provoked by the Peoples
sins. Verse 14.

And thus we have the first part of the Preface, containing Matter of
Reprehension of the Peoples Hypocrisy and Disobedience to the Law: exemplified
in the like of their Fathers, with its Punishment, that in and by them these
might see what themselves were, and what And the Verbes in the future Tense
(...) do import so much.
should likewise befall them without amendment. Even they also should call,
and not be heard; they should be scattered in fury over all the earth,
leaving their own Land desolate of its natural Inhabitants, as it is this day.

CHAP. VIII.
Again the Word of the Lord of Hosts came to me, saying,

2 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy,
and I was jealous for her with great wrath.

3 Thus says the Lord, I will return unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst
of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shall be called a City of truth, and the
Mountain of the Lord of Hosts, the holy Mountain.

4 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, There shall yet old Men, and old Women dwell
in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand for very
age.

5 And the streets of the City shall be full of Boys and Girls, playing in
the streets thereof.

6 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Though it be unpossible in the eyes of the
remnant of this People in these days: should it therefore fore be unpossible
in my sight, says the Lord of Hosts?

7 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Behold, I will deliver my people from the East
Country, and from the West Country.

8 And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and
they shall be my People, and I will be their God in truth and in
righteousness.

9 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Let your hands be strong, ye that hear in
these days these words by the mouth of the Prophets, which were in the day
that the Foundation of the house of the Lord of hosts was laid, that the
Temple might be builded.

10 For before these days there was no hire for man, nor any hire for beast,
neither was there any peace to him that went out, or came in, because of the
affliction: for I set all men, every one against his neighbor.

11 But now, I will not entreat the residue of this People as aforetime, says
the Lord of Hosts.

12 For the seed shall be prosperous: the vine shall give her fruit, and the
ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their deaw, and I
will cause the remnant of this People to possess all these things.

13 And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a curse among the Heathen, O
house of Judah, and house of Israel, so will I deliver you, and ye shall be a
blessing: fear not, but let your hands be strong.

14 For thus says the Lord of Hosts, As I thought to punish you, when your
Fathers provoked me unto wrath, says the Lord of hosts, and repented not.

15 So again have I determined in these days to do well unto Jerusalem, and
to the house of Judah: fear ye not.

16 These are the things that ye shall do, Speak ye every man the truth unto
his Neighbor: execute judgment truly, and uprightly in your Gates.

17 And let none of you imagine evil in your bearts against his Neighbor, and
love no false oath: for all these are the things that I hate, says the Lord.

18 And the Word of the Lord of Hosts came unto me. saying,

19 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, The Fast of the fourth month, and the Fast
of the fifth, and the Fast of the seventh, and the Fast of the tenth, shall be
to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and prosperous high Feasts: therefore
love the truth and peace.

20 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, That there shall yet come People, and the
inhabitants of great Cities.

21 And they that dwell in one City, shall go to another, saying, Up, let us
go and pray before the Lord, and seek the Lord of hosts: I will go also.

22 Yea, great People and mighty Nations shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts
in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord.

23 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, In those days shall ten men take hold out of
all languages of the Nations, even take bold of the skirts of him that is a
lew, and say, We will go with you: for we have heard, that God is with you.

The second part of the Praeface is,

2. COnsolation against all such discouragements as caused them to distrust the
good success of things: and this is opposed to their second fault, viz. their
Unbelief. The Prophet arms them against this by many comfortable Promises:

1. Of Gods Favor and Reconcilement with them for the present; set forth under
a similitude of an Husband, casting off his disloyal Wife, and taking her,
upon amendment, into his Favor again. The Promise is Verse 3. in these
words, [Thus says the Lord, I am returned unto Zion] my Church and People: and
that not for a little while, but [And will dwell in the midst of Ierusalem]
Which I had for a while forsaken; but now am come again, to make the temple
the place of my glory and worship: wherein my People shall honor me, and I
will protect them. This Promise of Grace and Favor is amplified two ways:

1. By the Contrary, his former Displeasure with his Church: Which, with its
Cause, is expressed, Verse 2. [Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I was jealous for
Zion with a great jealousie] Jealousy is a mixed Passion in an Husband,
consisting, as of most tender love to his Wife, and all careful Provision for
hers and his own honor, so of most furious Rage and Revenge where this is
violated. Both are comprised in this Verse, in the first Clause, Gods exceeding
great Care and Love to the Church of the Jews, in affording them all things
that might be for their safety and his own glory, by their pure worship and
service of him. But lerusalem played the Harlot, and broke Faith with God;
therefore in the next Clause he was wroth with her [ And I was, (or have
been) jealous for her (or, of her) with great fury] punishing her with
Rejection and Banishment of her Country. And this Interpretation, which refers
this [Great fury] of God, not unto the Punishment of the Babylonians, and other
Enemies that miserably afflicted the Church of the Jews, but unto the
Punishment of the Jews themselves; seems very agreeable, as to the Nature of
Jealousy, so this Place. One difficulty there is in the reading, (...) I was
jealous [for her] which must be taken in the good part, that for her sake God
had punished her Enemies that hurt her: and so (...) construed with (...) is
generally taken in the good sense, and signifies properly not Jealousy,
Zolotypia, but Zelus, Zeal. Between which, I take it, a Difference must be
made, Zeal being more general, a vehement Affection of Love, with an eager
Indignation against that thing or person which hurts the thing Loved:
Jealousy, a more special Affection in Married Persons, whose beginning is
Love with a discreet Observation of each others Demeanor: which, upon just or
evil suspicion of false dealing, is alienated, upon plain conviction quite
turned into Rage and extreme Displeasure against the party delinquent. Now it
is true, God was both zealous for Zion in punishing her Enemies that hurt her,
and jealous over her too, being wrath with her for offending him: But me
thinks this latter suits the place better, and (...) may be rendered not
unfitly [Over her] or [Of her] And so the French turn it in the former Clause
of the verse, who read it thus, [I have been jealous of Zion with great
jealousy, and I have been jealous for her with great Furie] altering the
manner of speech. Quaere. Happily these words may be taken in the same sense; as
Chap. 1. Verse 14. for Gods wrath against the Adversaries of the Church, whom
he punishes for the Love he bears to his Church. But it would be enquired,
why our Translators in the former place render [I am jealous] but here [I was
etc.] Ergo quaere ult. So the Paraphrast.
2. By the Effect of Gods return and re-inhabitation in Jerusalem, viz. The
re-establishment of his pure Worship and Service among the Jews [And Jerusalem
shall be called a City of Truth] Not only passively, because God should truly
perform all his Promises toward her, but also, and rather, actively, of that
true Worship of God, which should be maintained and professed in Jerusalem; the
only place in the World, where God was worshipped aright: all others being
full of Error, Superstition, and abominable Idolatry. So that, whereas
Jerusalem had before the Captivity been a Harlot, and broken Covenant with
God, by corrupting his Worship; and was therefore cast off, and punished in
Gods jealous Anger: now henceforth she should be (...) or, which is the same,
Esaias 1.21.27
(...) Civitas fidelitatis, or fidelis, The faithful City; observing Faith
and Loyalty toward God, in cleaving constantly to his sincere Worship. Which
also we find that they did from the Captivity till Christ: preserving the
maine of Gods Worship pure, and never falling to the open Profession of
Idolatry, as in former times they had done; though in Doctrine and Manners
there crept-in many Corruptions. And their final rejection was not, as in
former times, for Idolatry, but for stiff persevering in Iudaisme, rejecting
Christ and Christianity. [And the Mountain of the Lord of hosts, the holy
Mountaine] i.e. Literally, the place whereon the Temple was built, which had
layne polluted and profaned under the Ruins and Desolation of the Temple so
many years; should again be styled as of old ^^e has been.
The holy Mountain; because of an holy Temple thereon re-edified, and the holy
Worship of God therein performed. If we shall extend this and the former
Clause to a Typical Meaning, understanding them of the True Church, whereof
Jerusalem, and this holy Mountain were Figures, it may be done without
Absurdity: But I think, with Sanctius, that this Chapter ought not to be
wholly interpreted of the Spiritual Jerusalem, as Ribera, and others expound
it: but that it has its truth and accomplishment in all particulars in the
earthly Jerusalem; as will appear, Verse 2.
2. The second Promise (which, with the rest, is an effect of the first) is of
a Peaceable and Ample Estate. Though now they were few in number, and by reason
of Wars and other Troubles, not likely to increase to any great Multitudes,
or to live in Peace; yet God promises they shall do both. Which is set forth
by two special adjuncts or companions of a Quiet and flourishing State:

1. Long life of aged Persons [Thus says the Lord of hosts, There shall yet
Old Men, and Old Women, dwell in the Streets of Ierusalem] which now lay
desolate and unfrequented: they should be re-peopled in Peace, and for a long
Continuance, and they that were now yongue should live quietly in it till old
Age, yea, till decrepit old Age, [And every or, every one.
man his staff in his hand for very Age] A sign of a prosperous State,
wherein men are not cut off untimely by Wars and such like Calamities. See 1 Samuel 2.31. Lam. 2.20, 21, 22. and Lam. 5.11, 12, 13, 14. Verse 4. 2. Multitudes
of yongue Children sporting in the Streets, [And the streets of the City shall
be full of Boys and Girles] That Is a sign of Fruitfulness and Increase in a
State: The next of Peace and Security, [Playing in the Streets thereof] After
the fashion of Children, in Towns peaceably inhabited In time of War and
common Calamity it is otherwise. Verse 5. Now this Promise seemed strange to the
Jews, the present state of things being considered: Wherefore God, by way of
Prevention, confirms his Promise by an Argument from his Power, opposed to
their incredulity: the sum is this, That which seems unpossible or
unprobable in man's eyes, does not seem so in Gods, who can easily bring to
pass, what is to man most difficult. [Thus says the Lord of Hosts, If it
seem mavelous in the eyes of the remnant of this People] And therefore,
because but a poor remnant of a populous Nation [Should it be mavelous in my
eyes, Genesis 18.14. Romans 4.20, 21. Luc. 1.37.
says the Lord of Hosts?] No: what is unpossible with man, is possible with
God. Verse 6.
3. The Promise of Re-collection of the dispersed Jews, and restoring them to
their own home. [Thus says the Lord, I will save my People] i. e. The
scattered Jews: for of them I conceive the place is literally meant, howsoever
it may be mystically applied to the Church. [from the East Country, and from
the West Country] i.e. From all quarters of the World where they have been
dispersed: which by Synecdoche are meant, by the rising and setting of the
Sun; as is plain, Psalm. 113.3. Mal. 1.11. Psalm. 50.1. For, though the Jews
were chiefly driven into Babylon, and thence brought home again: yet was their
dispersion into other parts also; whence, upon the Restoration of their State,
those whose hearts God touched, did repair to Iudaea. See Chap. 2. v. 6. [And
I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Ierusalem] As without
doubt they did, though not all, nor all at one time. In five hundred years, so
long was the time between the Captivity and Christ, many things might fall out
which Prophesies speak of, and Stories mention not. And Stories of those times
being greatly defective, they are (me thinks) not well advised, who deny that
these Prophesies can be meant of the temporal Jerusalem, because they find
not the accomplishment of every particular related by Historians.

This Promise of re-calling them is amplified and confirmed by the End of their
coming home; which is also the Cause of their restoring. God, for his part,
was mindful of his Covenant, though he seemed to forget them; and therefore
would restore them: They, for their part, must be mindful of their
Obedience, being restored. And then God would renew his Covenant again with
them; as it is in the words following. Which express unto us

1. The Covenant, in a mutual stipulation, [They shall be my People, and I
will be their God] A solemn and usual form in Scripture to express the
Contract and Bargain, that is made between God and his Church, for Subjection
in her, and Protection in him.

2. The Manner and Condition of the Covenant on

1. Gods part, Truth, [in Truth] Certain and assured fulfilling of all
Promises of Grace and Favor which God makes to his Church. 2. Man's part,
Righteousness [And in Righteousnesse] i.e. On condition of Obedience to all
the Commandments of God. Verse. 7.8.
Unto these former Promises, the Prophet adds an earnest Exhortation unto the
People, not to be discouraged, but to take heart against all occasions of
distrust and fear. Which Exhortation he presses with much variety and force
of Argument, from the 9. to the Verse. wherein we have,

1. The Exhortation it self, which is, That they would resolutely and
cheerfully go on in all Undertakings for the finishing of the Temple,
restoring Gods Worship, and ordering of the State, upon Assurance and
Confidence of Gods Assistance. [Thus says the Lord of hosts, Let your hands
be stronge] And, not your hearts? Yes: your hearts in Faith, and then your
hands in Employment, viz. about the Temple, and all things belonging to the
public Service of God, and good of the State. Be not faint hearted, nor weak
handed in setting them forward.

2. The Confirmation and Enforcement of it: which is triple,

1. By Experiments: which is double,

1. In the Preaching of the Prophets: q. d. you may trust them whom you have
tried, and take comfort by the Promises and Exhortations they now make unto
you, who have formerly found them no Liars. [Yee that hear in these dayes]
viz. the fourth year of Darius [these words] promises, and exhortations [by
the mouth of the Prophets] viz. Haggai, and Zachary, who at this time
prophesied unto the Jews. [Which were in the day that the Foundation of the
house of the Lord of hosts was laid, that the Temple might be built] What day
was that? We have it related, Ezra 3.8. It was in the second Month of the
second year of the Peoples return from Captivity; that is, in the second
year of Cyrus: From whence, unto the fourth of Darius Nothus, are one hundred
and eight years. But what, were Haggai and Zachary Prophets then at that time?
Sure they must now be of a great Age, about an hundred and forty years old,
supposing them to be about thirty at the laying of the Foundation of the
Temple: which by the term of [yongue man] given to Zachary, Chap. 2.4. seems
not likely. And where are all their Sermons in that long space? or did they
prophecy at the laying of the Foundation, and after for an hundred and eight
years hold their peace, during the time the People neglected the building of
the Temple? It cannot be thought. Sanctius therefore takes the laying of the
Foundation of the Temple, not to be properly meant, but to be understood, for
the Continuation of the Work, which had been so long time interrupted, and
then taken in hand again. Which may seem to be a new beginning of the Work;
as Ezra 5.2. [They began to build] though they had begun before, Chap. 3.8.
And then the meaning of the words lie thus, [In the day that the Foundation of
the Lords house was layd] (...) the House was founded, i.e. Reared and set upon
its Foundation formerly laid. Now Zerubbabel and Iehoshua began to go in
hand with the finishing of the Temple, the second year of this Darius, upon
the Prophecy of Haggai in the sixth and ninth Month of that year, Hag. 1.1.
and 2.11. and of Zachary in the eight Month of the same year, Zach. 1.1. In
the ninth Month of the second year, it appears that the Work went forward:
before which time they had been plagued with Famine, and after that God
blessed them with increase; as is plain, Hag. 2.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. verses.
From that ninth Month of the second year, to the ninth Month of this fourth
year, wherein Zachary now preached, was two whole years: Wherein, as the
Work of the Temple still went forward; so God still continued his Blessings on
them. And therefore Zachary brings this as a Motive to persuade the People to
Faith and Obedience to his Words now, by two years experience which they had
had of the truth of his, and his Colleagues former Prophesies. This
Interpretation seems to run smooth enough, and has nothing harsh in it,
except that of Laying the Foundation, for, Yet in Haggai there is somewhat that
sounds like it: for, Chap. 2. verse. ^8 that is called laying of a Foundation,
which verse 15. is termed, laying of a stone upon a stone, viz. of the building
upon the Foundation.
Finishing upon the Foundation. Our old and new Translation seem^ plainly to
speak of the very first Foundation of the Temple, [The Foundation was laid,
that the Temple might be built] distinguishing the rearing of the Walls from
laying the Foundation. And Iunius more plainly, [ (...) dure redditur (ex quo
die) pro (qui suerunt in die).
Ex quo die fundata est domus Iehovae, I emplu n aedificandum fuisse] viz. The
Prophets that were at the first founding of the Temple, told the People then,
and ever after, that the Temple was to be built: i. e. Fuisse pergendum in
aedificatione, That they were to go forward with the Building. To the same
meaning the French Translators, who read this place thus, [Vaus qui oyez, etc.
i.e. You that hear in these days, these words by the mouth of the Prophets,
in whose days was laid the Foundation of the house of the Lord of Hosts]
joining (...) unto the former words (...) per appositionem. Which rendering
seems very good.
which is the Temple, that it might be re-edified, [Let your hands be strong]
But if we take it precisely thus, for the time of laying the first Foundation,
we must say, that either this Darius was not Nothus, but the Son of
Hystaspes; or that Haggai and Zachary were now very old men, and either had
not preached at all for one hundred and eight years; or had but ill success
all that while. Ergoquaere.

2. In the Event which they had found by Experience to answer the Prophets
preachings: viz. A present Redress of their formerly most miserable and
afflicted estate. Their present Comfort is set forth under its Opposite, Their
former Misery: which would best discover it. Their Misery was threefold:

1. Famine. [For before these dayes] wherein the building of the Temple, long
neglected, was taken in hand, [There was no hire for man, nor any hire for
beast] i. e. No fruit nor commodity came by the labor of man or beast: The
Earth did not pay for the tillage and manuring, by yielding sufficient for the
food of man or beast, as it is Hag. 1. 2. Wars and Danger from Enemies round
about them, who by incursions and invasions did vex and disquiet them.
[Neyther was there any Peace to him that went or came in] at home, or abroad,
in City, or Country: wheresoever, and about whatsoever they went, they had no
security, but were in danger of the Enemy. [ Because of the affliction ( lege,
Targum (...)
as Iunius) of the Enemy (...)] Whom, though God so restrained, that they did
not as yet (for ought we find) by great Armies, and strong Invasions set upon
this poor remnant of People; yet by smaller Troops they did rob and spoil
them; and out of their own hatred of the Jews, and Gods judgment for the
neglect of his Worship, wrought them much mischief. These were their
Neighbors, the Samaritans, Amonites, etc. the old Enemies. 3. Sedition and
civil Contentions one amongst another. Envies, grudges, factions and
partaking, reigned among them, to the hinderance of the Common quiet [ For,
lege And (...) I set all men every one against his Neighbour] A miserable
State, poor and famished, vexed by enemies, and discontented within it self,
God suffering their minds to be imbittered one against another. Verse 10.
2. By Promises. Things were well amended with them already, and God now
promises to continue the same favor toward them, for time to come. This
Promise is,

1. Proposed in general terms, That God would show himself otherwise toward
this People, than in former times: then he was angry, now he would be
favorable to them. [But now I will not be] Iunius [I am not] the Verb
substantive is not in the original. Now the present State of things showed
that God was not to them now, as before: And therefore I take it the future
tense is better supplied here [I will not bee] according as the next Verse
shows, being a Promise of future times, [Vnto the residue of this People as
in former days, says the Lord of Hosts.] I will be gracious to this poor
People, whom I have formerly afflicted. Verse 11.

2. Amplified many ways:

1. By the Particulars wherein God would bless them: Which are two, 1.
Abundance, contrary to their former scarcity and want, expressed in the
several particulars, which are means of Plenty [ The French read it thus,
[A^us lisemente de paix y sera] i. e. But the seed of Peace shall be there: In
that sense I take it, as it is said, Light is sown for the righteous, etc.
For the seed shall be prosperous] (...) the seed-time shall be peaceable,
says Iunius, i. e. quiet, without molestation of the Enemy, who hindered the
Husbandman in sowing times. But I conceive, that the Promise of Peace is
rather in the last Clause of this Verse: and therefore I understand it, with
our Translators and Sanctius, Of increase and abundance: The seed sown should
be prosperous, i. e, Fruitful, to bring forth a plentiful Crop. [And the
Vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give her increase] Every sort
of Husbandre shall thrive: and that because [The Heavens shall give their deaw]
seasonable, and kindly showers. 2. Peaceable possession of their Abundance,
contrary to their former dangers, etc. [And I will cause the remnant of this
People to possess all these things] God himself would put them in possession:
and though they were a poor remnant, yet they should enjoy it quietly in spite
of all their Enemies. Verse 12.
2. By an Event or Consequent that should follow upon Gods restoring of the
Jews to so plentiful and prosperous Estate. As all the World had taken notice
of their former miserable Desolation; so should they of their glorious
restitution: Which public notice, so generally taken, does greatly amplify
the quality of the Jews ruined and restored estate, both being so singularly
notable. [And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a Curse among the
Heathen] A form of execration and cursing: as thus (God do to me, or thee, as
he has done to the Jews) or (God make thee like a Jew) or the like: making
their Calamity a pattern for any fearful imprecation. See Deuteronomy. 28.37. Ier.
24.9. Ier. 29.18. and verse 22. and Ier. 42.18. Psalm. 83.11.
And, says Sanctius, Hoe familiare est Mahometanis, qui in execrationibus
dicunt, Iudaeus sim, si fallo, etc. [O house of Judah, and house of Israel]
Here Is a hard knot. God speaks to the Ten Tribes as well as to the Two; and
promises, that as both had been a Curse (which was too too manifest) so now
both should be a Blessing. Whereby it would appear, that at the loosing of
the Captivity, not only the Two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, called the house
of Judah from the greater Tribe; but also the Ten Tribes, named the house of
Israel, did return home. Sanctius thinks it may be solved by an Epexegesis,
Thus the house of Judah, i. e. the house of Israel: which he makes like those
Exegeses, usual in the Psalms; Jacob shall rejoice, i.e. Israel shall be
glad, Psalm. 14.7. God is known in Judah, i. e. his Name is great in Israel,
Psalm 76.1. with many the like. And he further confirms it, Because the Name
of Israel was given to the Tribe of Judah before this time, Is. 48.1. as the
most noble Tribe. Vide Sanct. in (...). 37.2.19.
and Chap 46.13. When the ten Tribes were now carried captive. But, by his
favor, this Exegeticall interpretation of this place sounds harshly, and not
justifiable by these other places, if their times and other circumstances be
compared with this. Ribera understands it of the general Conversion of all the
Jews in the times of the Gospel: but happily we need not go so far, if it may
appear, that not only the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, but also the ten
Tribes, returned home at this time. I say the ten Tribes not wholly, nor yet
the greatest part: for so it is manifest they did not come back again; no,
nor the two Tribes neither: A great, if not the greatest, part of whom remained
in Babylon, despising the benefit of their deliverance; as we have seen
before: but yet both are rightly said to return, because some of either did
return. And so that place, Hos. 1.6. must be taken of the Generality, and
whole body of the ten Tribes, not precisely, as if no remuant of them should
escape out of Captivity, contrary to verse 11. of that chapter. And a like
example of the Jews, that fled into Egypt, to whom utter destruction is
threatened, Ier. 42.16, 17. Yet a remnant did escape, Ier. 44.28. The
probabilities that persuade the return of some part of the ten Tribes, are
these:

1 The Generality of Cyrus Proclamation, Ezra 1.1, 2, 3, 4. and of Artaxerxes
after him, Ezra 17.13. who give permission to all the Jews in their Dominion
to return to Jerusalem. To restrain this unto the Jews of the two Tribes,
there is no reason; no more than to think, that only the two Tribes, and none
of the ten, make use of it. It was but about one hundred and thirty years
that the ten were captived before the two: and that time was not so long as
to make them forget all acquaintance one with another: and seventie years
commerce was sufficient to recover it, had it been lost, especially
considering how common afflictions do strangely beget love and acquaintance in
men of the same Nation in foreign Countries. And though the two Tribes were
carried captive into Babylon, and the ten somewhat further North and East
toward Media, 2 Reg. 17.6. yet it is apparent, that both the one and the other
were dispersed and mingled into all quarters of the Assyrian, and afterward,
Persian Empire, even throughout an hundred twenty and seven Provinces, Esther
3.8. and 8.9. and 9.2.12. Now seventie years acquaintance, and the common
burden of Captivity, could not choose but draw many of the one as well as of
the other, to embrace the occasion of a general release from thraldom.

2 In the second of Ezra, we find the number of the whole Congregation, that
returned, to be 42360. besides their attendants: but if we reckon up the
particulars of Judah and Benjamin, which are in that Chapter punctually set
down, we shall find the sum amount but to 29974. so that there wants about
12000. of the full number. Which, say the Hebrew Doctors, were those that came
up out of the other ten Tribes. As R. Schelamo Isaac relates on Ezra 3.64.

3 The Scripture seems plainly to signify so much in diverse places, as Ier.
3.18. Hos. 1.11. Ezekiel. 37. per totum. Albeit the meaning of these and the like
places be controverted, and by many expounded of the Conversion of the Jews
unto Christianity, and not of the Union of these remainders of the twelve
Tribes, which, returning from Captivity, grew into one of Church and State in
Iewrie. Ergo quaere ult, of this their return.

Furthermore, touching this Compellation of the house of Judah and Israel, this
is to be noted. That before the Captivity of the two Tribes, and whilst the
Kingdom of Israel stood; there were many that from time to time revolted unto
Judah out of love of true Religion there maintained, or other respects; as
appears in the time of Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 11.13. to verse 17. and of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15.9. and of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30.11.18. And these, mingling themselees
with the two Tribes, were with them carried Captive, and with them returned:
And of these the Prophet may speak [O house of Israel.] Sed quae penitus. Let
us proceed. [So will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing] A form to be
used in blessing of others; as the like Ruth 4.11, 12. see Zeph. 3.20, Now
because so great prosperity was not likely to befall them, the Prophet again
repeats his first and general Exhortation to Belief and Courage: which he
used, verse 9. [Feare not] Cast no doubts, mistrust not your own weakness,
your Enemies strength, etc. [But let your hands be strong] Go on in the Work,
and be confident of Gods aid. Verse 13. And this he further assures them of,
by that which is the third Amplification of this Promise of a prosperous
Estate, viz.

3. By the Cause of their Prosperity: Which springs not from themselves, or
others, but from Gods gracious purpose to do good unto them. Which purpose and
decree of his is constant and unchangeable: and therefore they may trust to it.
This the Prophet lets them understand in a Comparison of Gods dealing both
ways, in Judgment and in Mercy: that having found the former true, they
should not doubt of the latter.

1 The first part of the Comparison touches the time past; and shows 1. Gods
decree and purpose of punishing their sins, declared in so many threatenings
denounced by the Prophets. [For thus says the Lord of Hosts, as I thought]
decreed and determined [to punish you, when your Fathers provoked me to wrath,
says the Lord of Hosts.] 2. Gods execution of that his purpose [And I
repented not] I changed not my mind, because they changed not their evil
courses, but did as I forethought and fore-threatned. And the Jews had found
by experience, that thus far God was as good as his word.
2 The second part concerns the present and future times; and sets forth in
like manner 1 The gracious purpose and determination of God, to show mercy unto
them [So again have I thought in these days to do well unto Jerusalem, and
to the house of Judah.] 2 The certainety of its execution [Feare ye not] that I
will fail of my Promise; I will surely bring to pass what I have intended for
your good. Verse. 14, 15.

But what? if God be resolved to bless the Jews, then they need care for
nothing else belike. Not so: the Promise is upon a condition; and that's the
fourth Amplification of the Promise of an happy estate, viz,

4. By the Condition required at their hands, [These are the things that ye
shall doe] viz. if we will have any favor. Which are generally their
Obedience, declared in some particulars,

1. Doing of good, in two kinds: 1 Speaking the truth, [Speake the Truth every
man to his Neighbor.] 2 Doing of true Justice, [Execute the judgment of
Truth] For the Manner, Judge truly, according to right and true informations.
[and Peace] For the End and Effect, To compose the quarrels and differences
between private men; and so preserve the public Peace. [in your Gates] In
the places of justice, which were in those times in the entrance of the gates
of the Cities. And Justice, sitting at the gate, is a better safeguard for a
City, than a Corpse du guard, or strong Doors and Bars. Verse 16.
2. Forbearing of evil, in two kinds: 1 Evil imaginations and purposes
against our Brother [And let none imagine evil in your hearts against his
Neighbour] as Chap 7. verse 10. 2 Swearing falsely, to deceive and wrong our
Neighbor, [And love no false oath] Psalm 15.4. And, an ill practice will not
be left till it be hated.

The not doing of these things is pressed on them by a forcible Reason, from
Gods hatred and detestation of such doings, [For all these are the things that
I hate, says the Lord] and them that do them: As on the contrary, the other
are the things that I love, and such as observe them. Verse 17. And thus we
have the first part of this Sermon, this most excellent Praeface, unto the
final decision of the maine question first proposed unto the Prophet. We come
in the second place to

2. The Answer it self, which the Prophet makes to their Demand about Fasting,
which he briefly resolves them of in few words. His Answer consists of two
parts:

1 An Abbrogation of their Custom of Fasting. [And the Word etc. Thus etc. The
Fast of the fourth Moneth] wherein a breach was made in the Walls of Jerusalem,
and so the City taken, 2 Kings 25.3. [And the Fast of the fifth, and the fast
of the seventh] See Chap. 7.3.5. [And the fast of the tenth] wherein Jerusalem
was first beleaguered, 2 Kings 25.1. [Shall be to the house of Judah joy and
gladnesse] Times of inward rejoicing in stead of their inward mourning and
sorrow of heart, [And of cheerful feasts] in stead of outward fastings and
abstinence from meats and drinks. 2. An Injunction to observe that, which God
most required, and they most neglected: [Therefore] Ye see how little God
regards your Fastings, it is not that he looks after: Therefore etc. or the
Particle (...) may here be rendered And, And love ye the Truth: or [as the
French, Love then the Truth, the Truth] the substance of Religion, in Obedience
to God, Charity to your Neighbor; and let go these outward needless
Ceremonies [and Peace] This is an effect of the love of Truth: It was not their
Fastings, Psalm. 37.27.
but their Piety and Mercy that would procure their Peace, and bring them
favor from God, and redress of their troubled and afflicted estate. It may be
also that in this word the Prophet gives them a close Caveat, not to be
contentious in maintaining of old unnecessary Customs, but quietly to lay them
down. Verse 19.
The Resolution of their Question being thus briefly delivered, the Prophet
further enlarges, and confirms his Answer, by a Reason drawn from the Times
now approaching; wherein Ceremonies should cease, and Truth only come in
place; wherein the Gentiles should be converted to true Religion, and join
themselves with the Jews, to make up one glorious Church: which should be a
cause of rejoicing to the Jews. This is delivered with great Caution, the
abolishing of Ceremonies being rather intimated than expressed; and the manner
of the Gentiles Conversion set forth in such wise, as the Jews might take no
offense at it. The Argument then to move the Jews to rejoicing, is this, That
their Estate, how ever now it appeared, should be so glorious and flourishing,
as that the Gentiles, who now despised them, should be won to embrace true
Religion, and join themselves in fellowship with the Jews. Which was
fulfilled partly before Christ, by the more usual and frequent access of
Proselytes than ever before; partly after Christ's incarnation, by preaching of
the Gospel: which time is here principally spoken of. For the words, we have in
them the Gentiles Conversion, described

1. Generally, Verse 20. [Thus says the Lord of Hosts, It shall yet come to
passe] (...) Yet, or, yet further, as the French (Il adviendra en outre) as an
Access to the Jews happy restoring [that there shall come People, and the
Inhabitants of many Cities] of the Gentiles, who shall come, i. e. be
converted, and join themselves to the Church.

2 Particularly, by three special Circumstances:

1. The Zeal and Charity of these Convers, who would not come alone, but draw
others along in company with them, to the worship of God. Which is lively
expressed in a Mimesis, or imitation of the invitations and encouragements they
should use one to another, Heb. Eundo tamus.
[And the Inhabitants of one City shall go to another, saying, Let us go
(and that) speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hostes]
i. e. To worship and serve the Lord, comprised under one kind of Prayer; and to
be informed of the right way and means to worship God, meant by seeking of
him. Now these that were so earnest to have others go, were not backward
themselves, and willing to tarry behind, but [I will go also] Every one was
as forward for himself as zealous for another. A singular pattern of zealous
Charity, that neither leaves others behind, nor turns others before it.
Verse 21. 2. The large Extent of this Conversion, [Yea many People, and strong
Nations] Not a few, and such as were poor and despicable, but even the
richest, most potent and populous Nations, should take no scorn to cleave unto
the Church of the Jews. Which also sets forth the glory of this Conquest of
the Nations unto the Faith, that it was not done by compact and fraudulent
convention, they were many of diverse Languages, and far asunder; nor yet by
force and violence, because they were mighty and strong, able to have made
resistance [Shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Ierusalem] Typically,
because at this time Gods Worship being only there, all Converts were to
resort thither [And to pray before the Lord] as before Verse 21. Verse 22. 3.
The Manner of their Conversion: which is so described, as the Jew, who thought
himself the peculiar People, and choice Favorite of God, should not think
himself disparaged, and his glory eclypsed by the Access of the Gentiles into
the Communion of the Church, but rather honored thereby. Because he should be
made the most honorable instrument of the others salvation. [Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, In those dayes] of the publication of the Gospel [it shall come
to pass that ten men] Genesis 31.41 Lev. 26.26. Job. 19.3.
Many [shall take hold out of all Languages of the Nations] to whom the Gospel
was preached [even shall take hold of the skirt] (...) Ala, or Fimbria: a
simile from little Children, that catching hold on their Mothers garments, hang
upon them, and run after them [of him that is a Iew] even literally, and in
the flesh. For it is manifest, that the Gospel was preached, as first to the
Jews, so next by the Jews to the Gentiles. Now it is also apparent, how the
Gentiles flocked unto the Apostles, and other Jews that brought them the glad
tidings of Peace; how they honored, and dearly esteemed of them, etc. Paul's
entertainment may be an Example of all the rest. [Saying, We will go with you]
in the worship and service of the true God. The Reason of all this Love and
Honor given to the Jew, and of the Gentile's joining himself to him, is, [For
we have heard] viz. by your preaching, [that God is with you] only rightly
known and worshipped among you Jews, or in the Church; but not among us who
are ignorant idolatrous Gentiles. Verse 23.
CHAP. IX.
THe burden of the Word of the Lord in the Land of Hadrach: and Damascus shall
be his rest: when the eyes of man, even of all the Tribes of Israel, shall be
toward the Lord.

2 And Hamath also shall border thereby: Tyrus also and Zidon, though they be
very wise.

3 For Tyrus did build her self a strong Hold, and heaped up silver as the
dust, and gold as the mire of the streets.

4 Behold, the Lord will spoil her, and he will smite her power in the Sea,
and she shall be devoured with fire.

5 Ashkelon shall see it, and fear, and Azzah also shall be very sorrowful,
and Ekron: for her Countenance shall be asbamed, and the King shall perish
from Azzah, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.

6 And the stranger shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the Pride of the
Philistims.

7 And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abominations from
between his teeth: but he that remains, even he shall be for our God, and
he shall be as a Prince in Judah, but Ekron shall be as a Iebusite.

8 And I will eampe about mine house against the Army, against him that
passes by, and against him that returns, and no oppressor shall come upon
them any more: for now have I seen with nune eyes.

9 Rejoice greatly, O Daughter Zion: shout for joy, O Danghter Jerusalem:
behold, the King comes unto thee, he is just and saved himself, poor and
riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt the Foale of an Ass.

10 And I will cut off the Chariets from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem:
the Bow of the battle shall be broken, and he shall speak peace unto the
Heathen, and his Dominion shall be from Sea unto Sea, and from the River to
the end of the Land.

11 Thou also shall be saved through the blond of thy Covenant. I have loosed
thy Prisoners out of the Pit wherein is no water.

12 Turn you to the strong hold, ye Prisoners of hope: even to day do I
declare, that I will render the double unto thee.

13 For, Judah have I bent as a Bow for me: Ephraims hand have I filled, and I
have raised up thy sons O Zion, against thy sons, O Grecia, and have made
thee as a Giants Sword.

14 And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his Arrow shall go forth as the
Lightning: and the Lord God shall blow the Trumpet, and shall come forth with
the whirle-windes of the South.

15 The Lord of Hosts shall defend them, and they shall devour them, and
subdue them with sling-stones, and they shall drink, and make a noise as
through wine, and they shall be filled like bowls, and as the horns of the
Altar.

16 And the Lord their God shall deliver them in that day as the flock of his
People: for they shall be as the stones of the Crown lifted up upon his Land.

17 For how great is his goodness! and how great is his beauty! corn shall
make the yongue men cheerful, and new wine the maids.

We are come to the third Sermon, or Prophecy of Zachary, contained in the
9, 10. and 11. Chapters, and is divided into these parts:

[1.] A Prophecy against the Enemies of the Jews, with a Promise of the
Churches defense, unto the 9. verse of this Chapter. The Nations and Cities
against which Destruction is threatened, are

1 The Land of Hadrach [The Burden of the Word of the Lord] or, The burdensome
Word, i. e. A Prophecy of some burdenous and heavy judgment to fall upon
any. The French, [la charge de la parole] not so fitly. [in the Land] rather,
Upon, or Against (...) [of Hadrach] Not the name of a man, but of a place of
some note in Syria, not far from Hamath and Damascus, sa appears by the Text.
It is not mentioned in Scripture, except in this place; yet by all, except
Iunius and Jerome, it is agreed, that it was some particular City or Region. R.
David in this place thus Reports out of the old Doctors, (...) i. e. We have
found among the sayings of our Rabbines of blessed memory, thus: Rabbi Benajah
says, This Hadrach is the Messiah, because he is (...) sharp to the Nations,
but (...) gentle to the Israelites: to whom Rabbi Iosaie, the Son of
Dormiskith, said, How long do thou pervert the Scriptures? I testify before
Heaven and Earth, that I come from Damascus, and there is such a place, the
name whereof is Hadrach. That conceit of Rabbi Benajah St. Jerome follows.
Iunius reads it, [In terram circumstantem te] according to the Syriake; but
his Translation therein is rejected by Piscator: nor does it follow, because a
place is not found in other Stories; therefore there was none such. The
Paraphrast renders it (...) in the Land of the South. Sed quaere. 2 Damascus
[And Damascus] the chief City of Syria, Esaias 7.8. whence the Israelites had
been often plagued by the incursions and invasions of the Syrians, [shall be
the rest thereof](...) the Article referred not to (...) but to (...) or (...)
Damascus also shall be the rest of that burthenous Prophecy, i. e. That
heavy punishment shall rest upon Damascus: Noting not a fleeting and light
touch, but an abiding continuance of the judgment upon it, as in its place of
rest. See the like phrase of speech, Psalm. 125.3. Esaias 9.8. Before the Prophet
proceeds to other Nations, he sets down a reason of Gods thus proceeding to
punishment. [When the eyes of man, as of all the Tribes of Israel, shall be
toward the Lord] The Clause is somewhat of a dothefull construction: Some take
this (...) passively, for Gods eye of Providence upon man: and then (...) must
be rendered [for] not [when] and so, with Iunins, the French read it, thus [For
the Lord has an eye upon man, and upon all the Tribes of Israe] i. e. [Pouree
que^^ Eternel (...) orel surle, hommes and surtoutes les tribus d'Israel]
He will punish others as well as his own People: He that has so severely
observed and chastised the Tribes of Israel, does take as strict notice of the
offenses of other Nations, the Enemies of his People, to punish them as
sharply. And this sense is plain, agreeable to the words, and context,
showing a Reason why these Nations should not escape, from Gods revengefull eye
which he had over them, as well as over his own People. The (...)
Targum also to the same sense. Our last Translators take the words actively,
for man's turning of his eyes and heart toward the Lord, and so render ((...)
when) to signify the Time when God will execute his judgments on these
Nations, viz. when the eyes of man, as, i. e. of all the Tribes of Israel, shall
be toward the Lord: (...) looking unto him for aid and help against all their
Enemies; and converting, as their eyes, so their hearts, to him by true
Repentance. Thus Kimhi, The eyes of man in those times shall be (...) i. e. to
the Lord, not to their Idols and Images. Or thus, When the eyes of man, i. e.
of the Gentiles, shall be toward the Lord, as the eyes of the Tribes of
Israel. But the times of the Gentiles Conversion and Destruction of these
places here named, agreenot. Besides, in these Interpretations, the turning of
(...) (when) and (...) (as) is not so natural: Wherefore I rather choose the
first sense.

3 Hamath, which should bear a part in this punishment. [And Hamath](...)
Whether a City or a Region? The Scripture speaks of both. A City of this
name there was in Nepthali, mentioned Josh. 19.35. yet written with some
difference (...) Hammath, not Hamath: but Numb. 13.21. the same For it is most
likely the S^^es went not so farce as the Country of Hamath which lay beyond
Libanus.
place is called and written as here (...). It was a City of note, and lying
hard upon the border of the Tribe of Asher, was not far from Sydon and Tyrus;
founded by Hamath, one of the Sons of Canaan, Genesis 20. St. Jerome, who makes
Ortel. Thesa. Geog. verbo Emath.
two Hamaths; the Great, called Antiochia, upon Orontes, and the Less, called
by Antiochus Epiphania, situated between Apamia and Emesa, understands by
Hamath in this place, Epiphania. ( Hamath Civitas est, says he, Syriae caeles,
quae ab Antiocho Epiphania dicta est) And this Emath or Hamath he places in
the Tribe of Naphtali: But he is therefore justly taxed by the learned Knight,
Sir Walter Raleigh, * who makes it apparent, Hist. lib. 1. cap. 5.. 12.. 7.
Ptolom. Asiae Tab. 4.
that Epiphania can no ways belong to Naphtali, the Provinces of Loadicene and
Libanica lying between it, and any part of the Holy Land. Besides, he is
deceived in making Epiphania to be a City of Coelosyria: which being a
Province, lying in the hollow Valleys between Libanus and Antilibanus, has
Libanus for its furthest North bound. Now Epiphania lies yet a great way
further to the North, as it is apparent by Ptolomie.

The Country of Hamath is that Region which lies to the North East of
Libanus, and boundeth Ezekiel. 48.1.
North upon Damascus. The Region wherein Riblah stood, where Pharaoh Necho slew
lehoahaz, and Nebuchadnezzar the Jewish Captives, 2 Kings 23.33. and 25.6.
20.21. Which Ribla, says Iunius out of the Ierosolymitan Paraphrast, Number.
34.11.
was Apamia. It was this Country whereof Tohu was King, who sent David
Presents after his Victory over Hadadezer, King of Zobah, who was his
neighbor, and had war with him, 2 Samuel 8.9. Which Zobah is that that is
called Aram Zobah, Psalm. 60.1. And is, according to Iunius Translation, placed
in Chamath, 1 Chro. 18.13. [Regem Tzobae in Chamatha] But by our Translators
it is well rendered, not (in) but (unto Hamath) (...) viz. David pursued him so
far. For these two Kings Tohu and Hada dezer, bordered upon one another, but
did not lie one within another. It was this Country that was the Northermost
Border of the Land of Canaan, as is plain by Joshua, Cap. 13. verse 5. where
Hamath lies Eastward from Lebanon, and Baal-gad under Mount Hermon. But
Hamath in Naphtali lies South-west from both. And of this Hamath Moses
speaks, Numb. 34.8. for by comparing this place with Joshua 13.5. and Ezekiel.
47.15, 16. and 48.1. it is apparent, the North borders of the Land of Canaan
stretched a great way farther than * Hamath in Naphtali. And it may be, See
also Exodus 23.31. Deuteronomy. 11.24. and Amos 6.2, 14.
that this Land of Hamath is meant, 1 Kings 8.65. where Solomon made a Feast
for Israel, from the entering in of Hamath to the River of Egypt, viz. Sihor;
this the most Southerly, that the most Northerly bounds of Canaan, both at that
time in Salomons possession, 1 Kings 4.21.

Now whether of the two be here meant, it is somewhat uncertain: But I take it,
that the Land of Hamath is here spoken of, rather than the City before
mentioned (unless there were some other great City in Hamath, of the same name
with the Country) because that had been the place wherein the Jews Enemies
had executed part of their cruelty against them; and because it borders upon
the Province of Damascus: And so that being after this, was next to the
burning, according to the next words, [shall border thereby](...) refer the
Article to (...), and the sense is plain, Hamath lies nigh unto Damascus in
place, and it shall fare the worse for its neighborhood; the punishment that
lights on Damascus, shall fall also on it. Yet concerning that City in
Naphtali, it may be that the Naphtalites never gate it into their Possession,
no more than the Asherites, their near Neighbors, could win many strong
Cities, that were in their Tribe, from the Phoenicians, especially Tyrus and
Zidon: and as these, so Hamath not far from either, might still continue in
the Phoenicians possession, who were no kind friends to the Jews; and
therefore should now smart for it. Then quaere ult.

4 [Tyrus and Sidon] two famous Sea Towns of Phoenicia, given to the Tribe of
Asher; but still possessed by the Naturals. These used much Ezekiel. 26.2.28.24.
proud, insolent and cruel dealing toward the Jews, in the time of the
Desolation of their State: Wherefore God threatens Revenge, which they should
not escape: no, [ Some read, [Because they are wise] i.e. Cunning and crafty
Merchanes, to cosen others. Which brought a plague upon them.
though it be very wise] viz. Tyrus the chief City, or rather [though each of
them be very wise](...), the singular Number distributively; as the French
[chacune d'elles] by a common Hebraisme. The effect of the words, is a kind of
eironicall derision of these Phoenicians Wisdom and Policy, for the
upholding of their State against Invaders; which yet should not help them a
whit. See the like Mock, Ezekiel. 28.3, 4, 5, 6. where we may see how arrogant
they were, especially Tyrus. Wherefore the Prophet proceeds on in a further
Declaration of the judgment of Tyrus, showing

1. Her Confidence, which (besides her Wit and Policy before named) stood
upon two things:

1 Fortification and Munition [And Tyrus did * build her self a strong Hold]
Fortified the City and other places about with Military Defense. (...)
Paronomasia ^legans.
And how strong Tyrus was, even by its natural situation, it is well known. 2
Money, the other finew of War. Their great plenty of Gold and Silver is
described Hyperbolically, by such things as are most numbersome, and easiest,
and cheapest got together [ and heaped up Silver as the dust, and fine Gold
((...)) as the mire of the streets] Which Abundance of Treasure, it was not
hard for the Tyrians to gather together, considering the long and great Trade
which all Nations of the World used there, as is largely described, Ezekiel. 27.
Verse 3.
2. Her Ruin: neither Wit, nor Wealth, nor Strength should save her. [Behold,
the Lord] by his Instruments [will cast her out] viz. of her inheritance and
great wealth (...) Expellet eam haereditate, or Pauperem reddet. Which
Translation (me thinks) fits well to this place [will make her Poore] in
opposition to her great riches wherein she trusted. So the French [l'appourira]
And Rabbi Schelomo (...), in that signification which the Word has, 1 Samuel
2.7. [And he will smite her power in the Sea] i. e. Though she be seated in
an Island, very difficult to be besieged and approached unto: yet shall she
not be impregnable; means shall be found to besiege and take her,
notwithstanding all the strength of resistance that can be made. as after it
fell out. And this is spoken in opposition to her strength, which should be
vanquished by taking of the City. But this is noted, She shall be burnt too,
[and she shall be devoured with Fire] eaten up, i. e. consumed: a Metaphor
from ravenous Beasts. This burning of the City is added Emphatically; Tyrus
was seated in the midst of the Waters, yet she shall be devoured with Fire.
Nothing shall quench where God kindles the flame. Verse 4.

5 The Philistines, who dwelt along the Sea Coast Southward of Sidon and Tyrus,
from whence this storm was next to come upon them; who also had evermore been
the Jews bitter Adversaries. The Philistines punishment is expressed,

1. In the particulars, what should befall each principal City of that Coast,

1. Before the judgment did actually light upon them, and that was a great
astonishment and trouble in the State, when they saw danger toward them, and
no help for them; expressed in the troublous affections of 1. Fear [Ashkelon
shall see it] viz. the Destruction of Damascus, Hadrach, Hamath, and the
Phoenicians [and feare] the like to fall upon her. 2. Sorrow [Gaza also shall
see it and be very sorrowfull] like a Woman in Childe-birth, ((...)) for the
inevitable Ruin that is coming upon her. 3. Shame, being left destitute of
such succor as they hoped for [ And Ekron for her Esaias 20.5, 6
expectation] with segol under (...) usually it is (...) it may be here it comes
by an unusual Crasis. (...) pro(...)
(...) scilicet, of aid and assistance from the Tyrians and Sidonians, their
Friends and Neighbors, [shall be ashamed] being deceived of such help as
she looked for from her potent, but then impoverished Friends, who could not
save themselves, much less help others. Iunius and the French read it thus [
And the Targum also(...) i. e. Quia pudefacta est ob domum fiduciae suae.
For her expectation shall make her ashamed] with some difference in the words,
none in the sense. These Affections, ascribed to the several Cities, are yet
to be understood of all in common, as also in the next Clauses.
2. When it was actually executed on them. And then a triple Punishment should
fall on the Philistims, 1. Dissolution of their State and Government [And the
King shall perish from Gaza] i. e. the Governors and Government, the State and
Liberty of their Commonwealth, shall be overthrown. 2. Dispeopling of their
Cities and Country of the natural Inhabitants, [And Askelon shall not be
inhabited] The Inhabitants being wasted by War, or carried Captive. Verse 5.
3. Bringing in of Forreiners, to dwell and rule in place of the Naturals [And
a Bastard](...) Spurius, A Bastard borne of a Whore, Deuteronomy. 23.2. thence, by a
similitude, applied to So the Heb. Expositors (...) i. e. (...) And, (...) i.
e. (...)
Strangers and Forreiners, Alienigenae,(...), who, being not homebred and
naturally descended, do, like Bastards in a Family, intrude upon the Right,
and Inheritance of the true and natural Inhabitants of a Country. And
Forreiners, that thus possess another Country, are no less infamous and
odious to the Naturals, than Bastards are to lawful Children. [shall dwell in
Ashdod] otherwise called Azotus, Acts 8.40.
2. In the Generality, [And I will cut off the Pride of the Philistims] their
Wealth, Strength, and all other things that made them swell with Pride and
Insolency against their poor Neighbors the Jews. Now, touching the
fulfilling of all these forementioned threatenings, the doubt is, of what times
the Prophet here speaks. Two opinions there are: 1. That this is to be
understood of the Expedition of And so some understood that of the Bastard in
Ashdod properly, Alexander being a Bastard, by his Mother Olympia's confession.
Justin. Lib. 11.
Alexander the Great, who over-ranne all these places here mentioned, besieged
and took the Cities, placed and displaced Colonies; as it is most apparent in
the Historians that have wrote his Actions. 2. That the Prophet here means
the Victories and Conquests which the Jews should make of these Nations, who,
whilst the Persian State was embroiled by Alexander, and that the Syrian and
Egyptian Kings, the Successors of Alexander, contended one with another; gate
something in the scuffling: and, as they grew stronger, wanne many Cities from
the Philistims, Phoenicians, Syrians, Samaritans, and others. The Prophets,
Zephaniah, Chapt. 2.4. and sequ. and Obadiah, Zach. 2.9.
Verse 20. seem to speak very plain of the Possession of the Country of the
Philistims, and Seacoasts of Phoenicia, by the Jews that should return from
Captivity. In Stories it appears they did, 1. Mac. 5.2. Mac. 12. Joseph. 1.4.
Antiq. c. 11. Aegesipp. l. 1. c. 18. And thus Sanctius understands this place,
with the Hebrew Commentators, Kimchi, R. Isaach, and Aben Ezra, on the place;
and the Chaldee Paraphrast, who renders it thus, (...) i. e. and the house of
Israel shall dwell in Ashdod, who shall be there as strangers. I suppose, we
shall take the surest way, to understand this Prophecy of all the time after
Zachary till Christ: wherein, partly by Alexander and his Successors, and For
Sidon was taken by A^^xe^xes Ochus in the tenth year of Philip of Macedon, a
great while after this time. Diod Sicul.
others; partly by the Jews, all these Places were thoroughly plagued with
War and Calamities. And so Iunius takes it.

Thus we have Gods judgment against the Enemies of Church: next we shall see,
how God in judgment remembers to show Mercy, in a double respect:

1. To his Enemies, of whom a Remnant shall be saved, according to Grace.
Instance is given in the Philistines; but understand it of all. [And I will
take away the blood out of his mouth, and his abominations from between his
teeth] i. e. His Murders, Cruelty, and Rapines; meant by Blood: and his
Idolatries; meant by Abominations. (...) for Idols are often so termed, as 2
King 23.13. Ezekiel. 20.7. Ribera understands that of Blood, to be the bloody
sacrifices offered to their Idols. Now these things should be taken away, i. e.
pardoned, and also reformed by the Preaching of the Gospel, which should
pluck away these Abuses out of the Mouth and Teeth of the Philistines:
Metaphorically, to show the Nature of Sin, which is like Meat and Drink to
Sinners, who are as unwilling to part with their Wickedness and Idolatry, as
to have their Meat plucked out of their Mouths, which they hold fast between
their Teeth. And this (I take it) is the meaning of that (out of his Mouth) and
(from between his Teeth) if we follow this Interpretation of the Place,
touching the Conversion of the Remnant of the Philistines, whereto Iunius,
Piscator, Ribera, and (...)
Aben Ezra, incline. [ And he also shall remain, or, be left, or, be reserved
(as the French, sera reserve) unto our God] (...) i. e. Even of the
Philistines, and Enemies of the Church, some should be left, upon whom God
would show his Favor in their Conversion and Salvation. [And shall be as a
Governor in Iudah] i. e. accounted as one of the People of God; and that, not
of the meanest Rank, but as a Captain, or chief Man in the Church [And
Ekron] Synecdochically, The Philistims shall be [as a Iebusite] who were not
utterly expelled out of Jerusalem, but dwelt among the Jews, and among them
many were converted; as principally Araunah the Iebusite, 2 Samuel 14.16. unto
whom, Iunius thinks, Allusion is here made. Thus the converted Philistimes
should be, not as Strangers, but as Citizens of chief note in the Church of
God.

Yet, me thinks, all things being considered, another Interpretation of this
Verse may seem as probable: viz. To understand it of Gods Mercy to the Jews,
in giving them deliverance from their bloody Adversaries; and not only so, but
Rule and Authority over them. [I will take away his blood out of his Mouth,
and his abominations from between his Teeth] I will deliver the Jews, who
were an abomination to the Philistims, always hated and abhorred by them; and
of whom being now weak and poor, the potent Philistims thought to make a For,
says Ab. Ezra, and Sanctius agrees with him, these Philistims did according to
the salvage custom of those times, eat of the flesh and drink of the blood of
their slain Enemies. See Sanct, on the 15. of the Acts.
bloody Prey, and (like salvage Beasts) to tear them to pieces: God would now
rescue his People from their Teeth and Jaws, when in their imagination they
had even swallowed them up. [But he] or, [And hee] there is no necessity to
translate (...) But, in this place, implying some kind of opposition between
this and the former Clause, where there is none, but an addition of another
benefit of Prerogative, to the former of Deliverance. [And he that
remaineth](...) making a distinction and pause at that Word. That is left, not
of the Philistims, but of the Jews, after their misery and vexation which the
Babylonians, and these Philistims, with other Nations, have brought upon them,
[Even hee](...) even that poor ignoble and contemptible Remnant of the Jews [
shall be for, or, unto our God] (...) i. e. in his Care, Protection, Favor,
and high account, [and he shall be as a Governor in Iudah] not only of
highest Rank and chiefest Esteem with God, as Princes and Captains are in a
Commonwealth, but also (which, I take it, is especially meant) shall be free,
and have Command and Rule over others, like the ancient Governors of Judah,
the Kingly Tribe; albeit the Jew had been now a long time a servant himself.
[And Ekron as a Iebusite] i.e. a slave and tributary (...) and one appointed to
Destruction, as the Iebusites and the rest of the Canaanites were. And this
Interpretation runs smoother, and more agreeable both to the first Clause,
the Phrase whereof implies manifestly a Deliverie of a Prey, out of the Power
of the wild Beast, i. e. Potent Enemies, rather than either Pardon, or
Punishment of sin; and also to that Opposition, which is apparent in the
second Clause, between him that Remains, who should be as a Ruler etc. And
Ekron also shall be as a Iebusite. Both be not meant of the same. and (And)
here might well have been rendered (But Ekron as a etc.) Ergo quare.

2. To the Church, which should be preserved in safety among so many invasions
as were made upon the Territories round about them: Gods Protection of his
People is set forth

1. By the Manner of it; It Was Armies and Hostility that his People might
fear: (...) prasentiam gloriae meae, says the Paraphrast
God would find means of Deliverance proportionable to the danger, [I will
encampe] opposing my * power, as an encamped Army, against the Enemy, [about
my house] the Temple, i. e. the Church, for which sake the State is preserved,
[Because of the Armie] scil. of the Enemy. For those that sacked the Country
about Iudaea, when they invaded them, bare as little good will to the Jews; as
appears by Alexander, whose purpose of besieging Jerusalem was strangely
altered, beyond his intent. [Because of him that passes by, and him that
returneth] namely, the Enemy ranging up and down the Coasts, to and fro with
his Armies. Whether here be intimated something of Alexanders voyage, who
passed by Iudaea into Egypt, and to Ammons Oracle with his Army, and thence
returned to Persia by the same way, not hurting the Jews; or something about
the many Expeditions of the Seleucidae and Lagidae, to and fro from Egypt to
Syria, and back again, among which hurly burly the Jews State stood fast,
though sometimes a little shaken; I dare not say: it may be both those and all
other the like dangers are here generally comprised.

2. By the Effect of it, Safety from the Power of the Oppressor [And no
Oppressor shall pass through them any more] How this Clause should be
construed, is doubtful. (...) here rendered Oppressor, is properly an Exactor
of Tribute, Debt, or Labor: and so the Seventy turn it sometime (...),
sometime (...), as Exodus 3. of the Jews Taske-masters in Egypt. Now because
those three things are many times imposed and demanded against right and
equity, therefore the Word very usually signifies an Oppressor. Further, in
regard the power of imposing Tribute belongs to the Prince, it is sometime used
in that signification for a Ruler or Governor; and by the Paraphrast so
rendered here, (...) Dominus, Princeps, and in diverse other places. Shall we
then take it in this sense, That the Jews, now freed from Captivity, should
be no more under the government of foreign Princes, oppressing them with
Tributes and Exactions? If we consider the Story of times succeeding the
Captivity, it is apparent, that the Jews, though freed from Captivity, yet
were not freed from their Subjection to the Monarchs of Persia, as long as they
stood. They paid Toll and Tribute, as their Subjects; though yet herein was
some part of Liberty, that as they used their own Laws, so they were
governed by men of their own Nation, as Zerubbabel, Ezra, Nehemiah, and the
High Priests after them, not by Persian Satrapaes, sent thither for that
purpose. Upon the dissolution of that Monarchy, the Jews ran the same Fortune
that other smaller Provinces did, being shared among the Successors of
Alexander. And though at that time they (no doubt) might well have afforded to
attempt a revolt, and free themselves, as happily some other Provinces did at the
overthrow of the Persian State, and destruction of the Grecian Empire after
Alexanders death: yet being a weak and small Territory, impovereshed and
broken by their Captivity, and also lying in the midway between two potent
Kingdoms of Egypt and Syria, they were driven to put themselves into the
Protection of one of them. And yet they were safe on neither side, by reason of
the hot Wars between those Northern and Southern Kings; and so if they
held with one side, they were judged Enemies on the other. Whence it came to
pass, that they were put to continual vexation, their Country much harried,
the City often seized on by force or fear, the Temple sometime polluted, many
Massacres committed upon the Inhabitants, Idolatry sometimes established by
force, Tribute imposed upon the Country, with other Miseries, during most part
of the time that these Syrian and Egyptian Kings reigned and contended. And
after that both were (...) in pieces by (...) the Romans, themselves set foot
in Iudaea, and made it a tributary Province, till its utter desolation; which
also they governed by Praesidents that were Romans borne. And then was the
supreme Government of the State administered by the Roman Deputies, not by the
Naturals of the Country, who, till that time, were chief Rulers of the Jewish
Affairs, though with some reference and subordination to one foreign Prince
or other, for the most part. For sometimes also they defended themselves as a
free State, fought against their Enemies, over-came them, and also much
enlarged their State and Territories. Wherefore I take it, that such a kind of
Oppressor is here understood, as the Jews had formerly felt; namely, who
should utterly ruinate the Country, and carry away the People captive, as the
Assyrians had done. And such a one should pass thorough them [no more] i. e.
not a long time, or, with condition, so long as they were obedient to God: for
so that Phrase is often to be taken in Scripture.

Now this is true, that though the Jews State had many sore plunges, yet it
held up its head, was honorable, and flourished, even among so many
afflictions; and for the space of almost five hundred years, till a few years
before the coming of Christ, had Laws and Governors of its own, and was, in
a manner, a free State, though in dependence upon others. And therefore when
the Romans had swallowed Syria and Egypt, yet they yielded not, but upon
conquest: And after Christ's time thought themselves strong enough to rebel,
which wrought their final Ruin. If this be not the meaning, I know not what
to say of it; it were a labor worth the undertaking, to compile a short
History of the times from the Captivity to Christ, comparing the passages of
Story with the Prophecies: It would give much light, especially to the three
last of the smaller Prophets. Story is yet very defective in this particular.

3. By the Cause of it; Gods favorable respect unto his People and Church [For
now I have seen Taken good notice of it.
with mine eyes] scilicet, their Captivity and grievous Afflictions past, and
now my favor shall be showed unto them for the time to come. See the like
Phrase Exodus 2.25. And the Paraphrast to the same sense, (...) i.e. For I have
now revealed my power to do them good. That conceit of Aben Ezra, that these
are the Prophets words, saying, that he had now seen all this in a manifest
Vision, is not worth the mentioning or confuting.

[2.] A Prophecy of the Coming of Christ, of his Kingdom, and the manifold
benefits which the Jews had, and should enjoy by that expected Messiah. And it
is fitly annexed to the former Prophecy, to show them by what means, and from
whom, all comfort was to be expected. This Prophecy, full of much
difficulty, reaches to the end of the tenth Chapter from the ninth Verse of
this, containing a large Description of the Times of the Messiah, of the Nature
and Benefits of his Kingdom and Government. The Parts of the Prophecy are.

1. A Promise of the speedy coming of the Messiah, whose approach should be
in that quality under which they expected him, viz. as a King. The Prophet
sets it down Emphatically [Behold, thy King] i.e. the Messiah, who shall be a
King, though of another kind, than the Jews imagined [commeth unto thee] very
shortly: he is even as it were upon the way, and will be here speedily,
appearing in the flesh. And he amplifies this by the Effect, which the Hope
and Promise of Christ's coming, should work in the hearts of his People, viz.
Singular joy and rejoicing, notwithstanding the present Miseries which now lay
heavy upon the Church [Rejoyce] and that [greatly] [O Daughter of Zion] the
Church, [ Exodus 32.17, 18.
shout] make an open Declaration of the joy thou conceivest [O Daughter
Ierusalem] either Synonymice, to the former, the Church, or happily, the State:
for both have singular Benefit by Christ's Kingdom. and generally CHRIST is all
our joy.

2. A threefold Description,

1. Of the Person of the Messiah, what a manner of King he should be whom they
expected: He is described by three most excellent Properties of a good King;

1. Justice, [He is just] most strict and equal in his Government, not
favoring his People in their offenses. See Esaias 11.3, 4, 5. and 9.7. Exodus
23.21.

2. Protection and Safeguard of his Subjects [And having salvation](...) not
taken passively in Niphal, for Servatus, but actively for the same that (...)
Servator, a Savior: So rendered by the Paraphrast (...) and Liberator,
Salvator. See Mat. 1.21. Some turn it, [and saved himselfe] And so the French
[Et qui se garentit de pau soy mesme] which is true, that his own Power saved
himself from being overcome by death, etc. but yet this rendering is too narrow
for the sense. That conceit of Aben Ezra, [He is just, and by his justice,(...)
he shall be saved from the Sword of God and Magog] is a Jewish dream of
Christ's temporal Kingdom.

3. Humility, [lowly](...) afflictus, humiliatus, pauper, Mat. 21.5. and the
Seventie (...) Humilis, Mansuetus, Meek. The first Interpretation of the word
respects the Poverty and Meandness of Christ's outward state: and so the
Paraphrast takes it [(...) Afflectus] Iunius and our old Translators, [Poore]
And the French [Abject]: The second Interpretation respects the inward
Lowliness of Christ's heart; as far from Pride, as his State was from all
Pomp: and so our new Translators take it, according to Matthew. Let us take it
in both senses: for both agree to Christ, who was both poor and humble, A
King, quite of another Condition, than the magnificent and proud Monarchs of
the World are. This lowly Mind and mean Estate of the Messiah, as it appeared
through the whole course of his life, from his birth to his death; so was it
then very remarkable, when, above all other times, he seemed to take greatest
State upon him, namely, when he made his solemn Entrance into his City of
Jerusalem; which is here fore-shewen unto Zachary by the Prophetical Spirit.
For, albeit at that time the Acclamations and Honor the People gave unto him,
as unto a King, were not small: yet, in regard of outward Magnificence, they
were far inferior to the Pomp and Stateliness, which earthly Potentates
make at their Entries into the head Cities of their Kingdoms. The Manner of
his Entrance, in all humble and lowly sort, is set forth by one special
Circumstance of it, viz. the kind of Beast that he should ride upon, [And
riding upon an Asse] not carried in a Triumphall Chariot, or on some stately
Courser, or on a Mule, as the fashion of Kings, 1. Reg. 1.33.
before and then, was, especially in greater Solemnities: but on an Ass, a
poor silly Beast. It Is true, that the riding on an Ass was a Custom not
dishonorable, but used even by such as were Princes and great Men; as Judge.
5.10. [Speake ye that ride on white Asses, ye that sit in judgment, etc.]
And the thirty Sons of Iair, Judge. 10.4. with the forty Sons and thirty
Nephews of Abdon, Judge. 12.14. are said to ride upon so many Asse-Colts:
likewise 2 Samuel 17.23. of Achitophel, a great Counselor of State; and 2 Samuel
19.26. of Mephibosheth, a Kings Son: yet I suppose it to be probable, that
at this time that old Custom was almost worn out: And though meaner men did
use the Ass, both for Travel and Labor; yet that the Princes and Kings of
the Jews for a long time, especially such as they had after the Captivity,
did imitate the Customs of all Nations, and used the more comely and graceful
Creature the Horse. However, Christ's Manner of riding was certainly far from
King-like Magnificence, even in regard of the Beast he rode on: the rather,
because it was not an Ass bred up a purpose, and fitted for the Saddle, but a
wild Colt, following his Damme, laboring in the yoke, [ Even.
and upon a Colt the Foale of an Asse] (...) Pullum filium Asinarum, that is,
as the Chaldee, (...) Filium Asinae, turning the plural by the singular: and
so Matthew 21.5. (...), Pullum natum Asina subjugi, used to the yoke. And out
of this Translation of Matthew Iunius and Piscator give the Reason, why this
Foale is said to be natus Asinabus, Because of his running after two Asses
coupled together in one yoke, whereof one was his Damme. Now this Clause is,
That is, says Kimchi, (...) according to that Judge. 12.7. He was buried (...)
that is, (...) in one of the Cities of Gilead.
as I take it, but an Exegesis of the former, showing what manner of Ass it
should be that Christ would ride on, namely, not one ready tamed and trained
to the saddle, but a young wild Colt, whereon never man sat: wherein, as there
was a neglect of all curiosity and ornament, so was there some Demonstration
also of Christ's power over the Creature. Claresoente gloria inter humilem
simplicitatem. Whereas Sanctius, after many others, take these two Clauses
severally, and make, that Christ first rode on the Damme, then on the Colt. No
such thing appears by the So Kimchi, (...) i.e. ^epen^^em dive^si^ very is.
The like repetition see Judge. 8.19. and passim. Genesis 49 11.
Evangelists, where the accomplishment of this praediction is related: Matthew.
21. Mark. 11. Luc. 1^. Ioh. 12.
Three of them mention nothing but the Colt; and the Circumstance which they
add [whereon never man sate] implies that Christ rode only on him. And though
Matthew say, that both were brought and covered with garments, scilicet, that
Christ might choose whether he pleased; yet its like one went lire, the way
being so short that that Christ went, about a mile and a half. That Mystery
which many make to be contained here, that by the Ass was meant the Jews, by
the Colt the Gentiles, and by Christ's riding of both, his Dominion over all, is
a conceit which was merrily made by some Ancients: but they that in good
earnest maintain it for a truth, have too much of the Beast.

Further this manner of Christ's Entrance, as it showed his Humility, so does
it also imply his Peaceablenesse: The Ass is a Beast used in Peace, the Horse
for War. Rabbi Kimchies words are worth the setting down; He rode on the
Ass, (...) that is, Not for want, for all the World is in his Dominion; but
out of Humility: and further, to show that the Israelites should have no need
of Horses and Chariots; as it follows in the next Verse.

And this of the Description of his Person by his excellent qualities, whereby
he is differenced from the unjust, destroying, and proud Monarchs of the
World, such as had afflicted the Jews State: the next is the Description,

2. Of the Kingdom of the Messiah: what manner of Government they should
expect: Not a Temporal Rule, as they hoped for, but a Spiritual. Which is yet
closely carried, lest the Jews, in this their Misery, might take offense at
it. Now this his Kingdom is described,

1, By the Means that should be used for its Establishment and Propagation:
which are set down

1 Negatively, Not by outward Force. By denying the use of all Instruments of
War, [And I will cut off the Chariot of Ephraim] i. e. Israel [and the Horse
from Ierusalem] out of Judah [and the Battle Bow shall be cut off] i. e.
Synecdochicws, No Engine of War whatsoever shall be of use in the Spiritual
Kingdom of Christ, typified by Ephraim and Judah; Christ should rule over all
the Tribes, and defend his Church, but not by force of Arms: Nor were the
Jews to think, as they vainly did, that under the Messiah they should become
Emperors of the World, and bring all Nations under subjection of the Jewish
Crown, by power of their victorious Arms. No, the Chariot, the Horse, the
Bow, all Earthly Weapons should have no force to preserve and enlarge Christ's
spiritual Empire over men's hearts and consciences. See Esaias 2.4. Micah 5.12. 2
Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. Further, this may imply, that as outward Force cannot help
forward, so it shall not hinder the Kingdom of Christ.

2. Possitively, by the power of Preaching the Gospel of Peace. [And he shall
speak Peace unto the Heathen] the Gentiles: to whom he shall speak Peace, i.
e. peaceably, as Psalm. 85.8. and 28.3. by publishing of the Gospel of
Reconciliation. See Acts 10.36, 37. Ephesians. 2.17.

2. By the Extent of it; it should be as large as the World, stretching it
self into all quarters of the Earth, [and his Dominion shall be from Sea] the
Red Sea, or Arabian Sea, [to Sea] the Mediterranean Sea, [and from the River]
Euphrates [to the Ends of the Earth] to the utmost Bounds of the Holy Land
toward Egypt, viz. the River Sichor, or Rhinocornra. Now the Holy Ghost
mentions these as the limits of Christ's Kingdom, not that it stretched no
further, but partly speaking to the capacity of the vulgar, who conceived
these Bounds to be of so large extent, as beyond them there was scarce any
thing; partly according to the Type: these were the utmost Borders first
assigned Exodus 23. Deuteronomy. 11.
to the Land of Promise, the Temporal Kingdom whereof was a Type of Christ's
Spiritual Kingdom. which should extend in compass as far as the largest
Borders of the Kingdom of the Even when it was ruled by Solomon, the greatest
King that State ever had, and a most special type of Christ: to whose times
this Prophecy has peculiar relation, as is apparent by Psalm. 72.
Israelites; partly by a common custom of speech, wherein the Borders of the
Holy Land are put for the utmost quarters of the World: as Psalm. 89.12. where
Tabor and Hermon are put for the West and East. Psalm. 107.3. Verse 10.

This of the Description of his Kingdom: in the third place follows the
Declaration,

3. Of the Benefits that the Jews had, and should have by the Messiah: and
these respect,

1. The Time past, viz. Deliverance out of the Captivity of Babylon, granted
unto the Jews by virtue of the Covenant made with them, and ratified in and by
Christ. [As for thee also] viz. O Daughter Zion. [By the blood of thy Covenant]
that Covenant which was made first with Abraham, Genesis 15. and sealed by the
blood of Circumcision, Genesis 17. that of his Seed the Messiah should come, in
whom all the World should be blessed: and which was afterward renewed in most
solemn manner at Mount Sinai, between God and the whole Nation of the Jews;
where he took them for his peculiar People, among whom to preserve his Church,
and they took God for their God. The Conditions and Manner of which Covenant
are expressed, Exodus 23. the latter end. and Chap. 24. the beginning. This
Covenant was confirmed by the blood of Sacrifices, Exodus 24.8. figuring the
Sacrifice of Christ, from whom this Compact between God and the Jews was to
have its full ratification and strength. Now albeit the Jews (for the
generality) had broken this Covenant, and were for such their Transgression
sorely punished: yet God for his part was always mindful of it; and because
of it, did remember the Jews in their Adversities, and delivered them out of
Captivity, that he might make good unto them the Promises touching the
Messiah. This is excellently described, Levit. 26.42, 44, 45. By virtue of this
Covenant, as at other times, so now they were delivered from their great
Captivity under the Assyrians. [I have sent forth] set at liberty, [thy
Prisoners] thy Captives, held in bondage and thraldom [out of the Pit wherein
is no water] i. e. out of Prison; and the worst place in the Prison, the
Dungeon: Such was that, and so called, wherein Jeremiah was inprisoned, Ier.
38.^. of which the Text likewise says, (...) Such dirty places their Dungeons
were, like Pits emptied of water, but having mud the left at bottom.
(...) a darkesome dirty Vault underground, wherein to Prisoners were let down.
By which Psalm. 40.2.
Metaphor is expressed the disconsolate and hard Estate of the Jews, under
which they were held during the Captivity. And this I take to be the plain
meaning of this place, according to the reading of our last Translators, which
is most natural to the original Text. To which reading the [ Quant a toy, a
cause du sang de ton alliance je mettray, tes prisonniers horse de la fosse. la
ou il ny a point d'eau]
French also accord, only that they render [I have sent forth] by the future, I
will send forth. Iunius, and our first Translators distinguish this Verse into
two several Clauses, whereof the former should imply Remission of Sins, the
other Deliverance out of Captivity. But the Text does not kindly admit of
those additions of [Infecta] in Iunius, or [shalt be saved] in our old
Translation. It Is more natural to take those words [(...)] absolutely, not
construed with any that follow; as in the like construction, Psalm. 73.2. and
Verse 20. with many the like places in the Psalms.

Sanctius, after Ribera and other Popish Commentators, make a foul coil about
this Text, and to establish the false reading of the old Vulgar, and the new
invention of Limbus patrum, fall upon this place, and bemangle it pitifully.
There is no Remedy but in their opinions it must needs be corrupted by the
Jews malice: (...) of the feminine must needs stand as sometime it does. Number.
11.15. Deuteronomy. 5.27.
for the masculine (...), and (...) corrupted for (...), and (...) foysted in
for (...), and (...) cogged in for (...): else how should the Vulgar Greek and
Latin be so mistaken, as to render it, (...), etc. and, Tu emisisti, etc. And
how should Limbus be established out of this place, were it not an Apostrophe
of the Prophet, speaking to Christ, and declaring how he by his bloody
sacrifice had ransomed the Fathers out of their Purgatory, or infernal Limbus?
Wherefore Sanctius is peremptory, Textus Hebraicus quem modo habemus, sine
dubio corruptus a Iudaeis: and, Volunt autem dum Christo tantam gloriam, and
nobis tantum ad veritatem (an old Wives tale) cognoscendam lumen invident, ad
Synagogam suam, sieve ad Jerusalem restitutam, hunc locum non flectere molliter,
sed violenter contorquere. Yea, in the orginall reading he sees not what
reasonable sense can be made of it, and what great cause there should be, cur
adeo in sanguine Foederis exultandum sit? to what purpose this of the blood of
the Covenant should be alleged about the Restitution of the Jewish State and
Church. Sure it is pity these men should not enjoy their conceits, who, rather
then they will dare to suspect their own opinions, will venture to corrupt the
Scriptures for the confirmation of any doting fancy. Which yet they cannot
gain out of this place, no, though we read it according to their
Criticismes. For what? must this Pit without Water needs be Abraham's Bosom? or
must Abraham's bosom be Limbus patrum, a place (as Sanctius speaks) Magnae
profunditatis and horroris, squallidus, teter, sordidus, bordering upon hell;
proverbially so termed from common Prisons and Dungeons. Which (as Ier. 38.6.
Genesis 37.24.
Ieremies) were sine aqua, but not sine luto. They are unworthy their heads
should ever rest in Abraham's Bosom, that make that place of the Saints rest,
to be their layle and Prison. And Sanctius, with the rest, while here they
give such dreadful Epithites to it, forget what Abraham himself says of
Lazarus in his Bosom, That he was then comforted, Luke 17.25. But no more of
this Dream: I come to those Benefits; which respect,

2. The Time to come: and these are partly Temporal, partly Spiritual; as
Christ is the Fountain of both unto his Church, and they concern either

1. The two Tribes, returned from Captivity, to the Verse of the tenth Chapter.

2. The whole Nation of the Jews, from thence to the end of the tenth Chapt.

1. The Benefits upon the Jews returned home, in the times presently ensuing,
till Christ's coming, are double:

1. Temporal preservation against the Violence of their Enemies, and by name,
of the Grecian Empire, with which they were to have continual conflicts. This
is set forth,

1. Generally, in

1. An Exhortation, showing them whither they were to repair for help and
succor in this their miserable state: [Turne ye to the strong Hold] (...)
Fortress, where you may besafe against all dangers that come upon you. But
what or who is this Castle or Fort to which the Jews are exhorted to repair
for safety? I take it, that it is not Jerusalem, or the Holy Land, but the
Messiah, who would be to Jerusalem and the Jews a strong Castle of Defense
against the Adversary. And this will better appear, if we consider who they
are that are here spoken to, [yee Prisoners of hope] i.e. hoping, or As the
French [Qui az ez e^p^rance] and the Targum, Sperantes li^erationem, (...)
who have hope, viz. of Deliverance. Who were these? Either the Jews in
Captivity, or else those that were now returned. Not those that yet tarried in
Babylon; for they cannot be termed Prisoners of Hope, nor be thought to long
for Deliverance, who when the Prison door was open, and an easy way made for
their escape, refused the opportunity, and wilfully continued in Babylon; as
has been seen before. And no doubt, but they, seeing how ill matters were
likely to succeed with those that were returned, did applaude themselves in
their choice, in sitting still where they were. Wherefore I conceive this
speech is not directed to them, to exhort them to return to Jerusalem, but to
those that were already returned, to persuade them to And our last Translators
imply so much, in rendering (...) not, Return, but, Turn: intimating the
conversion of their desires and hopes toward the strong Hold, rather than the
motion of their bodies from place to place, as Es. 45.12.
turn their hopes and hearts toward the Messiah. They had been Prisoners in
Captivity, and were by him delivered out of it, Verse 11. and they were partly
Prisoners still, expecting further freedom from such afflictions and dangers
as encompassed them on every side: under the straightness and burden whereof
this poor People sighed, waiting for the Redemption promised by the Messiah.
To these God speaks, and that in general, to the whole State, though happily
more particularly also to such as looked not only for Temporal but Spiritual
deliverance by the Messiah: such as are mentioned Luke 2.25.38. though this is
certain, that even the best among the Jews had their thoughts more upon a
Temporal than Spiritual Redemption by Christ. The Jesuits here dream of
another Apostrophe, which the Prophet makes to the Patriaks, sticking fast in
the mire of Limbo, and expecting Christ's help to pull them out. A conceit as
idle as that in the former verse.

2. In a Promise, that they should not only find succor by that strong Hold,
but also have double comfort to that which formerly they had enjoyed. [Even to
day] when your State seems very miserable and deplorable; yet [doe I declare]
make an open Promise unto you [that I will render (...) Targum (...) two for
one.
double unto thee] not only Defense against the Enemy, but such singular
Favor moreover, as should be double to all that ever they enjoyed in their
most happy Estate. Which was fulfilled by the incarnation of Christ, and
publishing of the Gospel; a Benefit incomparably Hag. 2.9.
greater, than ever the Jewish State enjoyed in their greatest Prosperity, if
they had made a good use of it. [Vnto thee] (...) a sudden, but not unusual
change of the Person, for (...): God speaking, as it were, to each of those
Prisoners in particular, or, collectively, to one, as all. Verse 12.

2. Particularly, describing this Deliverance of the Jewish Church, in many
specials:

1. The Persons who should contend, including also the time when this
Deliverance should be granted, and the Promise verse 12. fulfilled. The Persons
Defendant are the Jews, Assailant the Graecians. And the Messiah, after that
by his power he has preserved the Jews from the Graecians violence, should
grace Iudaea with his Presence. [When I have bent Judah for me, filled the Bow
with Ephraim, and raised up thy Sons, O Sion] Judah and Ephraim are here taken
for the same, by an elegant variety, as before Verse 10. and are no more, but
the Sons of Sion; such of the Jews as were returned. For that Ephraim,
properly the ten Tribes, had any thing to do with these Grecian Kings, it
cannot be affirmed. Wherefore I take them for Synonymaes; unless we will,
with Sanctius, say, not improbably, that mention is here of Ephraim, partly in
regard that many of the ten Tribes returned with the two; of which before:
partly in regard of the Epithet here given them, of filling the Bow, or
Archerie, wherein the Ephramites excelled, Psalm. 78.9. [Against thy Sons, O
Greece] Those Kings of Egypt and Syria, which were of the Posterity of
Alexanders Captains, whom he brought out of Greece with him, and who, after
his death, seized on those Kingdoms, and for many years grievously vexed the
Jews. These Kings are principally meant, though they might also use Grecian
Soldiers in their Armies, which yet is not very likely. By this place it is
apparent, to what times this Prophecy is to be referred, namely, to that of
the Maccabees, when the Jews were mightily preserved from the rage of so many
merciless Tyrants.

2. The Means of their Victory and Deliverance, which should be from God, and
not by their own Puissance: This is expressed,

1. Figuratively, in many lofty Tropes: which touch

1. Either the subordinate Means to be used by the Jews, but blessed and
prospered by God. Their Bow, and Sword, and Warre-like Praeparations should
have all their strength from God: The Jews should be Instruments, God the
principal Agent. [When I have bent Judah for me, and filled the Bow with
Ephraim] that is, Metaphorically, Prospered their Arms; as if not they, but my
self did both bend and draw their Bows: or thus more simply, but to the same
sense, When I have made Judah as my Bow bent, and Ephraim as a Shaft, wherewith
I have filled, i.e. Implere arcum, to fill a Bow, is, To draw it up to its full
bent, till the Arrow be at the head, and the Bow make a semicircle. The Phrase
is used 2 Kings ^.24. (...) per Hypallagen (...) He filled the Bow in his hand,
i.e. says Kimchi, (...) the same that is in 1 Kings. 22.34. (...) i.e. A man
drew a Bow in his full strength. So Veget. de re Mill^. l. 1. c. 15. M^ior
adhi^enda, solertia ut Arcum diligenter ac sapienter tenean, ut fortiter
impleant, ut staistra fixa sit: and Sidon. Apoli. Ep l. 1 ep. 2. Of Theodoricus
K. of Goths his skill in Archerie, Spicula capit, implet, expellit.
Drawn up my Bow unto the Arrow-head, to be discharged upon the Graecians.
Some difference there is in the reading, The Paraphrast, the Vulgar, Iunius,
the French, and our former Translators, join (...) to the first comman, [When
I have bent Judah for me as a Bow] but the accent Rebia over (...) makes a comma
there, and leaves (...) for the next following: and so the reading is smoother
than either our old, [Ephraims hand have I filled] in that sense as 2 Kings
9.24. or the French [Et auray remply Ephraim comme un carquois, and shall have
filled Ephraim as a Quiver] for Ephraim is not here the Quiver, but the
Arrows, wherewith the Bow should be filled: Though Kimchi also interpret the
place so, (...) i. e. Ephraim erit mihi tanquam Pharetrae sagittarum plena. but
this fits not so properly. Though for the sense the difference is little, all
signifying, that the Armies and Arms of the Jews, should be Gods powerful
instruments for destruction of the Enemy: And so in the next words it is
plainly expounded [And raised up thy Sons etc.] awakned and put courage into
the Jews, to provide and stand for their Defense. [And made thee] O Zion, ye
Jews [as the Sword of a mighty man] as a sharp sword in a strong man's hand
that can use it to purpose. Verse 13.

2. Or the chief Means, viz. Gods immediate power, manifested fortheir
Deliverance. Which is declared by allusion to those Deliverances which God had
in former times given unto the Israelites, at the Red Sea, in the Wilderness,
against the Canaanites etc. wherein, by thunders, lightnings, and tempest, he
showed his power in the defense of his People. [ And the Lord shall be seen
(...) may be turned Contra eo^, and the French does so here, but not so fitly,
over them] his powerful Protection of his People shall be apparent: like as
when he showed himself over the Israelites in the Cloud, Exodus 14.19.24. This
is further described in three particulars, wherein God would fight for his
Church,

1. Lightnings, which are compared to Psalm. 144.6.
Arrows: [And his Arrow shall go forth as the lightning] swiftly, suddenly
and unresistably.

2. Thunder, like the noise of a Trumpet, to sound to the Battle; and more, to
affright the Enemy. [And the Lord shall blow the Trumpet] God himself shall
be the Captain, and his Thunder shall be as the sound of a Trumpet, to gather
his Forces together, and give a dreadful Alarm to the Enemy.

3. Whirle-windes, [And shall goe] against the Enemy, with his People [with
whirle-windes] Targum (...) Tempestuous winds that hurl and scatter here and
there with unresistable Violence. Sanctius understands it of the Swiftness of
Gods proceeding: but its better to interpret it of his furious Violence, which
he would use against the Enemy; and therefore Whirlewindes, (...) not simply
Winds are spoken of. [Of the South] (...) Targum (...) because Teman lay South
to Jerusalem. But why of the South? Sanctius gives two reasons: 1. Because like
as the South Wind blows against the North, so these Judgments should fall
upon the Northren Countries. This is far fetched, and little worth. 2. Because
the South wind is more tempestuous than others. Arist. Met, l 1. c. 5. (...).
This is something, if Aristotle's observation in Greece fit other Countries, and
so See Lu. 12.54 55. [When ye see a cloud rise out of the West, you say
straightway, a snowre comes, and so it is. And when ye see the South-winde
blow, ye say that it will be hot, and is comes to pass.]
Iudaea: which may be doubted, because of their diverse Situations, this having
Land, that Sea to the South of it, which much alters the Winds. Wherefore (I
suppose) we may not unfitly interpret it by allusion to those Tempests,
wherewith God overthrew the Egyptians at the Red Sea, Southwards of Iudaea.
Which, how dreadful they were, not only in Thundrings, Lightnings, and
horrible Rain, but also in outrageous Winds, is apparent by considering of
those places, ( Psalm. 77.16, 17, 18. and Exodus 15.10.

Touching the fulfilling of this Prophecy, whether God did show any such
extraordinary works in the Battles of the Jews against the Graecians, or that
hereby no more is meant than his present and special aid in their
Deliverance; it cannot well be decided, unless Story were a little more
particular in this business. Something there is 2 Mac. 2.21, 22 Chap. 5.2, 3.
Chap. 10.28, 29, 30. Chap. 11.8, 10. Which shows, that God did manifest his
powerful presence to these, distressed in very extraordinary manners s. q.
Verse 14.

Thus we have the means of their Deliverance, expressed figuratively: the
next is,

2. Plainly, in these words [The Lord of Hosts shall defend them] God, that is
Captain of the Armies of Angels, Men, and all Creatures, shall fight for them,
and give them the Victory. Verse 15.

Thus far the second particular, the means of their Deliverance: now follows
the third.

3. The Victory it self, described likewise in Metaphorical Terms, of eating
the flesh, and drinking the blood of their Enemies. [And they shall devoure] i.
e. slay, and destroy; as the Targum, (...) occidont: by allusion in this of
eating, and that of drinking, to the barbarous Custom of many Nations, who
ravened upon the very Bodies of their flaine Enemies. But the Jews should not
be so barbarous: therefore the next words tell us what this devouring is, [and
subdue with sling-stones] Synecdochice, by Some by weak means, as David did
Goliath.
force of Artillery, and Weapons of War: Among which the use of the Sling was
one, practiced by the Jews in ancient times, Iud. 20.16. 1 Chronicles. 12.2. and
likely it was not quite neglected now. [And they shall drinke] their Enemies
blood, in that sense as before, [and a noise, as through Wine] shouting and
triumphing in the shedding of their Enemies blood, as men use to do that have
well drunk of Wine, which makes them merry and frolic: [And they shall be
filled] with blood and spoil [as the Bowles] (...) singular for the plural
(...) Exodus 38.3.
Bowls and Basins, that held the blood of the Sacrifices, [and as thee corners
of the Altar] (...), by the Targum (...) latus, the sides: but rather its the
same with the four Ibid. ver. 2.
(...), whereon the Horns, (...), of the Altar stood: which were Levit. 4.
all bespringled with the blood of the Sacrifices. By which similitudes are
setforth those bloody Victories which the Jews should get upon the Graecians.
This Interpretation of this Verse seems agreeable enough, and it is so taken
by the most: But Iunius, and, with him, the French Translators, make another
sense of it, understanding this verse of a double consequent that should follow
their Victories, namely,

1. A joyful and peaceable Possession of their own Wealth, and the Enemies
Spoil. [They shall eate] i.e. quietly enjoy their State [after they have
subdued] (...) rendered [after] not [and] [the sling-stones] i. e. Metonymice,
the Kimhi expounds it by the same Metonymie, and adds a conceit, that the
Graecians are here called (...) in opposition to the Jews, ho were afterward
styled (...)
Slingers; of which there were many among these Enemies of the Jews: and
Synecdochice, their Enemies. [And they shall drink and make a noise, as
through wine] rejoice greatly in their Victories and Peace, with such mirth as
men use at Banquets.

2. Thanksgiving for their Victories: and they read the last Clause thus, [
They Implebunt tum craterem, tum angulos altaris. (...) where the rendering of
(...) tum tum (as, so) is agreeable to the usual acception of that particle of
similitude, as in Es. 24.2. Hos 4.9. Genesis 18.25. But I know not how to
understand the French reading here, [and en rempliront le bassin, commele comgs
de (...) i.e. and with it ( sc. Wine) they shall fill the Basin or Bowl as the
corners of the altar.
shall fill both or, (as) the Bowl, and or, (so) the Corners of the Altar]
scil. with the blood and bodies of Sacrifices offered up in great number for a
thankes-giving for their Victories. And unto this sense the Paraphrast inclines
in part, and Rab. Scel. altogether: who comments thus, [They shall eate]
namely, (...), the spoil of their Enemies [and subdue] (...) [treading under
their feet the stones of the sling] i. e. (...): (...) The Graecians, who are
skild in the Art of shooting and slinging. [and make a noise as through wine]
(...) with the voice of mirth and gladness, like those that drink wine. [and
shall fill] (...) their souls or hearts with good, or Mirth [the Bowle] (...)
that was full of blood before the Altar, [as the Corners of the Altar] (...)
where they offered wine, and the wine was poured out upon it, or flowed upon
it. (So that he understands the Bowl to belong to one, the Corners to another
Altar, and he quotes it out of the Talmid. But we find no such Altar (in
Scriptures.) Ergo quaere.

4. The Cause of all this happy Deliverance, which is Gods singular love and
tender regard he has toward the Jews, according to his Covenant made with
them, that they should be his peculiar People, among whom he would establish
his Church: wherefore as before he said [The Lord of Hosts shall defend them]
so now here [The Lord their God shall save them in that day] with special
reference to the Covenant which God entered into with the Jews: in regard
whereof God promises that they shall be in his protection and chiefest care, in
a double manner,

1. As a Flock, whereof he will be the Shepherd, and defend them. (...) as a
man defends his sheep with all his might, as Kimchi interprets, [ -- Save them
in that day as the flock of his people] as a People which are to Psalm.
77.20.78.71.
him peculiar; of whom he has the Custody as of a flock of sheep, among
all the Nations of the world, who were but as Herds of Goats, or worse, as
ravening Wolves, preying upon the Jews.

2. As the precious stones of a Crown or Diadem, which God will take care of
to preserve and advance, as their King. [For they shall be as the stones of a
Crowne] (...) as the stones of the R. Solomon, expounding it of the Maccabees
that were Priests, (...) So also does Aben Ezra.
Ephod, says the Paraphrast; of which Exodus 28.9. but there is no reason to
forsake the usual signification of (...) for a Crown, or Regal Diadem,
which is beset with stones of great price. And the Jews should be as dear to
God, as such a Crown is to a King. This Interpretation of this place is
justified by the very same Prophecy of these times, Esaias 62.2, 3. where the
like similitude is used, [Lifted up as an Ensigne] (...) following the
propriety of the word, not taking it at large for (...), as Kimchi, For, the
Jews should be, not like a Crown enclosed in a Cabinet, but set forth to the
view of all, lifted up on high for a regal Standard or Ensign, for all People
to gather themselves to it, and join themselves to the Church of the Jews.
See Es. 62.10. and 11.10, 12 [upon his Land] in the Land of Canaan or Iudaea,
wherein God preserved his Church, and advanced it as a Banner displayed, to
call in the Gentiles to the society thereof.

Iunius, Sanctius, and the French, Inter haec signa and lapides, qui locum esse
Deo consecratum oftendent, pascet Dominus populum suum tanquam gregem: sicut
Pastor inter nota pas^u^ saxoque terminali ab alijs distincta pecus agit.
Sanctiue.
construe it otherwise: either that by (...) are meant Lapides separationis, i.
e. terminales, limitanei, mere stones, set up to distinguish one Field from
another: and then they refer it to the former, thus, God will save and feed
them as a flock, within their proper grounds and pasturages, which the Enemy
before time had encroached upon, but now Marks or Bound-stones should be
pitched up, within which compass the Enemy should not approach: Or that by
these stones of a Crown, are meant * Crowned stones; Tropaea opere coronario
cincta and lemniscata; Pillars of Stone, whose Epistylia or Chapiters were
wrought about in fashion of a Crown, and they set up for Trophies, in memory
of such Victories as they should get. The former sense is very much strained,
and this latter satisfies not fully.

Now this Cause of the Jews Felicity is further and more plainly expressed in
a patheticall exclamation, whereinto the Prophet breaks forth, admiring the
singular goodness of God toward his Church. [For how great is his goodness,
and how great is his beauty?] Whose? Gods, or the Messiah, who is good, and
that in the most excellent manner, beautiful too: good and beautiful in
himself, and also in his abundant favors, and the most comely Administration
of his Church: his grace and wisdom in both is such as cannot be expressed.
This Clause has a double reference, 1. To that which goes before, whereto it
is as a Conclusion. 2. To that which follows in the next words, and the
beginning of the next Chapter, touching the Relief of their present Penury,
by sending Abundance. The division of the Chapters here make the cohaerence
somewhat difficult: but if it be well considered, it will appear, that the
next words belong to the matter of the next Chapter.

Hitherto of the first Benefit, viz. The temporal Deliverance of the Jews
from the rage of such Parts of the Grecian Empire, as they had to do withal.
Now follows the second Benefit toward these Jews that were returned, viz.

2. Relief of their penurious Estate, by promising them Abundance of outward
Necessaries. The Jews had been a great while pinched with Famine, and for the
time to come, having to deal with so many Enemies that should harry their
Country, they might doubt to feel a continual scarcity of necessary
Provision. But God that purposed to preserve them, meant also to provide for
them: and as his goodness should be seen in the one, so should it not be
wanting in the other, to supply them with necessary maintenance. This blessing
is,

1. Promised: [Corne shall make the young men cheerful, and new wine the
Maides] under these two species comprising all necessary Provision whatsoever:
which should be afforded in such Abundance, as should make them who fainted
before through scarcity and want, full of life, cheerfulness and mirth.
(...) germinare, aut florere, aut loqui faciet, scilicet, (...) Metaphorically,
fill them with joy and thankes-giving, and properly make them strong, lusty,
and fruitful, who before pined and withered away, Lam. 2.12.21. And this was
partly fulfilled at that time, when Zachary prophesied, when God began to ease
the People of their long famine, as it is Chap. 8.2. and Hag. 2. partly in
times succeeding.

CHAP. X.
Ask you of the Lord Rain in the time of the latter Rain: so shall the Lord
make white Clouds, and give you showers of Rain, and to every one grass in
the field.

2 Surely the Idols have spoken vanity, and the Soothsayers have seen a lie,
and the Dreamers have told a vain thing: they comfort in vain: therefore they
went away as sheep: they were troubled, because there was no Shepherd.

3 My wrath was kindled against the Shepherds, and I did visit the Goats:
but the Lord of hosts will visit his flock, the house of Judah, and will make
them as his beautiful horse in the Battle.

4 Out of him shall the corner come forth: out of him the nail, out of him the
bow of battle, and out of him every Appointer of Tribute also.

5 And they shall be as the mighty men, which tread down their Enemies in the
mire of the streets in the battle, and they shall fight, because the Lord is
with them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded.

6 And I will strenthen the house of Judah, and I will preserve the house of
Joseph, and I will bring them again, for I pity them, and they shall be as
though I had not cast them off: for I am the Lord their God, and will hear
them.

7 And they of Ephraim shall be as a Giant, and their heart shall rejoice as
through wine: yea, their children shall see it, and be glad: and their heart
shall rejoice in the Lord.

8 I will hiss for them, and gather them: for I have redeemed them: and they
shall increase, as they have increased.

9 And I will sow them among the People, and they shall remember me in far
Countries: and they shall live with their Children, and turn again.

10 I will bring them again also out of the Land of Egypt, and gather them out
of Ashur: and I will bring them into the Land of Gilead, and Lebanon, and place
shall not be found for them.

11 And he shall go into the sea with affliction, and shall smite the waves in
the Sea, and all the Depthes of the River shall dry up: and the pride of Ashur
shall be cast down, and the scepter of Egypt shall depart away.

12 And I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk in his Name,
says the Lord.

2. AMplified two ways:

1. By the true means whereby these blessings were to be obtained: which are,

1. Prayer unto God in the time of their necessities, [Aske ye of the Lord
Raine] Synecdoch. for all other blessings of Fruitfulness and Increase,
whereof that is a principal Causs [in the time of the latter Raine] when there
is greatest need of it. (...) Pluvia serotina, The latter Rain, which fell in
the latter end of the Spring, between the latter end of March and May, which
brought the Corn to an ear, and made it kearne, before Harvest: There was
anothet Rain also greatly needful (...) Pluvia matutina, The former Rain,
which fell in the Autum, about the latter end of September and beginning of
October, in the seed time. Great Job. 29.23.
expectation there was of these two most seasonable Raines: in regard that
Syria and Iudaea lying very hot, there was not, nor is at this day usually for
three or four Months This is confirmed, not only by that 1 Samuel 12.17. where
rain is an unusual thing to be seen in harvest; and that of Hierome on Amos
4.^. who lived in Iudaea, and says, he never saw Rain there in June and
July, but also by the common experience of such as at this day live there by,
at Aleppo a little more Northerly, where, for three or four Months after May,
they scarce have so much as any deaw upon the ground.
space, from the end of May to the end of September, any rain at all, nay
scarce so much as any Deaw. And therefore if the former Rain in seed time had
not fell, the ground, by reason of that long drought, would have been unfit for
tilling for its hardness and want of moisture; and if the latter fell not
before Harvest, the Corn would have parched away in the blade, before it had
bin eared and kearned.

2. Gods Blessing upon the work of nature, in making Clouds, pouring out of
showers, and causing the Earth to give her Increase. [So the Lord shall make
bright Clouds] (...) the Seventie (...), apparitiones, mistaking the root from
(...) videre: The Chaldaean (...) ventos, but improperly, and not to the Text:
The Vulgar nives for nubes, by an error of the Translator or Scribe. (...)
properly signify Fulgetra, Coruscationes, Lightnings, Job 28.26.

The French turn it properly [de esclairs] Iunius [Nimbos] i.e. more stormy
and violent Raines: our old Translators [white Clouds] our new [bright Clouds].
If we take it for lightnings, it must be understood by a as Kimchi (...)
Coruscationes erunt (...) pluvia
Metonymie of the adjunct, Rain being a usual concomitant of lightning and
thunder, though also such weather is more for terror than comfort. If we take
it for Clouds, what is here meant by Bright, or White Clouds? seeing here is a
promise of Rain, and such Clouds are barren Clouds; as experience shows,
those that are full of Rain are dark and black. Buxdorfius verbo (...) has
something to this Point not improbable, out of Bereschith Rabba, and the
Talmud; to this effect, The Clouds have five names (...), and (...) are
interpreted to be Nubes cursitantes, i.e. Thin Clouds, fleeting under the
thicker and heavier: that which in English we call the Rack, and these are
thin whitish Clouds that fly swiftly in the air most commonly before and
after very rainy weather. And so they may be called (...) Clouds bringing
rain, as R. Solomon interprets (...) here. Sed quaere.

[And give them showers of raine] (...) The Seventy (...).
Imbrem pluviae, Synonymice^, yet with some Epitasis, for plentiful and
sufficient rain. [to every one grass in the field] (...) that is, as the
Paraphrast well expounds it, (...) i. e. Corn for the food of man, and grass
for cattle: for (...) comprises all, namely, (...) olus, (...) faenum, (...)
frumentum, and (...) legumen, as Schindler observes verbo (...). Verse 1.

2. By the wrong means, whereto this People had formerly trusted, and bin
deceived, and whereto in their blindness they happily might have recourse
again: these were their Idols and false Prophets. The little help and great
hurt which the Jews had received from them is here largely expressed, to the
intent that they might learn henceforward, whom to seek unto for succor,
namely, to God alone. By that which is past he puts them in mind what should
be the success for time to come upon like occasion. (...), say the Seventie.
[For the Idols] (...) in general, any Image, 1 Samuel 19.13. in special,
Images dedicated to Idolatrous Worship, Gen, 31.30.34. so here, and very
commonly the Paraphrast takes it for (...) Worshippers of Images, but the
Metonymie is harsh; it was to them the Idol spoke vanity. [Have spoken] How? by
Oracles uttered out of them, or by their Priests from them. That may be, and
it is not unlike but the Devil used the like feats to cosen the Jews, as he
did to the Graecians, and other simple Gentiles. But Vide Rain. Idol. l. 2. c.
3. Sort. 59. and seq.
we may take it as properly with reference to the Idolaters Prayers, unto which
the Idols, set up as gods, seemed to promise audience and performance of their
wishes: and so the Idolaters conceited. But what they seemed to speak and
promise, was but [vanitie] (...) The Seventie (...).
wicked deceit and cousenage: there being in them no power at all to effect
that good which they seemed to promise unto their Worshippers. [The Diviners]
false Prophets, Sorcerers, Witches, Astrologers, and the rest of that damned
crew, unto whom this People had resorted for counsel in time of their
distress, [have seen a lye] in stead of a true Vision from God, the
Diabolical fancy of a seduced brain, and speaking as they conceived [Have
told a false dreame] uttered that for a divine Revelation, which was but a very
dream, arising out of their own idle heads, or inspired by Satan, without
all truth. [They comfort in vaine] the Idols, the Prophets, have deceived the
confidence which the miserable Jews put in their power, in their
Prognostications: which failed them when they stood in need of their help,
and sorted to a quite contrary Event than they expected. See Ier. 10.8. and
27.9, 15, 16. and 29.8, 9. Hab 2.18.

Now this their vain confidence for prosperity and security by such bad
means


