THE GODLY MERCHANT, OR The great gain. A Sermon preached at Paules-Crosse.
October. 17. 1613. By WILLIAM PEMBERTON, Bachelour of Divinity, and Minister of
Gods Word at high Onger in Essex.

1. TIM. 4.7.8. Exercise thy self unto godliness. For bodily exercise
profits little, but godliness is profitable unto all things, having the
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

LONDON Printed by Edw. Griffin for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Bul-head. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and truly religious Lord, Robert, Lord Rich, Baron
of Leeze, etc. my singular good Lord, and Patron, all happy increase in the
great gain of Godliness, and godly contentment.
Our blessed day of Grace, (Right honorable Lord) in this bright sunshine of
the Gospel in this Land, as it affords unto us happy opportunity, so it
exacteth of us studious endeavor for prudent foresight, and timely provision
of things most behoouefull for our future use. Luc. 19.42.
And oh that we would know, even we, at least, in this our long and fair
Summers- day, the things which belong to our eternal peace!

We fairly bear our selves and others in hand, that our Covenant with God of
life and peace, Mal. 2.5.
is firm and sure, even everlasting: because the word of this covenant is
still remaining with us, and that God will not turn away from us to do us
good: Iere. 32.40.
because the Lords goodness is yet magnified toward us. And surely the Lord will
not be unmindful of his Covenant with us, nor unfaithful in performance of
his promise to us, Psalm. 103.17.18.
if we start not back, and prove unfaithful, but keep covenant and promise
with the Lord our God. 2. Chro. 15.2.
The Lord is with us, while we are with him: if we seek him, he will be
found of us: but if we forsake him, he will forsake us. Are our hearts then
upright toward the Lord? and is the fear of God (even godliness) within our
hearts? Esa. 55.3.
If this be so, O happy we, and ever blessed! for then shall our soul live,
and the Lord will make his Covenant everlasting with us, even the sure mercies
of David.

True indeed (Gods name be praised) Christ's true religion (the Doctrine of
Godliness) is by wholesome laws of our most gracious Sovereign, constant
Defender of the true Faith, most firmly established: by a good part of his
Majesty's most loyal subjects sincerely embraced: and generally approved or
formally professed of all, unless of those unhappy Romish Nurselings, who
have more deeply drunk of the golden cup of that Babilonish strumpet, Revel.
17.4.5.
whose soule-killing poison does secretly spread to more dangerous infection,
within the womb of our complaining Mother; complaining (I say) because her
life is in daily hazard by them, and yet she can neither cure and heal them as
her heart desires: nor yet be cured and eased of the^, as her safety would
require. God grant her mildnes toward them create not new dangers against
herself.

Did the power and practice of Godliness in the rest, attend the form and
show thereof, then had she not cause of so great complaint, but matter of joy
and good contentment, to see her children grow and prosper in Godliness,
though this viperous brood lie still crawling and gnawing within her bowels.
But, alas! alas! our times are perilous, our estate dangerous: 2. Tim. 3.1.
the world is a gainer: God a looser. And howsoever God has graciously given
all things that belong to life and godliness, 2. Pet. 1.3.
yet is there but little increase, or embrace of Godliness, either in heart,
or life. Many through blindness are sottishly ignorant of it, and cannot be
brought to sight of their misery without it. Many through security are
careless of it, and will not be affected with any liking to it. Some through
weakness grow ashamed of it, and are afraid to undergo any hardship for it.
Many through lewdness are a shame unto it, and by their inordinate living
bemire and deface it. And it is well, if some through profanesse would not
outface and shame it, and by their graceless impiety oppose against it. Many
by an art of seeming have painted their faces, but want the truth and
substance of being in the heart. Many through sacietie grow weary of this
Manna, and their full stomachs begin to loath this honie-comb. Numb. 11.6.
Prou. 27.7.
And many having walked with God on earth, are daily taken hence to live with
Christ in heaven. Now while so many are seduced by the error of the devil: so
many are enthralled by the lusts of the flesh: so many are ensnared with the
allurements of the world: and many of the best are removed from earth to
heaven: where does the sound Christian, and true godly man appear? or if he
be seen, as (God be thanked he is) yet his life and courage is not such, it
may be feared, as once it was, or now ought to be. Oh, what shall become of
Religion in this land, if our first love to religion shall languish in us? Reu.
2. v. 4.
or what shall become of us in this land, verse. 5.
if our Candlestick be once removed from us? Iere. 9.1. Psalm. 119.136.
Fountains and rivers of heart-bleeding tears suffice not to bewail our
sins, which threaten our misery; nor to prevent our misery, deserved by our
sins. The Lord in his great mercy grant us grace to know the time of our
gracious visitation; Luc. 19.44.
and to bethink our selves of the things that belong to our peace, last
hereafter they he hidden from our eyes.

Oh that we could, in time, grow wise in heart, and rich in grace, and nourish
the fear of God (even godliness) within our hearts! Then would the Lord
surely rejoice over us, to do us good, Iere. 32.40.
and still plant us in this land with his whole heart, and with his whole
soul. No power nor plot of wicked enemies shall prevail against us, if the
God of power and wisdom be loved and embraced of us. The Lord will soon
subdue our enemies, Psalm. 81.14.
and turn his hand against our adversaries. No want of good or sense of evil
shall discontent us, if this gain of godliness be fully possessed of us.
Wherefore it behooves all, from the highest to the lowest to give care to that
godly exhortation of that religious Ruler Joshua, Fear the Lord, Josh. 24.14.15.
and serve him in sincerity, and in truth. Or if the foolish and unhappy
multitude will not embrace such blessed counsel; but it seem evil to them to
serve the Lord, yet must every wise and courageous Joshua put on this constant
resolution, as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. What is that
service of God in that holy resolution of that courageous Captain, but the
exercise of that Godliness which ruled in the heart of that religious Ruler?
What was the ground of his resolution, but godly contentme^t; whereby he rested
wel-pleased in his sound Religion, and estate now enjoyed in this service of
God? And what was the benefit he thence expected, but this great gain of
Godliness; even fruitio^ of blessedness, in communion with the true God? This is
that oil (the oil of Grace) which those wise virgins provided in the vessels
of their hearts, Math. 25. v. 4.
and did furnish their Lamps of their profession therewithal. This cheered
their hearts with sweet contentment in their tedious expectation of the tarying
bridegroom, and readily guided them to the wedding chamber, where they did
enjoy this great gain of godliness, the joyful company of their blessed
bridegroom, in eternal society of felicity and glory. Our profession is the
same with theirs: our practice also should be the like. Let us therefore hold
fast our profession, Hebr. 4.14.
that outward profession of our hope, Hebr. 10.23.
without wavering: but not a seeming semblance without the truth and substance
in the heart. Hebr. 13.9.
It is good that the heart which is naked to God, be established with grace,
and that the life also which is open to men, be holy and unblameable, as
becomes Saints. That the glorious excellency of grace in the heart, Psalm.
45.7.
being adorned with the vestures of golden profession and practice of life, the
kings daughter may be a fit spouse for her bridegroom. God cannot approve of
the truthlesse show of godliness in our life, when the heart is not inwardly
sound and sincere. Neither can we gain ought by seeming rich in grace, when we
are, Apoc. 3.17.
indeed, both poor and miserable. But if we shall sincerely endeavor, that
God may have the possession of our gracious hearts, Prou. 23.26.
and men the benefit of our religious lives, then shall God have glory from
us, we comfort from God, and glory with him.

And all this shall, by Gods grace, be powerfully effected, shall we find and
feel in heart and life the truth and efficacy of this short sentence,
Godliness with contentment is great gain. Of which words I spoke (as it
pleased God to direct and enable me) in that solemn assembly, whether I was,
by authority, called to this service of God, and his Church: and where I
endeavored to become helpful to my present Auditors, in their spiritual good
estate, by laboring to persuade them (under the Title of Godly Merchants) to
make sure purchase to themselves of this great gain of godliness: which as it
is most comfortably attended of sweet contentment, so it will abundantly
enrich the possessor thereof, with all sufficiency of most precious treasures.

What I then delivered by speech, I am now induced, at the earnest entreaty of
sundry religious and well affected, to commit by writing to the public view.
The ground of their request (as they well assured me) and of my assent
thereunto (as the Lord does witness with me) is desire and hope of further
benefit thereby, through Gods blessing, to redound to Gods people. If God in
mercy grant this success unto it, I shall much joy in fruition of my desire,
and end of my labor.

I have withal inserted some things, which I had provided to speak, but did
purposely omit, for want of time. As for the allegations of some Authors, now
in the margent, as I did not judge it fit, then to trouble the hearers with
them; so may the readers at their pleasure pass by them.

Let my earnest request, to the christian Reader, be this: that he will kindly
accept, favorably interpret, diligently peruse, and religiously use, this
little help (a poor mite cast into the Treasury of the Church) to the
furthering of his purchase of Godliness, and nourishing of Contentment within
his heart.

And now* (Right honorable) I am bold to commend to the use of the godly
Reader, these first fruits of my labors, under the Patronage of your Lo
worthy name* Humbly beseeching your Honor to accept of them, as a small
testimony of that great thankfulness, which, from my heart, I desire to
return, first to God the gracious Author, and then to your Honor, as the
ready instrument of a good blessing bestowed upon me.

It pleased your Hon. long since to conceive well of me, and to retain a
purpose to do me good, and upon sit occasion offered, by most kind letters to
testify your pleasure, yea, and earnest desire to become my Patron, and
therein the happy means of my free and comfortable entrance into my Charge,
and Ministry. For which sweet blessing of God, my soul does daily bless
God: and it may well be unto me a good encouragement unto constant endeavor,
in that holy business, and weighty employment, for the glory of God, the
edification of his people, the comfort of my own soul, and the better
encourageme^t of your Honor, in the constant prosecution of your religious and
careful course, of upright discharge, of that great trust, of a faithful
Dore-keeper in the house of God: that, as much as in you lies, Gods Church may
be provided of a supply of learned and godly Pastors, who by sound doctrine
and holy life, may promote the glory of God in the salvation of many souls,
while they enrich them with this great gain of godliness, by faithful
dispensation of the treasures of Christ.

The holy company of these Godly Merchants, whereof this present Sermon does
entreat, does greatly rejoice to reckon your Honor among the chief of their
Society. And it does heartily praise God, for his goodness to you, in your
large portion of temporal blessings, (as of wisdom, honor, authority, and
good estate) but especially in Gods rich bounty to you in his spiritual
talents (of saving knowledge in the mystery of godliness, faith in Gods
promises, zeal for Gods glory, love to Gods Saints, Christian humility, and
studious endeavor to benefit the Church of God, with other precious graces of
Gods sanctifying spirit) those most durable riches, and inualuable treasures of
the best return of Godliness.

And this joy of this happy Company shall be much enlarged, to observe your
wise employment of these goodly gifts of your person and estate, for your more
happy growth in your heavenly wealth, for the greater increase of the sweet
Contentment of your heart, for the farther adorning of your holy profession,
and the advantage of your Lord and Master, and advancement of his glory, in
the propagation of his truth, unto still succeeding times and persons. And all
this shall be happily effected, as by constant prosecution of all other your
godly courses, wherein the Lord expects your daily progress: so in
maintaining still your deserved Honor, of an vncorrupt Patron, and crowning
your good proceedings with constant perseverance. That while too many enrich
themselves with the price of blood, your Honor may still remain in the
blessed number of such truly Honored Patrones, as (through faithful
discharge of that weighty trust) purchase true wealth, and enriching
treasures, in furthering the gain of souls, both their own, and others.

The Lord, for his mercy, add to this number of vncorrupt Patrones, make a
daily supply of godly and learned Pastors: bless and multiply the company of
sincere professors, (these Godly Merchants) and glorify his great name, in
propagation of his Truth, and enlarging of his kingdom. The Lord do good in
his good pleasure to this our Zion: Psalm. 51.18.
The Lord build the walls of this our Jerusalem. Psalm. 122.7.
Peace be within her walls, Psalm. 122.7.
and prosperity within her palaces. Psalm. 128.5.
Let all that fear the Lord see the good of our Jerusalem all the days of
their life. Nehe. 13.14.
And the Lord, in goodness, remember you herein, and wipe not out your kindness
which you have showed unto the House of your God, and for the Offices thereof.
The Lord grant unto your Honor long and comfortable life; make you thrice
happy and honorable, in your person and posterity; and give you a blessed
increase in this great gain of Godliness; that you may assuredly find much
prosperity in this life of Grace, and fruition of felicity in that kingdom
of glory.

Your Honors in all humble duty in Christ ever bounden, William Pemberton.

THE GODLY Merchant, or the great gain.
1. TIM. 6.6. But godliness with contentment is great gain.


RIght Honorable, and beloved in the Lord; Gal. 4.26.
The celestial Jerusalem which is above, and the Mother of us all, is the
chief City of the living God our heavenly Father, wherein all our elder
brethren and fellow-seruants, after faithful employment of their spiritual
talents, Mat. 25.16, 17
having given up to God a good account, do rest from their labors and their
works follow them: Ibid. verse. 21.23.
for they are entered already into the joy of their Lord, and enjoy their
desired felicity in fruition of God.

The Church of Christ on Earth is likewise a City of God, Ephesians. 2.19.
Gloriosissima Ciuitas Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 1. c. 1.
yea a great City, and a place of great Trafique and Merchandise: all the
Citizens whereof having received, from the Lord, their number of talents, are
become Merchants, Mat. 25.15. etc.
or traders, in one kind or other, all unweariable in their painful
endeavor, and all aiming at one common end; their return and increase in
their profit and their gain. Or if any be sloathfull, he hopes to purchase
ease, and that, in his account, is a sufficient gain.

Now as it fares in other Cities, so it falls out in this; that all prove not
wise and faithful factors, using fair and honest dealing in their trading,
and contenting themselves with a good and lawful advantage: but some are
crafty and deceitful Merchants, who corrupt and adulterate their most
precious wares, and all to feed their covetous humor. Such were the false
Apostles mentioned in the former verses: who did (...) teach otherwise then
they should, Verse. 3, 4, 5.
who consenting not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to the doctrine which is according unto godliness, did set out religion
unto Sale, and used false imposture for their private advantage: Supposing in
opinion or avowing in practice, that gain was godliness. While they measured
Christianity by earthly commodity, and corrupted the truth of God, and abused
the precious name of Piety, only to satisfy their greedy appetite: as though
the mystery of godliness were a mystery of iniquity, 1. Tim. 2.16. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
or a trade to serve to their sordide and filthy lucre. And these are one sort
of Merchants who trade in this City; and these have great doings and many
partners, who make their fair profession of piety a slight to further their
earthly gain: yea and pretend religion the better to deceive. Of such false
impostors, the Lord himself complains: That their silver is turned into
dross, their wine is mingled with water, Esa. 1.22. of such our Apostle had
experience that they did (...) corrupt the word of God. 2. Cor. 2.17. and
concerning such he forewarnes Timotheus saying, from such separate or withdraw
thy self verse 5

There is another sort of Merchants that are wise and faithful, who having
found the precious pearl of religion and piety, Mat. 13.45.46.
preserve it entire and vncorrupt without all imposture or mixture of their
own. And such a Merchant was holy Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15 10. 2. Cor.
11.23.25.26.
that Great trader both by sea and land, who accounted all things dross and
dung for Christ Jesus alone, Phil. 3.7, 8.
the only pearl of price, and did impart it to others in all fidelity, (That
they might partake with him in this heavenly wealth) while as of sincerity, as
of God, 2. Cor. 2.17.
in the sight of God, so he did preach in Christ. He accounted it great
impiety to deal deceitfully, and extreme folly to aim at earthly
commodity; and made this his rule of direction in all his trafique, which was
an immovable conclusion of his most serious deliberation: That, Godliness
with contentment is the great gain.

The scope of the words.
The intent of Saint Paul that experienced Merchant (that I may follow the
allegory) is to persuade Timotheus, a much entrusted factor, and all others
that trade in this kind: not to follow the guize of such deceitful dealers,
as measured Christianity by outward gain (as though he were the holier who is
the wealthier) and made their preaching and practice of the doctrine of piety,
to become a base and sordide trade to compass their earthly commodity: but to
become partners with him in his approved course: to embrace the Gospel in all
integrity, and to content themselves with their least increase in their
outward condition, so they were surely possessed of the rich pearl of piety,
able of it self to cause a wel-contenting sufficiency, and therefore he
backs this conclusion with all force of reason. That, Godliness with
contentment is great gain. Ver. 7, 8, 9.10


The contents of the words.
These words then contain in them, a sound position of Saint Paul a true
Apostle, opposed to a fond supposition of the false Apostles. Their fond
supposition, in effect, was this. Gain is godliness. Goods are goodness.
Where there is wealth enough there is religion enough. For they preached and
professed the religion of Christ, only to purchase the wealth of the world.

But Saint Paul's sound position most acutely opposed to their fond supposition
is this. Godliness is gain. True goodness is the true goods. Where there is
religion enough, there is wealth enough. Yea, godliness is great gain. Naked
piety is the wealthy commodity. True grace is the richest treasure. Godliness
with contentment is great gain. Godliness is attended with contentment. True
piety brings true plenty, and of it self will cause a wel-contenting
sufficiency.

The summary conclusion of all is this. It is most false, which the false
Apostles did so profanely and impiously suppose: that, gain is godliness. But
it is most true, which the true Apostle did most fitly and religiously oppose:
that, godliness with contentment is great gain. 1. Tim. 6.5.
And therefore, those are foolish and deceitful Merchants, of sick brains,
corrupt minds, profane hearts, that suppose gain to be godliness; while they
publish and profess the religion of Christ, for private respect of the pelf
of the world; But those are wise and faithful dealers, of wel-staied heads,
prudent minds, upright hearts, who esteem godliness to be the true gain,
and as therewith right well enriched, rest well contented with a lesser portion
in their outward condition.

And further, those are certain loosers that account gain godliness, for
such crafty Merchants as are so cunning to deceive others, become so wily that
they beguile themselves, and shall find themselves but bankrupts, when they
make up their accounts, and are cast into prison till they have paid their
debts. Mat. 18.3, 4.
In stead of an estate of plenty, which they vainly expected; they shall
meet with an estate of misery which they little feared. But those are sure
sauers who make godliness their gain. Who purchase to themselves not so much
this worldly wealth, as those heavenly treasures: who fill, not their houses,
but their hearts: not their coffers, but their consciences: who are rich, not
so much in earth, as in heaven: not in themselves, but in God, even in Christ
Jesus, in whom are all treasures of godliness, even the fullness of the
Godhead. Who became poor to make us rich: Mat. 8.20.
and by his extreme outward penury, purchased our exceeding inward plenty.
Who was poor for a time, that we might be rich for ever. Who will cast unto
us here, after our godliness begun, a wel-sufficing competency, and will
replenish us hereafter, when our godliness is perfected, with all-sufficient
felicity. So then: godliness with contentment is great gain.

Hitherto we have been taking a general suruay of the coherence, and scope,
and sum of this sentence. Now let us enter into a more special view thereof,
as it is in it self an heavenly position, and a divine conclusion, short but
pithy, in very few words very greatly commending the worth and excellency of
godliness, as the only pearl of price, worthy the purchase of the wisest and
richest Merchant.

In this golden sentence, or heavenly aphorism, we may consider a simple or
naked assertion, godliness is gain. The parts of this assertion. 1. The
subject (or antecedent) godliness. 2. The attribute (or consequent) gain, are
either amplifyed and illustrated by their several attendant.

1. The attendant of godliness is contentment. (...), true piety is attended
with an autarkie or wel-contenting sufficiency. True contentme^t being (as I
conceive it) a fruit and effect, and (as I may so speak) a daughter of
godliness: borne of her, bred up by her, and an inseparable attendant of her:
and therefore they are by this particle, (...), linked together as with a
golden chain, (...) godliness (attended) with contentment.

2. The attribute of godliness, that is, gain, is amplified and enlarged by
an attendant quantity, great. Godliness with contentment is great gain. And
this attendant quantity, or greatness imports a commendation of this gain,
which, the greater it is the more commendable. Godliness is such a gain as is
great. 1. Great in it self simply considered: as a rich treasure of great
sufficiency. 2. And great comparatively in respect of other gain. Godliness
attended with contentment is of all the greatest gain. The true gain, the
great gain, the greatest gain of all is: Godliness attended with
contentment. Even true piety, which brings with it good contentment, or, a
wel-contenting sufficiency.

The particular branches of my future discourse, (as by that which is spoken,
you may discern) for order and number may well be these.

The first concerning godliness the subject of this gain.

The second concerning contentment, the attendant of godliness.

The third concerning gain, the attribute of godliness. And herein that.

1. True godliness is true gain. 2. True godliness is great gain. 3. True
godliness is the greatest gain of all.
And of these in order as God shall enable, and your patience, and time permit.

The matter or subject of this true, this great, this greatest gain is, (...)
godliness or piety. The name imports as much as true worship or religious
adoration. Which Nazianzene (distinguishing from (...), which sometimes
signifies worship of false gods) describes to be (...). Definit. 152.
The religious adoration of the blessed Trinity. The thing it self, which we
understand by the name of Godliness, is of very great and large extent. It
consists of the concurrence of all those precious gifts, and lovely graces of
the sanctifying spirit of God: and conteyneth the whole body of those divine
virtues of Christian religion, expressed sometime by the fear of God, as where
it is said of Cornelius that he was (...) a devout or godly man, Act. 10.2.
and one who feared God. Where the fear of God, which ere-while notes out one
special grace; or gracious disposition, may well comprize, all religious
devotion and due respect of God, both in heart and life: and may plainly and
briefly be thus described.

What' godliness is.
Godliness is that religious reverence and awefull respect of God, which arises
from the true knowledge of God, and sense of his love, and causes a studious
endeavor to walk with God, in all holy duties, both inward and outward, and
that in sincerity.

This true godliness (the character and cognizance of true-beleeuing
Christians, which distinguishes the new and right-born sons of God, from the
bastard-brood of Satan, and corrupt generation of Adam) is for nature and
property a religious reverence and awefull respect of God, possessing the
heart of man with all due regard of the holy presence of God. The wel-spring or
root thereof is the feeling and effectual knowledge of God, which is the
ground of happiness, the seed of all virtue that grows in the heart, and the
first gift which God imparteth to a people selected to serve him, and to be
admitted into league and covenant with him. Ier. 24.7.
First God gives an heart to know him, that he is the Lord, and then, and not
before, he will be their God, and they shall be his people. Without this sacred
and saving knowledge man is not godly but godless: (...). Ephesians. 2.12. Ephesians. 4.18.
not in Covenant with God, but a stranger from the life of God. Men cannot live
well that do not believe well: nor believe well, that do not know well.

Whence godliness springs.
But from what knowledge of God does godliness spring? surely from knowledge
and acknowledgement. glorious majesty and sublimity of Gods divine nature, and
of his pure holiness infinitely surpassing the model of the most excellent
creatures: in comparison of whose brightness the very sun is dark: in
comparison of whose purity the very heavens are polluted: Job. 15.15.
for resplendencie of whose glory the very Angels cover their faces: Esa. 6.2.
before whose dreadful presence the earth melts, Psalm 97.5 Esa. 51.6
the heavens, fly away, the devils tremble, and all creatures stand astonished
and amazed. Iam. 2.19.


Godliness springs from the knowledge of Gods al-seeing eye, Prou. 15.4.
Hebr. 4.13.
al-knowing wisdom, al-beholding presence: whereby God pondereth the paths,
observes the gestures, hears the words, Ier. 17.10.
searches the hearts, tries the reins, Prou. 15.11 Job. 26.6.
and pryeth into the bottom of hell and destruction it self.

Godliness springs from the knowledge of Gods al-ruling providence, Mat.
10.30.
al-commanding power, sovereign authority, and unlimited Lordship. Whereby God
can, and will, ouerawe and order all creatures and actions, conditions and
estates: and curb, and keep under al proud resisters and rebellious
opposers; can bruise them in pieces with his iron rod, Psalm. 2.9.
and consume them to nothing with the breath of his nostrilles. Yea command and
work the weal or woe, life or death, felicity or misery of all manner his
creatures.

Godliness springs from the knowledge and acknowledgement of Gods exact
justice, and impartial equity: whereby the Lord, Romans 2.11.
not accepting persons, nor taking rewards, does distribute and divide to every
one his deserved right in good or evil, rewards or punishments, for obedience
or breach of his holy, divine, and sovereign revealed good will and pleasure.
And all these considerations do strongly urge and powerfully enforce unto
piety or godliness.

godliness may indeed be wrought, and grow, and flourish in the heart of a
Christian (and that he may draw near to God and not be deterred from God) he
must above al find and feel the quickening juice of Gods eternal love,
issuing out of the root of the true vine, Christ Jesus, through conueiance and
sweet influence of the spirit of God, which arising into the heart of a true
Christian, will both mollify, heat, and effectually affect the heart, and
most kindly cause therein true godliness, and religious respect of God.

(...). Nazianz.
And thus this true godliness wrought in the heart being an habit of good
things (as Nazianzene speaks) does take the possession and government of every
part of the soul, does their reside and rule and causes an exercise of
goodness, (...)
and exerts and shows it self in certain actions and works called the
exercises of godliness or religious devotion, both inward in the heart, The
large extent of godliness.
and outward in the life, which express the nature and power of piety. Of
which kind are these. Effectual faith, diligent love, patient hope, reverend
fear, pure conscience, sound repentance, assured confidence, all holy
affections, divine meditations, godly resolutions, earnest petitions, devout
gestures unstained profession, religious speech, unblameable conversation.

At these actions of piety does our holy Apostle aim, when he advises
Timotheus to exercise himself unto godliness. 1. Tim. 4.7.
When he exhorts that prayers and supplications be made for all men: 1. Tim.
2.1.2.
for Kings and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and a
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Lastly, at this does the Apostle
Saint Peter leuel, upon serious meditation of the final dissolution of the
world. 2. Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Seeing the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, in the which
the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be
burnt up: seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, or duties of
godliness -- being diligent in exercise of the offices of piety, that ye may
be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.

And this I take to be the sum and substantial nature of this godliness,
which our holy Apostle commends unto us as the great gain: to which if we
shall add one seasoning grace, it will abide the touch, and be approved of
God.

Sincerity a seasoning grace.
This seasoning grace is sound sincerity of the soul and inner man, freed and
purged from dissembling and hollow-hearted hypocrisy, so that it may abide the
through trial of Gods discerning view. And so much the name godliness does
seem to import, as taken from God: so that, in my apprehension, the godliness
of a Christian is such inward disposition of heart, as consorts with the nature
and will of God: such outward conversation of life, as beseemes the presence of
God. Without this soundness and perfection of the inwards, and the heart, our
pretended godliness is little better then profaneness; Mat. 23.
and our seeming piety detestable hypocrisy. Luke 16.15.
But shall this sound integrity and true candor be dispersed as blood through
every vein of the whole body of true piety, and as seasoning salt be
sprinkled on every action and work thereof: Mark 9.50.
this godliness shall be accepted for true and good: the heart shall be sound,
and actions approved: and then may this precious pearl of piety be commended
of God, and esteemed of us as our greatest gain, and truest treasure.

This (beloved in the Lord) even this is the comely feature of godliness, the
subject of our gain, a thing of great worth and excellency every way: which
yet notwithstanding is so smally respected, yea so greatly contemned, as is
lamentable to behold, of the most and greatest part, of this foolish world. Oh
that our blind eyes were able to behold it! Oh that our perverse hearts were
able to esteem it! Surely, surely: it would command both eye, and hand, and
heart, and all, to seek it, to embrace it, to yield all kind and loving
entertainment unto it. I will not now speak but pray. That the God of all
grace would grant unto you all, this marrow of all grace, true godliness and
piety to guide both heart and life.

Thus much I thought good to premise concerning godliness alone, which is
presupposed as the matter, and subject of our gain: now I proceed to the
attendant of godliness which is Contentment, for godliness, is not alone but
attended of contentment. Godliness with Contentment is our great gain.

The 2. general point of godly contentment.
The attendant of godliness is contentment: a most worthy waytingmaide of so
honorable a Mistress! True Godliness is as it were a royal Queen full of
Majesty and beauty, striking admiration, and reverence into the hearts of all
earnest beholders: and Contentment as a young Lady and Princess, a pure and
spotless Virgin of seemly feature and wel-pleasing demeanure, ever attending
godliness as her Lady and Mistress. Both for progeny of the blood Royal, of
offspring divine, drawing their line and lineage from God himself. For as
godliness is from God: so is Contentment from godliness, borne of her, bred
up by her, and of bounden duty, an inseparable attendant of her; both are sent,
of God, into this world together, that being entertained into the hearts of
men, they might make both heart and life Godly, and gainful: holy, and happy.
And holy sure and happy is that heart, that house, that town, that city, that
country, that court, that church, that kingdom, where godliness and
contentment do rule and bear the sway. These surely will cause an heaven on
earth, and bring in time from earth to heaven.

What the word signifies.
The word [(...)] translated contentment, sou^ds (as I may so speak)
selfe-sufficiency: and points out such an estate and condition, as has
sufficiency of it self to furnish it self withal; and needs not to seek
for supply elsewhere, and therefore affords contentment within it self, Genesis
17.1.
such properly and absolutely is the estate of God alone, who alone is
El-schaddai, the almighty and all-sufficient God. God all-sufficient in himself,
of himself and for himself, and for all his creatures, of whom all creatures
stand in need, but he in need of none, but rests, ever wel-contended within
himself as being Iehoua, Exodus 34.6.
the fountain infinite and inexhaust of his uncreated being, wel-being, life,
wisdom, will, power, felicity and glory, daily delighting and rejoicing
always within himself Prou. 8.30. and such is the autarkie of the Nature
divine abounding in it self, not needing us.

Contentment from God, as well as godliness.
Now as godliness is from God, and goodness from this first good: so is
sufficiency and true contentment from this al-sufficiency of God ((...).) Our
sufficiency is from God. 2. Cor. 3.5. From God we derive our being, our
wel-beeing, our ability to do well, to suffer ill: our godliness, our
goodness, and our good contentment in our own condition, which, with our
godliness, we receive from our God. Which our holy Apostle most elegantly and
emphatically expresses to the magnifying of Gods bounty and our felicity. 2.
Cor. 9.8. And God is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye
always having all sufficiency, in all things, may abound in every good work.
As God is able, so is he willing, as in grace to bestow godliness: so with
godliness to give this happy attendant of Contentment, By what means.
and that 1. While by faithful promise he endoweth godliness with so rich a
portion, as may well suffice and give contentment: for godliness has the
promises of the life that now is, 1. Tim. 4.8.
and of that which is to come.

2. While he causes the godly mind recounting with it self it own inward
plenty (as being enriched with treasures of spiritual goodness) to rest
wel-pleased, and wel-appayed, with what outward estate or condition can befall
him: which, whatsoever it is, is that which his heavenly Father has shared out
unto him, and therefore he is resolved to rest content therewith till it shall
please God to better the same: having by the instruction of godliness learned
with Saint Paul, Phil. 4.11.
in all Estates to be content, and if any occasion of discontent befall him,
he retires himself into his counting house: and there finds himself so
well stored through Godliness, that he sees no place for coffeehouse?

Godly contentment is no stoicall senslesnes.
Where note by the way, that this godly contentment whereof we speak, is no
careless stupidity of stoicall minded, or rather mindelesse and graceless
humorists, who are no way affected with any change: but as they never tasted of
this godly sufficiency: so rest content in their insensible misery. But this
our contentment is such as the heart affected with the sweetness of Gods house
can comfortably recount, and does daily observe to issue from true piety:
which as it brings with it, wel-contenting sufficiency: so it poyseth the
heart to holy equabilitie, and quieteth the mind in all Estates.

When contentment attends godliness.
Now the estates and times wherein contentment attends godliness, are
generally two. One in this life, the other in the life to come: in this of
grace: in that other of glory. And as this and that life are not two in kind,
but only one; and two in degree of grace and happiness: so is godliness it
self, and godly contentment, in these two several times; not two in nature,
but only in degree: either suiting and consorting with either condition, both
live and love, go and grow together. When godliness begins, then begins
contentment, as godliness increases, so contentment is enlarged, and when
godliness is grown to full perfection, then shall the godly heart find full
contentation. Perfect holiness shall be attended with perfect happiness,
perfect piety with perfect felicity: and all this through full fruition of God
in Christ, who is the wel-spring of our godliness and goodness: and the
ful-flowing fountain of our sufficiency and contentment.

Contentment attends godliness in this life.
That godliness in this life is attended of contentment, it is manifest out of
the word of God: especially out of the Gospel, which the Apostle styles the
truth, Tit. 1.1. 1. Tim. 6.3.
or doctrine according to godliness, which holy doctrine directs unto
godliness, and unto godly contentment. Unto godliness, in this tenor: Mat.
6.33.
seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousnesse-purchase piety,
gain godliness. Then, exercise thy self unto godliness: 1. Tim. 4.7.
inure thy self unto the practice of piety. Unto contentment in this manner.
Be not careful for your life saying: Mat. 6.25.31.
what shall we eat? what shall we drink? wherewith shall we be clothed?
(where prudent provision is enjoined, distractiue care condemned) For your
heavenly Father knows, Ibid. verse. 32.
that you have need of these things. Verse 33.
These things shall be cast unto you, (being godly) without your ungodly care)
let your conversation be without covetousness, Hebr. 13.5.
and be content with those things which you have. And when piety prouokes to
pray for more, it prescribes godly moderation, with this limitation; Give us
this day our daily bread, Mat. 6.11.
that is, a reasonable competency of necessary provision. But it condemns
covetousness as the enemy of godliness; 1. Tim. 6.10. 1. Ioh. 2.15.16.
and permits not the King himself to multiply his horses, his silver, or his
gold, Deutr. 17.16.17.
above due measure of godly moderation: or in any measure arguing his
discontent, or want of dependence on God for a competent portion, or needful
protection, by good and godly means.

What ought to content.
Yea, beloved in the Lord, this doctrine of godliness does inform, what ought
to content, viz. Meat drink and apparel; if God give no more. If we have
food and raiment let us therewith be content. 1. Tim. 6.8.
Nature (says the Physician) is content with a little: as, not to thirst, not
to starve, Galen. (...). Cibus and potus sunt diuitiae Christianorum. Hieron.
Bp.
and grace ought to content it self with less. In this case, meat and drink
are the riches of Christians: yea bread and water with the Gospel are good
cheer. More ought not to discontent, if God give more. Less if God give not
so much. (Any thing is more, then any man can challenge. The smalest good is
above man's greatest desert, all is of mercy nothing of merit.) Whatsoever God
measures out unto us, that ought to give contentment to us.

And a godly man may well content himself in all estates: and if in any, he
find himself not well: it is not because he might not therein be well: but
because he does not in such holy manner demean himself, Why a godly man is
sometime not content.
as godliness would direct, for so out of question he should be well. True
indeed it is, that contentment, which attends godliness in this life, is not
such a settled composedness of mind, and quiet tranquillity of all the
affections, as never meets with any turbulency of passion, or is never
interrupted nor assailed of discontment. For as godliness in this life is not
perfected: so is the mind of a godly man not fully contented. But, through
inward distemper and outward occurrence, is sometimes shaken with unsettledness
and discontent. The sea is not so calm in Summer, but is sometimes troubled
with some boisterous wind: no not the stable mountain so firm, but may be
moved with some fearful earthquake. So is it with the mind of a godly man:
it is sometimes moved, sometimes tossed with winds and terrors. Yet so well
is it ordinarily composed through habitual resolution of dependence on God,
and equability of affection in all estates: that it is neither often disturbed,
nor long disquieted: but after some lesser or shorter distemper, it does
quietly compose and settle it self again, and through the power of godliness
does recover it self, and enjoy again this sweet Contentment.

Happy, happy, yea thrice happy is that soul, that is so quietly settled, and
so well composed, that it is not much shaken and tossed with discontent! and so
happy may every one of our souls become, shall we seriously consider, How to
come to godly contentment.
how we may become so happy. Which if any desire indeed to know, let him lend
his ear, yea his heart, a little, and cast his eye of faith upon the doctrine
of godliness; and he shall therein behold such strong foundations of true
contentment laid, as that the gates of hell may well assail, but shall not
prevail against it.

4. Grounds of godly contentment.
The foundation of godly contentment has these four degrees. 1. Gods powerful
providence. 2. Gods prudent love. 3. Gods gracious promise. 4. The present
portion which God bestows upon a godly man.

The first ground of godly contentment is Gods powerful providence, 1. Gods
powerful providence.
whereby he wisely orders, and sweetly disposes all actions and events,
conditions and estates. The Lord kills and makes alive, 1. Sam. 2.6.
he brings down to the grave, and brings up. 7.
The Lord makes poor, and makes rich: 8.
he brings low and exalts: he rayseth up the poor out of the dust, and
lists up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them amongst Princes, and to
make them inherit the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the
Lords, and he has set the world upon them. The Lord, Psalm. 147. v. 4. verse. 8.
the Lord, guides and numbers the stars in heaven, hangs the clouds in the
firmament, Mat. 6.26.28.
feeds the fowls of the air, clothes the flowers of the field, takes care for
the oxen in the stall, multiplies the fishes in the sea, numbers the sands by
the shore, preserues the hair on the head, and the drowing of a swine, Mat.
8.31, 32. Mat. 10.29, 30.
the falling of a sparrow, the perishing of an hair does not escape the
powerful providence of our most gracious God. Act. 17.28.
Yea and our God (in whom we move, live, are) is able for bread to give manna
from heaven, Exodus 16.14, 15. Exodus 16.13. Exodus 17.6. ver. 78. Exodus 13 21.
Deuteronomy 29.5.
for flesh to send quails from the sea, for drink to give water out of the
flinty rock, for shelter a cloud. For direction a pillar of fire, for want of
new apparel can preserve the old: Ios. 3.15, 16 Exodus 14.21, 22.
for a passage can divide Jorden, and make a dry lane with watery walls
through the deep channel of the red sea. Out of bondage can give deliverance;
out of sickness, health; out of death, life; out of sin, good; and out of
misery, can draw felicity. Numb. 11.23. Esa. 50.2.
His hand is not shortened that he cannot now help: he is now God
all-sufficient, as well as ever he was. And what cannot our God do for us? God
is able (says our holy Apostle) to make all grace to abound toward you, 2.
Cor. 9.^.
that ye, always, having all sufficiency, in all things, may abound to every
good work.

Every word has it weight. Our God all-sufficient has al-sufficiency, for us
all, always, in all things, to cause all grace to abound to us, and to cause
us to abound to every good work. Oh the powerful providence of our gracious
God? Oh the immovable foundation of godly contentment! What fear of want or
woe can discontent us, seeing our God has all-sufficient for us? our God has
sufficient wisdom for our instruction; sufficient power for our preservation:
sufficient grace for our infirmities: sufficient plenty to supply our penury:
sufficient mercy for all our miseries: sufficient comfort for all our maladies:
sufficient honor to wipe away our infamy: sufficient life to overcome our
death, and sufficient glory to perfect our felicity. Thus is our God able to
make all grace to abound toward us, that we always having al-sufficiencie in
all things may abound to every good work. On this foundation may a godly man
begin to build his house of godly contentment thus. Use. The meditation, of
Gods powerful providence.


Does any evil or cross befall me? It comes not from the hapless stroke of
blind Fortune, but from the al-ruling hand of an al-seeing God. Did the
spiteful tongue of my enenemy defame me? Or his powerful hand oppress and
iniure me? Or did any other creature bring any evil upon me? Whatsoever was
the means, or how ill soever affected to me, Gods ouer-ruling providence has
some hand therein. Not indeed himself unjustly striking, or instilling malice
into the striker, or exciting him to sin, or excusing him in sin: yet
guiding the blow, and directing it to me, as an actor in, not an idle spectator
of the action: yet no author or approuer, but judge and revenger of the evil,
of the action. Ier. 25 12.14.
Threatening and punishing the instrument of the evil, and correcting evil in
me, by the good event of this evil accident, intended for evil, by evil
man, against me: but turned to good, by Gods goodness, unto me. Well;
whatsoever it is: Gods will appointed it, Gods providence orders it, his
power ouer-ruleth it, his hand limiteth it: and, when he sees fit, he can as
easily remove it, as permit it, and turn this great evil to my greater good,
and therefore I will be content.

The second ground of godly contentment is Gods prudent love. 2. Gods prudent
love.
Gods powerful providence, able to work our welfare, is seconded with his
prudent love, which makes him willing. Such is Gods love unto a godly man, that
he cannot but wish well to him, and do well for him.

Your heavenly Father (says our blessed Savior, Mat. 26.32.
our elder brother) knows that you have need of these things. God is your
Father, if you be godly: yea, your heavenly Father; and bears unto you the
affection of a Father: and cannot but love you, as being your Father: and that
prudently, as your heavenly Father. Mat. 7.11.
And if you being evil know how to give good things unto your children, how
much more shall your Father which is in heaven, give good things to you that
ask him? God your Father is heavenly wise, and knows better then you, what is
best for you. The God of heaven is your good and loving Father, and will not,
for his love, suffer you to want what might do you good. And therefore not to
rest content with that which your Father gives you, were either to make your
selves wiser then he, as if you knew better then he, what is best for you: or
more loving to your selves, then your heavenly Father is to you, in wishing
more good to befall you, then your heavenly Father is, in love, willing to
bestow upon you. If you doubt of God your Fathers prudence, it is because you
are not wise: if of his love to you, it is because you love not him. For God is
not ineprudent in any of all his actions, nor wanting in love to any of all his
creatures: nor in any degree of love, to those that love him well. And if God
so cloathe the grass of the field, Mat. 6.30.
shall he not much more cloathe you? Oh ye of little faith to your Father, if
you believe not this word and promise of your Father! Oh ye of little love to
your Father, if you be not so well persuaded of your Father, that he loves
you well!

Use. The meditation of Gods prudent love.
And this is the second foundation of godly contentment: whereupon a godly man
not doubting of the prudent love of God his heavenly Father unto him, must
needs in prudence content himself with that portion which God his Father has
carved out unto him.

3. Gods gracious promise
The third foundation of Godly contentment, (wherein Gods prudent love most
brightly shines) is Gods gracious promise passed to a godly man. And what is
this gracious promise? He has said. I will not leave thee nor forsake thee,
Ios. 1.5. Hebr. 13.5.
therefore let your conversation be without (ungodly) covetousness, and be
content with such things as ye have.

Question But what if I have not, but want, shall I then be content?

Answ. Fear not want, but fear the Lord: Psalm. 34.9.
for there is no want to them that fear him.

Obie. Yes, some that fear the Lord do sometime want (as Elijah. Lazarus.
Paul, 1. King. 17. Luke 16. 2 Cor. 1.8. Hebr. 10. Psalm. 34.10. Psalm. 84.11.
and many godly Christians) Sol. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger:
but they that seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good. Every thing, good
in it self, is not good for thee. If good for thee, it shall not be wanting
unto thee. Surely the Lord will not fail his people, Psalm. 94.14. Phil. 4.19.
Thy God will supply all thy necessities. Thou shall sometimes want indeed (as
those godly ones did) because it is good for thee sometimes to want. But thou
shall want nothing that is good for thee to have: unless thou be wanting to
thy self. And therefore thou shall not sometimes want afflictions: because it
is not good for thee, Psalm. 119.71. Lam. 3.27.
sometimes, to want them, but good to have them. And when they are upon thee,
thou shall not want due comfort in them, for God has said: I will not leave
thee nor forsake thee. Ios. 1.5. Hebr. 13.5. Esa. 43.2.
I will be with thee in the fire and in the water. The Lord will not forsake,
for ever: but though he cause grief, Lament. 3.31 32.
yet will he have compassion, according to the multitude of his mercies. 2.
Cor. 12.9
His grace is sufficient for thee. He will lay no more upon thee then he will
make thee able to bear. 1. Cor. 10.13.


Use. The meditation of Gods gracious promise.
On this foundation may a godly man thus frame his sanctuary of godly
comtentment. God will lay no more upon me, then he will make me able to
bear etc. Either my cross shall be moderated, or my ability to bear
increased. Either my burden shall be made lighter, or my faith stronger, as God
does press me down with one hand, so will he raise me up with the other. God
can draw me to himself, with the cords of love, under the rods of men.
And if my crosses shall prove great, Gods love therein shall prove as great. In
greatest crosses God uses to wrappe up the greatest mercies, and turns the
deadly poison of afflictions into wholesome and sovereign medicines. That
which in my apprehension may seem the greatest evil, Gods gracious
dispensation shall turn to greatest good. All things shall work together for
the good of the Godly (that love God): Romans 8.28.
greatest evils to greatest good. The heauiest cross shall find the happiest
issue. 1. Cor. 10.13.
Death it self shall prove a rich revenue, Phil. 1.21.
bringing the happy return of an eternal life.

Oh how sweet a song of triumph may a godly man sing, in the greatest threats
or assaults of his most dreadful foes!

A godly man's song of triumph.
Whence my enemies intend me greatest danger, thence shall I purchase greatest
honor. My enemies may behead me, but cannot hurt me: Slay me, but cannot
conquer me. Romans 8. v. 37. (...) we more then conquer.
My enemies may take away my life, but not my hope: My head, but not my crown.
Whether I be wounded or slain, I shall not loose the victory, if I die in the
battle, I shall triumph after the fight, and if I fight till death, 2. Tim.
4.8.
I shall receive a crown of life. Act. 14.22.
I may go (and if God see fit) I must go, yea, I shall go, by the cross, to
a crown: and through cruel martyredome unto a glorious Kingdom.

4. A godly man's present portion.
What yet is wanting to a godly man, to make up his bulwark of godly
contentment? Unless it be the consideration of his portion? Which yet is not
wanting unto him: because God has in part already bestowed it on him. And what
is this portion? Surely such as may well uphold and support his soul with
godly contentment. He is already possessed df some part of godliness it
self, which of it self is a goodly portion: as being a rich treasure of all
precious pearls of grace and goodness. Yea; Psalm. 119 57. Psalm. 16.5, 6
Thou art my portion O Lord (says holy David.) The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot. The lines are fallen unto
me, in pleasant places; I have a goodly heritage. My flesh and my heart
fails: Psalm. 73.26.
but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. The Lord is my
portion, Lam. 3.24.
says the soul of mourneful Jeremy, Ier. 10.16. and 51.19.
in his doleful lamentations. The Lord of hosts is the portion of Jacob: and
Israel is the rod of his inheritance. If the Lord himself be Aarons portion
and his inheritance: Number. 18.20
why should not Aaron content himself, though he have no other inheritance
among the people? And if the Lord be the portion of Jacob, of Israel, of every
godly man, Gal. 6.16.
who is of the Israel of God: why should he not rest well contented, although
he want an inheritance in the things of this world? Oh happy man, that in that
his want enjoys more, then the world can either perform or promise!

Use. The meditation of a godly man's portion.
The serious view of this goodly portion, of a godly man, may afford unto him
this holy meditation. God himself is my portion, if I be godly; and God
all-sufficient in himself is all-sufficient unto me. Psalm. 100.3. Hos. 2.20.
Ioh. 3.16.
God gave me to my self: God gave himself to me. God the Father gave his
Son to me: God the Son gave himself to me: God the Holy ghost gave his
seal, Ephesians. 1.11.
to assure this gift unto me, and shall I not be content? God the Father has
sent the spirit of his Son into my heart, Gal. 4.6.
to make me call God my Father, and Christ my Redeemer: and shall I not be
content? That which I was, Quod homo est, esse Christus voluit, vt and homo
possit esse, quod Christus est. Cypr. de idol. vanitate.
Christ would be, that I might be that which Christ is: The Son of God by
grace (as he by nature) and fellow-heire with him, of all things, in glory,
and shall I not be content? What shall I say more? God the Son received all
things from the Father for me: that in him, and through him, and with him, I
might receive all things from the Father. 1. Cor. 3.21.22.
And why should I not content my self with him; without whom all things are as
nothing: and with whom no-can be in stead of all things? Surely the man that
is indeed godly, is infinitely above all measure wealthy, and therefore I will
be content.

Tell me now (beloved in the Lord) can that true godly soul shrink down
through coffeehouse, that is so strongly propt with these so many pillars?
or can it ever languish, and wax faint, while it does seriously recount and
call to mind, Gods powerful providence disposing all things for him: Gods
prudent love intending all good unto him: Gods gracious promise assuring him of
his love: and his plentiful portion, as a pawn of Gods gracious promise?
While he has received godliness, as a treasure of goodness, and holiness
as a pledge of his happiness, and some measure of grace as a forerunner of
unmeasurable glory? The rain of afflictions may fall indeed: Mat. 7.25.
floods of persecution may come, the winds of temptations may blow, and beat
upon the house of a godly man's contentment: and shake and batter it, but it
shall not fall: for it is builded on the foundations of God. Even upon the
rock Christ Jesus, and chief corner stone, 1. Pet. 2.6. and verse. 5.
upon whom all godly men as living stones are built, and whereupon also they
build and found their impregnable fortress of godly contentment.

On these grounds and foundations does a godly man, when he is himself, build
a sanctuary to his soul of godly contentment: wherein he does shelter, and
solace himself, in all the changes of this present mortality, in this manner.

The use of the four grounds of contentment.
If God, in goodness, give abundantly, he is joyful, and receives it
thankefully: if a competency, he is cheerful, and enioyes it comfortably: if
but a little, he is quieted, and accepts it willingly: if not any thing at all,
yet he is patient, and waits hopefully. For he wisely considers; that God
gives abundantly, that man might be an instrument of Gods bounty. God gives
moderately, that he might not be cumbred with superfluity. God gives
sparingly, that he might ask both these, and better things, more earnestly.
Yea, God sometimes withholds these outward things, and sends crosses in stead
of them: for trial of some grace, exercise of some virtue, prevention of some
danger, cure of some disease. To weane him from the world, to direct him
toward heaven: to draw him to himself: or some way, or other, for Gods glory,
others example, and his own true good. He knows that Gods providence
disposes of all: Gods love to him is firm in all: Romans 8.23.
Gods promise is passed, that all shall turn to his good: and his present
portion is not only good, but a pawn of a greater. If more were now
behoouefull, he should not want it: and seeing more is not given, he feels no
want without it. But finds a supply in his storehouse of godliness, which is
ever attended of wel-pleasing Contentment.

What now is there, in all the world, that can threaten, and cause
coffeehouse unto a godly man? Surely many things threaten it: 4. Causes of
coffeehouse.
as namely these four. First, conscience and remembrance of evil committed.
Secondly, strength and violence of temptation enforced. Thirdly, sense, or
fear of evil suffered. Fourthly, want and defect of good desired. And these
indeed, are of great force to work or threaten coffeehouse. For where guilt
of sin is not removed: where assaults and temptations are not repelled:
where the bitterness of crosses is not sweetened: and where desire of good is
not competently supplied, peace and contentment cannot lodge in the heart of
any mortal man. Here is a large field opened, but I may not walk therein at
length. In one word therefore. God be thanked. These causes removed.
1. Christ has suffered, and the guilt of sin is removed. 2. Christ has
conquered, and temptation shall be vanquished. 3. The comforter is sent, and
crosses are sweetened. 4. Heaven is prepared, and all wants shall be supplied,
unto a godly man, and therefore a godly man may well content himself to live
by faith for the time of this life, and to comfort himself by assured
expectation of joyful fruition of all desired good, and safe exemption from
all suspected evil. Of these more largely.
More largely thus.

1. Cause of coffeehouse.
Conscience and remembrance of sin committed, is of great force to disease
the mind, and to distemper the heart with coffeehouse. For howsoever sin
proffer delight, and promise contentment, in the beginning: yet it works woe,
and breeds sorrow, in the ending, and never can true contentment lodge in the
heart within, as long as the guilt of sin is not removed out. Sin causes
God to be discontent with man, man with himself, while God, and his
conscience do war against him, what can work contentment in him?

1. Cause removed.
But God be thanked, Christ has suffered, and Gods justice is satisfied, sin
remitted, God reconciled unto a godly man, by his faith in Christ his person is
justified, conscience pacified, affections quieted, coffeehouse removed,
and his heart is refreshed with new delight, in the renouation of his covenant
of peace between his late offended, but now wel-pleased Father, and his late
disquieted, but now appeased conscience; which formerly was an accuser and
caused bitter sorrowing: but now is become an excuser and causes sweet
rejoicing.

2. Cause of coffeehouse.
As sins committed caused coffeehouse: so importunate assaults of new
temptations work much disturbance; and never cease to vex and disquiet, till
they be either utterly vanquished, or strongly repelled. The soul is not
contented, until it be settled; never settled, while it is importunately
molested: and as this molestation cannot be avoided: so danger of falling
cannot, by nature, be prevented.

2. Cause removed.
But herein a Christian has such a privilege as can exempt him from the
greatest danger of that evil which Satan enforces, and nature furthereth.
For the doctrine of godliness does sufficiently inform him, and the power of
godliness does in some measure enable him, to compose disordered passion
within, and to resist disturbing assaults without. The religious exercise of
mortification does expel the venom of viperous corruptions, and the skillful
use of the shield of faith does repel the poisoned darts of temptations. Or if
they press so sore upon him that he cannot ouer-master them, yet does he so
quell and weaken them, that they cannot conquerre him. He knows that if he
fight manfully, he shall win the field; and though he be pricked and
wounded, yet he shall not be killed. Grauiter tent^t^^, minime s^p^ratus. Aug.
de C^^it. Dei. lib. 1. c. 10.
He finds his heart religiously disposed to please the Lord, and absolutely
resolved, to avoid, to his power, the offense of God, and cries for help when
he feels the danger, and so rides at anchor in most boisterous storms,
feels ground of comfort in greatest depthes, and holds vnsurprised, in most
violent assaults, his impregnable fortress of godly Contentment.

3. Cause of coffeehouse.
Crosses do naturally disquiet the mind, which, when it is crossed, grows
discontented. Now the life of a Christian lies exposed to afflictions, and
cross follows cross, as wave after wave. The latter oftentimes ouer-takes
the former, and sometimes many do meet together (as disease of body, loss of
goods, defamation in name, disappointment of hopes, or other sad accidents)
which pressing sore on every side, drive often to great exigence and dangerous
extremities, and these make a natural man weary of his part, yea of his life,
and so distract him, that he is scarce himself; but sometimes breaks out
into grievous complaints, and opens his mouth against the God of heaven; or, in
miserable silence, makes his own hands the Surgeons by desperate cruelty to
seek for hopeless remedy, or, if he suffer himself to live, he lives
disquieted, and so his mind is discontented, and a man truly godly, through
violence of the assault, and weakness of grace, may be drawn very far this
way, and no humane skill can invent a remedy, to cure such biting and vexing
maladies.

3. Cause removed.
But godliness in this point of greatest extremity is of soue aigne force and
experienced virtue, both to prevent unnecessary crosses, which godless men
draw down upon themselves; and to mitigate and allay the force of such, as men
use to aggrauate against themselves; and safely to bring through such
bottomless depthes, as wherein the ungodly are utterly overwhelmed. And when
imaginary crosses, to a godless man, seem heavy and unsupportable: the truest
pressures, to a godly man, grow easy and comfortable; through the work and
operation of the spirit of comfort. Hence, for the most part, it comes to
pass; Ioh. 14.16.
that, after some conflicts and first assaults, a godly wise and courageous
Christian does take to himself such heart of grace, (while the spirit of grace
does possess the heart) that he declines the dint of the most deadly blows.
Godliness does instruct, both certainly to expect them, wisely to foresee
them, timely to provide for them, resolutely to undertake them, patiently to
bear them, constantly to pass through them, and prudently to make advantage
of them. And not only to be cheerful in them, but thankful for them; as
true tokens of Gods Fatherly love, needful promoters of sanctification, and
present pawnes of future good: of a crown of glory, after a penny-weight of
the Cross; and eternity of joy, 2. Cor. ^. 17.
after momentanie sufferings. And this is that which enlarged the hearts of the
faithful to joy and exultation in the furnace of fire, Dan. 3. Dan. 6. Act. 16.
in the den of Lions, in the stocks, at the stake, in torments, in death:
and is the quiet fruit of righteousness to all that are exercised thereby. So
that he has but small experience of the power of godliness, who has not
learned some measure of contentment in present miseries, on assured expectation
of future deliverance, and infallible hope of a better resurrection. Psalm
34.19. Hebr. 11.35.


4 Cause of coffeehouse.
Lastly, the present want of some desired good does greatly unsettle and
discontent the mind, for hope deferred is the languishing of the soul. It is
the nature of the desire, still to put forth it self, until it receive
welpleasing satisfaction, through fruition of some desired good. Now were the
desire directed by judgment, and bounded within the limits of Christian
moderation, it were easy to satisfy and well to content it. But as it is ever
ranging and roauing after every faire-seeming show, so it is not always
satisfied with sound and solid good; and while it carelessly neglects the true
good, it remains unprovided of true contentment.

4. Cause removed by two means.
But godliness will provide for satisfaction of the desires upon due
consideration of those forenamed grounds. And whereas good things desired are
either earthly, or heavenly, it teaches moderation toward those, gives
direction to these.

1. Moderation of desire of earthly things.
1. It teaches to moderate the desire of earthly things; to accustom himself
to live of a little, and to be content: and as for superfluities, not to
affect it, in heaping together these earthly things; as unworthy for themselves
to be desired or loved: the inordinate desire whereof, either depriueth of
possession of them, or dispossesseth of contentment in them. So that he that
desires them more then he should, does either loose them sooner then he
would, or not find that contentment in them which he expects, while he
makes a God of them, and God an Idol, and more then this; godliness teaches
moderation in care for them (which follows upon and draws after it, desire
of them) by calling to mind those heavenly exhortations. In nothing be
careful, Phil. 4.6.
cast all your care on God, 1. Pet. 5.7.
for he cares for all, and, cast thy burden upon the Lord and he shall
nourish thee. Psalm. 55.22.
Delight thy self in the Lord, Psalm. 37.4, 5.
and he shall give thee thine hearts desire etc. And applying to the heart
such experiments of Gods gracious supply of great necessities of his Church in
the wilderness, Exodus 16. and 17. 1. King. 17. Psalm. 147.9. Luke 12.24.
Elijah in the dearth and drought, etc. That God that feeds the very Ravens,
can cause the Ravens to feed the godly.

2. Godliness prouides for satisfaction of the desires by directing them to
things above, 2. Derect on of the desire to heavenly things. Col. 3.2, 3. Phil
3.7, 8.
laid up in Christ Jesus, the godly man's gain, and sufficiently able to give
contentment. He is abundantly rich, Affatim Dives est, qui cum Christo
pauperest Hieron. Ep ad H^liodord e vita solitaria.
that is poor with Christ, a replenished treasury of grace and glory: beyond
whom a godly man's desire can never extend or enlarge it self: but must needs
contentendly rest in him, as in the uttermost period of all desired, and
all-sufficient good.

Now, Use.
to draw to an end of this branch of my discourse, which entreats of
Contentment the attendant of godliness. If this be true indeed, as it is most
true, that godliness is attended of true contentment: Why so many men live
discontent.
what then is the cause of so many men's mislike of their own estates; of such
private murmurs, such public clamors, and common complaints which fill the
ears both of God and men; especially of those, who have sufficient to do
justice to others, and to pay their debts: to refresh themselves and to
maintain their families: to fit them for Gods service in their lawful
callings?

Coffeehouse grows through want of godliness, and how.
Surely the want of contentment argues the want of godliness: and men
therefore complain of their own estate as unpleasing and comfortless,
because they have not obtained the true-contenting gain of piety and
godliness.

1. Some, through ungodliness, have plunged themselves into comfortless and
heartbreaking miseries: and for want of godliness, can find no means of
remedy and relief. 2. Others have great wealth, but little contentment;
because they have much goods, but little goodness: great return of earthly
riches, but little increase of heavenly graces: great store of pelf, but
little piety. For certain it is, that according to the measure of godliness
is the measure of godly contentment. Little godliness, little contentment: no
godliness, no true contentment: great godliness, great contentment. Many
complain as well when they have, as when they want; because they want it,
while, they have it, as wanting godliness which teaches. 1. How to esteem
it. 2. How to enjoy it. 3. How to bestow it. Yea, the more they have, the less
they are satisfied: because, the further they are from godliness, the further
from contentment. They greedily gape for more gain without, because they want
due measure of godliness within. For were they wel-stored of godliness
inwardly, they would not feel such want of riches outwardly.

Why some men live contented.
In the heart of every godly man which is Deo plenum filled with (the grace of)
God, there is little room left, for these frail and earthly things, but it is
contented with a smaller portion of them. The godly man can find content in
poverty: the ungodly finds discontent in plenty. The godly man finds content in
disgrace. The ungodly, discontent in honor. The godly, content in pain: the
ungodly, discontent in pleasure. And, to omit the ungodly man, (who never
enioyes any true, any sound, any durable contentment) the godly man finds
plenty in poverty; honor in disgrace: pleasure in pain: health in sickness:
solace in sadness: life in death, and hope of future felicity, in sense of
present misery. Godliness made Saint Paul and Silas, in prison (in the inner
prison) in the stocks, Act. 16.24, 25
to sing for joy: while the ungodly Jews were, at liberty, either sleeping or
sorrowing; or senseless of their present sin and future misery. And the
unconverted Iaylor was ready, for fear of their escape, to make away himself.

Objections answered. 2 Cor. 6.9.10.
And suppose a godly man be in sorrow: yet is he sorrowful, as always
rejoicing: as chastened, yet not killed: as dying, yet behold he lives: as
having nothing yet possesses all things. 2 Cor. 4.8,
Be he troubled on every side, yet is he not distressed: perplexed yet not in
despair: persesecuted yet not forsaken: cast down, yet not destroyed: dying
for Jesus, yet receiving life from Jesus. And though he fall, yet the Lord
shall raise him up: Though he sit in darkness, Mic. 7.7.
yet the Lord shall be a light unto him. Weeping may endure for a night, Psalm.
30.5.
but joy comes in the morning. And the more his former affliction increased,
the more his after-ioy abounds. Godliness can mitigate and assuage the
grieuousnesse of present afflictions, and make patient of change from better to
worse, in the fluent uncertainty of this outward estate and the power of
godliness is a sovereign cordial to cheer up the spirits, and to make able
to counteruaile all assailing dangers, and sinister or cross events. So that
it is the privilege of a truly godly and sound hearted Christian to rejoice
in tribulation, Romans 5.3. Romans 8.31.32 etc. 1 Cor. 15.55.56.57.
and to triumph over death, and spiritual enemies: so that he alone has
sufficient cause to live comfortably, and to applaud himself in his happy
condition, when all the world does threaten, or is threatened, misery.

Godly contentment gives good direction in the life of man.
Worthy were it to consider for the commendation of godliness, but too long to
relate for want of time: how safely and comfortably, This godly contentment
will cause men to walk in the golden mean between those two foul extremes of
careless neglect of that which they ought to take; and greedy grasping after
that which they ought not to desire. 1. A godly man dare neither live out of a
calling, nor neglect his duty in a gainful course; because he is godly. 2.
Neither can he be greedy of gain, and rent himself with distractiue care, or
use unseemly means to rake to himself that which is not his; because he is
content with his own. This constant endeavor is, not to decline either to the
right hand or to the left: but to bound himself within the limits of Christian
prudence, and religious moderation. He accounts him rich, not who abounds in
his wealth, but who is godly in his desires, not who has his possessions
enlarged, but who has his affections moderated, and if the greedy appetite be
not satisfied; he accounts the treasures of Dives extreme poverty: and the
penury of St. Paul sufficient plenty. And maruails not that a godly Swain
can find more content in his beggars cottage; then an ungodly Emperor in his
princely Palace. In a word: he can learn of godliness with godly Saint Paul;
in whatsoever estate he is, therewith to be content, Phil. 4.11.
he knows how to be abased, and how to abound: to be full, and to be hungry
to abound and to suffer need. He can do all things through Christ who
strengthens him: and through the power of godliness which works contentment
in him. The holy Teacher of wisdom tells him, that, better is a little with
the fear of the Lord, Prou. 15.16.
then great treasure and trouble therewith. That a little which the righteous
man has, Psalm. 37.16.
is better then the riches of many wicked. Not because that less which he
has is better: but because he which has that less, is better. And as a
godly man finds his holiness increased, so he esteems his estate bettered.
And when he knows himself perfectly holy: then shall he find himself
perfectly happy. And then, and not before, shall he obtain the full fruition
of heavenly felicity, when he has bid farewell, to all earthly store, and
outward plenty. As his godliness is a wel-spring of his contentment: so is
his holiness a forerunner of his happiness. Conclusion.
Oh let us be godly, that we may be content: and holy, that we may be happy.
For true piety brings wel-pleasing sufficiency: and perfect holiness,
eternal blessedness. And thus much of Contentment the attendant of godliness.

The 3. general point* Of the great gain of godliness.
Time and desire, now hasten us forward unto the attribute of godliness
attended of contentment: and that is Gain. Godliness with Contentment is
gain, and this gain is not small, but Great. Godliness with contentment is
great gain. Where under the borrowed terms of gain and advantage in trading
and trafique in the course of this world, the worth and excellency of
godliness is magnifyed and extolled.

Return and increase in worldly profits is esteemed gain: and so it is, but
not such gain as the profane Apostles did fondly suppose: Verse. 5.
as though the holy doctrine of godliness, and precious name of piety should
be basely prostituted to serve this earthly commodity as though religion were
to be a bawd to covetousness, or an art in policy invented to compass this
worldly profit. No, no, but yet the truth is; That 1. True godliness is true
gain: 2. Yea great gain: 3. Yea the great gain or greatest gain of all. And
here are three points, and as it were three precious pearls, found out by our
holy Apostle, in turning over the dunghill of those profane Apostles, who
abused religion to filthy lucre. And these are three linkes in a chain of
gold, one inlinked within another, which howsoever they may be distinctly
conceived, yet can they not well be separately handled. For when I affirm that
godliness is gain, I intimate withal, that it is great gain, and when I
avouch, that godliness is great gain; I further insinuate, that it is the
greatest gain of all. In one word then, Godliness is true gain, inualuable,
and incomparable, or more distinctly thus. 1. True godliness is true gain. 2.
True godliness is great gain. 3. True godliness is the greatest gain of
all, and of these in order.

1. Godliness is true gain.
True Godliness is true gain. Godliness as it is a divine habit of grace,
wrought in the heart of man, is ^^esteeme in it self, though not esteemed:
commendable in it self, though not commended, apearle of price, a treasure
very rich. (...). Naz.
It is profit indeed to get gain into the soul. Verae diuitiae non opes
sunt, sed virtutes. Bern.
Virtue not wealth is the true riches. So gracious is virtue in the eye of the
worst, that it can extort from the vilest man an approbation of it true
goodness.

The Heathen wise in their three orders of their Bona.
goods. (1. Of body: as health, strength, beauty. 2. Of Fortune (as they termed
them) as riches, lands, treasures. 3. Of the mind: as knowledge of arts and
tongues, wisdom, virtue) placed virtue in their highest rank of all; Wealth
in the lowest. This scarce deserving the name of good; as unable to make the
owner good. That of large extent, and most divine; as able of it self to make
man happy. If they so highly esteemed of the shadow of virtue, little better,
indeed, then shining vice: where shall we place the substance, or virtue it
self, truly and indeed divine and heavenly? which whosoever has gotten, and
surely enioyceth, oh happy he truly and blessed! The wise man thus speaks,
inspired by Gods spirit: Blessed is the man that finds wisdom, Prou. 3.13.
and the man that gets understanding. For the merchandise of it is better
then the merchandise of silver: and the gain thereof then fine gold.

No sum of silver, no mass of gold, is so true a gain, as virtue and
godliness. Gold and silver what are they? Their matter is mud, of the basest
element. Their greatest estimation from the folly of the vainest men. Yet if
this mire and mud (condensated by heat of the Sun, and influence of the
heavens, purified by the heat of the fire, instamped with the image and
inscription of the King, attained and purchased by labor and industry,) be
accounted truly gain, and a blessing of God, as indeed it is; What then shall
we say of this true pearl of piety, which is not dug out of any earthly
mine, but fetched down from the highest heavens: not of mire and mud, but of
divine offspring: not generated by the heat of this visible Sun, or inferior
cause, but through divine influence of Gods eternal spirit: not drossie and
impure, but clean, and sincere: not bearing the stamp, and inscription of
mortal man, but the image and similitude of the immortal God? The having
whereof will not only enrich him, but transform him into the glorious
similitude of the invisible King of heaven: whose image instamped in man's heart
by creation, consisted in conformity with him in divine graces and virtues,
Ephesians. 4.24.
which are so many parts and parcels of the habit of godliness? Surely, we
can say no less of godliness, but that it deserves the name, and title, of
true gain.

2. Godliness is great gain: and how.
As godliness is true (and as I might have said Great) gain as it is (in it
self) a divine habit of grace, in it self considered; so is it great gain
indeed, as it intiteleth and interesteth into further advantage, in that it
has the promises of the life that now is and of that, which is to come. 1.
Tim. 4 8. Of life natural, and life spiritual.

1. The spiritual return of godliness.
The first and chiefest part and parcel of that rich return, which godliness
by Gods promise is interessed in, is that heavenly revenue of rich holiness
and happiness which belong to a life spiritual, both this of grace and that
other of glory. And here we must know that this promise is made, and made good
in Christ, from whom as our Head, we derive our Godliness, and in whom we
find all our treasures of goodness.

Christ our treasury emptied (as it were) himself, to replenish us: became
poor to make us rich. Poor in outward estate, to make us rich in our inward
condition: poor in our nature, that we might be rich in his grace: poor
temporally, to make us rich eternally. In Christ we gain sufficient treasures
of righteousness to discharge our debt of disobedience. 1. Cor. 1.30. 2. Cor.
5.21. Hebr. 9.14. and 10.14.
The all-sufficient sacrifice of his death to ransom us from the death of
sin. Esa. 53.5, 6. 1. Pet. 2.24. Col. 2, 3. 2. Cor. 5.18, 19.
The treasures of wisdom and holiness to remove our folly and deformities.
We gain reconciliation with God, Ephesians. 3.12. Hebr. 10.20.22.
in sted of emnity; access to God, in stead of alienation from God; Romans 5.1.
Romans 15.13.
Peace of conscience, in stead of terrors; Joy in the holy Ghost in sted of
sorrow in our soul; Romans 14.17. 1. Ioh. 1.4.
comfortable hope in sted of dreadful despair. In Christ we gain privilege
of Sonship and spiritual adoption, Romans 5.2. Ehpes. 1.5. Apoc. 1.6.
title to a crown, and fellowship in a Kingdom. Blessed communion with God
our Father, 1. Ioh. 1.3.
the son (himself) our redeemer, and the holy spirit our blessed guide, and
strong supporter, sweet comforter, and perfect sanctifier. In Christ we gain
the prayers of the Saints, yet living with us: the love of the Saints glorified
before us: Hebr. 1.14.
the Ministry of Angels working for us, grace in earth: and glory in heaven.
In Christ our gain is such, as that we shall have all losses recompensed; all
wants supplied; al curses removed, al crosses sanctified; all graces increased:
all hopes confirmed: all promises accomplished; all blessedness procured,
Satan conquered, death destroyed, Ose. 13.14. 1. Cor. 15.54.55.
the grave sweetened, corruption abolished, sanctification perfected, heaven
opened for our happy entrance. Lift up your heads, Oh ye heavenly gates, Psalm.
24.7.
and be ye lifted up ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may bring
us in. Now when Heaven shall be our gain, what can be our loss? Unless we
loose our tears, wiped from our eyes? Unless we loose our sorrows, expelled
from our hearts? Unless we loose our dangers, removed from our persons?
Unless we loose our infirmities, our deformities, our transitory estate, our
temporal condition (which we account for precious) to change them for
permanent and eternal happiness? And what is, or rather is not the gain of
godliness, when it has brought man to happiness? That, indeed, which no
mortal eye has ever seen, Esa. 64 4. 1. Cor. 2.9.
no ear heard, no tongue uttered, no heart conceived. What hand can measure
the bounds of infinity? What mind can number the years of eternity? What
hand, what mind, can measure, can number, the unmeasurable measure, and
innumerable number of the wealth and treasures of piety and godliness? Oh that
I had the tongues of the glorious Angels, in some sort, for your sakes to
utter? Oh, rather, that you had the hearts of the glorified Saints, in some
little small measure to conceive, of some part and parcel of this spiritual
gain of godliness! But this glorious Sun does so dazzle my weak eyes, this
bottomless depth does so ouerwhelme my shallow heart, and the surpassing
greatness of these rich treasures does so every way ouercharge me, that I
must needs stand silent, amazed and astonished, at the serious consideration
of the exceeding abundant excellency of these revenues of godliness.

2. The temporal return of godliness.
As those who find their tender eyesight dazeled by gazing directly upon the
body of the Sun, do learn to behold it in some oblique reflection (as we
observe the eclipse in a basen of water) even so let us perceiving the eye of
our mind now dimmed and dazeled with the exceeding brightness of the gain of
godliness, in the chiefest glory thereof) look upon it more indirectly in the
secondary reflections of earthly blessings, which (as you may remember) were
entayled on godliness by the gracious promise of God. 1. Tim. 4.8.
Godliness has the promise of the life that now is. Whatsoever true gain can
be found in this life, it is annexed to godliness as an auctarie or
appendant, and is as an overplus or ouer-measure cast unto him, Mat. 6.33.
who shall first have sought the kingdom of God and his righteousness, Hebr.
1.2.
conueighed by Christ the heir of all unto him that is truly godly, or truly
believing.

A godly man has two treasuries, without him of gainefull revenues. Heaven
above a replenished treasury of blessings spiritual: Mat. 19.21.
and Earth below a wel-furnished storehouse of benefits temporal. As those
above are bestowed only upon a godly man: so these below are by most just
title to descend to him, who is fellow heir with Christ, Romans 8.17.
the heir of al things. Strangers may have some portion of them, but the right
of inheritance belongs to the sons of God. Riches and honor, delights and
pleasures, life and length of days, Prou 3.16.17 and 8.18. Deuteronomy. 28. Ps. 1
12.2.3.
seed and posterity are entailed to such as are truly believing, and fear the
Lord. And howsoever the ungodly man may lay some claim unto them, and that by
some kind of right from God; (as a preserver of nature, How a godles man may
lay claim to temporal blessings.
a sustainer of his creature, a maintainer of callings, a rewarder of industry,
as a god of mercy alluring by benefits, and a god of justice to make men,
refusing his mercy, excuselesse.) And howsoever no man can despoil him of them,
without great sin, yet can he not enjoy them with any great comfort; as
wanting the best title, through the want of Christ. Now then if any man be
possessed with an ouerweening conceit, of the exceeding worth of worldly
gain: be it known unto him that whatsoever it is, rightly to weigh it, and
properly to speak of it, it is all, and only entailed to godliness. The best
title being lost in Adam, restored by Christ; for godliness has the promises
both of this life present and of that which is to come: 1 Timothy 4.8. Leuit. 26.
Deuteronomy. 28.
ungodliness the threats, and curses of them both.

Yet if any be so retchlesly peevish and perverse, that he will still contend:
that the gain of the world belongs as well to the ungodly, as godly, as de
facto, so de iure. To leave the deciding of that controversy as a fit
Nisiprius for the great Judge of all, at the general Assizes, be it granted
unto him that his claim is as good: yet his gain is still less then the
godly man's is, for howsoever the gain of the world be granted to be great,
yet the gain of godliness is of all the greatest gain. And in this I am to
spend, the last part of my discourse.

3. Godliness is the greatest gain of all.
That the gain of Godliness should be of all the greatest gain, it is holden
a Paradox and a strange assertion, among many in the world. The godless
worldling, take him in his humor, would be loath to be thought so foolish, as
to exchange his gain with a godly man's. His eyes are so blinded, and his heart
so possessed with the supposed worth and excellency of this earthly gain;
that he has neither eyes to see, nor heart to esteem the price of the
heavenly. Yea the euer-thirsting desire, and restless endeavor, after that
gain of the world, and the careless neglect and retchlesse contempt of this
of Godliness, which is seen in the most, does plainly demonstrate that, of
all, the fewest do account of godliness, as of all the best, and greatest
gain.

A comparison between the gain of the world and the gain of godliness.
Let us now enter into a comparatiue discourse between that temporal gain of
the world (which a godles worldling may have in common with the godly) and the
spiritual gain: of godliness (which a godly man does alone possess, besides
his part and portion in that other:) and it shall soon appear (I hope to our
profit) that the gain of godliness is far the greater gain. 1 General and
that in. 1 Profits of the worldling.


1. And worldlings gain may be great in deed, shall we (to help him) suppose
him possessed, of pleasant gardens, fruitful orchards, fields and vineyards,
fair palaces, and large provinces, shall we suppose him enriched with wealth
at will, Eccle. 2.
in store and abundance of gold as silver; of silver, 2 Chronicles. 1.15
as stones; of pearls, as pibbles in the streets: yet were the gain of
godliness greater then this: and a godly man far richer then he. Profits of
the Godly man.
For Christ the Lord of all is his Lord-treasurer, and the infinite fullness of
his all-sufficient deity the store that is laid up in the godly man's treasury,
some Jewels (which Christ does here bestow) are these; Prou. 3.
Wisdom, which is better then fine gold, more precious then the Rubies; Job.
28.
faith which is precious, love of God, hope of glory, piety, righteousness,
holiness, all heavenly virtues, and divine graces, treasures inualuable, of
incomparable worth. And what were those worldly goods in the judgment of the
wisest among the heathen? surely but indifferent. (...). Peripatet. (...).
Platonic. (...) Zeno. (...). Arist. Eth.
Neither good nor evil. Or good, not so much in their own nature, as in the
judgment of men. Others accounted them, useful to some good end. Or let them
be good, as indeed they are, the good blessings of God: yet are they good
things but of the lowest rank of good. Bona minima. Aug. retract. l. 1. c. 9.
The covetous worldling may esteem wealth the most Honorable good. And silver
to him may be blood and soul: (...). Eurip.
and when he has lost his goods he may hang himself, as having lost already
his life, laid up in his goods. Let all be trifles compared with his gold. Yea
let him say to the wedge of gold thou art my hope, Job. 31.24. (...). Menand.
and esteem silver and gold his most profitable gods. Yet what of all this? is
he therefore rich? The godly has wealth which is a God in deed, for Christ is
his gain; and God is his portion. Phil. 1.2 ^. and 3 7. Ier. 10.16.
It is not good simply to be wealthy; but to be wealthy in good things;
especially in God who is goodness it self.

2 Let the worldlings wealth be graced with honor, 2 The honor of the
worldling.
backed with Empire, and authority royal. Let him sit on the Throne, wear the
crown, saay the scepter, prescribe laws, command, forbid, reward, punish: Let
him be able to help his friends, to hurt his foes, to advance his favorites,
to debase his opposites: Let him be royally attended, highly honored, lowly
saluted; as victorious, wise, prudent, politic: Let him be heartily loved,
and loyally embraced, as the pillar of the wealepublique, father of his
country, pattern of antiquity, Amor and deliciae generis humani.
love and darling of wholem mankind, with Titus Vespasian: Let him be
esteemed the light of the eyes, Bonus Deus Constantinum Imperatorem tantis
terrenis impleuit muneribus, quanta optare nullus a^deret. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei.
lib. 5. cap. 25.
joy of the heart, breath of the nostrils of many millions of subjects. And to
conclude: Let him be so fully replenished with such earthly good things, as no
mortal man durst wish so great (As Augustine speaks of Constantine the Great)
Yet if in all this prosperity he be but a mere worldling, the godly man's game
is greater then this; shall he be likewise invested with his expected
sovereignty. The honor of the godly.
For he shall be adorned with the glorious robes of the righteousness of
Christ, victoriously triumph over the world, flesh, sin, and satan: prescribe
laws to inordinate affections; be ctowned a King in heaven, Apoc. 1.6.
attended of the Angels, honored of all creatures, live in nearest communion
with God himself, enjoy his glorious presence, Luke 12.32. Mat. 25.34.
and partake with him in an eternal Kingdom.

3. Pleasures of the worlding.
3 Lastly, let the worldlings wealth be not only adorned with honor, but
sweetened with pleasures. Let him enjoy the sweet comforts of health of body,
tranquillity of mind, faithful, fair, and fruitful wife, towardly and
obedient sons and daughters, trusty servants, good neighbors, kind
acquaintance, able and stable friends. Let him enjoy dainty meats,
sweete-sounding music, Eccle. 2.10.
and all the delights of the sons of men. Pleasures of the godly.
Yet is the godly man's estate far better then this: for he does most
comfortably enjoy the sweetest delights and comforts of the soul: due
submission of body to soul, of soul to God: peace of conscience, joy in the
holy Ghost, comfort in affliction, strength in temptation, life in death, and
neuer-fading delights, and rivers of pleasures; the joy and solace of a Son
of God, of a spouse of Christ, of an inhabitant of heaven, and of an enioyer of
God, in fullness of joy, and unchangeable glory.

Oh consider (I beseech you, beloved in the Lord) consider and weigh these
things a little. The matter is worthy your deepest meditation. 2. A special
comparison of the gain of the worlding, and godlieman.
Consider (I say) and you shall assuredly find; that the greatest gain of the
worldling is very small: the smallest of the godly is very great. This of worth,
that worthless.

The greatest gain the worldling can enjoy, is but outward and superficial,
1. The worldlings gain is but outward and superficial.
serving only for the use of humane and corporal life, which consistes in
conjunction of soul and body united alone by the bond of nature: but the gain
of the godly is inward and substantial, The godly man's inward and substantial.
of use to a life divine and spiritual, which consistes in conjunction of the
whole person, both soul and body, with God, and that by a bond of the spirit
of God. That frees but from some outward evil: as poverty, the least of
evils, which one rich and ready friend may easily remedy. From disgrace, which
may sometimes prove glorious, as for such cause, or with such persons, as
where disgrace is honor. From outward pain, which may work us pleasure, and
prepare for greater joy and solace. But this freeth from the greatest evils:
from spiritual beggary, ignominy, misery, and makes rich within, glorious, and
well appayed. And what were it to have a purple coat, and a polluted
conscience? a gay gown, and a sick heart? a bed of gold, and a diseased mind?
a full chest, and an empty soul? afaire face, and foul affections? to
glister in jewels, and to be filthy in manners? to be in grace with men, and
disgrace with God? One dram of that true inward gain is far more worth
then a thousand worlds.

2. The worldlings gain is mutable and uncertain.
The worldlings gain is mutable and uncertain, and soon, God knows, is
changed for a loss! it is constant in nothing, but in mutabilitie, 1. Ioh.
2.17.
the inseparable property of all earthly vanities. Now a man is rich, presently
poor: now in honor, anon in disgrace: now in pleasure, even now in pain.
Prou. 23.5.
Riches take their wings and fly away: honor with every cross blast is
blown away: and pleasures melt in the taste, as dew before the morning sun.
How soon are our feasts turned into fastes, and our sweetest songs into
mournful lamentations! Lament 3.5.
They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets, and they that
were brought up in scarlet embrace the dunghill. (...) Poet. Instin. histor.
lib. 2.
How soon fayre-shining Fortunes fall and fail! Renowned Xerxes, the fame of
antiquity, passed over into Greece, in passing state and pride, but returned
home in great baseness and fear. As he went, he covered the seas, with his
gallant ships: but as he came, was scarce provided of a mean fishers boat.
He went guarded with an army so huge and mighty, that it emptied deep rivers,
did eat up large countries, and was a burden to the very earth: but he
returned not attended of a waiting boy. And he who of late was the terror of
the world a broad, was presently in contempt with the meanest of his house at
home.

Would you see an admirable spectacle of humane mutability? Munster. Chronol.
de Tureis. lib. 4. c. 64.
cast your eyes upon Bajazet that terrible Turk, and cruel scourge of Greece.
How soon was he subdued by Tamerlane the Tartar, led about on a scaffold, as a
beast, in a chain of gold, and carried with him abroad, in all his
expeditions, as a footestoole to tread on, when he mounted on horseback, and
as a dog to pick crummes from under his table. And what became of the estate
of this cruel conqueror, who in deuilish pride disdayning the name of man,
would be styled, the wrath of God, the vastity and calamity of the world? He
left his kingdom, stuffed with wealth and treasures, to be dissipated and
extinguished by his disagreeing sons. Read the history of Adoni-bezek. Judge.
1.6, 7.
Who having in his pride and cruelty caused. 70. Kings, having their thumbes
and great toes cut off to be g'ad like whelps to gather crummes from under
his table: he was requited of God, and brought to like misery, and experienced
the mutability of all earthly states. What should I mention the known History
of Croesus, Herodet. Clio. sine lib. 1.
who in the top of his prosperity, would needs have Solon to pronounce him
happy; but anon ouer-topt by Cyrus, and set on a pile of wood to be burnt,
(finding his sudden change from supposed happiness to certain calamity) cried
out in grief and sorrow of heart, Oh Solon, Solon, Solon! The cause of this
outcry when Cyrus understood, he gave him his life, and entreated him kindly,
fearing the like misery to befall himself, (...). Hered. ib.
as knowing the instability of humane affairs, and calamity whereto all men
are subject, as the Historian does well observe. Of all the days of this
mortal life the latter finds him not as the former left him.

No marvel though Tiberius the Emperor refused the style of Pater patriae,
father of his country, on this ground of uncertainty of all these earthly
thing, saying. All mortal men's estates are uncertain: Cuncta mortalium
incerta, quantoque plus adeptus foret, tanto se magis in lubrico dictitaus.
Tacit. annal. lib. 1. De Ciuit. Dei. l. 1. c.1. Esa. 28.4.
man has gotten, the more slippery is his condition. Let me in one word (with
Saint Augustine) speak thus of them all: Sunt omnia terrena cacumina temporali
mobilitaie nutantia. All terrene heights do reele with temporal mutabilitie.
Hear the Lord himself: The glorious beauty (of all earthly excellency) which
is on the head of the fat valley, shall be as a fading flower, and as the
hasty fruit before the Summer: which when he that looks upon it, sees it,
while it is yet in his hand he eats it up. The best settled states grow soon
unsettled: and these adamantine kingdoms have foundations of sand.

The godly man's chief gain is immutable and certain.
But the choice gain of godliness is immutable and certain, (...) a Kingdom
unshaken. The heavenly calling and special gifts thereof are (...) Hebr.
12.28. Romans 11.29. Beza in Locum Nec prodi nec perdi possunt. Aug de ciuit.
deil l. 1. cap. 10.
Such as whereof God can never repent himself, that he gave them, or
repenting take them back again. These good things can neither be betrayed
nor lost. The same God that gave them will still maintain them; and second his
kindness with a supply of newgrace, This grace of God has no end, knows no
stint. (...). Christ. in Romans 5
Temptation may obscure the outward gloss, but cannot hurt the in ward
substance. Some leaves may fall, and some fruit may fade: but the feed and
root of grace shall still remain. Some showers and clouds are here below:
but above these mountains there are no clouds; in the highest heavens is no
mutability. But in that day shall the Lord of Hosts be for a crown of glory,
and for a durable diadem of neuer-fading beauty unto the residue of his
people. Esaias. 28.5.

3 The worldlings gain is for a short time.
The worldlings gain, though it were firm and certain, yet is it but for a
time. The longest term is but the short life of man, and what is the life of
man? short and uncertain. Job. 14.1.2. breuis est vita, and ipsa breuitas
semper incerta. Aug. de verb. dom. sermon. 10.
As grass in the field, soon withering: as a flower in the garden, soon
fading: as a bubble on the water, soon falling: as an unconstant shadow, soon
flitting: as a drowsy man's dream, soon vanishing. A gnat, a fly, ill smell,
moisture of dew, infected blast, or suspense of short breath dislodgeth the
soul of body and dispossesseth both body and soul of the world, and here is
farewell to all; and thus all this gain is gone. Unless he hope his name
shall live in the mouths of commenders; which gain (if but for worldly
respects) is a smoke of no weight, in St. Augustines balance: or to purchase a
tomb for his liuelesse carcass, which sometimes proclaims to the world his
not yet-dying ambition; and whereon ofttimes for his ill demeanure, are
instamped the characters of long-lasting disgrace. Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib
1. cap 3. Tacit. Annal. lib. 3.
Alexander the great (as likewise Caesar Germanicus) lived but 32 years: his
reign was little more then one third of that: In his short reign, he was
glorious, for slaughter and cruelty: and withal ignominious, for reuelling,
and drunkenness. The glorious reign of Cyrus ended in an ignominious death,
he was conquered by a woman, Eusebius. de vit. Constant. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Thomyris. Satia te saenguine, quem sitisti, cuiusque insatiabilis semper
fuisti. Justin. histor. lib 1.
and his head was cast into a vessel of blood, with vile exprobration of his
bloody designs. Yea, and all godly Kings, and religious Emperors must part
with this part of their advantage and gain; and must trust to that more
refined portion of their wealth, The godly man's gain is for ever. Prou. 8.18.
that proper gain of godliness, which is constant and durable; not dying with
the body or left below; but living with the soul through indissoluble union
and communion with God in Christ, 1 Ioh. 2.17. Bona huius vitae sunt,
vanescendo transeuntia: futurae sine fine mansura. Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 20.
cap. 3.
the wel-spring of life to the soul, while the body lies in the grave, and who
shall raise the body to partake in glory. When the world is passed and
vanished away: this gain shall be constant, for ever remaining. That gain is
like a sudden shower, which speedily falls, and hastily is gone: this like a
wel-spring or flowing fountain ever streaming and streaming unto all eternity.
Facile conte^nit omnia, qui se semper cogitat esse moriturum. Hieron. op. 2.
lib. 2.
He will easily contemn that earthly gain, who always thinks that once he
must needs die: and ever highly prize that heavenly wealth, which shall make
him ever blessed, and never forsake him. For it were much to pass from small
wealth to extreme penury: from short honor to eternal disgrace: and from
momentany pleasure to everlasting pain.

4. The worldlings gain is mixed and infected with loss.
The worldlings gain is not sound and sincere, but mingled and infected with
some attendant loss, here is no good entire, without some loss: no commodity,
without some inconueniency. Ipsemundi qualiscunque status plus anxietat is,
quam iucunditatis habet: and si qua tamen est, praeterit iucunditas non
reditura, and manet anxietas non relictura. Bern. ep. 113.
The best provided earthly estate has more anxiety (or vexation) then
sweetness, and the sweetness, if any, passes away not to return; the
anxiety remains and will not go away. So that a worldling is most-what
affected, if not afflicted, with ungrateful remembrance of some evil past: or
unpleasant sense of some evil present: or distractiue fear of evil to come.
And man is naturally affected more with evil, then good: with pain, then
pleasure. A short sickness more affects then long health: small pain
swalloweth up much pleasure: a little disgrace defaceth much honor: and a
little loss of wealth sustained does more disquiet, then much wealth retained
does content. Now no worldling so happy, but feels some calamity: none gets
such gain, but meets with some loss, and this loss does make the gain to
seem but small. The godly man's gain is sound and sincere.
But the gain of godliness (principally after this life when the chief
return thereof comes in) is thoroughly sound and truly sincere, without mixture
of loss, or concurrence of evil. Apoc. 22.3.5.
There Is no ungrateful remembrance of evil past, but joyful triumph over
evils escaped. There Is no unpleasant sense of evil present, but sweet and
sincere delight and pleasure. There Is no distrustful fear of evil to come,
but safe security, and interrupted tranquillity.

5. The worldlings gain is imperfect and cannot content.
The greatest worldlings gain (suppose it greater then ever it can be) only
good without positive evil: yet is is imperfect and cannot content the mind
of man. The desire of man does far exceed the model, and compass of all
inferior objects: they are all too scant and narrow to fill man's heart. So that
the worldling is usually much disquieted with discontent at the imperfection of
some good attained: or with languishing hope of some good expected. He often
deuoures that in hope, whereof he misseth: or if his hap be so good, as to
hit on it; yet is his joy far past, before the thing be had, or if it be had
with expected joy, yet is it enjoyed with less then expected comfort; while it
melts and dissolueth in the very taste. Hence it comes to pass, that a
Godless man (who has gained the world, but not godliness, and therewithal
godly contentment) is like to a sick man tumbling on his couch, and finding
all repose weariness; tediously conuersing with things present, and longingly
desyring things to come. Stilthe desire exceeds the fruition, and so the
affection still wants contentation: yea and though the present desire be
granted, yet is not the mind herewith satisfied: for men use highly to account
the things they would have, and when they have them, count them little worth.
And though they have never so much, yet be their any thing else which they
cannot have; the want of that more troubles them, then the fruition of al they
have, can please them. Yet more then this: let a mere godless worldling have
what he can desire, yet can he but suppose that he might have more: that vain
and foolish supposition will much detract from his good contentment.

What should I say more? The heart of man is, for possibility of desiring, so
unlimited, that no earthly thing can fully replenish it. All may be in it,
Anima rationalis ad imaginem-Dei facta, caeteris omnibus occupari potest,
repleri non potest. Ber^. Sermon dedicat. Esa. 28.20. Esa. 29.8.
but cannot fill it. This bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself
on it: this covering is narrower then that he can wrappe himself in it. A
godless worlding shall be even as when an hungry man dreameth, and behold he
eats: but he awaketh, and his soul is empty; or as when a thirsty man
dreameth he drinks, but he awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his soul
has appetite in it. The reason is: God made the reasonable soul in his own
image, Animam rationalem-Dei capacem quicquid Deo minus est nonimplebit. Bern.
Sermon. dedieat.
in some sense, capable of himself (as Bernard speaks of the unlimited disire
of the soul) therefore, whatsoever is less then God cannot fill it full.

But the gain of godliness is absolittlely perfect; The godly man's gain is
perfect and can give content.
and sit alone to give contentment; as being the gain, not of earth alone, but
the heaven alone, but of him also who filles both earth and heaven, Ier. 23, 24.
and heart and all; even Jesus Christ with the infinitenes of his abundant
store, as far as man's heart is capable of that which God communicates, when he
shall be all in all. Then also shall the desire of the glorified soul be
wonderfully enlarged, and the desire enlarged, shall be fully contanted. Where
between temporal and eternal good things observe this difference. Those
(temporal) are most desired before they be obtained, and when they are
enjoyed, are less accounted of (which because they are imperfect, give not
full content:) but these (eternal) are less esteemed before they be attained,
but as soon as they are tasted, they are more ardently loved: the more ardently
loved, the more earnestly are they desired: and most of all admired, when most
abundantly enjoyed: and that in that blessed kingdom of heaven, where our
love shall enjoy as much (if not more) as our mind can conceive, Esa. 64.4.
our heart desire, our faith believe, or hope expect. And what is that gain
which can give full contentment, but this infinite abundance of incorruptible
good?

The worldings gain exposes to many dangers: The worldlings gain exposes
to dangers.
but godliness directs how to escape them all. Those dangers do meet with
(if not enuiron) this worldly trader on every side: both in getting, and
keeping, and parting with it.

1. In getting.
Such is the baseness of this worldly gain, that it may be gotten, not only
by Truth and Virtue, but also by Fraud and Falsehood. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib.
5.12.
Not only by the bounty and blessing of God, but also by proffer and promise of
the devil, who proclaims himself owner of this world, Luke 4.
with the glory thereof, and bestower of them on whom he will. And the fairest
dealing in the course of trading is said to bring in, most commonly, such
slender return: that it is grown a proverb among the multitude: That, plain
dealing is a Jewel, but he that uses it shall die a beggar. And many are of
mind, especially tradesmen, that, if they deal truly they shall not be able
to live. Whereupon it follows: that many run on in the wide way of the
world, that they may better compass the wealth of the world. Ios. 7.21.
Achan gains his goodly garment, his shekels of silver, and wedge of gold, by
stealth. Balaam would curse to obtain his wages. Ahab and Iezebell get the
vineyard by murder. 1. King. 21. Act. 19.
Demetrius for his gainesake does raise an vproare against Paul. Demas, for his
better advantage this way 2. Tim. 4.10.
forsakes the Apostles, and embraces the present world. And Judas for the
price of thirty pieces of silver, Mat 26.15.
betraieth the Lord, his Lord and master. And to add one more to increase the
number. That Antichrist of Rome, the pretended Vicar of Christ, but successor
of Judas, in his wicked practice, and son and heir of the Prince of this
world, makes merchandise of Gods word, of religion, of heaven, of hell, of the
souls of men, of Christ, of God, and all; and all for the purchase of this
gain of the world. The love of money is the root of all evil: the
stepmother of goodness: the mother of naughtiness: the mother-city of all
iniquity. This thirsting desire in the godless worldling, that is may make way
for richer return, will expel and abandone natural duty out of the family,
humane cruility out of the city, religion out of the Church, respect of good
laws out of the commonwealth, and all difference and respect of just and
unjust, good and evil. It does persuade many to violate friendship, to
falsify promise, to cozen their friends, to oppress the poor, to defraud the
Orphans, to murder the innocent, to spoil the Temple, to betray the country,
blow up the Parlament-house, The Gunpowder treason. Nou. 5. 1605.
to kill the Prince, to forswear themselves, to damn their souls,
maliciously to blaspheme the God of Heaven: and, if it were possible to
confound both heaven and earth, and to leave no wickedness unattempted. Desire
of gold and gain what does it not constrain to undertake? It is an assertion
as true as ancient: That, Over whomsoever covetousness has dominion, he is
evidently subject to all kind of vices. And such is the rode-way, wherein many
a worldling does ride, and run, to leap, thereby, into fair houses, large
possessings, and places of account: sometimes, it may be, into the Emperors
Throne; and very often into the Popes Chair.

And what gain is this? Gen 25.33. Heb. 12.15.
to gain the pottage, and to sell the birthright? to gain the garment, and
to loose his faith? to gain the silver pieces, and to betray his Lord and
Master? this is gain in the coffer, but loss in the conscience: gain of the
world, but loss of heaven. And such is often the worldlings godless gain in
getting.

2. In keeping.
Secondly; as the worldlings gain exposes to danger in getting: so it
inwrappeth in danger in keeping. It intrappeth his mind, it winnes his
affection, it insnareth his heart, it bewitcheth his soul, it steals his
love and affection from God, and places and fixes them upon it self, and
causes him, oft-times, not only, most unjustly to defraud both himself and
others of the use of it, but impiously and superstitiously to honor it as a
God: to place his affiance and confidence therein, and to turn base-slaue to
Mammon his Lord and his God. The ambitious worldling is in the same case: for
al-beit the people serve him, yet his ambitious desire to dominere over others,
does most imperiously dominere over him. He adores honor and authority; as
his Prince and God: so his glory is turned into shame. The voluptuous
worldling, Phil. 3.
who drownes himself in pleasures, yields himself captive to his imperious
Dames, turns slave to his lust, Phil. 3.19.
and makes his belly his God, and purchases to himself damnation in the end,
and such is often the worldlings gain in keeping.

3 In spending
Thirdly; the worldlings gain exposes him to danger in spending; while it
draws from humility to pride; from sobriety to riot: from moderation to
excess: from labor to voluptuousness: from chastity to uncleanness: from
love and practice of virtue and piety, to liking and following of iniquity and
vice.

Oh how many and great are the dangers and difficulties which attend this
gain of the world in getting, and in keeping, and in spending the same.

Cum itsis opibus lasc^uire coepit Ecclesia. Platina in Bened. IIII.
The Church of God had experience hereof, which, when it waxed wealthy, began
to wax wanton, and it was not causelessly observed by one of the Ancient;
That, Religto pep^^ it diuitia^, and filia denorauit matrem. Aug.
religion brought forth wealth and the daughter devoured the mother, many in
the Church of God, (God knows) who have stood in adversity, have fallen in
prosperity: have increased in goodness while the world frowned, but decreased
in grace when the world fawned. The world by fawning deceives, and by
embracing kills; and blessed is he that has both worldly wealth and
heavenly wisdom,

And so every way dangerous is this gain of the world, while it insnareth with
desire of getting: oppresses with care of keeping: corrupts with
voluptuousness in spending.

Who therefore can easily account, these goods, which are gotten so badly? or
this wealth which is kept so woefully? or this gain, which is spent so
hurtfully? and what great gain is this of the world, that brings in danger of
the loss of heaven?

The gain of godliness is free from danger. 1. In getting.
There is no such danger in the gain of godliness. It is not got but by good
and godly means: through the ordinances of God, and work of Gods spirit. No
ill means can be an immediate cause of any spiritual good: but if any evil
be occasion of any such good, it is by the skillful hand of Gods omnipotent
goodness, that turns poison into potions, and evil to good. 2. In Keeping.
This gain is not kept but in good and godly manner, not laid up in a napkin,
but put out to Gods use. It is not bestowed, but to good and godly purposes. 3.
In bestowing.
And it does not only make the owner thereof good through getting, better
through keeping, and best of all by using it well; but it does teach and direct
to use the worlds gain well which without this we could not but use very ill:
Godliness teaches how to use worldly gain well.
and that while it well advises, not to place our happiness in it, but to
further our happiness by wise employment of it: by making friends of this
unrighteous Mammon that we may be received into that everlasting habitation.
Luc. 16.9.
And when this gain of godliness has brought us to our best condition here,
it will put us into possession of perfection elsewhere: and that not in this
earth below, where this worldly gain is got, and used, and left behind us:
but in heaven above, whence this is received, where it is reserved: and where
it shall be most happily enjoyed.

7. The worldlings gain cannot make happy: this of godliness can.
Lastly, that I may not be infinite in this discourse, but may come to a
conclusion of this comparison. That gain of the world makes many miserable,
none happy: this of godliness all happy, none miserable. Those goods, Aug. de
ciuit. De^. lib. 5. c. 1.
such men may have as are not good, and therefore not happy. These, none but
such as are good and therefore not miserable. That worldly wealth makes neither
us nor our children happy: for either while we live, we loose it: or when we
die, we leave it, to whom we know not, or to whom we would not. But this is
such as neither leaves us, nor we it: but remains ever with us, ever to
enrich us. And whereas happiness is not enjoyed but in fruition of God, who is
the only felicity of the soul of man. This gain of godliness unites us to
God, and works our blessedness, Psalm. 144.15.
while the Lord is our God. And that not only in this covenant of grace: but
specially in that communion of glory, Ephesians. 1.2 3.
with God in Christ; which is the fullness and vp-shot of all felicity, Ephesians.
3.19.
where God fills all in all: and where we shall be filled with all fullness
of God.

Now to apply all this unto our selves. The Merchants of whom I speak, are
(among the rest, you, Right Honorable and beloved) unto whom I speak. The
gain at which I would advise you to aim, is the purchase of Godliness, That
true, that great, that all-sufficient gain. Your talents and means of purchase
are, your abilities of body, mind, estate, joined with the holy and divine
ordinances of God. Your traficke and trading is your manner of carriage, in your
purposes, desires, delights, studies and endeauours both of heart and life. The
Mart-day is at hand, the day of grace is come, the the Sun is up, the Gospel
is preached. These precious wares of godliness are readily exposed to the open
view of all willing beholders, all wise and provident merchants, all prudent
professors, are busy at their work, and redeem fore-flowed time by double
diligence in their painful endeavor. The owner of all this wealth does call
unto you, by the ministry of his servants, in the preaching of his word,
saying. What lack you? what buy you? Come: see: buy: gain: be happy, be
blessed: Come; purchase the hidden treasure. this goodly pearl: Mat.
13.44.76.45.
The prizelesse wealth: this wel-contenting gain of piety and Godliness.
Come now while the day lasts, God knows how soon our sun may set. Come
all, young, old, rich, poor, learned, unlearned, mean, great. None it is too
good, too great, too mean, too miserable, to trade in this merchandise.

Let the King himself account it the crown of his glory, (...)
to be first of this company: as it is his deserved honor to be chief of
all the rest. And let him more feelingly rejoice: with good Theodosius to be a
member of the Church, Se esse membrum ecclesiae magis quam in terris regnare.
Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 1. c. 26.
then a Monarch in the world: to be truly styled constant Defender of one true
faith, then to be rightful Ruler of three larg Kingdoms. Let him make choice
with King David, rather to be a doore-keeper in the House of God, Psalm. 84.10.
then to rule and reign in the tabernacles of ungodliness. Much more to be
keeper of both the Tables of Gods law: a Prince and feeder of the people of
God: and by laws and authority, by learning and industry; in heart, by hand,
Pietas est verus Imperatoris ornatus. Euagr. hist praefat. 2d Theodosium
(iuniorem) imperaetorem.
a resolute Patron and bright shining pattern, of (this chief ornament of an
Emperor) religion and godliness.

Let the Queen his happy yokefellow join heart and hand in this, and become a
blessed help to promote their mutual blessedness. Let her make it appear
with the Queen of Sheba, 1 King. 10.
that her chief end of coming from far, was to hear this true wisdom from
the mouth of her Solomon. Let her try him with questions, and receive his
answers; and account her self happy to be partner with him, in this wisdom
and prosperity of piety and godliness.

Let the most hopeful Prince, in the morning of his state, lay the ground and
foundation of his princely greatness, in the desired return of these rich
revenues. Let him esteem this gain of Godliness the chief part of his
patrimony, and his hopes in heaven his happiest inheritance,

Let the Ho. Lords and Counselors of state, who advise for the weal and
welfare of this land, consult for the enriching of this renowned Kingdom with
a blessed increase in this gain of godliness.

Let the noble Lords and Peers of the land, innoble their blood in the blood
of Christ: enrich their estates with his treasures of grace: and place their
felicity in the favor of God. Let goodness be their greatness, and religion
their renown, and this gain of godliness their desired Happiness.

And you right Honorable the Lord Mayor, with other the Governors, and all
the inhabitants of this famous City, give me leave to speak unto you. You
trade by your callings: you gain by your trading: and you rise by your gain
unto honor and respect. Gods blessing be upon you, in your outward estates;
and bless your trafique with comfortable increase: and give you your hearts
desire, so your hearts be upright. But take heed to your selves, I pray you,
that you go not down the wind. Leave of betimes (I beseech you, from the
Lord) those hurtful courses, incident to your places, Mich. 6.10.11.12.
of worthless profits too too much used by too many of your company. Their
corrupting of wares, engrossing of commodities, inhaunsing of prices, falsehood
and deceit, in buying, and selling, weight, measure, and the like. Lest you
find gain in the chest, but loss in the conscience: increase of goods, but
decrease of goodness: prove rich in the world, Luke 12.21.
but not in God. Oh, purchase piety, gain godliness, grow rich in grace: so
shall your hearts and lives be holy, your estates wealthy, and your persons
happy in the day of your great accounts.

You reverend Judges, and Ministers of justice, be lovers of justice, and not
of reward. Mich. 3.9.11.
Suffer not your eyes to be blinded with bribes, and your hearts to be
corrupted with gifts in your bosom, to make you wrest judgment, Prou. 17.23.
and pervert the right. Oh judge you right for the fatherless and widows,
Esa. 1.17.
though your sentence and pleading should pass both without gift, and gain:
so shall you wax rich in this gain of godliness: your cause shall go well at
the great assizes: and you shall escape the dreadful sentence of the highest
Judge of all.

You Patrones and bestowers of the revenues of the Church, consecirated to
their use, who serve at Gods Altar, no more enrich your selves with the price
of blood: while, by bargain and sale, you pass them over, Esa. 56.10.11.
into the hands of unable and unconscionable men. Who through negligence in
teaching, or bad example of lewd life, do little less then murder the
souls of the poor people of God. Oh make wise choice (I beseech you) of men
of desert, for learning and life, fit to be pastors of souls: so shall you
gain comfort to your selves, and good to Gods Church, through increase of
godliness, and religion of Christ.

You Landlords, and letters of houses, of tenements and grounds, in no wise
oppress, and grind the faces of the poor; Esa. 3.15.
by racking and exacting above due measure, or ouer-charging with burdens too
heavy to be borne. Oh deal in love, deal in pity, with your poor
Christian brethren, that they may not (as many distressed ones do) droope and
languish with grief and sorrow, but may join with you in cheerfulness, in
the service of God: so shall you both grow rich in this gain of godliness,
and find a better increase in this heavenly wealth.

Let the poor, whose estate is weak in the world, amend his condition by this
gainefull purchase of grace into his heart: that this spiritual wealth may
supply his wants, and the riches of Christ may relieve his misery. Mat. 20.
Let the poor labourer toil all the day of his painful life, that he may
receive this penny at the night of his death. Let no time seem long, no travel
tedious. This penny will bring him true felicity, and make up his want of that
golden dross, which worldlings so admire in this present life.

And whom should I further name? Let biting usurers, become free lenders. Let
blood-sucking extortioners become ready restorers. Luke 19.8.
Let poore-murthering oppressors become comfortable helpers. Let pinching
misers become bountiful benefactors. And all of us good to our brethren, in
conscience unto God: that all may attain this gain of godliness.

Let the high Lords Treasurers, 1 Cor. 4.1. Mat. 13.52.
the Servants of Christ, the learned scribes, and faithful stewards of God, 1.
Cor. 4.2.
bring out of the Scriptures, the Treasuries of the Lord, 2. Cor. 4.7.
the true treasure to enrich the souls of the people of God. Though gold and
silver we have none, yet such as we have, let us give: Act. 3.10. 2. Cor.
6.10.
so we being poor, shall make many rich: and grow rich our selves, by
enriching our brethren. While we are liberal to others, God will be bountiful
unto us, and multiply our talents under our hands.

Lastly, let all that profess the name of Christ, join stock, and become
partners in this happy gain. or if the foolish and unhappy world, will needs
graspe at the shadows of transitory gain, and will needs grow wealthy, by
falsehood and forgery, bribery and extortion, and all kind of injustice, and
underhand dealing: Eating the bread of deceit, taking the wages of iniquity,
and expecting rewards with unhappy Felix. Act. 24.26.
Yet thou, O man of God, O godly man, have thou nothing to do with that
unrighteous Mammon. But partake with other godly in the happy interest, of
these substantial, and eternal treasures.

And what if the godless man go away with the gain of the world? Look not
thou on his wealth with an envious eye, nor on his prosperity with an unquiet
spirit. It is weakness of spirit to be disquieted with variety of desire
after the worlds gain, for thy self; or to envy at the fruition thereof, in
others. Thou art a Christian indeed, a greater gainer then the world can make
thee: and a surer keeper, then that the world can hurt thee. As for him, he is
miserable, to be pitied, not happy to be envied: thou art happy to be envied:
and withal, so happy, as not to be hurt by envy. Let not the conceit of his
prosperity molest thee: but the assurance of thine own felicity content thee.
As thou should not rejoice at his souls loss: so should thou not be
grieved at his worlds gain. He is a broken-stated bankrupt, that takes up for
day, and receives a penny to return a pound: thou art a rich heir, who live
on thy small pension, the time of thy minority; thine inheritance is reserved
for thee entire, till thou come to age.

And what, if for this spiritual gain, thou be feign to sit down with some
temporal loss? better it is to beg thy bread then to loose thy faith.
Better to cast ouer-boord some parcel of thy goods, then to make ship-wracke
of thy good conscience. Neither shall this prove any loss at all, but an happy
exchange for thy better advantage; of wealth, of delights, and honor on earth;
for riches, and pleasures, and glory in heaven. And thus did those godly ones
of old solace themselves in their light losses with hopeful expectation of
greater gain: Sic magnis sunt lucris leuta d^m^a solati. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei.
lib. 1. c. 10.
a better and more enduring substance. They esteemed with Moses the rebukes of
Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt: Hebr 10.34. Hebr. ^1.26.
and could not be with-drawen, Nul^o praemio huius mundi ab aeternae illiu^
patriae societat^ seducti. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 5 cap. 11.
by any wordly reward, from the society of that heavenly country. They had
respect to the recompense of reward, which was the rich return of this gain
of godliness: Heb. 11.26.
a sure increase of a full hundreth-fold, Mat 19.29.
with a promised inheritance of everlasting life.

Come therefore now, whosoever thou art, that bear the name and show of a
Christian: dote no longer upon these worldly vanities. Rest not bewitched with
the pleasing show, or smell, or sound of worldly gain. And if thou have
heretofore either immoderately desired, or unlawfully obtained that
copper-mettall, guilt over to beguile thee: leave off betimes that hurtful
trade. Turn thy self forthwith unto a better course. Take heed and beware
(in the name of God) of godless covetousness, of wicked worldliness, of
graceless voluptuousness, and profane lewdness; with all those open
practices of cruelty, and injustice; and secret mysteries of so many
iniquities. Those sworn enemies of religion: those cut-throates of goodness:
those deuilish hauock-makers of the gain of godliness: and desperate
ouer-turners of thy eternal good estate

Desire new profits, seek for better gains. First seek the Kingdom of God,
Mat. 6.33.
and his righteousness. First in time before all: first in degree above all
other gain. Yea, first, and last, and without interruption, even in the
midst of thy earthly employments. And give all diligence hereunto. For
howsoever the world flows in on many, of it own accord: yet this gain comes
not in without good endeavor. God indeed is free and ready to give it: but
none that are careless are fit to receive it; Prou. 2.4.
but must dig and delue, and blow and sweat, if they will enrich themselves
with these hidden treasures. Mat. 13.44.


Well then; do thou, from thy very heart, desire thine own true weal and
welfare? which if thou do not, oh foolish man thou, and most miserable! but
do thou indeed from thy soul desire it? then use, I beseech thee, all thy
will and skill, all thy industry and circumspection, in timely prosecution of
such holy endeauours, as God himself has made the happy means of this most
blessed gain.

Be instant in reading, hearing, meditating and conferring of the holy Word of
God, be frequent in earnest invocation of the holy name of God. Exercise thy
self incessantly in the duties of repentance, and new obedience. Labor for
faith, for hope, for love, and fear of God, and all other, sanctifying and
saving graces, as for life it self, even the life of thy soul.

Let slip no time, no occasion, no helps of daily increase and growth in
this heavenly wealth: let the word of God dwell in thee richly, (...). Col.
3.16.
through sacred and saving knowledge. Let those blessed rich graces of Gods
sanctifying spirit be treasured up abundantly, in the storehouse of thy
soul. Replenish both heart, and mind, memory, and conscience, and every
room, and corner of thy soul. And when thou have gotten abundantly, keep it
safely, that so thou may both live and die rich and wealthy, Prou. 4.23.
in this gain of godliness: and being rich in grace may be rich in glory.

And if thou shall in this holy manner demean thy self, and through faithful
employment of thy spiritual talents, shall give account to thy Lord of a good
increase. Then shall thou hear with thy ear, to the joy of thy heart: Mat.
25.21.23.
Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a
few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord: Thou have been faithful, as a servant: I will make thee a Ruler.
Thou have been faithful over a few things; I will make thee ruler over many
things. Thou have been faithful in the employment of thy masters talents:
enter now into the joy of thy Lord. And what is this joy? surely, the blessed
fruition of thy Lord and Savior, in communion and fellowship of thy Father,
and Holy spirit. Where thou shall enjoy, even joy without sorrow: wealth without
want: honor, without disgrace: pleasure without pain: peace without
disquietnesse: light without darkness: health without sickness: life with out
death: This wel-contenting gain of piety and godliness: that eternal
fruition of felicity and blessedness.

Now blessed Lord God, thou God of all grace, rich in grace, in mercy, and
bounty, to all that fear and call upon thee. Vouchsafe, we most humbly beseech
thee, to make all grace to abound unto us all: that we always having
al-sufficiency in all good things, may abound to every good work. Enrich our
hearts with the treasures of godliness: settle our affections with godly
contentment: and grant unto us a daily increase in this truest and richest
gain; that we may comfortably enjoy all needful blessings in this life, and
full fruition of glory and felicity in the life to come. And that through the
all-sufficient merits of thine only Son, and our alone Savior, Jesus Christ
the righteous, to whom with thee, O father, and thy blessed spirit, one only
wise and all-sufficient God, be ascribed of us, and of thy whole Church, all
honor, glory, praise, power, dominion, and thanksgiving, from this time forth
for evermore: Amen.

All glory be to God.

