The Truth of our Times: Revealed out of one Man's Experience, by way of Essay.

Written by Henry Peacham.

LONDON: Printed by N. O. for James Becket, and are to be sold at his shop at
the middle Temple gate. 1638.

To my Honored and much Respected Friend, Mr. Henry Barnwell of Turrington in
Marshland near to Kings-Lynne in the County of Northfolk.
Sir,
WHen I had finished this l^^tle piece, and bethought my self to whom I should
present the Dedication: I often (as Pliny advises Authors to do) considered
the Title, which was Experience: now least the Porch or Forefront might not
be suitable to the whole Fabric, I begin with the Experience I former^y have
had of your Friendly respect of me, ever since our first acquaintanc^ at Lynne,
which you have continued by many years, even to our late, and last meeting in
London.

The consideration whereof has moved me to be publicly thankful, (for I ever
hated ingratitude) and desirous at so far a distance, not to be forgotten so
long as you shall have this little Book (the pledge of my affection) lying by
you. Little it is indeed, but of little Books let me say as Virgil said of
little Bees: Ingentes animos in parv^ corpore versant.

Wha^^^ever it is, accept (I pray you) who can both judge and understand, and I
am sure will take in good part, whatsoever shall proceed from the Pen of him,
who truly and affectionatly

Will be ever ready to do you any friendly service. Henry Peacham.

To the Reader.
IT fares with me now (honest Reader) as with a Travailer in Winter, who
having foolishly ventured over some dangerous River or Passage quite frozen
with Iyce, stands on the other side pointing with his Finger, and showing his
following friends where it Cracked. In the same manner I have ventured before,
tried the coldness of these Frozen and hard times, together with the slippery
ways of this deceitefull and trustles world; standing (I hope) now at the last
safe on this other side, I show those, that are to follow me, where the
danger is. I have seen and known much, as well in England, as some where else
abroad, and have had much acquaintance (and which has been my Happiness, if
it be an happiness) with the most famous men of our time in all excellent
professions, whence I am not altogether ignorant in the noble Sciences, as well,
the Theorique as Practique, but to say the truth, I have ever found
multiplicity of Knowledge in many things to have been rather an hinderance,
then ever any Way-tending to advancement. Having hereby found much employment
to no purpose; but as we see a Carriers horse when he is heavily laden has
Bells hung about his neck, to give him some content on the way, and to allay
the pain of his burden: So have I taken pains and deserved well at the hands
of many of good rank, yet got I never any thing hereby save the Horsebels of
Praise, Thanks, and fruitless promises, which (like the Carriers) they can
put on and take off at their ^leasure. Vix vivitur gra^^^s, says Plautus. The
Peacocke, as Mantuan has it, was admired for his Plumes, which every beholder
would be ready to snatch off, but in the meantime there was none of them all
would give him so much as a grain, to ^ill his belly. In a word, the maine and
most material of my observations, and which the nearest concerned my self,
(Reader) I present thee withal, the less will fall in of themselves, and are
obvious: but fearing thou should give me such a jeere as Diogenes did unto
those of Mindum, I make my Gate but little, least the whole City should run
out; thus leaving what I have known by mine own experience to be certain
unt^ thy friendly Censure, I rest thine

H.P.

Imprimatur Tho. Weeks R. P. Episc. Londi. Cappel Domest.

The Truth of our Times revealed out of one Man's experience, by way of Essay.
Of Gods Providence.
I Will begin my first Observation (which from a child I have seriously
considered) with the contemplation of Gods Providence, which is never wanting
to the protection of them, and their posterity, who in singleness of heart
have sought, and sincerely served him all their lives; averring with David,
Psa. 37.25
that I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread.

When on the contrary, Oppressors, Atheists, cruel men, idle and lewd livers
have with the curse of Ruben, Genesis 49.4.
been as water spilt upon the ground: they have either sunk into the earth,
or ran without consistence, every one his several way so far, that their
place of Birth or Being in a second or third generation has been quite lost,
and utterly forgotten: Ps. 37.35.
I have seen the ungodly flourish, etc.

I never knew any sacrilegious Vultur digest that which he snatched from the
Altar; or any demolisher of Churches, or such as had converted them to profane
uses; as turning them into Stables, Sheepcoats, (after the depopulation of the
whole Town) thrive in their estates: and many of them have I known to have
come to infamous and desperate ends, yea, being their own executioners.

I have again observed the especial providence and Goodness of God extended
toward the meanest and poorest, whom the world has contemned^ as a poor man
in the country, who by his only hand-labour earning a groat or six pence by
the day, to have brought up a charge of six or seven Children: who (poor
things) get seldom their bellies full of bread, and their drink is many times
(as I have seen it) but a roasted Crab, crushed into a dish of fair water;
and for the greatest part of the year go barefooted, and bare-legged: yet
commonly, like Daniel with his pulse, are they as fresh-coloured, healthy,
cheerful, as free from diseases as the best men's children in the Coun^rey,
who usually are pampred, and crammed with the greatest dainties that may be
gotten, many times till their bellies are ready to burst: And though the
Parishes where they are born, commonly a^^oun^ of them no better than beggars
b^ats, not worth the loo^ing after; and caring not how soon they were rid of
them to avoyde charge, yet by the blessing of God, attayning (as many of them
have done) to the most eminent places of dignity, as well in Church as
Commonwealth, they have obliged their native places to them, by erecting
Schools, Hospitalls, Almshouses, and doing other charitable works, which of
it self the whole Parish had never been able to have performed.

I might fill a whole Volume, if I should reckon up all such great and eminent
personages the Cottage has afforded, as principal pillars to the support of
our Commonwealth; or tell you what magnificent works have been done by
Bishops, Lord Majors, and Citizens of London, whose Parents have been extreme
poor and obscure; and which is more, not a son, but sons of one poor man
have participated and shared in honorable advancement.

Chicheley, a very poor man of Higham Ferrers in Northamptonshire, about the
time of Henry 5. had two sons, the on^ Archbishop of Canterbury, (the
founder of All-soules in Oxford) and the other Lord Major of London both at one
time. Patten of Wain^let in Lincolnshire, a man of mean estate, had also two
sons, the one was William de Wainflet, Bishop of Winchester, and Founder of
that magnificent College Magdalens in Oxford, (besides a School at Wainflet,
where he was borne) and the other was Deane of Chichester; which brothers, one
in the habit of a Bishop, the other of a Deane, support the pillow under their
Fathers head upon his Monument in Wainflet All-hallows Church, who lies cut
out in Alabaster in a side-coate, a great pouch, and a dudgeon-dagger at his
Girdle. I could instance many others even of our own times, whose mean
beginnings no whit can derogate from their esteem worthiness, but I had
rather look backward, and farther off.

I have also with great comfort observed the merciful goodness of God in
providing for fatherless and motherlesse children, who being left in trust
with some hard hearted Executor, or sometime to the miserable mercy of some
poor Parish to be maintained, God miraculously has taken them into his
protection, by kindling Love and Pity in the hearts of those who are his, to
receive and take them in; they keeping the true Fast which God commands in
Esaias. Esaias 58.7.
And how in time with their growth, he guides them with his Grace, to live
hone^tly, and uprightly, which were else impossible for these young and tender
souls to do; especially in populous Cities, and public pl^ces, whither
they are constrained at fourteen or fifteen years of age to come up with a
silly Countrey-carrier, and some small sum of money (the benevolence of
friends) to bear their charges, to seek services and means of living; where
they know no body, neither are they ^nowne of any; being left as poor chickens
^aving lost their Mother Hen, and defender, unable to protect themselves, to
the merciless mercy of a most cruel and pitiless Age: wherein besides they
are in danger, through want and necessity to be seduced to lewd and ill
courses, and as the Wise man says, Wisd. 1^1^
To seek death in the error of their lives. Neither has poverty any thing
more unhappy in it, than perverting good natures, and drawing them into vicious
courses, as a Poet justly complains: Mant^an.
O ^ala paupertas, vitij scelerisque ministra.

Hence let all Parents, while they are living, be seriously careful to the
uttermost of their powers, to provide something to maintain their poor children
in their livelihood after their Deaths: if they cannot, to give them that
education and knowledge, (in some Art or other) seasoned with the fear of God,
that they may be able to encounter the manifold miseries of this wretched
world, and withstand all lewd temptations and allurements unto vice.

And being able in an honest calling to subsist of themselves, bless God for
his care and goodness toward them, and say with the Psalmist, When my Father
and Mother forsook me, thou oh Lord ^ookest me up: which freely I confess, I
may say my self, being left young to the wide world to seek my fortune, and
acknowledge the providence of Almighty God to have attended me both at home,
and abroad in other Countries, for which I had rather be silently thankful,
than to proclaim the particularities; (which to some may seem to be fabulous
and incredible) and for any thing I know, I and mine must say yet, (though in a
far different condition) with that Noble and great ^arle of Cork.
Earl of Ireland, Gods Providence is our inheritance.

Of Schools and Masters.
THere is no profession more necessary to the erecting the frame of a famous
Commonwealth, than that of Schoolmasters, yet none in more dis-esteeme among
the common vulgar, yea, and illiterate great ones: I know not the reason of
this, except that the greater part of the multitude being ignorant, they are
desirous that their children should be so likewise: But I rather believe that
which I have found true, Reward to be out of reach, and livings now a days to
be like Lotteries; some principal prizes, as guilt Basins and Ewers; some of
a middle rank, as Fruite-dishes and Candlesticks; some of the lea^t value, as
Spoones and Sawcers: yet one of these least many times costs him more than it
is worth, in expense of many years in the Vniver^ity, his labor in search and
making of friends, his money (hardly gotten) largely expended, and (as in a
Lottery) all this gets nothing.

Some few prime schools in England, serve as a foil for the rest; I mean
Westminster, Winchester, Eaton, Paul's, with some few others, which at this day
(as all others in general) have lost of their former greatness and esteem,
not because there are not learned and able Masters, (there being now as
sufficient as ever) and sound Grammarians among the Scholars, but because men
have found shorter cuts in the way of preferment for their children.

Neither do our Nobi^ity and Gentry so much a^fect the study of good Letters
as in former t^^es, loving better the Act^ve tha^ the Contemplat^ve part of
Knowledge, which in times of the Monasteries was more esteemed and doated on
than now: when Kings and Princes were so devoted to the services of God, that
they consecrated their Sons, Nephews, and other Kinsmen to the Church; some
of whom have become Cardinals, as Beaufort, and Poole, whose Mother was a
Plantagenet; I also omit many Bishops and Clergymen, who for the singular
estimation of their sincerity, truth, and learning, have been made by the
Prince his Treasurers, Chancellors, Masters of the Rolls, and preferred to
other the like honorable places of trust and credit. And why may we not expect
a re-advancement of Learning Ca^olinis ^isce temp^ribus, wherein so many works
of Piety have been undertaken, and the worthiest advanced?

Jews the eleventh King of France, would say that his son should learn no
more Latin, than Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare: Of which opinion are
many of our times, which is the reason, that after Travail they come home as
wise as they went, and hold their tongues, where wise, and learned men are in
discourse; and are left like wrecks in the open Sea of the World, without man,
Mast, or Rudder to direct them in a right and orderly course. Now where
Knowledge is undervalued, what reward can a Master expect? Teaching being one
of the most laborious callings in the World, and the School well termed
Pistrinum Paedagogicum. Hence the most Masters making Teaching a shift but for
a time, till a be^ter fortune fallet^, and to say truth, In Grammatica
senescere miserri^um. A Master of a Free School is more absolute; to teach in
private houses, is subject to many inconve^iences; the Master becommet^ more
servile than their servants, who observe him to an inch, (and as commonly they
are pick-thanks) and lay all the blame of their young masters unlucky behavior
upon his Master: if he falls in climbing a Dawes nest, his Master is in fault;
if he be asked a question at the Table by a stranger, and is dumb, his
Mother swells, and tells his Master, he loses his time, and does no good,
though he takes all the pains with him that possibly he can.

But imagine there is a good correspondency held on all sides; he pleases the
Parents as well in pains taking, as using the children mildly and gently, they
again love their Master: let him expect no future preferment, but only (for
the present) his bare stipend: But some may tell him, his Master has ma^y
Benefices in his gift; but believe me, not any that ever he shall be better:
but why not, since he will bestow them gratis? yes, in the Adjective, (but not
in the Adverbe) to them that will give most; sometimes if he happens to marry
a Chamber-mayd of the house, he may fare the better; neither much, Computatis
computandis, for his wife (for charge) may stand him in as much as a small
living may be worth; or if he be a neighbors child, and his father, or some
friend for him will lay down a matter of seven or eight score pounds to a
second or third man. For Simoniacall Patrones are like pick-pockets in a
throng, they will not have the purse and money found about them; they presently
turn it off to another of their consorts not far off, who, to avoid the
danger of the Law, has taken in lease his Advouzons; so hereby both the King,
Bishop of the Diocese, or the Vniver^ities are cheated of their right in the
next presentation. But perhaps his Scholars, when they come to be men, and of
themselves, will not be forgetful of him: let me tell him, he mu^t get him a
pair of leaden shoes, if he means to attend upon so long and ^edious hopes,
and withal remember that old monkish Verse, wherein the Reason is much better
than the Rhyme: Servitium pueri, mulierum,
and Black-monachorum^
Est, and erit semper, small
thanks in fine laborum.


Indeed in the Unive^sities many young Noblemen, and ingenuous learned
Gentlemen have been very grateful afterward to their Tutors and Teachers, and
have prooved the only raisers of their fortunes; neither is here any long
expectation, they being of years of judgment to discern a benefit, which
commonly they requite ere it be out-worne and forgotten. So that I conclude, it
is most fitting that good Schoolemasters should be as well in public Cities
and Towns, as private Gentlemen's houses; but more fitting they should be
better dealt withal then commonly they are in most places: besides, it were
greatly to be wished, that those who took that profession upon them, and found
themselves able to endure it, should follow none other calling so long as they
lived, and (as in other Countries) to be maintained by the public with large
and sufficient stipends; so themselves would not be unprovided in their age,
and their scholars not be turned over to seek every year new masters; than
which nothing can hurt or more hinder proficiency in Learning. For my part, I
have done with that profession, having evermore found the world unthankful,
how industrious soever I have been.

Of making and publishing Books.
Solomon says, There is no end of ^aking Books; and Books many times are made
to no end, since according to that, Nihil dictum quod non prius: For writers
now adays (like Cooks) dress but the same meat after another manner, which
in substance is but one and the same. All the Libraries of the world have been
ransacked and tossed over and over, and whatsoever has borne the stamp of
Antiquity, now vindicated from dust and moaths, and brought to see the light of
the Hebrew, Arabic, Greek, and Latin; having broken through the midnight and
mi^ts of many barbarous Ages, have now regained their proper luster and purity.

Neither are the bare making of books now adays sufficient, but new Authors
are made and brought to speak and determine controversies, not only in
Divinity, but in other Sciences; and like painted wooden Cannons (against the
walls of a weak town) do terrify for a while, but the stratagem is quickly
discovered: and many ancient Authors that are made to speak more than they
would if they were living, if Manutius has spoken the truth; but this by the
way: I would know whether out of a superlative singularity, or like the
Griffons in Bactria) they envy the world should partake, and be sharers of
that gold which they have dug for. Many famous and great Scholars love not
to be seen in Print, (except a necessity by command of superiors) be laid
upon them) being as they suppose, able to do as much with their tongues, there
being already such a mass of books in the world, (which has swallowed more
than it can digest) it were a folly to burden it with more; especially there
being not the third Reader to the fortieth book, and the better part of these
vain, useless, yea, sometimes impious; of what sort are those of Casa, Bishop
of Beneventum, Aretine, Machiavel, and many other; so that among the learned
and wise it is a great question, whether Printing has done more hurt or good
in the World. Certain it is, we have knowledge now almost at the height,
according to the Prophet Daniel, Daniel 12
of these last times: Scientia multiplicabitur; but practice of Piety, Charity,
and Devotion at the lowest, as St. Paul foretold of the same times.

But say, thou being a general Scholar, a Traveller, an excellent Artist in
one kind or other, and desire (not out of a vain glory Digito monstrarier
hic ^st) but of a good mind of profitting, and doing good to others, to make
the World partaker of thy Knowledge if thou be a Scholar; or thy
Observations, being a Trav^ller; or thy Experience or Invention, being an
Artist; having spent many years, much money, and a great part of thy life,
hoping by thy labors and honest deserving to get a respect in the world, or by
thy Dedication the favor and support of some great personage for thy
preferment, or a good round sum of a Stationer for thy Copy, and it must be
a choice and rare one too; (which he for his own gain will look ^o) it will
hardly by a tenth part countervaile thy labor and charge. For the respec^ of
the world is nothing; nay, thou sh^lt find it altogether ingrate, and thy
Reader readier to requite thee with a jeere, or a ^corne, than a good word to
give thee thy due; and perhaps out of envy, because thou know more and art
learneder than he: and though thou have a general applause, thou shall be
but a nine days wonder.

But then you may say, the Dedication will be worth a great matter, either in
present reward of money, or preferment by your Patrones Letter, or other
means. And for this purpose you prefixe a learned and as Panegyricall Epistle
as you can, and bestow great cost of the binding of your book, gilding and
st^inging of it in the best and finest man^er: Let me tell thee, whosoever thou
art, if now adays (such are these times) thou gettest but as much as will pay
for the bin^ing and st^ings, thou ar^ w^l^ enough, the rest thou shall have in
promises of gre^^ ^atters; perhaps yo^ shall be w^lled to come another time,
but one occasion or other will so fall out, that come never so often, you loose
but your labor, your great Patron is not stirring, he is abroad at Dinner, he
is busy with such a Lord; to be short, you and your labor are forgotten:
some of his Pages in the mean time having made himself of your Book.

See now learned Authors, and you Modern Poets, what end your elaboured lines
tend unto, and what you gain by your neat and eloquent Epi^tles, wherewith
many times you gild senseless Statues, that will teach you (as they did
Diogenes) patience when they are sought and sued unto.

Aretine, I remember, gives a Reason why Poets have not that esteem, and fall
short of the munificence of Kings and Princes which formerly they did partake
of. Poets (says he) now adays are not rewarded for their Verses, because
their Patrones in their conscience find themselves not guilty of any desert or
merit, why they should be extolled by them. Again, an ingenuous and a ^ree
spirit cannot Dor^r les oreilles d' Asne, as the French man says, do honor
to the undeserving; there are many that befoole themselves this way. Therefore
let the book you dedicate, sort with his judgment and understanding to whom
it is presented, as near as may be, you having formerly known him. I had
rather present any work of mine to a private Patron, with whom I might
confer of the subject, hear his judgment, and speak mine freely: besides,
books are evermore best taken of such, and you be esteemed less ambitious.
There be some so highly upborn by the bladders of their honor and greatness,
that they receive your gi^t but as an homage or a tribute due to their
transcendency.

Leaving those farther off, let us look a little back to the Authors and
Poets of late^ time, and consider how they have thrived by their works and
Dedications. The famous Spen^er did never get any preferment in his life, save
toward his latter end he became a Clerk of the Council in Ireland; and dying
in England, he dyed but poor. When he lay sick, the Noble, and pattern of
true Honor, Robert, Earl of Essex, sent him twenty pound, either to relieve
or bury him. Iosuah Silvester admired for his Translation of Bartas, dyed at
Middleborough, a Factor for our English Merchants, having had very little or no
reward at all, either for his pains or Dedication: And honest Mr. Michael
Drayton had about some five pound lying by him at his death, which was Satis
viatici ad coelum, as William Warham, Bishop of Canterbury, answered his
Steward, (when lying upon his deathbed, he had asked him how much money he
had in the house, he told his Grace Thirty pounds.) I have (I confess)
published things of mine own heretofore, but I never gained one halfe-penny by
any Dedication that ever I made, save splendida promissa, (and as Plutarch
says) Byssina verba: Neither cared I much; for what I did, was to please my
self only. So that I would wish no friend of mine in these days to make
further use of English Poesy than in Epitaphs, Emblemes, or Encomiasticks for
Friends: Yet i^ his vein be for Latin, not to restrain himself herein; for
hereby he shall do honor to our Nation, and become a man, though not of Mars,
yet of Martes, getting himself hereby the name and reputation of a Scholar.
As all other Excellency, so Latin Poesy is valued at an higher rate abroad,
than with us in England, (albeit our wits are nothing inferior to theirs) and
more bountifully in all places rewarded.

Sint Moecenates, non deerunt
Fla^ce Maro^es.
Amongst us let Moecenases but be,
And (Flaccus) Virgils thou ^now shall see.
I confess I have spent too many good hours in this folly and fruitless
exercise, having been ever naturally addicted to those Arts and Sciences which
consist of proportion and number, as Painting, Music, and Poetry, and the
Mathematical Sciences: but now having shaken hands with those vanities, (being
exercised in another Calling) I bid them (though unwillingly, and as friends
do at parting with some reluctance) Adie^, and am with Horace his old Sencer
forced to say, -- Veiani^^ armis
Herculis ad po^tem fixis latet abditus agro.


Of Liberty.
THere is nothing so sweet and agreeable to the nature of Man, next unto his
health, as his liberty, which, according to Tullies definition hereof, is an
Arbitrium vivendiut velis, The choice of living as a man list himself.
Wherefore Paracelsus (that glory of Germany, for his depth of knowledge in the
nature of Minerals) to show his true happiness herein, when he traveled by
the way, and came to his Inn at night, the first thing he did, he would lay
his sword upon the Table, professing he would not give the same to be
Emperor of Germany: it was a long broad sword, and had engraven upon the blade
this: Alterius non sit qui suus esse potest.
As being the Emblem of his Libe^ty: In the pommell (which was hollow, and to
be opened with a skrew) were all his chief Quintessencies, and spiri^s of
Metalls and Herbs, wherewith he cured the most desperate Diseases, gaining
hereby infinite treasure and sums of money.

And the old Burgundians possessing that part of Germany which belongs at
this time to the Lantgrave of Hessen, to express their hatred to bondage, and
their love of Liberty, gave in their warlicke Ensign a Cat, because no
creature in the world is more impatient of bondage than it; for put her into a
cage or grate, she never will be quiet, but rather beat her self to death
there, than want her liberty. Hence that Prince is called Princeps Catorum, and
in the Germane, Die Lantgraffe von Hessen: Hesse as well in the high as low
Dutch signifying a Cat; for as we call here Pusse, so they there Hesse: yet
in Gelderland they call her Pous as we do.

Servitude was as a curse pronounced to them who had offended God, and
transgressed his Law; as Noah cursed Canaan, saying, A servant of servants
shall he be unto his brethren: Genesis 9. 25
and we find indeed bondage to be but an effect of vice, as in unthrifty idle
persons, and offenders of the Law; withal intemperate persons, who by their
ill living fall into many long and loathsome diseases, are as it were in bonds
bound to their beds, and imprisoned within their chambers, and set in the
stocks by the Gout.

There is also the want of half a man's Liberty in Marriage; for he is not
ab^olutely himself, though many believe, when they are going to Church upon
their Wedding Day, they are going into the Land of Liberty: But Solomon tells
them, The fool laugheth when he is going to the stocks. For my part, I am not
married; if I were, I should find my wings clipped, and the collar too straight
for my neck.

The Low countries having tasted the sweetness of their liberty, when they had
shaken off the yoke of Spain, gave for their Emblem a Lion, who having slipped
his collar, looked behind him to the ^ame, with this Liber Le^ revinciri^escit:
An absolute man cannot be he who wants his liberty.

Who enjoy their liberty, commonly are longer lived than others who want it;
they are more able in wit and judgment, they are more useful to the
Commonwealth, when the rest are but Vmbratiles, but shadows of men; they have
done the best works either of wit, or expense; they are the fastest and truest
friends: lastly, they have been the fairest presidents of Piety and Goodness.

But you tell me, every man cannot enjoy that condition, but some (yea, the
most) must serve, and obey: It is true; I only speak of the ingenuous, and
those as may, if it please them, be fabri fati sui, shape out their own
fortune, yet rather choose a servile condition, before Liberty and Freedom: as
if a Master of Arts should turn Gentleman Usher to an ordinary Lady; or a
Lieutenant in the wars leave his honorable profession to become a Lords
Porter; or like a foolish Vicar in Lincolnshire who would suffer his wife to
raise him in cold winter mornings to make her a fire. Some again are by nature
so base and obsequious, that being overcome with the presence of those who were
greater or braver then themselves, they sooth him up, and foolishly applaud and
admire whatsoever he says; and if he speaks in his own opinion any thing
wisely, or like a Statist, and looks about him for applause, they reply, Your
H^nor or Worship is in the ^ight, the best Counselor the King has, could not
have spoken to better purpose, God maintain your life, if some would be ruled
by you it would be better for all England; wi^h the like gross and palpable
flattery. And if happily he utter a^y thing savouring of a j^st, they feign a
Sardonian ^mile by way of allowance of his facetious conceit. And indeed many
there are so stately, and affecting greatness after so foolish a manner, that
they become ridicul^us, in suffering men ofttimes as good as themselves to
stand bare before them three or four hours together, and therefore many times
they hold them in talk for the purpose, in expecting the title of Honor or
Worship at every word that is spoken, as if they were the Constables of the
next Wapentake. Sometime they will be bold to command you as their menial
servant, which also you must take as a favor. In brief, I will ever commend
that gentile freedom of the French nation, who affect servility least of all
other, especially that of standing bare, yea even in waiting at the ta^le, were
it before the greate^t Lord in France, (they usually bringing up the dishes
with their hats on their heads) as also in freedom of speech, whereof none
save sl^ves are debarred. For mine own part I affect freedom so much, and I
have found such happiness therein, that I had rather dine even at a three penny
Ordinary, where I may be free and merry, then to be a dumb tenant for two
hours at a Lords table, preferring health and liberty, bonc corporis, before
those of Fortune, and all the wealth the greatest Usurer has in the wo^ld, and
will ever say, O bona libertas pretio, pretiosior omni.


Of Opinion.
OPinion is a Mon^ter of more heads then Hercules his Hydra; and if one happily
be cut off, another arises forthwith in the room. One day when I walking in
Breda in Brabant not far from the Market place, I passed by a Gentleman or
Merchants house, over whose great ga^es was written in letters of gold upon a
blew ground, Totus mundus regitur opinione. I stood still, and pondering upon
it, I found wi^ty and weighty, to concern the whole world, and every one in
particular, and my self especially at that time, since I thought it to be the
best that I had seen, which perhaps another would have disliked.

And I have often wondered why the ancient Pagans in their deifying so many,
passed by Opinion, bearing a f^r greater sway then dogs, onions and leeks in
Egypt, Cui nomen crescebat in hortis. Yet it is no great wonder, since
deifying was wont to be done with a general consent, Opinion was never to
expect it, every man where she reigns being of a several mind. It was but
Opinion that caused Count Martinengo of Italy, of a noble house, and of an
exceeding great estate to marry a common Laundresse, whereupon within two or
three days following, Pasquin i^ Rome had a foul shirt put upon his back and
underneath this in Italian, Perch Pasquin^, etc.


Pasquin how haps it thou have a foul shirt on upon a Sunday morning?

Risposto.

Because my Launderesse is made a Countess.

It is but Opinion that makes all the marriages in the world; for there is no
beauty, favor, or complexion, but is loved and liked of by one or other,
Nature so providing, that none might be lost for having.

It is but Opinion that great Ladies many times marry their grooms, refusing
great men, and of great means.

It is but Opinion that one goes to Rome, another to New England, and a third
to Amsterdam. It is also but Opinion that a proud cox^combe in the fashion,
wearing Taffata, and an ill favored lock on his shoulder, thinks all that
wear cloth, and are out of fashion, to be clownes, base, and unworthie his
acquaintance.

So that Opinion is the Compass the fool only saileth by in the vast Ocean
of Ignorance: for hereby vices are taken for virtues, and so the contrary; and
all the errors that men commit in their whole lives, is for want of the line
and level of an eaven and true judgment, and it is the very rock whereat
many, yea the most make shipwreck of their credits, estates, and lives.

That Emblem was a pretty one, which was an old woman who having gathered up
into her apron many dead men's skuls, which she found scattered upon the
ground, with an intent to lay them up in a charnell house, but her apron
slipping upon a hill where she stood, some ran one way, and some another; which
the old woman seeing, Nay (quoth she) go your ways, for thus ye differed in
your opinion when ye had life, every one taking his several way as he fancied.
There is no Writer, none of public or private employment in the common
wealth, but passes in danger by the den of this one-eyed Polyphemus. And
while I write, by how many opinions am I censured? one saying one thing, and
another another, but I am not so unhappy as to fear or care for them; I hold
on a direct course, and will never strike sail to Rovers.

Of following the Fashion.
ECclesiasticus says, that by gate, laughter, and apparel, a man is known
what he is. Truly nothing more discovers the gravity or levity of the mind
then apparel. I never knew a solid or wise man to affect this popular vanity;
which cau^ed Henry the 4. of France to say usually of his Counselors, and
learneder sort of his Courtiers, that they had so much within them, that they
never cared to beg regard from feathers and gold lace: and himself would
commonly go as plain as an ordinary Gentleman or Citizen, only in black,
sometime in a suit no better then buckram. The Emperor Charles the 5. seldom
or never ware any gold or silver about him, save his Order of the Fleece. And
the plainness of our English Kings in former times has been very remarkable.
King Henry the 8. was the first that ever ware a band about his neck, and that
very plain, without lace, and about an inch or two in depth. We may see how
the case is altered, he is not a Gentleman, nor in the fashion, whose ^and of
Italian cut-work now stands him not at the least in three or four pounds.
Yea a Semster in Holborne told me that there are of threescore pound price a
piece; and shoo-tyes, that go under the name of Roses, from thirty shillings
to three, four, and five pounds the pair. Yea a Gallant of the time not long
since, paid thirty pound for a pair. I would have had him by him self to have
eaten that ^ish of buttered Eggs prepared with Musk and Ambergreece, which
cost thirty and five pounds, and when his belly had been full, to have laid
him to sleep upon my Lady N. bed, whose furniture cost her Ladyship five
hundred and threescore pounds.

I never knew any wholly affected to follow fashions, to have been any way
useful or profitable to the common wealth, except that way Aristotle affirms
the prodigal man to be, by scattering his money about to the benefit of many,
Tailors, Semsters, Silkmen, etc. Neither ever knew I any man esteemed the
better or the wiser for his braverie, but among ^imple people. Now this thing
we call the Fashion, so much hunted and pursued after (like a thief with an
Hue and Cry) that our ^aylors dog it into France even to the very door. It
reigns commonly like an Epidemicall disease, first infecting the Court, then
the City, after the Country; from the Countess to the Chambriere, who rather
than she will want her curled locks, will turn them up with a hot pair of
tongs, in stead of the irons. The Fashion (like an highe^ Orb) has the
revolution commonly every hundred year, when the same comes into request
again; which I saw once in Antwerpe handsomely described by an he and she
fool, turning a wheel about, with hats, hose, and doublets in the fashion,
fastened round about it, which when they were below, began to mount up again,
as we see them. For example, in the time of King Henry the 7. the slashed
double^s now used were in request, only the coats of the Kings Guard keep the
same form they did, since they were first given them by the said King, who was
the first king of England that had a guard about his person, and that by the
advice of Sir William Stanley, who was shortly after beheaded for treason,
albeit he set the Crown (found thrown in a hawthorne bush) upon the kings
head in the field. After that the Flemish fashion in the time of King Henry the
8. came in request, of strait doublets, huge breches let out with puffes, and
cod pieces. In Queen Mary's time the Spanish was much in use. In Queen
Elizabeth's time were the great bellied doublets, wide saucy sleeves, that would
be in every dish before their master, and buttons as big as Tablemen, or the
lesser sort of Sandwich Turnips; with huge r^ffes that ^tood like Cart wheels
about their necks, and round breeches not much unlike Saint Omers onions,
whereto the long stocking without garters was joined, which then was the Earl
of Leicesters fashion, and theirs who had the handsomest leg. The women wore
strait bodyed gowns, with narrow sleeves ^rawne out wi^h Lawne or fine
C^mbricke in puff, with high bolstered wings, little ruffes edged with gold or
black ^ilke; and maids wore cawles of gold, now quite out of use. Chains of
gold were then of Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen commonly worn, but a chain of
Gold now (to so high a rate Gold is raised) is as much as some of them are
worth.

The like variety has been in Hats, which have been but of late years. Henry
the 4. is commonly pourtrayed with a hood on his head, such as the Liveries of
the City wear on their shoulders. Henry the 6. the 7. and 8. wore only Caps.
King Philip in England wore commonly a somewhat high velvet Cap, with a white
feather. After came in hats of a^l fashions, some with crowns so high, that
beholding them far off, you would have thought you had discovered the
Tenariffe, those close to the head like Barbers basins, with narrow brimmes,
we were at that time beholden to Cadiz in Spain for. After them came up those
with square crowns, and brimmes almost as broad as a Brewers mash-fat, or a
reasonable upper stone of a Mustard querne, which among my other Epigrammes
gave me occasion of this: Soranzo's broad brimd hat I often compare
To the vast compass of the heavenly sphaere:
His head the Earths globe, fixed under it,
Whose Center is, his wondrous little wit.


No less variety has bin in hat-bands, the Cipresse being now quite out of
use, save among some few of the graver sort.

Wherefore the Spaniard and Dutch are much to be commended, who for some
hundreds of years never altered their f^shion, but have kept always one and
the same.

The Switzers ever since that fatal and final overthrow which they gave to
the Duke of Burgundy at Nancy in Lorrain, have worn their party colored
doublets, breeches, and cod pieces, drawn out with huge puffes of Taffata, or
Linen, and their ^tockings (like the knaves of our Cards) party colored, of
red and yellow or other colors. I remember at the taking in of the town of
R^es in Cleveland, between Wesel and Embrick upon the river of Rhine, (I being
there at the same time) when a part of the Swisse quarter, being before the
town, was by accident burned, I demanded of a Swisse Captain the reason of
their so much affecting colors above other nations: he told me the occasion was
honorable, which was this: At what time the Duke of Burgundy received his
overthrow, and the Swisses recovering their liberty, he entered the field in all
the state and pomp he could possible devise, he brought with him all his
Plate and Jewels, all his Tents were of silk, of several colors, which the
battle being ended, being torn all to pieces by the Swisse soldiers, of a
part of one color they made them doublets, of the rest of other colors
breeches^ stockings, and caps, returning home in that habit; so ever since in
remembrance of that famous victory by them achieved, and their liberty
recovered, even to this day they go still in their party-colours. Let me not
forget to tell you the occasion of this mortal war; it was only as
Guicciardine tells us, but for the toll of a load of calves skins coming over
a bridge, which toll the Duke claimed as his right, and the Swisses theirs. But
this by the way.

I have much wondered why our English above other nations should so much dote
upon new fashions, but more I wonder at our want of wit, that we cannot invent
them our selves, but when one is grown sta^e run presently over into France,
to seek a new, making that noble and flourishing Kingdom the magazin of our
fooleries: and for this purpose many of our Tailors lie ledger there, and Ladies
post over their gentlemen Vshers, to accoutre them and themselves as you see.
Hence came your slashed doublets (as if the wearers were cut out to be
carbonado'd upon the coals) and your half shirts, pickadillies (now out of
request) your long breeches, narrow toward the knees, like a pair of Smiths
bellows; the spangled Garters pendant to the shoe, your perfumed perrukes or
periwigs, to show us that lost hai^e may be had again for money; with a
thousand such fooleries, unknown to our manly forefathers.

It was a saying of that noble Roman Cato, Cui corporis summa cura, ei
virtutis maxima incuria; and most true it is, since on the contrary we daily
find by experience, our greatest Scholars and Statists to offend on the
contrary part, being car^^^sse, and sometime slovenly in their apparel, that
many times (their thoughts being taken up with studious and profound
meditations) they forget to button or to trusse themselves, they love their old
clothes better than new, they care not for curious setting their ruff, wearing
cuffes, etc.

Erasmus in Epistolis I remember reports of Sir Thomas Moore, that a puer^ in
vestitu semper fuit negligentissimus; and I believe it to be most true that
God has said by the mouth of his Prophet, That he will visit, or send his
plague among such as are clothed with strange apparel.

Of Friendship and Acquaintance.
I Have ever found the most solid and durable friendship to have been among
equals, equals in age, manners, estates, and professions, that with
in^eriours is subject to many inconveniences, as lavish and needless
expending, lending, importunity of entreaty, and sometimes discredit. On the
contrary, that with superiors (which I cannot properly call friendship) but
raises or depresseth a man in valuation high or low, as they please
themselves; and this friendship is but a kind of subjection or slavery. As he
is your friend, a great man inviteth you to dinner to his table, the sweetness
of that favor and kindness is made distasteful by the awe of his greatness, in
his presence not to be covered, to ^it down, and to be placed where and under
whom he pleases, to be tongue-tyed all the while, though you be able to
speak more to the purpose than himself and all his company; while you whisper
in a waiters ear for any thing that you want, you must endure to be carv^d
unto, many times of the first, worst, or rawest of the meat; sometime you have
a piece preferred unto you from his own trencher, but then imagine his belly
is full, or he cannot for some other reason ea^e it himself; so that for true
and free content you were better seek your dinner with some honest companion
in Pie-corner. Beside, they love you should have a kind of dependency of them,
that they might make use of you at their pleasure, if you be well qualified,
^ewarding you with promises and overtures of great matters of future hope, in
the mean time you must live only by countenance, and shift for your self. In
a word, to trust to this superlative Friendship^ is but as an earthen pot, to
join your self to one of bras^e, who under a color of assisting you in the
stream, will crack your sides one way or other. And it is one thing to be
necessitous and stand in need of great ones friendship, and another out of your
election to apply your self to such whereof I only speak.

So that the first point of discretion in the choice of a friend, is to know
whether he be real or superficial, whether he aymeth at his own ends, or
tendereth and is willing to advance your good. Indeed Poverty and Necessity
(according to Saint Hierome) be touch^tones for the trial of real Friendship.
Ob hoc unicum (says he) amanda est paupertas, ut a quibus ameris intelligas.
Yet according to Seneca, not the truest and the best, Amor virtutis est morum
similitudo: the love of Virtue, and likeness of Manners, begets amongst men
the most solid and durable Friendship.

Sometimes there is a sympathy in Nature, whereby one man affects the
friendship and acquaintance of another, whom before he never saw in his life,
yea and it may be whom he never saw at all: as a Duchess of Burgundy fell in
love with a Nobleman whom she only heard two strangers commend for his person
and rare qualities, walking on the other side of a River, near to her Court.

The common and ordinary friendship of the world is measured by the benefit
that one man reaps by another, according to Ovid.

Turpe quidem dictu sed si modo vera fatemur
Vulgus amicitias utilitate probat:
Sed vix invenias multis in millibus unum.
Virtutis pretio qui putat esse sui.
And this Friendship for the most part lives and expires with men's lives and
their Fortunes, and indeed merits not the name of friendship. I confess my
self to have found more friendship at a strangers hand whom I never in my life
saw before, yea, and in foreign parts beyond the seas, then among the most of
my nearest kindred and old acquaintance here in England, who have profes^ed
much toward me in empty promises.

The ordinary friendship of our times is but mere acquaintance, whose utmost
bound and extent is, in the Country entertainment for you and your horse a
night or two; in the City, an old acquaintance meets you, and with admiration,
Good Lord (says he) are you alive yet! when he sees him, and speaks to him;
then at the next Tavern gives you a pint or a quart of wine: at the Court,
you are shown the King or the Queen at dinner. So that if among one hundred
of your acquaintance, yea five hundred, you meet with two or three faithful
friends, think your self happy, such is the world in our cunning age.

You may also be much deceived by overweening, taking those for friends which
indeed are not; such friendship you ordinarily meet with over a cup of wine
in a Tavern, where they will call you brother, and promise you all kindness by
giving you their hands, and the next morning (when the grosser parts of the
wine are turned to melancholic dregs) as is usual with the Dutchmen, they
look on you like Lions, and never were the men.

The vows of such vanish into air, to the often loss of your labor in
visiting, soliciting, and attending them at their houses or chambers. Sometimes
you shall be so injuriously dealt withal, as by believing their promises, you
shall in hope take tedious journeies, to London, the Court, and other places,
and when you have done all, you shall only find your horse tired, your pur^e
emptied, and your self in your expectation merely abused. So I wish thee
whosoever thou art, to have as little to do with these transcendent great ones
on the one side, as the useless inferiors and va^ltneants on the other.

I have often considered with my self, whether a man were the better or the
worse for multitude of acquaintance; I concluded generally the worse,
considering the most are of no use unto us, casting into the account the
expense of money, loss of time, and neglect of business.

The best acquaintance is with such as you may better your self by, any way,
especially in knowledge by discourse and conference, (which was the ancient
course of learning, according to Euripides, (...), Converse was the mother of
Arts) either with general Scholars, Travelers, such as are skilled in the
tongues, and in mechanical Arts, for by conversing with such you shall husband
your time to the best, and take the shortest cut to knowledge^ beside, the
keeping of such company gets you the reputation of being understanding and
learned as they are, though yet a puis^e and a novice in their studies and
professions.

The best way to pre^erve a gotten f^iend, is thankfully to acknowledge the
benefit you have received from him.

To endeavor all you can to requi^e his curte^ie some way or other.

To use him tenderly, and not often, and then but in cases of necessity, when (as
a good sword) you shall see what metal he is made of.

To give him no occasion by your ill carriage or unthriftinesse to think ill of
you.

To go on in an honest way and calling, that he may think his courtesies
well bestowed, and be the readier to assis^ and further you; for commonly
friends accumulate one good turn upon another, especially where they have
found the former to have been seasonably and profitably bestowed.

Of Parents and Children.
ALL Parents are naturally indulgent to their children, especially while they
are young; yet the height of their affection, or coldness of love toward
them, appears not until they are of riper years, at what time they do them
equal wrong either in giving them the reine of liberty and spending, or being
over harsh, unnatural, and hard hearted over them. I have known excellent
spirits, and many noble wits lost and undone either way.

Some Mothers when their children are young are so fond over them, ^s by no
means they will endure them out of their sight, much less send them abroad to
school, or to be nurtured by others abroad, by whom they profit more then at
home. Hence it comes to pass that so many great and rich men's sons and
heirs, when they come toward men^ estate, are so simple and easy to be
wrought upon by crafty knaves and cheaters. Hence we see them often brought
upon the Stage under the names of Sir Simple, John Daw, Abraham Ninny, and the
like, their st^dy being nothing else but the newest fashion, what Tavern to go
to dinner to, or stare at every post to see where the newest play is that
aftern^one.

I knew a great Lady that had only one son of some fourteen or fifteen
yeare^ of age, whom indeed she would have brought up at school, but he must
go when himself listed, and have two men to carry him thither, and to bring
him home again to dinner and supper; he was once in my charge, and I remember
not a bit of meat would down with him without sauce, which must be
extraordinary too, as the juice of limmons with sugar and rose water. Sometime
if it were a dainty foul, as Patric^, Gray Plover, or the like, he must have
wine mixed with bread crummes, and the juice of an Orange; Pepper he could not
abide, for it bit him by the tongue: his breakfast was either a ca^dle, or a
manchet sp^ead with Almond butter. Being one day with his mother at dinner, she
se^med to be overjoyed, in that her son fell to eating of beef, which she
protested he never did before in his life, and now she verily believed he
would prove a soldier; indeed he proved very valiant after, for he kick^ his
mother, and told her he was better descended then ever she was, so that it
seems strong meats have strange effects. In earnest thi^ young gentleman was
the only one who^ I ever knew to prove towardly and good, after such a motherly
education. Indeed as I said he was sometimes my scholar, and at this day is
as understanding, civil, discreet, and as thrifty a Gentleman, as is in the
west part of England.

Some again in the Universities maintain their sons at such an height, that
there in stead of studying the seven liberal Sciences, they study seven couple
of hounds: yet I must needs say, they there grow perfect in the Spanish,
French, and the Dutch, that is, Sack, Claret, and Rhenish, while poor
Scholars make their Exercises; and some of these now and then (unknown to
their friends) clap up a match with some semster, chambermaid, or tradesmans
daughter: that news is carried to their fathers, how their sons have profi^ed
so well in the University, that they have gotten more in an hour, than they
know what to do withal all their lives after.

Hence being men, they become unserviceable both for the Church and State, and
being no Scholars, they hate learning in others: whereupon when in learned
company they can say little, they break jests upon others; or which is the more
generous and commendable, if it be at a Tavern and upon a spending occasion,
they will numerando Symbolum officium sarcire, as Erasmus says, make amends by
paying a good part of the reckoning, and being no scholars, show their loves
to scholars.

On the other side, there are some Fathers so unnatural and harsh toward
their children, that they are not only careless in giving them any education
at all, but no means of maintenance to support their livelihood, turning them
off young to shift in the wide world, seek their fortunes among strangers, and
become servants to others: or if they stay at home, use them in that manner by
blows and beating or ill and uncomfortable words, with^rawing timely help for
their preferments, that all their lives after they loath their fathers house,
and the very sight of the place where they were bred and borne.

I knew a very rich and able man in Norfolk, that while he lived would allow
his children no means at all to live upon, (they being at man's estate, and
very civil and honest Gentlemen) save the wind^falls of trees in his woods,
and to make their best by selling them, but no winds stirring, they were feign
to help themselves by digging the roots loose within the earth, then covering
them again with turfes, that the least wind in a manner would lay them along:
and these shifts do^ merciless fathers put their children unto, who though by
nature towardly, ingenious, and no way vitiously given, are oftentimes through
poverty and want wrested from the bent and that natural and inbred honesty of
mind, to do things base and u^beseeming: whereupon Mantua^ wisely complains
of poverty, s^ying, O mala paupe^tas vitij scelerisque m^nis^ra. I ^^ve known
some, whom their fathers ha^^ng s^nt to the Univers^^^es or the Innes of court,
have le^t t^eir houses and cour^e o^ studies for want of maintenance, making
mo^^y o^ books, bedding, (...) as they had to (...) else where, hence ^hey have
^ot bee^e able to ^^epe company with the better sort, they are undervalued all
their lives after, whatsoever their good parts are, they are constrained to
walk on foot, take up their lodging in base Alehouses, be hail fellow with
every Tinker by every fire side: many times driven by necessity, they borrow of
their kindred, or fathers tenants, lie at their houses: sometimes for debt or
despair they are feign to leave the Land, and seek means in foreign
countries, either by turning Soldiers or Seminaries; sometimes not going so
far they take purses about home, ending their miserable days at the
gallows, where they cry out against their Parents (Fathers especially)
hardness, and carelessness of them, in neither giving them maintenance, or
settling them in some course wherein they might have lived and prooved honest
men, and good members in the Commonwealth.

Neither must Parents have all the share in their Childrens undoing, since I
know (though many are hard enough) they all would have their children to do
well, and the most are careful enough to bring them up in all virtuous
education: yet many times their children are refractory, and averse to all
goodness out of an ill temperature of the mind by nature, and prove so
notoriously evil, that nothing can reduce them to civility and honesty: Such a
one was Troilo Savello of late years in Rome, descended of noble and honest
Parents, being their only child, and hope of their house, who by that time he
was sixteen years of age; joining himself to the Banditi, or out-lawd thieves
and robbers, became the arrentest villain one of them that ever Italy bred,
and before those years his mother laid him up in prison, being glad to keep
him alive there; but he breaking out, and falling to murdering, robbing, and
acting all manner of mischief, was afterward beheaded. If I mistake not, there
is the story of his life translated out of Italian into English by Sir Tobie
Matthew. I have often seen and read it over in Dutch: but this by the way.

Sometimes among Children the Parents have two hopeful, and the third void of
all grace: sometimes all good, saving the eldest.

I remember when I was a Schoolboy in London, Tarlton acted a third sons part,
such a one as I now speak of: His father being a very rich man, and lying upon
his deathbed, called his three sons about him, who with tears, and on their
knees craved his blessing, and to the eldest son, said he, you are mine
heir, and my land must descend upon you, and I pray God bless you with it:
The eldest son replied, Father I trust in God you shall yet live to enjoy it
your self. To the second son, (said ^e) you are a scholar, and what
profession soever you take upon you, out of my land I allow you threescore
pounds a year toward your maintenance, and three hundred pounds to buy you
books, as his brother, he weeping answered, I trust father you shall live to
enjoy your money your self, I desire it not, etc. To the third, which was
Tarlton, (who came like a rogue in a foul shirt without a a band, and in a
blew coat with one ^leeve, his stockings out at the heels, and his head full
of straw and feathers) as for you sirrah, quoth he) you know how often I have
fetched you out of Newgate and Bridewell, you have been an ungracious
villain, I have nothing to bequeath to you but the gallows and a rope:
Tarlton weeping and sobbing upon his knees (as his brothers) said, O Father, I
do not desire it, I trust i^ God you shall live to enjoy it your self. There
are many such sons of honest and careful parents in England at this day.

I have also known many children to have prooved and become honest and
religious through the loathing of the parents vices and lewdness of behavior;
as if they have been addicted to drunkenness, the child would never abide it;
or if to swearing, their son was free from that vice; yea many times children
have prooved their parents best advisers, and reclaimers from their vices.

I never knew any child thrive in the world that was rebellious against father
or mother, by cu^sing them, abusing them, scorning them, as many do that come
to p^e^^rment and high place, from a poor paren^age and a mean beginning, bu^
the Iudgemen^ o^ God has fallen heavy upon them at one time or other Solomon
says, The Ravens shall pick out the eyes of such in the valley^ meaning, they
shall be hanged, and left for Ravens, and other fowls to feed upon.

I have also known very Religious, and honest parents withal, of very great
ability, who have had but only one son in the world, heir not only to
their own inheritance, but also to brothers, and other of the kin, to whom
they have given allowance according to his own desire, as his horse to ride on
whither it pleased him, money to spend among gentlemen, to stay at home, or go
whither and when he listed: yet all this, and all the care they could take,
could not keep him at home, but like a vagabond to wander up and down the
country with common Rogues and Gypsies, till at the last he came to the
gallows: I have known two of this humor, being the sons o^ v^ry rich and
able men, my loving friends.

From sons I come to daughters, of whom I have known many proper young
gentlewomen, daughters to rich and miserable clownes, who to save their money
for portions, and servants wages, keep them at home unmarried, making drudges
of them to do all manner of work about the house, till growing stale maids,
they bestow themselves on their fathers horse-keepers, serving-men, many times
on tailors that come to work at their houses, and so are oftentimes undone for
ever.

That among these extremes, we may come to a mediocrity. Let both the Parent
and the Child listen to, and remember the short (but pithy) advice of St. Paul
in their reciprocal duty: Children obey your Parents: Parents provoke not your
Children. I never knew a race to thrive and prosper, but where there was a
firm and mutual love of one toward the other; in the child a true filial,
and fearful to offend: in the father that ^ame (...) or natural affection,
discending and applying it self without bitterness, to the disposition of
weak and childish age.

Likewise between brother and sister, and this is preserved and cherished by a
moderate and wise indulgence of the Parents, as if ought be amiss, by
familiar admonition, teaching, gently reb^king, discoursing with them, as (with
strangers) of years and understanding, and growing to men and women's estate,
to supply their wants, keeping them neat, and (with the best of their rank)
fashionable in apparel, which adds spirit unto them, makes them to think
well of themselves, and teaches them to make good choice of their company and
acquaintance; lastly, (...) makes them in all places t^ be respected, and
their friends commended. It is also fitting, that a father, when ^is ^onne
grows nere man, not only to supply his corporal necessi^ies, but also to allow
him money in his purse to keep company with his equals, and sometimes to lay
out upon a good bargain, which unexpectedly he may meet withal, hereby he
will learn to love and keep his money, lay it out to the best advantage to
keep and maintain his credit, he shall be known, and get reputation in the
world, he will become more obsequious to his Parents and friends; when those
pennilesse (and long of their Parents) poor ones, are a disgrace to their
Parents, the object of pity to their friends, and a scorn to every golden
ass, and their enemies, and which is most lamentable, are sometimes driven to
be beholding to these. There was a miserable slave not long since, that had
kept three or fourscore load of Hay two or three years, hoping it would be
still dearer, when it was at five pounds and ten shillings the load, but
presently it falling to forty and thirty shillings, went into his barn, takes
a stool to stand on, and throwing a rope over a beam, kicks down the stool,
and so hangs: his son being threshing on the other side of the wall, hearing
the stool fall, runs in, and seeing his father hanging, takes his knife, and
cuts him down, rubs him, and recovers him: his son a week after coming for
his weeks wages for threshing, (for his father allowed him nothing but what
he dearly earned) he abated him two pence, which the son told him was
wanting; his father answered, the rope which he cut cost him so much, and he
should pay for it: the son departing heavily, told his father, if he would
forgive him that two pence, he should not want a new rope at any time;
withal, wished for his own sake he might not find him at the like business
again.

It is also worthy the observation, that when God would destroy and root out a
wicked family, or generation from the face of the earth, he suffers enmity and
discord to reign and divide a kindred in their affections one toward another:
The father hates the child, the Child the father: the sister cannot abide her
brother, the brother speaks ill of the sister, purloyning one from the other:
they seldom or never see or visit in kindly manner one another: in sickness
one will not relieve or comfort one another; nay, many times grudge a nights
lodging in a word, no more regard of blood or alliance amongst them, than among
swine. This I have often observed, and when of such a family, in few years not
one of the name has been left.

Of Clownes and rude behavior.
SCaliger reportethth, Angli rustici and Voscones sunt omnium in humanisimi.
that our English Coun^rey husbandmen, and Gascoignes, to be of all other the
most clownish and uncivil, wherein he is much deceived; for the Boores of
High and Low Germany are ten times worse, as well in their Education,
Manners, and Civility, in respect of whom, ours in the general, are most
gentile, humane, and courteo^s: Some we have I confess merely terrae filii,
Mushromes in a night, shot up and nourished by the dung of the earth, that have
neither religion, wit, or moderation, professed enemies to understanding,
learning, civility, and all manner of gentility, by nature commonly so base and
miserable, that they could find in their hearts they had come into the world
like Calves, with skins of hair, that they might never have gone to a
Drapers for cloth; or like Pan, to have got feet of horn, they could have
kept their money from the shoemaker: like that Emblematicall Sow, (their noses
are ever rooting in the earth) with Vlterius over her back. They commonly love
the Church so well, that they had rather spend ten pounds in Suit, than allow
him one tithe pigge out of nine: Erra Pater, and this years Almanacke (if he
can read) are the two only books he spends his time in, and if a shower of
rain extraordinarily happens in Hay-time, or harvest, he grumbles against
God, beats his maids, and looks currishly upon any that speaks to him.

Of all men in the World he cannot endure Lawyers, but evermore he is barking
against them, as dogs do at Tinkers; not because they stop holes in their
dames kettles, but because they make their budgets of their skins: If a
gentleman or noble man happen to ride (in hawking time) over his grounds, he
bannes and curses him and his followers to the pit of hell: for between your
Clown and Gentleman there is ever an Antipathie. If I should tell you how the
late Prince of Orange, Grave Maurice has been answered amongst his Dutch
Boores, as he passed through the Country, you would say our Country of
England was a School of Civility in regard of those Countries.

Charles the fifth, that religious and puissant Emperor, when by fortune of
war, he was pursued and chased by the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgrave of
Hesse, and in a very dark and rainy night having lo^t his way among the Heaths
and Woods, having only two or three in his company, fortuned to come to a
Boores house, that stood alone under a woods side, and knocking desired
entertainment, but to sit up by the fire till it were day; the Boore looking
out at his window, (as Boares thrust their heads of the Frank) said, he and
his wife were in bed, and he was some Skellum, or rogue, that would be out
so late, if he would, to use his own words, Met s^i^ verkens slaepen, rest
him with his Pigges in an out house he might, in he should not come. The
Emperor then desired of him to know what time of night it was; the Boore told
him all by twee heuren, near two of clock in the morning; the Emperor asked
him how he knew? the clown replied, ^ck he^t n^ ghepist, he had but newly made
water: these entertainments are common amongst them, yea, were he the greatest
Prince of the Empire. I once lived in a town, where scarce a gentleman, or any
of civil carriage lived, and having found but ill^requitall for good deserts,
I caused this to be written over the porch of their free-schoole door, Subi
dura a rudibus: It is Palindrome, the letters making the same again backwards.
To know an absolute Clown, observe these his conditions; he had rather be
spreading of dung than go to the leanest sermon in the shire; he murmures at
all payments and levies, especially the money to be collected for the
maintenance of his Majesty's navy royal; If he fortune to be Churchwarden
of his Parish, at every brief gathering in the Church he reserves a groat or
six pence to himself; if he do affect to follow the fashion in his
clothes, it is long of his wife, some gentleman's daughter, who was matched
unto him for his wealth; and being fine, he takes place above her, and all
women at the table: salute him on the way, he will give you never a word; his
hands are commonly unwashed, and his doublet unbuttoned, but never trussed: his
ordinary discourse is of his last years hay, which he hopes will give fix
pounds the load in Smithfield, and of the rate of Swine in R^mford market; all
his jests consist in rude actions with the hand or foot: his speech is
Lincolnshire about Wrangle and Freestone: if he be westward, about Taunton,
and ten miles beyond, and though the most of them wear russet, and have
their high shoes well nailed, yet they are often too hard for velvet and
satin, in law tricks and quiddities, and commonly hold their own the longest,
great men that hold them hard, and keep them under, have them as they list;
yield unto one of them, or stand to his mercy, you shall find no Tyrant more
imperious and cruel: most true is that old verse: Rustica gens, est optima
flens, and pessima ride^s.


Of Travail.
THe true taste of our lives sweetness is in travail upon the way, at home,
or abroad in other Countries; for not only it affords change of air, which
is very availefull to health, but variety of objects and remarkable occasions
to entertain our thoughts, beside choice of acquaintance with able and
excellent men in all faculties, and of all nations, and perhaps some such, as
you would ever after think your labor and expense of money well bestowed, if
you had but only passed the sea for their acquaintance: such an one I met
withal, travailing in a very rainy evening, through a moody part of
Westphalia, where I had lost my way, and it grew near night, and in latin
demanding of him the way toward Oldenburg, and how I had lost my way; using the
word deviavi hic, answered, humanum est errare; to be short, he would not
suffer me to pass any further, but carried me home to his own house, which
was almost h^lfe a mile off, where I never found better entertainment, or had
more friendlier respect in all my life.

The first thing in any good Town where ever I came, so soon as I had made
choice of mine Inn and lodging, was of my acquaintance, for in all places you
shall meet with very civil and courteous people, evermore of the better sort,
(in Italy especially) who will show you all respect and kindness, but without
charge; you must never put them to any expense or charge, no not so much as to
come to dinner to their houses, though you be solemnly invited; and on the
contrary, look that nobody be chargeable to you: you shall have many times (as
also here in England) as soon as you are alighted at your Inn, or Harbery,
fellows that will insinuate themselves into your company and acquaintance,
beginning either by commending your horse, or demanding how far you have come
that day, or of what Country you are, and the like; and after perhaps will
offer their service to show you the Town, to bring you acquainted with some
famous man there living, or carry you ad calidas, and callidas, solis filias,
(as Lipsius calls them) to the handsomest wenches about the town. Sed aures
obtura, ad has Syrenum cantiunculas, rather be alone purusing some good book
in your chamber, or walk by your self.

You shall in travail never lose ought by silence; many have paid dearly for
their lavish tongues in strange Countries, especially being far from home; and
where they must not be allowed to be their own interpreters, especially in
matter of Religion and State; when you shall find it safer and better to talk
of the great Turk, than the Pope.

Let your observations be of such things whereby you may profit your self or
your Country, your self by procuring and winning the acquaintance of the
famous men in Science or Art, for the bettering of your understanding, and
skill in whatsoever you pretend unto; if you study Physic, you shall have in
Paris, and other places of France, the most learned and able Physicians of the
world: if you would be a Civilian, Bononia, and other Cities of Italy will
afford you the rarest men in that way; if you delight in painting, and the use
of your pencill, the Netherlands; every where will afford you rare Masters, if
in other Mechanical Arts, the higher Germany, which Bodine calls hominum
officinam, for the variety of Ar^ists there, and therein Spires, Shasbourge,
Norenburge, and many other famous Cities, will furnish you with skillful men
abundantly.

I have observed, as I have gone along those Countries, many excellent points
of good husbandry in fields and gardens, which we here in England have not
been acquainted withal; as in manuring their land so at one time, that it
shall bear a great croppe seven or ten years together; their artificial
Ploughes, that shall turn up in a day as much as two of ours; their neat and
handsome stacking of their corn abroad to stand dry all the Winter; their many
devices for draining of grounds, casting of Moates, and Town ditch^s; many
excellent forms of grafting, adulterating Plants and flowers, with infinite
such devices.

Apparel abroad is much dearer than here in England, especially cloth;
Stuffes are cheap, and ordinary in the Netherlands, so are velvets and silks
about Naples, and other parts of Italy, and commonly worn of tradsemens wives
and daughters.

Boots and shoes are very dear every where, especially in France; for leather
is there very scarce; so that if I had but the Monopoly of carrying old shoos
(newly mended) and Mastiffe whelps into France, I should think to live as well
and as happily, as Ma^ter Major of Quinborrow. For diet I bought what I liked,
and learned one thing, not usual with us in England, (save in Cooks shoppes)
that is, to know the price of meat before you eat it: If our young gallants
would observe this rule in costly Taver^s, (who only call for a bill at the end
of dinner) they would have money many times when they want it; but they esteem
it a disgrace better befitting Carriers and Aquivitae men, than gentlemen of
rank: hence it comes to pass they pay eight shillings for a Capon, as my L.
of N. gentleman did once at Greenwich, another a mark or foureteen shillings
for a pair of soales, I having often bought as good at Ben^ington in Holand
for threepence. And as I would not have you to be familiar with every one; so
it is good, so to retire your self, as you scorned to eat or drink in any
other company; for note, you cannot take up your chamber, and call for your
meat thither, but commonly an ordinary is kept, where all the guests sit down
together, of what country or condition it makes no matter, if they be merry,
you must be so to, or at least feign your self to be; if they drink to you,
you must pledge them, (for their draughts are but sippings, not carousing whole
pints and quarts, as among our tosse-pots in England) so shall you be beloved
and made welcome amongst them, otherwise they will suspect you to be a spy
from the enemy, or to scorn their company, whereby you come into danger of
being quarrelled withal, suddenly stabd among the Dutch with a knife, in Italy
to be poisoned, etc.

Travail (like Physic upon several complexions) works diversely, with a
staid and mature judgment it does best, such return much bettered by it:
those who are sent young and childish (whom foolish fathers and mothers would
have thought to be rare and ripe witted, become the worse by it, for wanting
judgment to understand the true use of travail, to know with whom to
converse, and what to observe, but only to follow and to wear a love-locke on
the left shoulder, return home as wise as the Ass, who undertaking to
travail into far Countries, and to acquaint himself with strange beasts
abroad, at the last returning home, he asked the Fox how he liked him since he
undertook his journey? the Fox replied, and told him plainly, he saw no
difference in him, but that his Maine and his Tail were grown longer: if they
chance to go into the Netherlands, and perhaps get to be gentleman of a
company but of three weeks standing; then at their return among their
companions, they must be styled by the name of Captain, they must stand upon
that air title, and mere nothing, called Reputation, undertake every quarrel
and challenge, or become seconds to those that will: It is a great want of
discretion, beside very dangerous, to tell or show your money openly in strange
places where you are unknown, or to travail upon the way extraordinary rich
in you clothes; hereby many have been betrayed and lost their lives, as a
gentleman, and an acquaintance of mine, Master W.T. was pistold by his guide in
the forest of Ardenna, because riding in a suit laid thick with gold lace,
he was supposed to have had store of crowns.

Erasmus I remember in his Epistles, tells us how narrowly he escaped his
throa^e cutting one night in an Inn, where he drew store of money out of his
velvet pouch, (which commonly^ he wore at his girdle) that he was feign to
rise in his shirt, with another that lay in the same chamber, to barricado the
door with a form and some stools, to keep his host out, who was an arrant
thief.

Be as thrifty as possible you can, as well in your apparel as diet; for you
shall many times be ^ard beset for money, and if you can otherwise avoid it, go
seldom upon credit, which is not gentleman-like abroad, but much more base in
England, where for the most part, hosts and hostesses are far more
unconscionable than they are there: for spend five pounds at a sitting, you
shall not be misreckoned a penny, and they expect as just dealing from you; here
you shall be shomefully wronged, except you very narrowly look to your
layings out, besides meet with ill penny-worths, paying (as good many times)
as forty in the hundred for the use of your credit.

I could wish every young gentleman before he travailes into foreign parts,
non esse Domi peregrini, because here are many rarities in England, and our
coast towns are worthy the view and the knowing, if it were but only to
satisfy strangers, who are many times inquisitive of the state of England;
yea, and many times know it better than most of our home-borne gentlemen:
herein Sir Robert Carre of Sleford in Lincolnshire, a noble gentleman, and my
worthy friend was much to be commended.

A religious honest man.
I Never knew any man of sound judgment, and fit for employment, either in
Church or Commonwealth, but he endeavored to be religious: for Virtutem vel
optimarum actionum Basis Religio; and there are many, who though they make no
outward show thereof, by those actions and gestures which may also be common
to Hypocrites, yet the bias of the life of an honest man would ever lean (for
doing and discourse) to a serious service of God; hence such men keep their
Church together, with their families constantly, there carrying himself with
the greatest reverence and humility.

You shall know a religious honest man by humility, charity, or love of
hospitality; hence he is discreet in his discourse, affable, pleasant, and
peaceable, among his neighbors loving, and beloved.

He back-biteth and traduceth none, meddleth not with matters and affairs of
s^ate; well knowing (like those builders of the tower of BABEL) that a rash
affection of things too high, brings discord and conf^sion; and if any
controversy shall arise among his neighbors, he commonly has compounded the
strife ^re the Layer can finger his ^ee.

His tithes he pays chearefully, and with the most; well knowing that God by
Ma^achy has promised a blessing by the opening of the windows of Heaven upon
such as pay their tithes truly, and with alacrity.

He is versed and very ready in the holy Scriptures, and their O^^hodox^ll
exposition, never wresting, or misapplying them (as Sectaries do) to serve
their purposes, and suite with their fantastical, or wilful opinions.

As Mahomet, and his followers, affirmed that place of St. John, John 14.
where our Savior saith^ I will send you a comforter, to be meant of
himself; or in that place something to be written of Mahomet, which the
Christians have scraped or blotted out.

So not long since a false Prophet affirmed that himsel^e was one of those two
witnesses St. John spea^^^h of, in the 11 of the ^^^elatio^.

The like examples may be produced from David George, Knipperdoling, Hacket,
and others, which we pass.

Again, the moderate religious man forbeares with open mouth to rail against
the Pope, but speaks of him in a modest reverence, as of a great Bishop, and a
temporal Prince.

He is also to his power a benefactor to poor scholars, and though not
learned himself, he is a prompter of learning. So was Wickham Bishop of
Winc^ester, who being no great Scholar himself, said, to make amends, he
would make scholars, and soo^e after he founded Winchester school, and New
College in Oxford.

He loves unity, and prayseth it as well in Church or Commonwealth, as his
ow^e parish and family; hence is he oppo^ite ex dia^etr^, to seperati^ts, and
schismatics, who, since they fall in my way, let me tell you what out of my
own experience I have known, and found by them, having remained a good time
at Leiden in Holland, and other places where they have their congregations and
convintecles: There are about thirty two several sects, among some whereof are
called Hui^copers, other huis^ ver coopers, 1. house buyers, and house sellers,
and such enmity there is among them, that the pride of their heads, or
ringleaders, will never an unity one with another.

Now why our sectaries should single out themselves aftes this manner, I
confess I know not, perhaps, not without the divine providence, and for that
very same reason, Joseph Acosta gives of beasts and birds of prey, whom God
(as pernicious and hurtful to mankind) has set at ods and at enmity one
with the other^ for if they should accompany together in heardes and flocks,
they would over-runne and devour a whole country: as among beasts: Lions,
Bears, Wolves, Foxes, Badgers, Polcats, etc. And among birds, Eagles, Hawks;
Kites^ Ravens, Vultures, Buzzards, etc. When Nature for the behoof of man,
has set others which are most profi^able unto him at unity among themselves,
and to live peacefully one with the other: As Kine, Horses, Dear, Sheep,
Goats, Conies, etc. Of Birds, Pigeons, Geese, Ducks, Partridges, the most of
the daintiest of Sea birds, with sundry others.

I have heard some of their Sermons, and been present at their private
ordinary discourse, and somewhat always seasoned the same, that savoured either
of Pride or Malice, or both; especially against our Church, and the happy and
well settled estate of the ^^me.

We must make a difference between our stricter people in England, whom your
prophaner sort call Preci^ians, and these who are super-intendants over a few
button-makers and weavers at Amstelr^dam, for of ours we have many conformable
to his Majesty's laws, and the Ceremonies of the Church, carrying themselves
very honestly and conscionably, among which I rec^on not the professed Puritan,
of whom I know many, who gladly take that name and profession upon them, being
tradse-men in Cities and market towns, only to get custom to their shops,
and working th^mselves into the opinion of the world to be hone^t, Religious,
and upright dealing men; they procure to themselves many salutation; (like the
Pharisees) in the market place, and hence they become the prime men at feasts
and mee^ings, and are trusted with the estates and education of men's children
at the death of the Parents, out of the opinion of their zeal and honesty,
whereby they become mavelous rich, and by consequent so proud, that (as St.
Augustine says of the Donatists) ne nostri ^uiquam dicant Ave, they will not
bid a conformist good morrow, or good even, and sitting in their furre or
velvet faced gowns, with their neat set double ruffes, they tax^ (with
Augustus) all the world. But some of these men have not many years since
reformed^ themselves.

There is yet another sort amongst us worse than these; who like double faced
Ianus, one way look to their own Parish^ Church, and the other eastw^rd
toward St. Peter's in Rome; these indeed are filii hu^us seculi, and here only
have their reward; making Religion only as a cloak, or w^^t coat to be worn
both sides alike: Some profess themselves Roman Catholics, that their
families might keep Lent, all the Saints Eves, Ember, and all other
fasting-dayes, whereby their Masters save in their victuals their whole years
wages: another while they are Protestants, and will monthly visit the Church,
to avoid the penalty of the Law, or to insinuate themselves into some gainful
emploiment or other in the Commonwealth; these be those lukewarm Laodicaeans
whom God cannot digest, Rev. 3.^6^
and whom I have known both Protestan^ and P^pist^ alike to have discarded.
There I remember is a Country, whether Vtopia or no, where those who side
equally with contrary factions, wear party colored coats and stockings.
Besides, they are great rackers of their Tenants; backward and restie in all
levies and payments for the common good; seldom charitable to the poor, and
the worst payers of their ^ythes and duties to the Church and Minister that may
be.

Of Discretion.
THe old Lord Burleigh, sometime Treasurer of England, coming to Cambridg^
with Queen Elizabeth, when he was led into the public schools, and had much
commended their convenience, beauty, and greatness, they had sometime received
from their founder, Humphrey the good Duke of Gloucester; yea marry, said he,
but I find one school wanting in our Universities, and that is the school of
Discretion^ in what sense he meant it I know not, bu^ most true it is, that
though Dis^retio^ be no^e of the liberal Sciences, it is an Art that gives
all other their value and estimation, and without which (as a Ship without an
helm, an Horse without a bridle, or a blind man without a guide.) Men do they
know nor what, go they know not whither, and instead of steering a right
course run upon the rocks of their irrecoverable ruin.

Di^cretion is so called of Discerno^ which properly is to sever or part one
thing from another, as to divide or sift the flower from the branne, silver
from the lead, a quintescence from Elementary parts. So that Metaphorically it
is applied to our judgments in severing or dividing virtue from vice, that
which is honest, from that which is profitable, the necessary from the
superfluous, a friend from a foe etc. and indeed it is the highest pitch of
understanding and judgment, which the most men seem to have, but fall shorr
off, yea in their weightest actions: in which our actions of it claims so
great an interest, that without discretion the whole course of our lives is
nothing else but folly, or rashness, as I found well expressed in this Distich
which I found engraven upon the hest of a Learned Ladies knife in Brabant:
Omnia si repetas humanae tempora vitae,
Vel male, vel temere, vel ni^il egit homo.


Whence comes it to pass, that so many men undo themselves and their
posterity for ever, by selling and making away such fair estates left them by
their friends, but lack of Discretion, their judgments being so corrupted,
that they think they shall never want, their children will otherwise be
provided for; while they wear the best clothes they shall be respected,
beloved of Ladies, saluted by Citizens, congied by Courtiers, and the like: now
the salt of Discretion should first have seasoned his brains in this or the
like way; while walking in his garden in the Country, or under a solitary wood
side, he should have thought with himself, God has blessed me with with a
fai^e estate: and as Henry the fourth said to his son the Prince; Getting is
a chance, but keeping is a wit: and what a difference of happiness is there in
enjoying and coming freely to an estate left by friends, than in attaining to
the same by continual labor of my body? hazzarding my health in sitting up
late, rising early, to endure heat, hunger, cold, and the like extremities;
then to be only master of the same a very few years; yea sometime days;
that most truly Martial as a principal happiness accounted, Res relicta, non
parta labor.
An estate left, and not by labor gaind.


Now if I part with this, let me believe, and assuredly say with the
Philosopher, A privatione in habitum nulla est regressio, I may another day
come by and view, saying with a sigh of me and mine, Fuimus Troes, This was
ours once; how have I wronged you my poor Children? who will feed and
entertain you, but you are like to wander up and down, and seek untimely
death in the errors of your lives; and for my self, who will relieve me when
all is gone? I would be loath to depend upon any, being of a generous and free
spirit, and debere quibus nolis miserrimum. and these times are grown so
cunning, and flinty hard, that necessitous men can hardly borrow five shillings
of their best friends and acquaintance. And how many great heirs have I known
to have begged and dyed in Alehouses and barnes, surfeiting of that abundance
which has been lefe them? These and the like notions mature Discretion should
have suggested, and been mistress of the Key, before the house had been
parted withal.

Out of the heat of thy youth, unknown to thy parents or friends, thou
matchest thy self to some snout-faire young thing ^ot worth a great, whereby
thou art sure ever after to be dis-esteemed and undervalued, Discretion (had
thou been acquainted with her) would have told thee, nil temere, do nothing
rashly, and how marriage (with ones calling and profession) is the greatest
action he shall undertake in his whole life, and like a stratagem in war, in
which he can err but once; and how beautiful soever she be, the Dutch women
can tell you, Good looks buy nothing in the Market^ moreover, in stead of
honorable (many times) or worshipful Kindred and alliance, you shall have on
her side a needy kindred, always relying upon you by begging or borrowing;
lastly, after the springtime of her beauty, and your amorous desire is over,
you begin to loath her more than ever you loved her; hence proceeds your
perpetual discontent, home bred quarrels, scoffs and jeering from the
neighbors, a weary life to servants; and to conclude, a parting or divorcement
between your selves, which Discretion (had you been a scholar in her school)
would have easily taught you to have prevented. Let these two examples, in
stead of many other, show the inestimable value of Discret^on in all our
actions: I will now come to speak of Discretion we ought to have in speech
and discourse.

An ill tongue in the holy Scripture is compared to a two edged sword, bitter
words to arrows, slanderous and malicious to the poison of Aspes; and it is
the instrument many times of life and death, as well to the soul as the body;
wherefore the old Egyptians dedicated their Persean tree, whose leaves are
like tongues, and the fruit or apples like hearts unto Isis, meaning hereby
the tongue and heart agreeing together should be consecrated to God only, and
his honor, and not in profaning or blaspheming his sanctified name, (usual
even in these days among children in the streets) or slandering and lyingly
traducing others behind their backs; wherefore we show our Discretion in
nothing more than in our speech and discourse: and hence came the word, Loquere
ut te videam, for a natural fool so long as he is silent, for ought we know
may be the wisest man in the company; and a great wit by too much babbling, and
suffering his tongue to run at random, oftentimes prooves a more fool than
he, speaking their pleasure of Princes, Statesmen, and Bishops, raising them
higher or lower, as Dutchmen do their coin, to their own advantage; hence
they crave pardon (being questioned) of their ears that heard them and stand
in awe even of strangers and waiters upon them: Homer at^ibutes it as a prime
virtue in Ulysses, that his words were few, but to the purpose. I confess the
Table, as with good dishes, so should be ^urnished with good discourse^ for
mirth at feasts and banquets has ever been commended, and I deny not, but
where men of several dispositions meet, something (...) may slip beyond the
bounds of Discretion, and these impertinencies, and quicquid inter pocula
liberius dictum fueret in mappa projiciatur cum micis, as Erasmus holds:
sitting without more ado, having learned as much of Horace.

-- Ne fidos inter amic^s,
Sit qui dicta for as eliminet.
And Plutarch in Symposiasis says, it was a custom among the Lacedaemonians,
that when they invited any kinse-man or friend unto their houses, they with a
finger would point to the door or porch and say, (...), No words must come
from hence, which was the law of Ly^urgus; hence proceeds it that in many
places, as well in England, as the Low Countries, they have over their Tables a
rose painted, and what is spoken under the Rose, must not be revealed; the
reason is this; The Rose being sacred to Venus, whose amorous and stolen sports
that they might never be revealed, her son Cupid would needs dedicate to
Harpocrates the god of Silence^ hence these (not in elegan) verses. Est Rosa
flos veneris, cuius quo surta laterent,
Harpocrati matris Dona dicavit amor.
^nde rosam mensis, hospes suspendet amicis,
Convivae ^t sub (...) dictatacenda sciant.
And for the same reason ^erusa and Oblivo were dedicated to B^cchus, meaning
what had been done or spoken freely among merry cups, should either have been
quite forgotten, or very slightly punished.

Of common ignorance.
THe world has taken so much upon trust from credulous and superstitious
antiquity, that now adays it will hardly believe common experience: whereof I
will produce some neither unpleasant, nor unprofitable examples.

There are many that believe and affirm, that the Manna which is sold in the
shoppes of our Apothecaries, to be of the same which fell from heaven, and
wherewith the Israelites were fed forty years in the wilderness, which
cannot so be by these reasons.

1. That Manna in the wilderness was miraculous; this of ours natural,
falling from the heaven in ^aire, clear, and hot days at certain seasons of
the year, in Calabria, and upon mount Libanus. 2. That Manna in the
Wildernes^e was kept but only one day, excepting the Eve of the Sabbath, when
it remained incorrupt for two days together; ours in shops will abide a year
and more sweet and good. 3. That was a meat, ours a medicine to loosen the
body, withal most excellent to purge choler, and ours so unfit to use for
food, that if we eat much, and continually of it, our bowels will melt within
us, and we dye forthwith.
Now from that affinity and likeness it has from the other: in some things it
borrows the same name; that is, the whiteness, the taste of an honey-like
sweetness, and the place whence it comes, that is the air.

It is called in Hebrew Man, derived either from Mana to prepare, because it
(...) prepared by God himself, or else because when the Israelites saw it
first fall, one said to the other, Man hu? What is this? Exodus 16. 16.

Manna Thuris, or the Manna of Frankincense, as Pliny shows, is like neither
of these; but only the smaller and finer corns of Frankincense falling out in
the shaking and tossing two and fro.

If there be any (as there be many) that cannot away with an ordinary
purgation, their stomachs taking offense thereat, let them take but two ounces
and a half of Manna, and it will purge choler m^^ easily and gently, and
without any offense at all.

The like error has antiquity been possessed with, concerning the Bear, who
is said to bring forth, instead of a proportioned whelpe, a lump of flesh
without form, which by often licking she brings to its right shape: which
Ovid verily believed, when he says, Nec catulns part^ quem reddit ursa, recenti
Sed male viva caro est: lambendo matter in artus.
Fingit and in forma^, quantam capit ipsa reducit.
It is most false, for I have seen a Bear whelpe newly littered, in all
respects like unto the dam, in head back, sides, feet, etc. like unto other
young creatures, it is true the Bear licks it; so does the Cow her calfe, the
Mare her foale, and other creatures in like manner; but that by licking she
gives it form and shape it is most untrue.

Scaliger affirms as, much, saying in our Alps (meaning those about
Piemount) the hunters caught a ^he Bear big with young, who being cut up,
they found a whelpe within her of perfect form and shape, etc.

The Diamond (says Pliny) never agrees with the Loadstone, l. 37. c. 4. but
are so far at enmity, each with either, that the Diamond will not suffer the
Load^tone to draw any Iron unto it, and happily if it do, it will pluck and
withdraw the same away unto it self, which is most untrue, as Garz^as ab
Horto, and many other great Physicians and learned men have proved. And as true
it is, that the Diamond can be broken by no means, but by the blood of a goat
only, I know not whether or no there be several kinds of Diamonds, but I am
sure, I have seen in the City of Antwarp the powder of a Diamond, and the
aforementioned Garzias affirms, with an Iron hammer it may be easily done, and
himself has seen it beaten into a fine powder.

It is moreover as commonly believed as reported, that the Swanne before her
death sings sweetly her own funeral song, which not only Poets and
Painters ever since the time of AEschylas, but even the chief among
Philosophers themselves have believed and published, as Plato, Aristotle,
Chrysippus, Philostratus, Cicero, and Seneca: yet this has proved a mere
fable, so confessed by Pliny Athe^aus, and others, and confirmed by daily
experience: see Bodin in Method hist. c. 4

The vulgar ignorance and simplicity is in these days notably wrought upon by
cunning Sectaries, pretending under a severe kind of carriage and show of
religion, the cure of their souls, and by medicinal impostures for the cure
of their bodies; of the former I have spoken of, the later I will now say
something.

For the first, true it is, they suffer themselves to be bitten of Serpents,
especially Vipers, but cleared and rid of their poison for they take their
Vipers in Winter, when they lie half dead and benumbed with cold, and with a
fine or small pair of tongues take away certain little bladders about their
teeth, wherein their poison lies, which being gone, their bi^ing is never
deadly after: others keep their Vipers lean and half hunger-starved, and then
throw amongst them some hard dried flesh, which when they fall upon, their
teeth stick so fast in the same, that at once they power out all their poison,
and become harmless ever after; and of these they suffer themselves to be
bitten, to the great admiration of the standers by; but if you happen to get a
Viper fresh out of the field, and offer that to him to show his skill, he will
rather be hanged than venture upon it; hereby their notorious cheating is
discovered.

The other will have nothing to do with Serpents, but only swalloweth down
poison (or seems so to do) to utter his trade, or antidote to the people at
as dear a rate as he can. These when they take poison, take before hand, in
Summer time, Let^uce, well steeped and soaked in oil, but in winter the
tripes, or fattest entrails of beasts; for by these meats they retund and
abate the strength of the poison; the coldness of the Lettuce, and fatness of
the oil an entrails only availing hereunto^ neither is this all, but
returning to their lodging they drink good ^tore of thick milk, and cast it
up again; and if all cannot be brought upward, the milk digested, conveighes
it the other way.

But they having bin many times deceived by Arsenicke, which having tarried so
long with some, till it eat out their guts, they have found out a new trick,
which is, when they are upon their stage, they send a boy forthwith to the
Apothicaries for Arsenicke or Mercury, being brought he shows it to the
multitude about him, with the Apothicaries te^timony that is right and good:
all the people see it, what then? he presently conveighes into the cover of a
box lidde turned upward, upon which sticks Sugar, made into the form and
color of Arsenicke, which Sugar he takes out, and puts into water or wine,
drinks it off, falls down, and keeps his breath, that you would certainly say
he were quite dead, but he remembers his Triacle, takes it, and is raised to
life, then he commends his Antidote and Triacle to the skies. the people fetch
it from him as fast as he can utter it, but if any afterward happen to use his
triacle when they are poisoned indeed, it never does good, but they dye without
all question. I have spoken the more at large of these kind of people that our
Magistrates in Cities and towns may have a care of seeing themselves and the
people abused by such runnagates, and artificial picke-pockets, but we are
not much troubled with them here in England.

Of quietness and health.
WE do find by daily experience, that the Age of man very much declineth,
and that men now, for the most part, are not half so strong and vigorous as
they were in the memory of our fathers, as we may easily perceive by those
arrows of a yard or an ell long, which hang by the walls in many places of the
North and west part of England, which the owners grandfather or great
grandfather left behind him for a monument of his loyal affection to one of
the Roses, under whose conduct he served an Archer; the shooting-Bu^s in
Country Towns have lost much of their length since the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth's reign. Who can wield that lance which Charles Brandon D. of
Suffolk tilted withal, yet to be seen in the Tower? neither can so heavy
arms be borne, as were not many years; our Pikes and Muskets are made far
less, because our lesser bodies find them rather for burden than use: Now if
we look into the cause and true reason hereof, we shall find first the
world declining, and like a mother in her age, to bring forth but weak and
short-lived children; neither is this all, but we living in the last age of the
world, wherein all iniquity and vice does abound, men shorten their lives by
over-eating and drinking, ease and want of exercise, luxury and incontinence,
Temperance and Continency being the maine and only supporters of our health,
as in comparable Fer^elius affirms: there are two things more (as these to
our health) which conduce to our happiness in this world, which are, Liberty
and tranquillity or quiet of mind; these I confess fall not to every man's
share, most men living being involved in so many affairs: variety of cares and
bu^inesse which attend us in this our earthly pilgrimage, that this quiet of
mind is as rare as Homers Nepe^the; many men not out of necessity, but of
selfe-wilfulnesse, vexing and disquieting themselves without cause or reason.
As how many rich, and men of great estates be there in this Kingdom, of whose
care of getting and purchasing there is no end; they never in all their lives
(like the Ass that carried Venison, Pheasants, Capons, bottles of Wine, and
other dainties upon his back) tasting the sweetness of what they had about
them, but fed upon the Thorns and Thistles of Vexation, grief, and
needless carfulness, to enrich some unthrifty son or kinse-man; or scrape
up thousands for some dainty thing troubled with the green sickness, who
within a year or two is stolen and married by a Tailor or Ho^teler.

Others again are by nature choleric, fretfull, quarrelsome, and evermore
enemies to their own rest, delighting to be meddlers and brokers in other men's
business, as Eeles in troubled waters and mudde. Some out of curiosity, or the
search of some deep, and uncuoth invention, as firing ships under water,
making traps for the monstrous Bear of Nova, Zemla etc. or secret in Nature,
as ^etting the Lodestone and ^et at enmity about Iron and strawes: Others draw
misery and vexation as with cords unto them, through weakness of judgment,
when they marry disadvan^agiou^ly to themselves either for estate, o^ their
own dispositions, I mean, when themselves being gentle, and addicted to
peac^, m^tch with errant scolds; honest of life, meet with whoores, and the
like.

So since we cannot make our selves Master of this so sweet a benefit
Tranq^illity of mind, let us (which is in our own power) look unto o^r
health, whereof the most men are careless and negligent. To the conservation
whereof, let us first consider the quality of the air in that place where we
live, which is not only an Element, but an Aliment; for by it, if it be pure
and good, our spirits are clarified and quickened, our blood rarefied, and our
hearts re^omforted; for the whole body fares the better for the goodness of a
pure and sweet air: so that we find by experience, that men are more
sprightly, lively, and merry in an upland perfumed, and fanned with the
flower-sented air of Country, and of better complexions, than in close lanes
and noisome allies about the City, where the air in such places is not good,
but raw and cold: you may better it (especial^y in infectious and dangerous
times) by burning of several sorts of sweet Wood, as Cipres, Juniper, Bay,
Rosemarie, Pine, the Turpentine, and Rosin-tree: if it be too hot, open your
windows, and place your bed toward the North, strewing the flower with
rushes, Water Lillies, Nenuphar, Lettuce, Endive, Sorrel, and ever and anon
spri^kle cold water with a little vinegar of Roses^ If any in Rome were
troubled with Ulcers of the the Lungs, or fell into consump^ions, Galen would
pr^sen^ly send them to mount Tabian, a most sweet Air near unto Naples,
where, through the drynes of ^he place, and drinking the milk of goats and
kine, which f^d upon many medicinable herbs (and proper to those diseases
growing in that place) they recovered in a short time: having perhaps learned
out of Hippocrites, that i^ long and languishing diseases, there is nothing
better then Air, and place of our dwelling.

The next thing for our health we must have especial care of our eating and
drinking: our meat^ wherewith our bodies are nourished, proceeds either from
living creatures, or vegetables, that is plants: and of these there must be a
choice had, that of Plants nourishes far less than the flesh of living
creatures, excepting that grain whereof we make our bread, as Wheat, Rye,
Barley, Oats, etc. Wheat being the chie^e: fruits nourish very little; of
fruits, Cheries and Grapes are the best. Melon, Cowcumbers, and Citrulls are
good for choleric stomachs, they breed gross blood, are very cold, and hard
of digestion: Platina tells us in the life of Pope Paul the second, how the said
Pope two hou^es before night was taken suddenly with an Apoplexy, being a
little before very well, and complaining of no disease or pain, which came
through eating of 2 whole Muskmellons. An. 1471.

And how many in these our times kill themselves with overmuch drinking, the
cause of many long and deadly diseases; as Apoplexies, Dropsies, Palsies, the
Gout, and many other; and I know not whether any of the colder Northern Nation
herein excel us, drunkenness now a days being grown into that request, that
it is almost esteemed a virtue, at least a gentleman like quality to carouse,
sit up whole days and nights at it.

-- Donec vertigine tectu^.
Ambulet and geminis exurgat mensa lucernis.
Keeping neither Method nor measure in their eating and drinking, which the
ancient Grecians, and other nations were so precise in it: England formerly
having been acc^^nted the most ^ober and temperate nation in the world:
neither were we ever noted for this vice, till (as Mr. Camden ^aith) we had to
do with the Netherlands in their wars. Also being from all antiquity our
English drink: Britanni (says Pliny) habent potus genus quod Alicam vocant:
which do^btlesse was our Ale, Beer, and ^ase viols, came into England in one
year, in the time of King Henry the seventh. But tha^ I may conclude
concerning those things whereon ours does principall^y depend, which are, the
Aire^, eating, drinking^ sleep and waking, mooving, and exercise, rest,
evacuation of excrements, venerall recreation, and passions of the mind; that
we may live to serve God, to do our King and Country service, to be a
comfort to our friends, and helpful to our Children, and others that depend
upon us, let us follow Sobriety and Temperance, and have (as Tully says) a
diligent care of our health, which we shall be sure to do, if we will observe
and keep that one short (but true) rule of Hippocritas, (...).
All things moderately, and in measure.

FINIS.

