The fairest Fairing for a Schoole-bred Son;
Whereby Praise, Ease, and Profit may be won.

That is to say, Lillies Lesson to his Scholars. teaching them good Manners.
Translated by John Penkethman Lover of Learning; and by him Dedicated to all
the laureat LILLIES of these times.
This Table may be cut a cross between the two middle lines, and inserted in
the Grammar.

MY little Scholar, to thy Book inclinde,
Come near, and print my Sayings in thy mind;
Leave thy Bed early, let not Sleep invade thee;
Haste thee to Church and worship him that made thee:
Yet first thy Hands and Visage wash thou fair,
Let all thy Clothes be neat, and comb thy Hair;
And when my School shall bid thee come away,
Be there without excuse of loytring Stay:
When there thou see thy Master, him salute,
And to thy Mates in order be not mute:
Sit where I set thee, and in any case,
Unless I countermand it, keep thy place;
And as more Learning every one does get,
So in a higher place he shall be set:
And for thy Studies have thou ready still,
MY little Scholar, to thy Book inclinde,
Come near, and print my Sayings in thy mind;
Leave thy Bed early, let not Sleep invade thee;
Haste thee to Church and worship him that made thee:
Yet first thy Hands and Visage wash thou fair,
Let all thy Clothes be neat, and comb thy Hair;
And when my School shall bid thee come away,
Be there without excuse of loytring Stay:
When there thou see thy Master, him salute,
And to thy Mates in order be not mute:
Sit where I set thee, and in any case,
Unless I countermand it, keep thy place;
And as more Learning every one does get,
So in a higher place he shall be set:
And for thy Studies have thou ready still,
(...)
If ought to thee I dictate or allot,
Write thou it rightly, without fault or spot;
But such thy writings do thou not commit
To papers loose, for which a Book is fit.
Record thy Lessons more than once or twice,
And if thou doubt'st, of Others ask advise:
Who doubts and often asks, my charge retains,
But he that nothing doubts, no profit gains.
Learn, Boy, nor let Forgetfulness abuse thee,
Lest that a guilty mind of Sloth accuse thee.
And mark me well, for what avail my pains,
Unless thou fix my Sayings in thy Brains:
"The hardest things through diligence are known;
Be painful, and the Glory is thine own.
"For as the Earth yields neither seeds nor flowers,
"Unless man(...)r'd in (...)
"So he that does not exercize his wit
"Does lose, with precious time, the hope of it.
Let Order likewise in thy speech commend thee,
Lest by uncivil Babbling thou offend me;
Speak low, when thou thy Lesson do apply,
But to Me saying, let thy voice be high.
To Me, when thou repeat'st, ad vnguem, look
Thou have all ready, laying by thy book.
And let None prompt thee, when thou art repeating,
For that much hurts thee, and descrues a Beating.
If ought I question, answer so the same,
As thou thereby may merit praise and fame.
No praise thou get'st in speech to run or creep,
"The Meane's a Virtue profiting to keep;
And ever when thou speak use Latin phrase,
Yet shun thou barbarous words as rockie ways;
Instructions asked unto thy fellows grant;
And help (to my desire) the Ignorant:
"Those that want Learning, he that seeks to teach,
"Himself (though most vnlearn'd) may all outreach.
But let no paultrie Masters give thee aim,
To Roman Eloquence no little shame;
Amongst whom there is none so foolish, or so rude,
But him an Author the like Sort conclude.
The Grammar Laws if thou would rightly know,
And learn to make thy Speech more sweetly flow,
Read works most famous by old Authors wrought,
And which the chiefest Latinists have taught;
Now Virgil, sometimes Terence does inuit thee,
And otherwhiles would Cicero delight thee;
All which who learnes not, only dreams does see,
And in Cimmerian shades would ever be.
Some Boys, (their minds denying Virtue room)
The time do love in Trifles to consume:
Others, their Fellows trouble, making sport
With hands or feet, or in some other sort.
And Those there are that boasting of their stocks,
Disparage Others with unsavory mocks:
Such evil patterns do not thou regard,
Lest that thy deeds at length have just reward:
Nor buy, nor sell, nor changing give or take;
By others Loss do thou no profit make:
Let money go, which many has defilde.
"Nothing, but what is chaste becomes a child;
Do not lie, steal, scoff, brabble, fight, or jar,
Ill noise and scornful laughter banish far.
To no dishonest words enure thy breath,
"Man's Tongue the Portall is of life and death.
Hold it a heinous crime, most worthy blame,
To rail, or swear by Gods most holy Name.
Keep safe thy Books, (not leaving one at School)
With all things else, which is a special Rule.
Yea fly what ere may cause thee to offend
Me, or the meanest One: and so I end.
The Translators Conclusion to the Scholars.
THese Precepts who perform, their Master please;
And reap thereby both profit, praise and ease:
But Those that break the least, his Anger gain,
Working their own loss with reproach and pain.
To the Parents.
Et isti haec rejicere male nolunt
Qui filijs and Qui mihi been volunt.
That is,

And Those will not unkindly These reject,
That honest Precepts and their Sons affect.
FINIS.

