AN APPROVED TREATISE OF Hawks and Hawking. Divided into three Books. The
first teaches, How to make a short-winged Hawke good, with good conditions.
The second, How to reclaim a Hawke from any ill condition. The third, teaches
Cures for all known griefs and diseases.


By EDMUND BERT, Gentleman.



LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his shop in
S. Dunstans Churchyard. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY, Earl of Oxenford, Viscount Bulbecke, Lord
Sanford and Scales, and Lord Great-Chamberlaine of ENGLAND.
MY Honorable Lord, I never affected flattery, if I had I should now have
been much disappointed; for your noble worth exceeds what I can say. To
particularize your honorable Titles, or here to blazon your excellencies were
needless, and shall rather be printed in my faithful heart, then published by
my ruder pen; especially upon the dedication of so slight a subject. Sir, I
have long waited for opportunity, and this great while whipped occasion on,
whereby I might tender some open testimony of my love, before I dye, which may
remain as a perpetual memorial of my euerdeuoted service. To that end (my
Lord) I have run back into my younger years, to summon the delights of my
able youth, together with the fruits of my more experienced age, (comprised
within a few leaves) to attend your Lordships leisure, and humbly to crave your
Honors patronage. To arrogate to my self by an immoderate commendation of the
Work, were poor: to derogate too much from it through modesty, were as silly:
Therefore (not to be excessive in the one, nor too liberal in the other) I
would (with your honorable favor) do you thus much to understand: As for the
subject it is not weighty (being but a Treatise of sport) and to attend and to
give place to your Lordships honorable affairs, and more serious employments;
but as for the handling of the Subject (I dare, and will boldly say and auerre)
it is good: Nay, I will submit my self to partial censurers upon due trial,
and bazard my reputation upon true judgment. My Lord, I frame not my wavering
surmizes upon probabilities of sic dicunt; but I ground my constant opinion
upon certainty of probatum est: Nor can I quote any Author but my self; and
out of my own industrious experiments I (first) extracted my own conclusions:
I reap no man's harvest, but plough with my own Heifer. In fine, I here
dedicate to your Lordship the delights of my Childe-hood, the pleasures of my
youth, the experiments of my age, my faithful (though painful) labors, my
fruitful (though slight) endeavors, myself, my continual service and
observance to your truely-noble Self, humbly requesting your Honor not to be
ashamed to Patronize that which your servant is not afraid to present: And that
shall crown my poor endeavors, and give my labors an eternal sufficit; and
make me ever rest

Your Lordships humbly devoted, EDMUND BERT.

To the friendly Reader.
FRiendly Reader, I did never purpose to publish in common these my labors,
but to have given them privately to whom they are dedicated, and to whom I
stand devoted: but being discovered to some of my friends, and by them made
known to many of the rest, there importunities and earnest persuasions have
made me put it to the press, whereby I shall be sensured of such as have lest
Judgment, but let it answer for it self; I have not set down any thing so
erroneous, but being well examined, it will prove judicious: and although this
subject has already been dealt withal, and well handled by a Gentleman of
good experience, whose good and probable discourse might be a means to hinder
my proceeding herewith, yet a great many gentlemen to whom the goodness of my
hawks have been known to be such as that they could not be bettered, do
strongly enforce it, that my Skill, Art and knowledge must be in the same
degree: In truth I have not kept any hawke above three years, but I have put
them off for much money, besides many thanks, and much love. I had for a
Goshawke and a Tarsell a hundeed Marks, both sold to one man within sixteen
months. I know there are many of good experience will ouerlooke this my book,
and some that are young professors, and some that would learn to profess, but
whatsoever he be that undertakes this profession, I will wish him an able
body, a quick spirit, and most of all, an earnest love and delight thereunto;
to such a man a hawke will quickly teach knowledge, but of him that wants wit
she will make a fool, and of a dull-spirit a true pack-horse: If these good
properties shall be wanting in a man, he is hardly to be made a good
Austringer, and it will be hard for him to make a good hawke. I would I were
able to deliver plainly what I understand, I will set down as familiarly as I
can, the best instructions I am able, but knowledge and understanding, loving
practitioner must be gotten by thy diligent and careful observing thy hawke,
in her sundry passions and sudden toys, such vigelance, such diligence, and
such carfulness will work such an apprehension in thee, as in a little time
thy knowledge and understanding will bring forth such effect, as that thou will
be able to prevent all her ill intendments. I cannot set down what thy
experience will teach thee; but I rest to give thee fullersatisfaction, by
conference, then I have herein or can possibly publish: Farewell.

From my house at Collier-Row, near Rumford Thine to his power. EDMUND BERT.

THE CONTENTS OF the several Chapters of this BOOK.
The first part, teaches how to make a short-winged Hawke good, etc.
CHAP. I. THe Authors opinion of the Goshawke and Tarsell, and of their
defference; which he writes to them that are of small practice, and would
have their labors put to the best profit. II. Wherein the Tarsell differs
from the Goshawke. III. Of the several kinds of the Goshawkes and Tarsels,
viz. the Haggart, the Rammish, and the Eyes Hawke; (I will distinguish no
further) and of their differing dispositions: And first of the Haggart. IV. The
description of the Rammish Hawke. V. The description of the Eyas, upon whom I
can fasten no affection, for the multitude of their follies and faults. VI. A
pre-admonition to the Reader. VII. The manner how I have used the Rammish-sore-
Goshawke, after I have taken her from the Cage unto my fist, until she has
been flying.
The Contents of the second Book. Wherein is set down, how to reclaim a
Hawke from any ill condition.
CHAP. I. HOw to make a Hawke hoode well that will not abide the sight thereof,
and (how disorderly soever she be) it shall be effected in forty eight hours,
with less then forty bates. II. How to bring a Hawke that will royle, and
seek for Poultrey at a house, to good perfection: And how to win her love,
in whom an ill keeper has wrought such carelessness. III. How to reclaim a
Hawke that will carry, and not suffer her keeper to come unto her. IV. To
reclaim a Hawke that will carry a Partridge into a Tree. V. How to use that
Hawke, that as soon as she has a Partridge will break it, and gorge her self
upon it. VI. How to use a Hawke that will carry a Partridge into a Tree, and
will not be driven to the ground, but will there assuredly eat it: And (it may
be) not be taken up until the next night. VII. How to reclaim a Hawke that
will neither abide horsemen, strangers, Carts, or Women, or such like. VIII.
How to use a Hawke that will sit upon the ground at mark, and by missing many
flights, beat out her self from her true stying. IX. That the Tarsell is more
proane to these ill conditions then the Hawke, and how to reclaim him that
will seek for a Doue-house.
The Contents of the Third Book. Wherein is set down, Cures for all known
diseases.
CHAP. I. FIrst, for the beak, mouth eyes, head and throat, and of the
several griefs and diseases there breeding, and offending. II. A medicine for
a wet Canker in the mouth or beak, which will eat into her eyes and brain;
and (unless it be killed) will kill her; and this is more common with the
long-winged then short-winged Hawke. III. A medicine for the Frounce, whereunto
the long-winged Hawke is much more subject then the short. IV. A remedy for the
kirnels, whereunto the long-winged Hawke is not subject, but it much follows
the short winged Hawke. V. There is a disease in the head, of some called
Vertego, a swimming of the brain, and the cure follows. VI. The Pin in the
throat, of all other the most desperate and incurable disease: I have not
known a long-winged Hawke troubled therewith, but to a shortwinged Hawke it
brings death. VII. An excellent medicine for a blow or lash in the eye. VIII.
An excellent water for a hot rhume that runs out of the eye, the heat
whereof scaldeth all the feathers from that part under the eye, and makes it
bare. IX. For a Snurt, or cold in the head of the Hawke, or the Rye. X. For
the Mytes, wherewith I have known many Hawks that have not only been
troubled about the beak, but the very Ieukes have been left without feathers,
and eaten the very skin off. XI. A receipt beyond all other, to take out Lyme
from the feathers of a Hawke. XII. A powder to be given to a Hawke that
blows, and is short-winded. XIII. A medicine for the Worms, wherewith all
Hawks are troubled, and other Creatures also. XIV. A receipt for a Hawke that
has lost her courage, and ioyeth not. XV. To distill a water wherewith to
strengthen a weak Hawke. XVI. To distill a water, whose property is to kill
any unnatural heat in the mouth or body; a great cleanser and increaser of
the breath; and the best that ever was for the Liver that is hot, and nothing
better for a field hawke that flies in Summer. XVII. An excellent approved
medicine for a dangerous bruise, to be given presently after the hurt. XVIII. A
medicine for a Hawke that has received a wound by some ill accident. XIX. A
medicine for the Cray. XX. A receipt for a streine or bruise in the foot.
FINIS.
AN APPROVED TREATISE OF Hawks and Hawking.
CHAP. I.
The Authors opinion of the Goshawke and Tarsell, and of their difference; all
which he writes unto them that are of small practice, and to them that would
have their labors put to the best profit.

THe Goshawke is most able to endure much, and is more profitable then the
Tarsell, not only with bringing home many quarries, but with bringing
diversity and variety of quarries: Her disposition is meek and gentle, if she
be mildely dealt with, and not so apt to ill conditions as is the Tarsell, she
is subject to seek for poultry, into which fault she will never fall, except
it be through want of knowledge in her keeper; which fault to prevent, as also
how to reclaim a Hawke from that evil condition, or any other, I will
hereafter give most plain and true instruction in his proper place.

CHAP. II.
Wherein the Tarsell differs from the Goshawke.

EXcept it be for his practice, I would not advise him that cannot rightly
effect all things in a Goshawke, to meddle with the Tarsell, for he is apt to
ill conditions, which every good Austringer (if he will) is able to prevent: He
will take dislike at many things, or at any thing; he is apt to royle, and
sometimes may find poultry that is fit for his turn; and if he once take a
liking, and stand well affected that way, there is none unfit for him: He will
quickly know a Doue-house, and too soon learn to find the way into it, and
then he has wit enough to please himself; but these faults and many more
follow such Hawks as are not well handled, but are harshly and unkindly dealt
with in their first manning: He is lightheaded and nimble winged, the quick
handling of them in his flying pleases more then the Goshawke, and therein the
Spar-hawke exceeds the Tarsell, and the Marlin therein exceeds both
Goshawke, Tarsell and Spar-hawke. They may fitly be compared unto a A
comparison.
large Gelding, and a smaller, the first having a large and long stroke goes
faster then he seems, the other In either kind this holds not generally.
that gathers short and thick seems to go much faster then he does; the
larger shall enforce the lesser to strike thrice for the ground that he will
almost at twice perform; my opinion is, he that riddeth most ground, with
most ease, shall longest endure. Judge your self the difference between the
Goshawke, Tarsell, and Spar-hawke.

CHAP. III.
Of Goshawkes there are three several kinds, and so of Tarsels, the Haggart
Hawke, the Ramish, and the Eyas, much differing from the rest.

I Only write now the differing dispositions of these Hawks, of their
several properties, and the inconveniences that follows them in particular:
and first of the Haggart in general. She has lived long at liberty, having
many things at her command, and she is therefore the harder to be brought to
subjection and obedience: In her first manning she is apt to take every
accidental occasion that gives offense to come from her keeper; A comparison.
As a young horse in his first riding, if he shall bogge or be afraid of
something, if his rider shall then spur him upon it, the horse may thus
think that the thing whereon now in fear all his thoughts are placed, is the
true moouer of the spurs that torment him; so the Haggart tied to her Masters
fist, that bateth, and then finds her restraint, the object taken away, she
will stare her keeper in the face, and think all the offense came from him, to
whose fist she was tied, otherwise she had been at liberty, and so could have
freed her self from whatsoever feared her. But let me speak this now more A
caveat.
than I purposed, lest hereafter in his proper place I may forget to give that
caveat, if thy Haggart be so angry as that she stare thee in the face upon any
such accidental occasion, or sudden thought of her present bondage, own it
not, see it not, and by all means possible carry thine eye from looking upon
her, for that will work her more dislike toward thee; which if you observe,
you shall the sooner find her pacified. She seldom meweth timely or orderly;
and although some can say that A great inconvenience.
they have had a Haggart Goshawke mewed well and fair, fit to draw at
Bartholomew; I answer, one Swallow makes not a Summer.

When the Haggart is flying, nature is altered, and therefore I must not here
speak of her good or bad properties at that time, for they are wrought in her
through the good or bad discretion of her keeper, when she was in making, or
after she was made, as her keeper thought. I will leave those to their proper
place, only I say and so conclude, that your Haggart is very loving and kind
to her keeper, after that he has brought her, by his sweet and kind
familiarity, to understand him; but if she fall into any vice, she is most
hardly reclaimed from it, and brought to good perfection again; if it shall be
hoped for, it shall soonest be gotten and performed, by exchanging her keeper,
if his skill may equal her former keeper.

CHAP. IV.
The description of the Rammish Hawke.

THere is small difference between the Haggart and the Rammish, only the
Rammish Hawke has had less time (by preying for her self then the other) to
know her own strength and worth, but in manning and making her I will set
down my whole practice, with my friendly advise to others that will enter into
the same course, for in the Rammish Hawke is my especial delight, for in them
my labors have proved most successful.

CHAP. V.
Of the Eyas Hawke, upon whom I can fasten no affection, for the multitude of
her follies and faults.

I Feel it most burdensome to spend my time idly; I think the difference
little, either to be idle, or spend the time to no purpose, or be long of doing
a little, and such effect his travel will give him for reward that medleth
with an Eyas, except a long expectation of good will give him satisfaction; For
they are so foolish as the first year they will hardly be taught to take a
bough well, and if that cannot be effected, there can no prosperous success be
expected. I have known some that have not proved very excellent the second
year in taking a bough, and then it is a foul fault, to do nothing the first
year, and not very much the second; for I have seen diverse entermewers hang I
will not affirm that all will prove thus.
with their head downward, holding a bough fast in her foot or feet. I have
known some of them likewise that would sooner catch a dog in the field then
a Partridge, and although she had flown a Partridge very well to mark, and sat
well, yet so soon as a dog had but come in to the retroue, she would have had
him by the face. One other as ill a fault as this, if she fly well, yet it is
odds you Neither is this generally to be understood.
shall find her sitting upon the ground at mark, when although you keep your
dogs quietly behind you, and though you use some course to terrify her, or
take her between your hands and You shall find hereafter a remedy for this.
throw her up, you may perhaps find her folly give her leave to fall again
upon the ground within twelve or twenty yards of you; fear the worst, the best
will help it self, it may be she will not go to a tree at all, (this is
grievous.) Neither will most of them like the hoode well, and many of them will
cry as loud to you, as you will speak to them. Neither can I hope to buy a
sound Hawke of them from the Cage, who knows not that they are hot and
scratching upon the quarry: Art will easily amend that fault, which I will not
fail Easy to be amended.
to deliver in his place. But this I say, if a man have the patience to endure
their impatience, and attend a long time for their good proof, if at the last
she shall prove well, she may be ranked among the best in the highest degree:
She will ever mewe orderly and timely, and except some evil accident shorten
her days, she will live longer then any of the rest, she is not apt to be
sick, or surfeit so soon as the other, yet if a sickness should befall her,
she will out-grow it with less danger then the other. In this discourse I have
altogether spoken of the Eyas-Hawke, but the Tarsell is not so unapt to take a
bough, neither is he apt to catch dogs, if he prove well: there can no
attribute be given to the Rammish Tarsell (but all qualities examined) he shall
own as good, or better. And thus much as concerning my opinion of the Eyas
Hawke.

CHAP. VI.
To the friendly Reader.

FRiendly Reader, before I begin to treat of the Rammish Hawke, and to set
down the courses whereby I have made so many and so extraordinary good Hawks,
as they could not be bettered both for flying and good conditions, I must tell
you, and so far explain my self, that I do not therein so much arrogate to
my self, as to think my courses are not to be equalled, but they may be
bettered, even by men that live in obscurity, but for what I write, is my
opinion; from which (although it shall move others but little) I cannot be
drawn, because I have had thereby so good, so prosperous, and so profitable
success: Some may contrary my opinion, who can for themselves say but as I
do, that their opinion is such; if I cannot set down sufficient reasons for
my proceedings, my Hawks shall testify for me, it has long lain by me, and
that I have not been forward to publish this but in a Manu-script, is very
well known to many of my friends, Gentlemen that have come to visit and
comfort me in the time of my sickness (which has continued with me for the most
part these three years, in all which time I have made but only one Hawke, but
diverse have been brought unto me to be cured of diverse diseases, and some to
be reclaymed from ill conditions) and by these Gentlemen I have been
ouer-powred (desiring that my knowledge might not be buried with me) to thrust
out my labors to public view. And although my memory has escaped some
secret, yet I am assured the skilfullest shall find something herein set
down, that neither he nor any man has made use of, either in making his Hawke
of good and fair condition, or in reclayming her, or any other of their kind,
from any ill condition. And thus follows my direct course for the reclayming,
manning, and making of my short-winged Hawke.

CHAP. VII.
The manner how I have used the Rammish-sore- Goshawke, after I have taken her
from the Cage unto my fist, until she has been flying.

I Must speak something of the time wherein usually I make choice to buy my
Rammish Hawke, about the latter of Michaelmas term; or if I can learn that
there are more Hawks coming before Christmas, I will tarry their coming, for
those Hawks do not show themselves out of the great couerts until after
Saint James: And to buy one of them in the beginning of Michaelmas term that
has been so long taken, and done so little for her self, I like not, but I
will hope for a more late taken Hawke, which when I have, I follow How I begin
with my Hawke.
in this manner. I continue her upon my fist ten days or a fortnight,
(unless in a shorter time I find her a sound Hawke) which I shall the sooner
understand, because I see how she puts over This must be especially observed.
her meat, how she does in due it; and if there be any doubt of her
well-doing, there shall hardly a mute escape my sight whosoever does carry her
for me, for she shall be well assured to find no other perch then the fist,
from that time I rise until Thus you may recover her strength, that in so long
a journey is made weak.
I go to bed, when she shall go with me; and if in this time I find it fit,
she does not fail to have casting. I find no time lost in this course, for in
this time I will raise my Hawke and give her strength, and she will be the
less time after she is vnhooded before she does fly; my castings that My
manner of castings in the beginning.
I give, are Thrums, gotten of the Weauer, I get them washed, but not with
Soap, I cut the threads an inch long or less, and I size them out for a small
casting, and give them lose with her meat; or otherwise, I tie upon the thrids
two or four small knots, leaving some thrids open at the end of either knot;
otherwise I give plumage and some small bones, if the foul like me, the bones
of that part of the wing that is usually broken from the Partridge. Flannell I
could never approve of, neither did I ever use the iukes and feathers of a
house-Doue, The Feathers of the House-Doue not good.
for they (by reason of their own dung they sit in) are hot and strong in
savor. I am careful not to make my casting too great; I think there is no
man but has that care if he but undertake to feed a Hawke. When I find my
Hawke in strength of body and stomach bettered, I proceed to peppering, (for I
will let nothing escape me unset down in the whole practice of my Hawke,
until For peppering.
I have made her flying) and although peppering be as common with every man as
feeding, yet because I have known and heard of many Hawks that have dyed upon
peppering, when I had younger experience, I grew very careful thereof, and I
took this course: First, I made my water sees, and then I put thereto a
quantity of pepper, and a less quantity of Staues-acre pounded small; I put in
the less of both, because I sees them in the water, which makes the water
strong: When the water had sod a while, I did streine it through a fine linen
cloth, which should suffer neither Pepper nor Staues-acre to go through, and
therein I would then wash my Hawke. My reason why I do not allow of, nor use
the common course of A reason why thus.
peppering, is this; The water not strained through a cloth, the Pepper hangs
in the Hawks feathers, and when she falls to pruning of her self, she
oftentimes gets it into her beak, and so it hangs either upon the tongue
or in the mouth of the Hawke, and sets it on fire, the heat and dislike
whereof makes many Hawks to cast Especially such as are not perfectly sound.
their gorge, and so their sickness increasing, they dye. Besides, I have come
many times to some places four or five days, or a week after that they have
peppered their Hawks: And I have seen the back part of their wings red so
long after their peppering: There may thereupon grow (although not suddenly)
an incurable blister, which will lame his Hawke, and her Master shall never
know how it comes; but with the roughness An office ill performed.
of the Pepper, and with the ill handling of them that have executed that
office, I have many times seen the skin in that place rubbed off. If any man
will follow my course he may, if not, let this warn him of the inconveniences
that follow the other, many Hawks having dyed upon peppering, Avoid every
inconvenience.
my reason can find no other cause than what is aforesaid, or else a great
fault in her keeper, that would put his Hawke to such a hazard, A fault in her
keeper.
before he had made her body able and fit for it. My place of peppering should
be in a very warm room, although the fire were not very great I cared not, my
time should be in the evening, and for my company I cared not how many both men
and dogs, the more the better, for The earnestlier she looks at many things,
the less she will fear any.
then the Hawke seeing so many things, that any one of them might give offense
alone, there is now so much change, men, dogs, fire-light, and candlelight,
that she looks at all, and knows not which to be afraid of. Besides, she
has a desire to dry her self, and so let her continue until she be dry, and
has picked her self, by that time I would think it time to give her some
meat, and that should be but a little: she had none above one hour before I
began to pepper her; my Let her have no meat above when you pepper her.
hoode is laid away with no purpose to handle it before four and twenty hours
were spent, that night she never went from my fist, but when I entreated my
friend to ease me. But note, I seldom did sit still with her, but I would
walk, and Sit not still in manning your Hawke.
when I walked, or whether I sat still, I would entreat my Hawke not to be
idle, but in this manner to walk and travel with me, very often turning my
hand gently, forward and backward, A good means to man your Hawke.
whereby my Hawke should be made, leisurely, to remove her feet one after
another, forward and backward. I had rather she should gently remove a foot,
then with anger strike a wing, and the often remoouing her foot will save her
many a bate. It may be your Hawke (good friend) shall want that attendance that
mine has had for a fortnight before, if you fail in the beginning, look for
no succesfull ending, it is very like Observe this.
you shall find it at this time, when she will distemper and ouer-heate her
self with bating, which my former courses taken with my Hawke, assures me
that I need fear no such thing. To proceed, I with my Hawke upon my fist
walk, and I entreat her to do so likewise, by the gentle remoouing her
feet, which she should practice that night either upon my fist, my friends, or
my man's; toward the morning (if the weather Lose not the morning.
would give me leave) I walk abroad with some company, both men and dogs: and
howsoever the weather was, I would ever be abroad at the break of the day, and
so continue so long as I could conveniently. If my Hawke were unquiet, All
Hawks are then naturally disposed to stir.
it would be about, or rather before, the Sun rises, it is a time wherein
all creatures spirits are quickened: Although my Hawke has been thus truly
watched, yet I should find in her a natural working and stirring, as though
she had something to do; then to put her out of that humor, I would have either
the wing of a Mallard, Pullet, or such like, to set her a-worke, and put-by
those thoughts which nature taught her, and teach her to alter nature. All this
while I have both company and dogs with me; as I find cause I go into the
house, where I and my Hawke walk, she walking upon her feet as well as I upon
mine, I would tend her many times with tyring and plumage: And thus either upon
my fist or upon some man's else, she should sit and walk all that day, for I
think that is the day of marring or making; and this I think that if she
should be set down upon a perch but whilst I should change Allow her no ease
but upon the fist.
my Glove, she would be more impaired thereby then she would profit in ten
days travail, being compared to my course herein taken, and which I use, and
will take two nights and two days together. I assure you that I have never met
with that Hawke that has showed her self froward, or unruly, no not this
first day, neither shall I ever do, if I order her after this manner. Well
this day is spent in this manner, evening approaches, and bid'deth the Hawke
take her rest, which I have ever found her very ready and willing unto, and
fashion her self to take her up lodging upon my fist, neither owning nor
looking for other perch. Now she is conformable unto my will, she is even
already become familiar and sociable, Already sociable.
and so I will continue her. Now I show her the hoode, which my care has
beforehand provided, and made very large, I think somewhat larger then is
usual, but much larger at the top of the beak then I ever saw used. My hoode
made fit and easy, I would offer to put it on, Take care to have a very easy
hood.
which at that time I could never have my Hawke dislike. Thus I would use her
with hooding and vnhooding that night; and then would I bethink me whereof my
Hawke was likelyest to dislike or be afraid; I would now seek out the Smiths
Forge, and there she should endure the blowing of the fire, and knocking of
the Anuill, and the sparks flying about the shop. I pray you mark, it is not
long since she was begun with, and what I have done to her I have delivered
plainly, believe me within this little time, and with this my small pains, I
have made my hawke such as she would not be distempered, disorderly, Who will
not take this course?
froward, or more unruly, but that I have seen flying Hawks much worse. It
will be no hard matter to watch her this night, but it will be almost
impossible to keep her waking. I have heard of some that have watched their
Hawks seven nights and as many days, and still she would be wild, Rammish,
and disorderly. Know (good Reader) that a little sleep will suffice nature in
any creature, and when a Hawke is upon the fist, the man spending his time with
sitting still, talking, or at Tables, he may be virtuously spending his time
in reading the Scripture; in this time his Hawke sits still, she has no
exercise, and there is little difference in this, either to be upon a perch or
his fist: he may say, if I should set her upon a perch, whenever it were in
her sight she would bate to go to it; I ask what is the difference between
bating to go to the perch, or I do not allow that she should be set upon a
perch.
bating to fly from all things else? And thus you shall never have her a
well-manned Hawke. What are the discommodities that follow a Hawke thus manned?
She will endure nothing, because she has not been made acquainted with any
thing; for when her Master or keeper should see her to take offense or dislike,
he will avoid that because she shall not bate: Another-while he cries All
which I would have my Hawke used unto.
out, come not in the tail of my Hawke; but whosoever shall undertake the
course that I have used, he shall find his Hawke seldom apt to take any
offense at all. In a man's much sitting still in the time of manning his Hawke,
an easy apprehension will find a great error, for when the man sits
still, the Hawke sits still, and if she To sit still an ouer-sight.
has been truly watched, although she does not wink or shut her eyes, yet
her heart may be fast sleeping; or if it be in the day, so long as her keeper
sits still, she will be quiet, but let him but stir and walk, she likes
not that, she has sitten quietly upon his fist, and she is very loath to have
that custom broken. Every Austringer of any experience knows, that a Hawke
thus used will thus bate. Why is it so? Not because her eyes meet with that
which sitting still she saw not, but because now she meets labor, she is
angry and discontent, because she is not as she was sitting at ease. A Hawke
before she is truly manned (that has been set and used unto a perch) will
perpetually bate to be there. I hold it a great He is in an error that sets
down his Hawke hooded before she be well manned.
error to set her hooded, because she should not see whereon she sits; for
sure I am this fashion will breed more than a little inconvenience, and yet
hereby there is no love gained from his Hawke.

I have observed that it is much walking with my Hawke that has wrought such
good effect in her; for in my walking and turning, her eye The Authors
observation.
does still behold change of objects, and the stirring of her feet does work
as much or more good in her, for that makes her desirous to sit still, and
desirous of ease, which bating does not give, and in the first making saves
her many a bate. As at my first beginning I labor to acquaint her with
whatsoever a Hawke may dislike; so my manner of working this, is by that
means, which The means is most necessary.
otherwise she would dislike, and that is carriage, and in this beginning to
make my fist her perch, until she be such as I would have her, which this
night and the next day shall make her, for this night is but the second night;
and now my chiefest practice is the using her to the hoode, which she will as
familiarly take as the Faulcon. I will show you my manner therein: I show her
the hoode, put it to and over her head many times, I find her so truly
manned, as that she will no more dislike the stroaking therewith, then the bare
hand, I put it on gently and very leisurely, and I could never meet with any
dislike hereof in my Hawke; I would either put it on with my full hand, or else
holding it by the tassell, whereby Observe this.
you may know that it was lesurely and gently done, which will be a means that
she shall never hereafter be coy of it: But if my fine Austringer will show his
dexterity and nimblenesse of the hand, and with his finger in her neck thrust
her head into the hoode, if he miss the right doing it, the next time he
comes in such a manner, he may peradventure find her dislike, this is the
next way to make her think her head shall be pulled off; for the putting it on
in such a quick manner, or thrusting her head into the hoode with the finger
Avoid all such unkindness.
behind, will make the Hawke understand that it is no kindness, but violence
and churlish usage, which must never be offered a Hawke, and then you shall
perhaps find her dislike your hand and hoode coming to her, and so being a
little coy or angry, never be content to carry her beak right, but turn it in
the hood; and so my fine quick hand bobbeth his Hawke, and makes her utterly
dislike the hoode.

There is no way but gentleness to redeem a Beware of hasty hooding.
Hawke so bobbed, and therefore I advise thee not to trust to the quickness of
the hand, but rather to hold the hoode by the tassell to her head, and then to
put it on leisurely, with a light carriage. You may say she will not suffer
this; so think I also, after she has once taken a dislike thereof; but I
spoke in the beginning how to use your hoode, so as she shall never with such
usage take dislike thereof: use her as I have used mine, and you shall find
yours as I find mine; Admit your Hawke shall turn her head away from the
hoode, I know she will not bate from it, perhaps she will I could never find
more distemper.
likewise turn her body by the remoouing one or both of her feet; upon the
putting her head aside, I would still hold my hoode within an inch of her
head, until she should turn her head, and then to put it on leisurely; but if
she stir her body and remove her feet, then pull back your hand, and by
turning your body and your fist whereon she sits, set her right and fit, and
then hold the hoode gently to her nose, which she will be willing to put her
head into, rather then stir any more, for she knows there is no hurt
ensues. I could with ordering of my hawke She will find no hurt in leisurely
hooding.
(as I have already set down) never find any Hawke at a worse pass then so.
Well, she is now well made acquainted with the hood, the morning comes, which
I have said before, reuiueth all her spirits, which before were heavy and
dull, at Morning and evening are the times to make a hawke well conditioned.
the break of day getting company and dogs with me, or in the Town, or
rather where I should meet most passengers, there would I be walking, hooding
my Hawke, and sometimes let her feed after her hooding: After one or two
hours being abroad I would into the house again, where my Hawke should show
her self as sociable and familiar as a Lanner. I use altogether a low perch,
which set in the midst, or in such place of the room wherein I was, as that
both men, women, children and dogs should go by her, Their desire of ease will
make them endure all things, and their so sitting, man them with all things.
I did not fear although they did wipe their Gowns against her, I ever found
them so glad of their ease.

The second day, I know my hawke is as well manned as I can desire, it may be I
will set her down upon such a low perch, and in such a place as I have
foresaid, and I know there she would sit, not fearing any thing, and not
making one bate in two or three hours, (if I would let her sit so long, which
as yet I must not) unless hunger should enforce her to stir. I make no doubt
but Have something to please her howsoever.
she would be very gentle to take up, if she do not iumpe to the fist. Now I
follow her with castings, and I keep her upon my fist until I go to bed, and
now I am able to govern her, not needing any more help, and yet I pray
think, A Hawke must be kept to her good perfection.
that I know if she be not held and kept in this good perfection, she will
fall again: But all this I am able to do, only with late sitting up and
early rising. I feed her so as that I know she shall cast betimes, which I
will carefully look for one hour before day; and when I take her up I will
surely please her with something, then I fall to my old Trade again, walking
abroad as I did before, using her hoode as I find cause. I never call her
above eight or ten yards, until I find that she is bold enough and not
fearful, and that she be far in love with my voice, which I never fail to
give her, even from the beginning of her feeding, until she is flying, and
that is loud enough, as if I were to call her thirty or forty score, although
I call her but ten yardes. Well, when I begin to call her in cranes, although
it be for so small a distance, it shall be done from the hoode, and from the
fist of another man, in manner as your long-winged Hawke is lewred: and when I
call her twice or thrice at a time, between every calling I put on her hoode,
and so still I have her let in from the hood: Who knows not that a Hawke set
down upon a style, block, or any other convenient thing, when she shall with
the often seeing the Cranes drawn at length, and her keepers accustomed manner
in calling her, soon learn to know that now she After she is once called and
set down again, she will not let him go five yards.
shall be fed, and will be ready to follow him before he can get twenty yards
from her? But all this is not to the true purpose. I have seen a Haggart with
four days calling, not suffer the going from her five yards, but she would
have been at his elbow, after she had been once set down, and yet she was far
enough from the perfection of coming; for it is the voice that must not only
in this, but The voice is the Mistress of knowledge to your Hawke.
in greater matters, work a good effect in my Hawke. As I am thus calling my
hawke in cranes, it is very certain she will soon come to that understanding
as that she will bate upon hearing my voice, before she be vnhooded, I then
stay my voice until she be quiet; then I call again, and then stay my voice
until she be vnhooded: and again, I give my voice, not holding out my fist,
unless I see her coming: My experience has taught me to stay her, and not
to let her come until she be quieted, because I have seen long A reason.
winged hawks, (with which profession I have made an end thirty years since)
let into the lewer in the time of their bating, when they have had their eye
presently settled upon some other far remote from the lewer, whether they have
presently gone, and then not come to the knowledge, could not find the lewer,
and so have been lost. I spend two, three, and often four times of the day
thus in calling my Hawke, then I call my Hawke often.
for the day, for the most part my fist is her perch, and if I set her down,
it shall be ever upon a owe perch, where all sorts of people and dogs shall
How I bestow my Hawke.
travel by her, and where she shall see the fire stirred and blown, and wood
brought thereto, and diverse other such like objects: She will not for any, or
all of these make a bate. In this manner I have trained my hawke, that when
she has been a flyer. I durst set her down upon a Velvet stool, in a
cleanely kept dyning-Chamber or Parlour, as the place was whereunto I went, for
I would have my Hawke as much in my eye as could be; perhaps I should see the
Lady or Mistress of the house look discontentedly hereat, so well have I
been acquainted with my Hawks good disposition, that I have promised if my
Hawke should make a mute in the room, I would lick it up with my tongue;
Anger and unquietness is the cause of many mutes.
for well I knew no angry mute should come from her, otherwise she would not
mute; And I knew well (unless I were negligent, which I would never be) that
she would not stir until hunger did provoke it: This for the day.

In the evening when I had called and supped her, then I would no more let her
part from my fist, but continue her until I fed my self, it may be if I had
such means she should be upon the fist for that season also, and so until I
went to bed, (which the love to my Hawke would not have me hasten.) In the
morning before day I would assuredly have her upon my fist, and follow her in
such manner as I have formerly done, thinking that I could never be too
frequent with There cannot be too much familiarity between the man and Hawke.
my hawke, nor she with me. My inducements to carry her thus in the evening,
and night, would make her love me as her perch, and by my taking her up so
early in the morning, I would persuade her that there had been her perch all
night: But whether my hawke will have this loving apprehension, or no, I know
not, yet I am assured it works this benefit, that she will endure as much or
more than any other hawke not so dealt with; And it is this that makes her so
willing to sit still and take her ease, and not take offense, although there
should fly about the house fire, dishes, trenchers, and any thing else that
would mad other hawks, they shall not move her. Me thinks I hear some man
say, I have taken a very painful course in making my hawke. I ask who will
not fast one-day to be assured that he shall feel no A question.
want so long as he lives? Work but out your task in this fashion, and you
shall during your A sweet satisfaction.
hawks life find none but playing-dayes. Let me not omit any thing in my
proceedings; As for the hoode, I never in the house let her sit hooded at all,
and when she is a flying hawke, never vnhooded in the field. Be not negligent
toward your Hawke at no time, but especially whilst she is in manning, if you
be, she will pay you for it in her flying. I am afraid to be tedious, and I
cannot more briefly deliver my practice and my experience, I would gladly walk
plainly, and give unto every man full satisfaction.

I should have forgotten one special benefit By these means if she be found
taken from the Cage, she will be made flying in twenty days.
that is gained by your three nights painful following your Hawke, that is,
she shall not at all weaken her self with many bates: also her familiarity
will be such, as that you may thereby better her diet in her calling, and of a
poor Hawke from the cage, make her strong and full of flesh, the contrary no
doubt follows those Hawks that are by fits dealt withal; one while
carefully watched and manned, and to another time neglected, and then their
diet shortened to make The fruits of negligence.
them conformable at a keeper without form. Hence proceed the marring of many
hawks, that when they should be entered and fly, they are so weak, as they
are not able to show what they would do if they had strength. If this be not
motive enough to make you have a care of your hawks decaying strength, and her
falling of flesh, then know that poverty is the mother and If you will have
your Hawke fly well, let her be full of flesh.
nurse of all diseases: I have followed aduising too long, and left the
delivering of my practice. Now to proceed therewith, my hawke is to be called
lose, she shall not be weakened or hanged with draging her cranes above eight
or nine score, and my manner is to call her thirty and forty score before I put
her into a tree, and I use to call her at all hours in the day, I fear not
her coming home unto me; but admit what I have not met with, that she falls
off and goes to a tree, it must be want of a stomach that makes her do so,
or want of weathering, or bathing, which I will be sure she shall not want,
neither do I think she should want a stomach, which if she should want, that
want will make her sit quietly, Patience is an excellent virtue in an
Austringer.
and I had rather attend her pleasure with patience now, then when I am in
sport. I will tell you something touching this point: when I am traveled with
my flying hawke, that is as loving as sociable and conformable to my will in all
companies and times as I can desire; yet, I do bear her barefaced for the
most part all my journey, and when I perceive she grows hungry, then I put on
her hoode, and if there be no present hope of a flight, I set her upon the fist
of one that knows what does thereunto belong, then I pray him to ride
hind-most of the company, and I put my self foremost; then I call my hawke,
when her I call my Hawke always when I feed.
hoode being pulled off, she comes by all the company merrily to the fist;
Use makes perfectness, thus I use my hawke, and she never receives meat from
me, but I call her. It may be you will be advised hereby to do the like, if
you once find the benefit thereof, you will hold the greatest pain in
effecting it, sweet contentment and Pain is rewarded with pleasure.
pleasure: But to my hawke which does not so, (but granted she should do so)
make me wait her pleasure; I am not hasty to call her until she has taken
her pleasure: which with my observation, I will soon discern, and then when I
call her, I know she will soon please me, and so conclude, we are both
pleased: but if such an accident should befall me three or four nights before
I went to fly her, I would now not fail but show her a Partridge the next
night, if I could get a You shall find a reason for this elsewhere.
hand Partridge it would please me, if not, I would not be at all sorry; but
such a chance has seldom befallen me, and therefore to hold on with my true
proceeding: when I have my hawke perfectly coming, strong and in all points
fit to fly, the night before I show her a Partridge, at Sunne-set, I set her
down upon some style, gate, or rail, and walk from her; I would choose a
place where there should be many high trees, I would not give her my voice
until she went to a tree, but I would keep my self with my company
twenty-score from her, unless I should have one, whose eye should attend her
remove, lest she should go from me another way, thereby I should know the
better what I had to do: when she does remove and let up and down, then I
give her my voice, which she is glad to hear; having taken her down, I sup
her, not putting her up any more, my reason for this course, so taken, is this;
when my hawke is in a tree, that has been long kept This my reason for my
former flying.
and manned by me, and a longer time been kept in bondage before she came to me,
now she begins to know her self, and think of what she has formerly done
for her self, she would get her supper, and it is so late that she sees
nothing A Hawke may be sotted with long calling and drawing after a man.
whereon to prey, and therefore when she shall see the next night, what is in
her power to command; you shall not need to bid her go, but she will give you
cause of joy, to see with what metal and spirit she flies. No Partridge in
the world can fly from a good short-winged hawke, and the Pur in her springing
will make any hawke fly thereto, When you enter your Hawke look she has all
her rights.
if she have been rightly ordered, and in strength. I advise you once more, be
sure your hawke has all her rights, let her not have any smacke of wildenesse,
nor want either weather or water. It is to be understood, that I have showed my
hawke water within two or three days after she has been peppered, but it
should be at a brook, or some other grauelly place, fit for that purpose,
holding my first to the water, and the end of my lines in my right hand, if she
did not bathe at my first or second day showing her water, but refused, it
should be that she had no desire to bathe, and that when she refused so to do,
wildenesse or Rammishnesse should not be the cause thereof: Let her not bate to
fly from you, which although you have nothing in your fist she will do.
if she did iumpe to the water, I would have something in my fist ready to show
her, when she made show of coming from the water; which should make her ever
after, when she had done, look for the fist, where she should dry, prune, and
oil her self, and as yet she never had other perch to weather upon then my
fist, neither shall she until she be a true flying hawke. Now for the place
where I would first show her a Partridge, it should be in a champion, where
Partridges will assuredly fly The place to enter my Hawke champion.
to a hedge, then my hawke must needs take stand upon a bush in the hedge, for
it is great odds that she shall not have it in the foot, and although she be
far behind it, yet she will assuredly go to the place, because the love of
the Partridge inviteth Hereof I cannot make any doubt, because I never knew it
worse.
it, and it is ods, that nearer then that she shall have no place fit to go
unto; Well at the retroue, there is no doubt but she will have it; but say
that my hawke either has it in the foot, or otherwise, that she was so near
it that she has with striking at it, in the fall beat it clean through the
hedge, and there my Hawke sits upon the ground, it can prove no worse; if
she have it in the foot we are all well pleased. If she sit upon the ground I
stay both men and dogs, for it may be it is not flicked. A Hawke that has thus
showed her mettle will not sit long so, but up unto a A Hawke that has that
mettle is not so dull as to sit long upon the ground.
bough; then I ride in quietly, if the Partridge be there, it is very lucky, if
not, I hold it no ill luck to have so hopeful a young Hawke; but I go
presently about to please her, having a brown Chicken in my bag, the neck I
pull in sunder, but break no skin, and tied to my Lewers or Cranes, holding
the end in my hand, I throw it out fluttering, and thereupon please her as well
as if she had killed a Partridge: I do not tie it A prevention of evil.
to my Lewers, as fearing her dragging, or offering to carry it, out of a wild,
Rammaish, or any other ill disposition; for I have before this tied a dead Use
the same course.
Foul to my Cranes, and thrown it out unto her, amongst men, dogs, and
Horses, walking about her, and thereon I let her take all her pleasure, but by
little bits of warm meat I sup her from my hand, letting her wholly see all
that I do, until I see her ready to forsake the quarrie to catch my hand,
then I deliver up more covertly, until I have her iumpe to my fist, where with
plumage or tyring I end her supper. You shall hereafter find a better benefit
to many purposes Expect a better benefit.
by your dealing with your Hawke thus. Thus I reward my Hawke upon her
Partridge, and the commodities thereof exceed their understanding that have not
made use thereof.

As I have told you that I would choose a champion-Countrey wherein to enter
my hawke, yet it should be so as that there should be some small hedges: And I
have always this consideration that I will well know, that whither I ride
there should have been no store of hawking, and then I know they can fly no
better then a hand Partridge, and they will fly worse at that season Choose
such Partridges as are heavy flyers.
then some Partridges do that have been well flowne too, three weeks before
Michaelmas. I have ridden out of Essex into Sussex, unto the East part of the
Downs there, to enter my Hawks; Where I have not failed to do it, to the
great wonder of the worthy Knights and Gentlemen in those parts, and some
(right Worshipful) in the West parts of those Downs can witness, that in
their company I have killed for the most part of a month together with an
entermured Goshawke, eight, nine, and ten Partridges in a day. The day of my
going thither, and the day of my return to London, was just five weeks, and it
was a fortnight or more in Michaelmas term when I came back. I killed in that
time with that one Hawke foure-score and odd Partridges, five Pheasants,
seven Rayles, and four A note of a large quarry.
Hares against my will. This is not untrue, for I will present that much
honored Knight with one of my Books, who saw all this done: And every man may
know that we lost some time with fogges and reign, and my going and coming
spent four days.

I have in the East part shown such Hawks, as there was never seen the like
there, and all of them made in this manner, as I have delivered. If they had
fallen in Fearne, or among some small shrubbed Purzes, I would when I came in
but hold up my hand, and she would presently be there; or if any man else got
in before me, if he did not hold out his fist, she would light upon his head.
Is not this a sweet comfort, A sweet comfort.
for so little pains? If your Hawke be followed with flying as I use mine, you
shall have no cause to complain of the short-winged Hawke, that if they fit
still but one hour they are presently wild, and care not for their keeper;
you shall rather have a care to give her ease, setting her still (as I have
used mine) upon a low perch, and in the greatest assembly, never hooded in
the house; and so when she is to weather abroad vnhooded, upon a low perch,
never putting her in a corner to take weather and ease in, for neither all nor
none of my Hawks will be diseased, except of purpose foul play be offered,
which I hope I shall never meet with. If it has rayned, then you shall be
enforced to set her high, for if she ba^e to come to The using of her to a
little meat as she does sit upon the perch will make her love you, and look
for it.
you, either when you come to take her up or otherwise, she shall wet her
wings, so is she shall have more need to weather, then when she was set out.
So near as I can remember I will omit nothing of my practice. The manner of
giving my casting was over hand without any meat My manner of giving casting.
when I went to bed, although she had much meat above, it did not hurt:
Casting thus given could not hinder the putting over her meat, nor should lie
in her pannell with her meat, but after the meat is gone then comes the
casting that makes clean, and carries away what is left; Thus I do before
she is flying, but after she is flying she will upon every flight take some
plumage, and She provides casting for her self.
therefore with the bones and feathers of a Partridge wing I conclude her
supper. I never fail giving her castings, for I can find the perfect or
imperfect estate of my Hawke no better then by the knowledge of her castings:
And I think it will give the best instructions to a young beginner, A help
for a young Austringer.
even to know the times of feeding his hawke, and so by his diligent
observation come to better understanding; I think castings are as natural as
meat: For mine own part, from the beginning of Hawking, until after
Michaelmas, I have given two castings, and received two every day from my
Hawke, and sometimes three.

I must explain my self thus; When I have An explanation that I may not be
misunderstood.
early in the morning killed a Partridge, and given my Hawke the head in her
foot, which I suddenly get again, for if I should give her leave to eat all
the heads, I must not fly so often as I do, but so soon as she has the
head, I quickly pull out the heart, and break off the wing, and then holding
the heart to her, and bruising it between my finger and thumb, she receives
it at three or four bits, I continuing my hand still in his place, and then
cunningly I take up the head, letting her iumpe to my fist, where she shall
plume upon the wing, until I have bitten the skull from the brains, that she
may have them without bones. But it has thus fallen out, when I have so early
flowne my hawke, that she has eaten the head, which I have been willing to
let her do, and I have given the heart withal, because there were other
hawks to fly, and no great store of Partridges; An observation.
by which means it would be long before my turn would be to fly again, and
it has so proved that I have not flowne at all; but ryding homeward, for such
is my manner, ever to call my hawke, I set her loose upon a pair of bars,
going from her, preparing meat for her dinner, when I had walked about fifty
or threescore paces, I gave her my voice, she made no respect About ten of
the clock I called my Hawke.
of it, that usually upon my first call, would be at my elbowe; I stayed and
marvelled, and because the day was glorious, and the time dangerous to tempt a
hawke to play the wanton, I went back (I must confess) in some fear, giving
the fairest words I could to stay her, lest she should remove; good hawke she
had no such thought, but when I came near her, she gave me a small casting
that she had taken in the morning, and then I gave her another, which she
repayde at three of the clock in the afternoon.

I have many times (and lately) seen old and such as went for most expert
Austringers, when we have had a hawking journey, been afraid to have any thing
stir in their Chamber, for hindering This has been in the beginning of
hawking.
their hawks from casting, and to keep the curtains drawn before the
window, not suffering the least light to appear so near as they can, for
that would be another hindrance to their Fall not into this inconvenience.
casting, all this while they lie in bed and give aim, and when they are up
they are driven to seek dark corners, wherein to set their hawks until they
cast, when it were more fit they were in the field to fly.

I dare not reprove, I know they know their own errors. I was never yet
enforced to stay for my hawks casting, neither do you make any doubt, if you
will follow your hawke with that familiarity as I have followed mine, either in
the field, or in the house, carried barefaced in either If she be wild and
fearful, it may make her put it over again.
places, she will cast, or in any of them, to pull off her hoode when she
offers to cast. Not long after my hawke has cast I usually give her a little
meat; There is nothing but sickness, (a bar against all good perfections)
or wildenes, or rammishnes which makes her stare and look about her, which
makes her afraid to perform those duties, which otherwise she would do: The
hawks no better manned then so, are many other ways more defective and
disorderly then so. Thus much for ordering my hawke with castings for her diet.

I have flowne a hawke all one season, and never fed but upon the best meat I
could, she never My manner of feeding, and with what I feed.
tasted Beef, neither was her feathered meat (but very seldom cold; and to
help her better, a night did hardly escape me but I thrust out the marrow of
the wings of either Ducke, Pheasant, Partridge, Dove, Rooke, or such like,
breaking the bone off at either end, and so with a feather the end cut off,
drive it whole without breaking into a dish of fair water, setting my hawke
loose upon the Table, I would give it her between This will keep your
hawke-strong and able.
my thumb and finger, which she would much desire, and very much joy in, and
would expect such kindness at my hands. The better the meat is the less will
serve; your practice will soon tell you that there is difference between the
wing of an The difference of meat is to be respected.
old Dove, and the wing of a young Pigeon, and so much is the difference
between the wings of a Dove flying abroad for his food, and the Dove long
kept in a mewe for provision; although you shall find the one lean, yet you
shall find it tender and moist; and the Dove in the mewe, although it be
extremely full of flesh, and with his ease and good feed laid with fat upon
the neck, and under the wing, yet this pulled in pieces you shall find it
hard and extremely dry.

Now you understand how I made my hawke flying to the field, and if you will
now suppose her to be truly flying, and that she will tend upon the Dogs for a
retroue; for nature will quickly teach her to know what good service the
Spantell does her: Say by some ill accident I miss a flight, the Partridge may
be run into a Conyhole; it is in Kent a safe and common rescue: or the hawke
may strike at it in the fall, and so the Nature teaches the Partridge to save
her life by any means.
Partridge flicke. In Sussex I have seen two flights in one afternoon lost,
the Partridge would fall upon the hedges which were a rod broad in some place,
very thick, and never come to the ground; If (I say) one of these or other
such like accident should befall me, otherwise I held it a very hard matter to
miss a flight, and although I know (if I would let my hawke alone, and beat
to serve her with one other Partridge) that she would tend upon the Dogs, and
so kill it.

I dare do no such thing, for I know if I should Worthy to be well marked.
use her much to that, she would fall better in love with my Dogs then with
me, for they answer her attendance with springing a Partridge unto her, and
after a few times so served, although for want of Partridges they cannot do
it, yet she will expect it with such desire, as that she will neglect my
calling her, and so in the end prove an ill commer, and then want no ill
conditions; there Let your care prevent such mischief.
is no readier way to teach her to catch a Hen; one fault begets another:
If she should in this following the Dogs light upon an Hen, get some in your
company to run and catch her by the legs, letting the Hen go, if you have
none in your company that can do it handsomely, do it your self; in such
manner, and then setting her down upon some convenient place, call her and
give her some meat and plumage, and so she will be well reconciled, and not at
all the more unfit Make a reconcilement.
to fly again. Now I have my hawke at this pass I desire to go to the
covert, if the covert be large I hawke to the Covert.
I put up my hawke, not making question but she will draw after the Dogs,
although I should stand still (the field has taught her that;) If I serve her
not in a quarter or half an hour, I take her to my fist, and give her
something, and then I put her up again, and this bettereth my hawks
conditions: But it I should with a vain hope let her still draw, and not
serve her, I fear very hunger The hawke free from blame.
will make her look out to save her life. The hawke is not herein to be
blamed, for extreme hunger will make her keeper forget himself. I pray you
note hereby, and by what I have formerly said, that your voice, be it high or
low, neither your action in the covert, is that she looks for, for she will
give diligent attendance unto the Dogs.

If I spring a Phesant, I cannot in the covert have my Dogs at that command
that I have them in the field. Let me make all the have I can after my hawke, I
might miss of the quick finding her, if by The field has taught her better.
my dogs questing I were not drawn where she is; it is ten to one she will not
hunt for it upon the ground, if she should it will teach her wit; but it is
more likely that she will, if the covert with Broom or Furzes be not thick in
the bottom but that she may see it, she will as it runs tend it, flying
over it from tree to tree, and when the Dogs does spring it, she is so over it,
as that it will never rise to go to a high perch, if it should the hawke
would have it before it come there, and I have seen diverse hawks spoiled with
Dogs.
then falling amongst the Dogs they strive who is most worthy: All this is
quickly done, and before the Faulconer can get in to them; it may be you shall
find your hawke to enjoy it, if it be with some contention all the better for
my hawke, for it will forbid her not to be too hot of a Pheasant upon the
ground, and you shall with your practice find the profit of it as I have done;
for in the killing of more Pheasants then I will name, and I think in seven
years hawking to the Covert, I never had cause to cry, Here ret: For if my
hawke has it not in the foot the first flight, when I know my Dogs will not
meddle with it, then I shall before I can get to them assuredly here a baye,
and my hawke over the head of it, when having been well flowne, the fear of
the hawke, makes the Pheasant sit fast: An Eyas hawke would be hotter, and it
may be strike at it, and miss it, and so strike her self under the Phesant,
Thus may a Rammish hawke lose a Pheasant.
and then if the Pheasant goes our upon that advantage, it is lost without
great luck. Your Rammish hawke will not often lose a Pheasant thus, she partly
forbeareth, because the Dogs are so hotly baying, and it may be she has met
with some rough dealing amongst them before, but Which I wish she should as the
first flying.
she will so tend it as that she will challenge it for her master: And I have
ever had such success with such hawks, as what with their true flying and
diligent attendance at the retroue, I should seldom find the Pheasant but so
high as that I might take it down with my hand, or else shake it down in my
arms; which done, I would go to a convenient place, whether my hawke would
diligently wait upon me, and there holding it by the legs, I should soon have
my hawke upon the body, but I would cleanely put her to the head, covering the
body with my Hat or Glove, I would not stick to please her well:
Notwithstanding, some men's opinions are, that if they be well rewarded, and
kindly pleased upon a Pheasant, they will forbear the true stiuing Partridge:
I know not whether my discretion has so prevailed with my hawks, or their own
good dispositions have wrought such understanding in them; but assuredly I
never had hawke that I have had the handling of from the beginning, but they
have loved a Partridge much better then the Pheasant. Love a Partridge better
then a Pheasant.


It may be a wonder to some why I desire not to have my hawke take a Pheasant
from the perch, and further wondered at, why I should allow of some contention
between my hawke and Dogs. I understand that generally all dogs are hotter
in the covert then in the field, and I may meet with dogs, that if she should
not be coye of them they would endanger her life, especially if she should
catch a Hare, and so might my own dogs do against their will. I have seen a
Pheasant when the hawke has come to strike at him at the perch, chop to
another bough with such skill, as that he has gotten a long bough between
him and the hawke, and with his cunning remoues beat the hawke out of breath,
and in all this conflict would strive to get above the hawke; and when he has
had this advantage, go proudly away, and leave the hawke out of breath, or
unable to follow.

It may likewise be said that I am too peremptory in my opinion, in presuming
my hawke shall kill the first Partridge: For my opinion to the covert, having my
hawke so familiarly made, as that in the field she is well pleased with my
loving dealing with her, and will attend my coming in to her, not fearing any
thing so I be by her: so would I have her in the covert wholly to rely upon
me, and be confident that when I shall come unto her, she shall have her
desire satisfied; she will soon understand thus much, with using her in such
manner as I have fore-tolde; and as for my hawke I am most confident in her
entering her self, she has no way been weakened, she is familiar, Make her
loving and familiar, or else her strength and ability are Tutors to ill
conditions.
strong, and able, and I know nature has taught her to do the best she can.

You have formerly been told how and where I would enter my hawke, at
Partridges that had not been flowne at, and in fair flying; I advise you what
to do, by telling you what I have done.

I was entreated to fly a Goshawke of my neighbors, that would not kill a
Partridge, nor had killed one that year; I flew her to the covert, where I so
encouraged my hawke, as that Winter The covert hinders not a hawks flying in
the field.
she proved a good Partringer. This approoueth that the flying to the Covert
does not hinder a Hawks mettle in the field.

I did know Sir Edward Suliard, a Knight of high estimation in that Art, as
well as otherwise, for his worthy disposition, fly a foolish Goshawke at
Blacke-bird and Thrush, and he was glad when he had gotten her to that
perfection, to beat it into a hedge or bush: he did it to make her know that
she had a commanding power over Foul, if she would put her self to it; she
proved a very good Hawke.

I know many will say they have had Hawks, Hawks that are once flown to the
Pheasant will fly no more to the Partridge.
that if they had once seen a Pheasant, that then they would kill no more
Partridges that year: It is very like there have been many such; and as I
confess that, so I pray you give me leave to think that the fault was not in
them, but in the unskillfulness of their Keeper.

Some men so soon as their Hawks give up a Partridge, do presently work
upon them with scourings, and then pinch them and shorten their diet, by which
means they are unable to kill a How they are made unable to kill a Partridge.
Partridge, or thereby their courage is so taken from them, that they will not
show what they are able to do.

I would advise you herein, but all is in the practice and handling; I will
tell you my course, if I meet with such a Hawke, and my reason for it,
contrary to most men's opinions. I set up my rest that in ten days I will
fly my Hawke no more; but I strive with all the Art I have, to Rest increases
strength and courage.
bring her to as much courage and strength as ever she had, with good meat,
and some other devices I would practice upon her, (where with you shall meet
amongst my receipts, set forth for cures.) I would now have more care in making
this Hawke, for it is credit to make of a Herein true Art is showed.
Bussard a good Hawke.

It is not my meat and diet I give her must alone effect this in my Hawke, but
a diligent care over her for other wants, as manning, bathing and weathering,
all special means to make a hawke joy in her self; and she shall bate as
little as I can, for weakening her.

When I have brought my Hawke to such perfection, I dare promise to my self
she shall then do as well and better then ever she did. Although I have been
tedious, and at large set down my manner of practizing with the sore Rammish
Hawke; yet I do not think there is any thing set down but some will be
content to have the reading thereof: and let me deliver this as my last
request.

When you have made a perfect good A Hawke well made asks small tendance.
Hawke, let her not be neglected, but keep her so; the keeping is much easier
then the making her so.

I assure you in all my proceedings, from the first to the last with my Hawke,
I never I was her friend, she my playfellow.
found it painful, but the comforts I had of a good conclusion fed me with
sweet contentment and pleasure. It now follows that I show how to reclaim
any short-winged Hawke from any evil condition.

THE SECOND TREATISE, OF Hawks and Hawking: Wherein the Austringer is taught
to reclaim his Hawke from any ill-condition.
CHAP. I.
How to make a Hawke hoode well, that will not abide the sight of the hoode,
but bite at it, and with her feet strike at thy hand and hoode, bate, shricke,
hang by the heels, and will not stand up. on the fist; and this shall be done
within forty eight hours, with less then forty bates.

THe greatest motive that set my thoughts a-worke to find out a secret,
whereby a hawke should be brought to like of that which she did most detestably
hate, was that in my hearing, it has been often and many times said, by many
Gentlemen, of which, some would say they would give forty shillings, some would
give five pounds, and some other would give ten pounds that their hawke would
hoode well.

Many experiments I tried, wherewith I could have hooded such a hawke well,
which I will not publish, because they brought as much ill to the hawke in some
other kind, as the wellhooding would profit them. At length I thought of
feeding a hawke through the hoode, cutting the hole for her beak very wide, it
is but the marring of a hoode. I would have the hole so wide, as when I did
hold it by the tassell, she should very easily (when it was laid upon the
meat) feed through it. I would continue feeding her so three or four days,
never offering in all that time to put it on. But now that she was grown
familiar with the hoode, all fear thereof forgotten, which she would show by
her bold feeding therein, and that she should make no show of disliking my
putting it over the meat, and my taking it back.

When I found her thus securely feeding, and her head in the hoode, I would
then gently and lightly raise my right hand, a very small motion will serve,
and so leave the hood upon her head; Take heed you give her no dislike by the
sudden putting it on, and by the too high raising your hand in this your
beginning with her; and have as great a care that she be thoroughly imboldened
with the hoode, before you offer to put it on: with this practice, putting on
her hood and pulling it off, oftentimes in her feeding, you shall effect her
taking the hoode to your desire; provided always your practice be with
patience and leisure: for if you shall pop it on suddenly, and with haste, you
may thereby put her in mind that thereby she took her first offense: You
cannot wrong her by any other means; remember also to leave her with the hoode
upon her head when she is seeding.

This I did privately deliver to some of my friends, by word of mouth, above
twenty years since, and some did carefully follow my direction, and did not
fail, but brought their hawks to such perfection, as when she was most
discontented, with a stumpe of a Partridge wing he would readily hoode her.

Others, whose patience could not endure the time whilst they were thoroughly
emboldened with the hoode, and would feed securely and gently in it, would be
offering to put it on; and then what through her fear, and his hasty carrying
his hand, which increased her fear, brought her to that pass, that she would
not feed any more through the hoode, but with such a cautill fear as that
she would not be hooded, but was then as ill as ever she was, and so much
worse, because he had now bobbed her with this trick, whereby she might have
been taught.

Swollen big with desire to effect this by some more ready and easy means,
which might more speedily be done, and truly performed. I had an imagination
of this course, which here I will deliver, by which means I brought five hawks
and Tarsels to as good perfection as I could desire in the time of keeping my
house and chamber, being at that time very weak, and all of them were as much
disordered as hawks could be, and I delivered them as gently hooding as could
be desired. After they came unto me, and that I had bestowed them upon the
fist of one of my people, I kept them upon the fist, that day they came unto
me, and that night they were truly watched, after the former manner of
watching my hawks, both man and hawke to walk, or at the least the hawke to
walk. So soon as it was fair and light, I did male them up in a handkercher,
(I pray you understand thus much, that it is not good she should be fed before
she be maled) making it very close about the shoulders and body: I would not
male up the tops of her flying feathers, lest I should thereby mar the web of
the feather; her legs they were laid along under her train, but to save her
train from breaking any feather, because her legs and it must be tied
together, I plaite a large handkercher six times double, and lay that upon her
legs under her train, by which means, by binding her up you, cannot bruise or
crack a feather. There is nothing but all safety in this course.

My hawke thus maled up, I lay her upon a cushion, and carry her up and down
under my arm; She is now fast she cannot rebel, I offer the hood, whereat
although she shrike, and strive to stir, she cannot: so soon as she is
quiet, holding the hoode by the tassell, I gently put it on; she cannot forbid
it: thus I follow her hooding and vnhooding; I lay her upon a Table, I walk by
her, I put it on, and pull it off very often; and if I shall be made acquainted
with any thing that she cannot endure, I will then present her with that: Say
she will not abide the fire, or not the blowing or stirring thereof; I walk up
and down before the fire, which she should hear blown, and see it stirred
and ratled together, she cannot bate nor hurt her self; and when she shall
patiently lie still, and find that it does not hurt her, she will be the
less afraid thereof, and in all this time I lose nothing about my other
practice: It may be she is coye and fearful of the dogs, I lay her upon the
ground with her cushion, where she shall for that time have familiarity enough
with them: lying so, walking by her, I ply her with the hoode, and so I
continue until night: When night comes I vnmale her; I have had a hawke thus
maled, that in a winters day she has not made a mute; admit she does mute, it
is great odds she shall, she fouleth none but a few of her small feathers
about her tewell, which are presently washed with a sponge without any hurt.

When she is now vnmaled, and sits upon my fist, she will take the hoode by
Candlelight, as well as she did when she was maled, which it may be she would
do before she came unto me, for many hawks will hood by Candlelight that will
not abide the sight of it in the day.

But for your better instruction, it must be with holding it gently to her
beak, which she must be as willing to put into the hoode, as you are to put it
on. I pray you let your own reason guide you thus far; hastiness to hoode
her, when she would not be hooded, brought her to this imperfection; therefore
keep you as far from that as may be, and in this practice to do it with as
much leisure as may be. It is not to be believed how the least hasty motion
will put her in mind of what she has formerly met with. I watched her this
night with the often using the hoode, and whether I did sit still or walk, I
would be sure she should not be idle; believe it, all this night she will take
the hoode as well as you can desire, but the question is for the morning:
Therefore I would be without fail walking abroad in the morning before day,
and then and there follow my practice, when it may be I shall not find him
contrary my desire: As I feed often in the night, so now I fail not, lest
hunger should make him stur, if he be not coye of the hoode, at or a little
before the Sun rises, if they be carefully handled they are for ever made well
hooding. I never had any but one Tarsell, but with the night and day before,
were made very gentle to the hoode, only that one Tarsell I was driven to male
up again the second day; I must let none of them all have their full rest that
night; but when they are thus made, they must be followed, for fear they fall
again: Be sure to be abroad early in the morning, following her with the
hoode; I hope this is sensibly to be effected by any man; But if my hawke turn
her head from the hoode, I patiently attend her patience, holding my hoode to
her head, and with turning my hand set her right and fit to take it; but if she
will be wild Her watching has broken her from that.
or angry, she cannot understand me.

He that will use violence with a Horse already distempered, and with spur or
chain add fury to fury, may perhaps at that time be deceived of his
expectation: So, he that shall deal with a man in the time of his impatience,
may An example or comparison.
peradventure at that time want of a reasonable hearing; but give the man time
until that humor be spent, and so thy Horse, and Hawke, and they will all
mildely attend thee.

If your Hawke be distempered, and you know no reason why, use her not
otherwise but with a loving respect, and as soon as may be make a peaceable
love and reconcilement between you; there is no indifferent hooding to be
looked for by this manner of using her, for she must do it well in the highest
degree. Hereof I conclude, and so I proceed to the recovery of all other ill
conditions. And first for a Hawke that will royle and house.

CHAP. II.
How to bring a Hawke that will royle and seek for Poultry at a house, to good
perfection and staidness, and how to get that Hawks love in whom an ill
Keeper has bred such carelesnes.

IF a man should deliver among many Austringers, (and such that would scorn
that any man should exceed them in knowledge) that there were a man that would
and could recover a hawke to good perfection that were plentifully furnished
with all faults, and wanted no ill condition, I know they would laugh at him,
and say it were a lie, and impossible: But I avouch it, and am warranted
through my practiced experience, not to blush or care for what they say; but
this I advise them that stand affected to company and good-fellowship, to have
care how to order their hawks, for now their masters shall find, that
diligence will effect any thing, and not using careful diligence there is no
good to be gotten at their Hawks hands. But now to make proof of my Art, and
for thy instruction (good Friend) you are to note, you are to deal with hawks
that have been ill handled, and not to begin with them as with hawks from
the Cage, for she will royle and house, which at the first did come by her not
coming, and her not coming was want of love to her keeper; for if she had so
loved her keeper as that she would have come to him, he had been out of his
wits, if he would have let her alone to royle, and house.

I cannot otherwise think, that having this fault, but she is withal wild
and rammish, which might be a second means to make her travel in this sort,
and therefore your first course must be by watching and manning to make her
very gentle and familiar, and in that time you must labor to get her a good
stomach. It is not short meals alone breed a hungry desire in your hawke, but
continual carriage, castings, and often and cleanely feeding, with clean and
light meat drawn through water, but after dry your meat, for if the hawke
shall be fat and in grease when she does come unto thee, your care must be the
more for her diet; for if she want meat wherewith to carry away her grease,
the breaking of her grease will take away her stomach, and her grease too fast
broken, will not only make her sickely, but truly sick, and kill her, or
breed diseases, such as she had as good be dead: Therefore let her not last,
nor do not ouer-feede, which fault is as dangerous as fasting; for with her
meat in her mutes she will spend more grease then she can bring up with her
casting.

Her grease gone, and your hawke made gentle, your Hawke will quickly show a
good stomach, Wildenes will not suffer a hawke to show her hunger.
let not your hasty desire hinder your good conclusion herein.

When your hawke is come to a good stomach and perfect gentleness, as I did
reclaim my sore Rammish hawke, calling her to the fist out of the hoode, from
the fist of another man, in manner as the long-winged hawke is lewred; you must
observe the same course, only differing herein, for you must call her to a
catch or lewer, and thereunto take her as the long-winged hawke is used,
wherewith thou must make her much in love with thy sweet and mild using her,
and in doing thus, it will make her love thee better then ever she loved house:
Let her please her self upon the catch, offer not to meddle with it, but let
her freely and peaceably enjoy it; and when she is pluming upon it, feed her
with bits of good meat from thy hand, it will make her look for that sweetness
not only then when she is upon the catch but it will likewise make her love
thee when she is upon the quarry. If thou shall ply her thus with thy hand, it
will bring her to such pass as she will readily iumpe to your fist from the
catch, and the sweet and often using hereof, will make her leave the quarry in
such manner, and so preserve her feathers from wetting. At the first beginning
of calling her. I hope your understanding will advise you to have her in
cranes, wherewith if she would check she shall be prevented, and wherewith
she shall be stayed if she offer to drag or carry the catch; for the want of
love to her former keeper, could not but breed these as well as other ill
conditions: but I hope your gentle using and manning her, before you did ever
show Catch or Lewer, has freed her from these, and your now kind dealing with
your hawke, feeding her so from the hand upon the catch, will give her such
contentment, that never met with such content before, as that I am persuaded
she will be made thereby more truly loving unto thee, then a hawke shall be
made, bought from the cage.

I pray let us admit that she was a good conditioned hawke once, and would
come to the fist very familiarly; how should she then lose this, by her
keepers negligence, being not often or seldom called, and then upon her
coming slightly rewarded, supposing if he should give her any meat, it would
hinder her well-flying, which might fall out to be presently, but such reward
as would please her, will work no such ill effect; and now thou have her most
readily coming to the catch, if thou will handle her; with no better respect,
but only caring how for that present to get her to your fist, and thereby
please your self, and not at all her; she will be weary of it, and such usage,
and fall to her old trade; which being handled as I have directed, I would not
doubt but to put her up amongst hens, when at any hour in the day she should
leave them all for love of me, and the catch, which asks no longer time then
throwing it out; which I would vseher unto every hour, if I were not sure of
my flight.

And this I hope will suffice for this: But if you will have me grant that
which I cannot yield unto, that having flowne a Partridge to a house,
notwithstanding all these kind courses taken with her, she has caught a Hen,
then let some one in the company, that can tell how to do it, make haste unto
her, taking up both Hawke and Hen, and run to a pond or pit of water (there
is no dwelling house inhabited, and where hens are, but you shall find some
water) and thereinto over head and tail wash them both together three or four
times; then having the hawke upon his fist, let not her keeper show himself
until he that has her, has with her lines fastened her calling-cranes unto
her; then I would advise her keeper to give her his voice out of her sight, but
the hawke to be still held although she does make a bate to go to him: He is
to give his voice but once or twice, and that is where she sees him not; after
when he comes near her let him give her his voice cheerfully; and let her
in cranes be let go to him, when he throws out the catch in cranes, lest
being wet, she should desire to fly to a tree to weather and dry her self;
her cranes forbid it. And now you must not think she has committed a fault,
for she has done penance for it, and coming to you she looks to be much
made of; satisfy her expectation, giving her all the contentment you may: It
is not possible there should be a hawke so ill but by this means she will be
recovered.

It may be some young professor in this Art is possessed, that if his hawke be
very hungry and sharp, she will the sooner come unto him: He is herein much
deceived; for unless she loves him very well, hunger is the special means
that draws her from him, for hunger must be satisfied, and her little love to
him will make her the better pleased with that she provides for her self, and
make her look out for her own provision: But if she be truly loving him,
then there is no doubt but she would come the readilyer. Mark then, if this be
not the only maine A special and maine point to be looked unto.
point, for an Austringer to have his hawke in love with him.

There be many that will never affect my doctrine, because my course herein set
down is painful; but what is any thing worth that is easily gotten? but he
is deceived that holds it paineful, for his hawke once well made, she will
not ask half the pains or attendance in the time of her flying, as other
hawks, that are but half, for half made hawks must be followed with.
Whenever thou call thy hawke give her some reward upon the catch, and
likewise please her upon the fist.

If I may be so bold without reprehension, for my recreation, to think of a
more worthy delight, I will rest thankful, I will speak of the Horseman and
his horse, the Austringer and his hawke; always understand that I acknowledge
the one to exceed the other as much as gold exceeds dross; but what I
intend is this, both horse and hawke are as they are taught. If a horse prove
hard-mouthed, a runaway, carry an unsteady head, his neck awry, or his body
uneven; nay sometimes he may and will refuse to turn of the one hand, and
some other time dislike some part of the ground wherein he is ridden, and there
will fly out, or perhaps stop of his forefeet, without either rucking behind,
or advancing before, until after his stop, and other such vices, can it be
said that that horse has gotten such a fault or faults, otherwise then through
the unskillfulness of his rider, when the true Artist is not only able to
amend these faults, but in some parts to amend what nature has made defective?
The hawke is seldom seen to have any natural defect, and therefore asks no
such Art: Neither do I question the shapes of horses and hawks, for in both
kinds their shapes much differ, but what I write is for the manner of their
making, for the ill shape of either of them cannot excuse their ill conditions;
the worst you can say by an hawke for her shape is, that she is a long,
slender and beesome tailed hawke. I say all feathers fly, as horses of
several races, are of lighter, quicker, or duller disposition: So are your
hawks out of some Country and eayrie, of much more spirit and mettle then the
other; and will ask shorter or longer time in making; but for their vicious
making, therein rests the comparison. If thy hawke will not come, or not
abide company, or a stranger in the company, perhaps not a woman, a basket, a
horse or Cart, or will royle or house, or any of these vices; can the
Austringer have a less imputation laid upon him, then the ill-ridden horse
has given his rider, which is, he was ignorant and wanted knowledge? Alas,
simple Austringer, how shallow is thy Art in respect of Horseman ship? and so
much the more art thou worthy of blame: The excellent horseman will make and
show his horse without any vice; and so will the exquisite Austringer show his
hawke without any ill condition: In every Trade wherein a man is most
exercised, he is most excellent; Then strive and labor to exceed them in some
measure that have little skill, for the ordinary Handicrafts-man passes by
with less then ordinary or no respect, when the skillful is desired and much
sought after. Who understands not that the love of one Hawke is more readily
gotten, then the love of another and that it is not so easy to get the love of
a hawke that has been dealt with and bobbed, as to have it from a hawke that
has not been dealt with? And therefore in your practice have patience, and
never think she does well until she be wholly at your command, thy pains
will be answered with pleasure; work out the week, and Sunday will be
holy day. I will now proceed and examine what other ill quality a hawke may
have. There is an excellent hawke will fly and kill a Partridge very well, but
she will carry it from her keeper when he comes in. The remedy.

CHAP. III.
How to stay that Hawke that having killed a Partridge, will very unwillingly
suffer her keeper to come unto her, but will carry it.

HE was an unkind keeper, and handled his hawke very ill, so to get her
hatred, from whom but through love he could not hope to receive any good;
otherwise he was very unskillful, Dislike of her keeper, or rammishnes
to fly his hawke so wild and so ill manned; for one of these must be the
cause, then by working the contrary in her, she is faultlesse and will fly
the better: If she will come well, then it is not merely out of dislike of
her keeper; and so much the sooner brought to good perfection: But it may be
partly so, and partly wildenesse and rammishnesse, and there may be a third
dislike, which stronglier possesses her then any of the other, which presently
shall be delivered unto you. Before a hawke be truly manned and made gentle,
she will never learn good, or leave bad conditions; for so long as she is
wild, she is altogether angry, froward, unruly, and disorderly, therefore be
sure to use such patience and gentleness, as that she may understand thee:
then put her in cranes, and set her upon some man's fist; have a dead dove or
some other foul, it mattereth not although you stand not above twenty or
thirty paces from her, giving your voice as though you would call her, throw
the foul as far from you, as you can, which when she has in her foot and
does offer to carry, which the cranes Now she discovers the cause of her
fault.
forbid, then know, that it is not wildenesse or rammishnesse, for before this
with carriage in company thou hadest made her gentle, neither can it be that
she fears thee, for thou have labored before this to a better purpose; if
you have not, I have set down my directions in vain: If then you have so
carefully manned her, as that she neither fears you, nor is in fear of any
man else; yet it is fear that causes this, not fearing thee, but she fears
the quarry shall The third cause of her carrying.
be taken from her by thee, and she would be glad to give her self a better
reward thereupon then you will allow of, and the small rewards you have given
her, when you have taken her from the quarry has bred this fault; but this
fault shows the hawke has metal and spirit It is a good sign to have a
Hawke love the quarry.
enough. Well now that she is upon the catch, and so long as she stands still,
fearing she know not what, stand you still, not offering to go nearer then
you are, until she fall to be busily pluming, houlding the cranes fast, and
continually giving her your voice: When she fails to plume, walk gently to
her, still giving her your voice; and whereas her fear was the quarry should
be taken from her, let her find altogether the contrary, let her enjoy it; and
take this course, whereby you shall soon win her favor, that at any other
time she will not only give you leave, but lovingly expect your coming unto
her, have in readiness her supper or break fast, or at any or every time of
the day such meat as is warm and good, (her taste is very good, although it
cannot compare with her sight) feed her therewith by little bits out of your
hand. If she look at you for more, forbearing what is in her foot, then do
you forbear to give any more until she fall again to plume, then give her
your voice, and feed her so again. If you will do thus, you shall find her
look as earnestly at your hand for reward, as a hungry Spaniell will look for
a crust, and she will be so pleased with your voice, as when she has a
Partridge in her foot, she will diligently attend and stay your coming, when
I think hereby you are well taught how to use her: And now for this fault I
may conclude, and inquire what other fault may disgrace a hawke: She will carry
it to a tree.

CHAP. IV.
To reclaim a Hawke that will carry a Partridge into a Tree.

IT is so lately set down how to stay a hawke, and make her lovingly expect
your coming unto her, as it is fresh in memory. Your hawke being brought to
that pass, this fault will soon be left, I have approved it: So soon as your
hawke is gone into the tree, get all the The remedy.
company to go under her, using as fearful noyle as they can, showing Hats
and Gloves, which will soon make her remove, but it may be to an other tree,
follow her again with the like noise, there is no doubt but it will remove
her, if not, they must use some more violent means, as striking the tree with
sticks, or throwing cudgells up, she may peradventure remove twice or thrice
before she come to the ground, but so soon as she is come to the ground, whereof
you shall not have so great cause of joy, but she will joy more to hear your
loving voice, which I would then have you freely and familiarly give, when she
will soon understand she shall enjoy what she has with sweet content and
quiet.

CHAP. V.
For a Hawke that so soon as she has caught a Partridge, will break and
gerge her self upon it.

THe cause of a grief known, the disease is soon cured; and so it must be
enquired how she came by this foul fault, and then it is soon remedied. I
cannot understand it should be any otherwise then thus, at the first when she
had caught a Partridge, and before you come unto her had begun to feed, and
peradventure fed so much as you feared it would hinder your whole days sport,
it could not but move some passion in you, which you should have dissembled;
but it could not be but with some The Cause.
impatience you take her from the quarrie, not suffering her to eat any more,
which now at the first she did fall unto by chance, but now she has found the
sweet thereof, and the wrong you offered her in so sudden taking her up, will
make her the next time more earnestly and with the more haste to feed,
remembering how she was taken from it before, lest she now be so served again:
The best remedy is this, when The remedy.
she should fly to the next Partridge and kill, if you come in unto her before
she break (it may be she may catch it near you at the retroue) let her alone
with it, and feed her with your hand, she sitting upon it, as I taught you
before: If by chance she happen of a bare place, be not discontented, but plye
her with giving her meat from your hand, and let her eat in such abundance
until she does forbear to eat any more; In her pluming put on her limes.
it shall not be amiss when you have put on her limes to pyne her down at
length, and whether she has it in a ditch, bush, or hedge, neither reward her,
nor any other hawke, until you have her in the plain, and that will make them
so soon as they have a Partridge get out with it into the plain; then if she
bate upon any extraordinary occasion, she shall not go away gorged. You must
not now be sparing of your labor, for if you spend three or four hours in
thus feeding her, (she will not be so long in feeding) yet with the Partridge
in her foot, whereon although she will not feed, she will be unwilling to part
from, let her enjoy it, and be often offering her meat, and when you find
that she is careless of the quarry, take her to your fist; it may be A
supposition.
in your first entering, you were too sparing in your reward, but howsoever she
comes by this, in following this practice but twice or thrice, you shall with
kind handling her in her rewards, which should be much from the hand, you
shall have her handle a Partridge, as that you may at any time take a live
Partridge out of her foot, to enter one withal. And thus I conclude for this,
unless you will say she has almost eaten the Partridge before you come to
her, I say let her eat, and feed her still with the most provocation you can,
no doubt it will make her very choice how she feeds after she has been so
ouer-fed, and after she has been twice or thrice so dealt with take leisure. A
hawke loves her keeper very well she will draw after him and come at his
pleasure, she will in her drawing be still upon the head of the dogs, but when
she has killed it, will carry very foully.

CHAP. VI.
How to use that Hawke that will carry for fear of the dogs.

I Must herein suppose that she will draw after the dogs, or otherwise after
her keeper; but so soon as she has the Partridge, and as soon as the dogs
come to her, she carries away the quarry; this can be but to the next hole to
hide her self; but then if the dogs shall follow her thither, and thrust her
out from thence, herein the hawke is not to be blamed but the Examine by which,
it soon amended.
Spaniels, that better deserve a haulter then a crust. It must be thought upon
how she came to be thus fearful of the Spaniels, it could not be in the
field, because the Faulcknour shall be at the retroue, and then he is only to
be blamed, that has not taught his Spaniels better; if by neither of these,
then this must be gotten by very foul dogs in the covert, where if the
Spaniels be but a little hot in their sport, it My observation.
teaches the hawke more wit then knavery; for as I have partly said before,
she will not be too Not to hunt for the Partridge upon the ground.
hot upon the game for fear of them, but will trust to my help, and will tend
it so as that she will not lose it, so that I shall be sure to have it of my
own catching. I reap this benefit by her fear, that she will not strike at
the Pheasant upon the ground; for if she should so do, it is A discommodity.
great ods but so she misseth it, and if it then springs, it is more ods,
but it is clean lost; but if she tend it, and the dogs, as I have foresaid,
it is great ods but it goes to perch, from whence it is likely it will never
fly, but by my hands is to be delivered to her; I do not as I have seen some
do, toss it up high, that thereby she shall catch it, and so fall among the
dogs, which as they say, does imbolden her upon the dogs, Some men's opinion.
it must be there so, because she knows she is not able to carry it from
them, but when she is in the field, and has a lighter matter in her foot, it
may then work a worse effect, and having field-roome and sight whether to
carry it in safety, she will remove. The discommodities that I have met with in
having my hawke take a Phesant from perch, some I have before set down, in
the seventh chapter, and this is an other; Many times she hangs of one side
of the bough, having fast hold upon the Pheasant, and the Prevent what you
find may work any ill.
Pheasant upon the other: whether your hawke receives hurt hereby or no judge
you; and the like mischief must needs befall, when a Pheasant is tossed high
unto her; for when she catches it so high, she will not fall plumme down
therewith, but will a little strive to show her strength, and then the Pheasant
hitting a bough never so little, although the twig be very little, if the hawke
lets it not go, she must needs hang as before: I desire not to make my
hawke hot in the covert, my reasons before expressed may suffice; but these
inconveniences may advise other men how to deal in this case: But in my
practice I am sure there is no inconvenience No inconvenience.
by carrying it into a plain, and there to serve her as I used my rammish
hawke; I am well assured that thereby I make my Hawke as truly to love me, as
a Hawke can possibly love a man; and this benefit thou shall find it work in
thy Hawke that will carry, it will make her so to love This good insueth.
thee, and to assure her self in thee, as that if she does carry a Partridge
for fear of the dogs, yet hearing thy voice she will be so confident and
secure in thee, as she will stir no more; for she knows she shall have her
reward with quietness. If your Spaniells will not leave to follow her, but be
more ready to beat her out of the country then otherwise; if you will not part
from them, God send him sorrow that loves it.

CHAP. VII.
How to use a Hawke that will carry a Partridge into a tree, and will not be
driven to the ground, but will there assuredly eat it.

THere is no Hawke trained as I have done mine, and as I have taught to use
yours, will suffer such a vice to take hold of her: but I must not stand upon,
if she had been thus, or thus dealt with, this would never have been, but
now we must seek to amend it; and say she does it neither for fear of man
nor dog, but out of a natural disposition, and accustomed practice, let her be
short coped, so I would advise all short-winged hawks to be used, for the
safty An objection.
of thy own hands: It may be objected, how shall she then hold a Pheasant?
How have my hawks done that would hardly miss a Pheasant, Answer.
and all of them short coped? I will now deliver a truth, for the affirming
whereof I am willing to take my oath; I had a Tarsell of a Goshawke, that one
after an other, let two Pheasants slip out of his foot; I was thereat much
perplexed, I found many of their feathers, but I feared the spoiling my Hawke.
neither of their bodies: standing with my hawke upon my fist not knowing what
to do, whether I should fly any more or no, the wood was large, but the
groath of two or three years; as I stood still, a Cock did spring very near
me, my Hawke did neither suddenly nor earnestly bate at him, yet when he did
bate I did let him fly, when he showed he never meant to catch it, but flew to
mark, and I saw him darte up into a spear, I made haste unto him, and I did
spring the Pheasant just under him, he turned upon his stand, and then flew
after, not losing any ground of him, but when he plained to fall, he caught him
by the head, and did hang almost a yard from the ground, I came to him, laid
him in the plain, and covered his body, so he had as much pleasure and as
good a reward as I could give him upon the head and neck: After this I assure
you in all the time I kept him, and in the killing of very many Pheasants,
which then were very plentiful, he never made me a retroue, but would most
assuredly have him by the head at the fall, when the Pheasant would lie
stretched out at length and never stir feather. His nature not to stringe, if
so caught.
If when I had drawn a covert, a Pheasant had gone to perch, he would come
and sit near him, but not in that tree; put him out, he would take an order
with him, he should never fall more, but when he had him by the head. It has
been said that he killed one old Cock that had beaten an excellent Goshawke
of old Sir Robert Wroths, and Master Rainefords hawke. I could never meet
with any Pheasant that ever served me so; and I deliver this upon hearesay. Now
your Hawke is thus coped, take a leather in all points fashioned like a bewet,
put it about her hinder tallent, and then button it The practice.
to her bewet, whereon her bell hangs, and it will so hold up her tallent
that she cannot at all gripe with it, then she cannot sit upon a bough, hold
a Partridge, and feed. For a plainer demonstration, make your leather in all
points like your bewet, for the length, that you must make fit to hold up her
tallent in such place as you shall see cause, I advise you make it not too
short, lest it should hinder her trussing a Partridge, and so be discomfited;
cut a little slit in the midst of it, or nearer the button then the midst, as
you do in the leather wherewith you couple your Spaniels, and as you fasten
that about the ring of your couples, so fasten that about the tallent of your
Hawke, and so fastened, button it about the bewet, as you button the couples
about the Spaniels neck: Herein you are satisfied; let us now enquire for more
ill properties.

CHAP. VIII.
How to reclaim a Hawke that will neither abide Horsemen, Strangers, Carts,
Foote-men or Women, and such like.

LEt it be enquired how she came by this coyness, and why she should not
endure all these, or any of these, as well as other Hawks: There can be
nothing said for it, but that she has not been well and orderly manned; then
it should appear that well and orderly manning them should make them
familiarly endure these or any of these, and so it will; but now it must be
done by other means. You well understand the courses I have used in manning my
hawks, which truly practiced upon them, there shall no ill condition follow
them: But when a hawke is but half made, then she falls from bad to worse,
and so she is harder by much to be reclaimed then she was at the beginning, and
will ask more tendance and respective care to hold her well at the second
making, then a cast of hawks, wellmade, in their first handling. Before you
begin to practice upon her let her be watched, and carried a day or two, when
you have so done, if she have a good stomach, you may the sooner begin with
her, and yet she may have a good stomach, but rammishnes will not suffer her
to show it. There is nothing to be done with such a hawke, until by watching
and manning she be brought to patience, which done, begin thus; find out
some place where there is some great assembly either at bowls, or some such
other exercise, and having her in cranes there, set her upon some man's fist,
and let her iumpe to a catch, and thereupon dandle the time with her: This must
be done many days, and many times in the day. I would be near some
Market-Towne, where upon a Marketday I would find some convenient place, where
Women with their Baskets, Horses with loads upon them, Carts with their
carriage, variety of colored Horses, and passingers-by in diverse paces should
come by her, there I would be sure to spend the whole day in playing with her
in such manner upon the catch. If you will ask me how long she will be in
making familier with all these things, I say you will never do it, if so soon
as you have ended your practice, you go and set her down to grow wilder, and
be the second day as ill as she was at the first; but in the continuance hereof
three or four days, and thy careful attendance over her day and night, will
greatly prevail with her: I would not doubt but to make such a Hawke with my
diligence and pain (using her as I have herein taught you) to sit upon the
pelt in the Marketplace, nor fearing nor caring for any thing, (assidua stilla
saxume xcauat) has not God made all Creatures? have not wild Stags by
watching and manning been driven like cattle upon the way? What is it that Man
cannot effect, if he will thereunto apply himself? If one day will not serve the
turn, take two; if not two, then ten, and twenty more, but I would have my
travel satisfied with a sweet conclusion. There is something else to be
thought upon, and therefore I will proceed.

CHAP. IX.
What course is to be taken with a Hawke that has flowne a Partridge, and will
continually sit upon the ground at mark, and thereby is likely to beat out
her self from her true flying, by missing of many flights.

A Special care is to be had herein how you fly your Hawke, which must be as
the Country is where you fly your Hawke, as thus; if it be in the Champion,
then you must In the Champion fly far off.
let fly far from the Partridges, there she cannot lose sight of them, and
yet it may be she shall not see the fall so well, but being far behind, if
she be in strength and courage shoot up to a tree, for she is more then a
dull-spirited Hawke, and I think there is not such a hawke will fly home a
Partridge, but she will stir or hunt for it if she be near it at the fall,
or soon learn to go to a tree, which I said before I would have you prevent,
by flying far from the game, when she shall not be enticed by being near to
them to fall upon the ground. If this please you not, go hawke in the
Wood-land, and make choice to fly at such Partridges as will fly to a wood:
Here your course must A contrary course in the Woodland.
be, not as you did in the Champion, but to fly as near them as may be, for
fear, if she should be far behind, she should lose the sight of them, but
being near, they then tempt her to fall in the wood upon the ground; then let
her set and hunt until she be weary of so doing, be careful not to suffer a
dog to go unto her, neither let her hear your voice at all; at length she
will find that there is no good to be gotten by walking, and then she will up
to a tree; now your own knowledge assures you that It is the strength, and
safety desired.
out of the wood the Partridges will not flicke, and that putting your dogs
into the wood you shall be sure to show her a flight, wherewith if she fall
again, I would without question let her alone until she should wish she had
her supper: if in the wood-land you shall sometime make her draw after you, and
serve her with the Draw not near houses.
Spaniels, it will do her good; but the general practice will very quickly
work wit in her. And thus much for this, having a little spoken of it before.

CHAP. X.
That the Tarsell is more prone to these ill conditions then the hawke, and how
to reclaim him that will seek out for a Doue-house; with which fault I never
knew Goshawke tainted.

ALl my proceeding and direction has been wholly intended for the reclayming
and making the hawke, which is all one for the Tarsell, who is to be practiced
upon for such faults in the same manner as is the Goshawke, but there is one
vile quallity that I have heard a Tarsell would often practice; wherewith I
never yet knew Goshawke tainted, and whereunto a Tarsell would never fall, if
he be handled in that form that I have set down. Some Tarsell after a
Haggourtly or Rammish disposition, will upon the missing of a flight, not stay
at The keepers fault.
mark your coming to serve him; some other will sit fast until some stranger
show himself, and then he is gone: These quallities follow ill manned hawks,
as well as the Tarsell; this is nothing but wildenesse; want of true manning
brought him unto this; and he is of this fault to be reformed as is the hawke,
by feeding often, and many times in the day amongst a multitude of people in
cranes, upon a catch, where you must make a true practice, with feeding him
from the hand: It may be said he will kill himself before he will be quiet in
such an assembly, he must be then watched and carried bare-faste until he be
so gentle, as that he will endure all company, and then upon the catch thou
shall make him so in love with thee, with thus using him upon it, as I have
formerly set down that he will endure all things whatsoever. I have heard,
but I think it was more then truth, that a Tarsell royled from mark, and was
that night taken in a doue-house earnestly feeding upon a Dove, twenty miles
from the place from whence he was flowne: It is beyond all understanding, that
loving and knowing a doue-house well, as he did, he should travel so far
before he should find one should please him, and this should be in a country
that of my knowledge affords plenty of doue-cotes: But truth is, such was his
fault, that upon every little discontent, he would so please himself; from
which he is thus easily to be reclaimed, but be sure by watching and manning
he be made very gentle before you begin thus to practice, then As gentle as a
Parrot.
call him in cranes to a catch, as I have taught you to do a Goshawke that
will house, feed him in the same manner, and call him until you find that he
will come so soon as the catch is thrown out, it may be a dove that he
loves so well, but it is not much to the purpose what foul it be, although it
be a Lewer well garnished, for he will soon fall in love with any thing
wherewith he shall be so well pleased. When he is brought to that pass that he
is truly in love with thee and the catch, comes readily, and will endure all
company, then use him to draw after thee all times of the day, and take him
down very often: I would advise that in the evening he might be called near
unto a doue-house, where some of purpose should show and stir the Doves, that
if he went into the house, one of your company, rather then your self, might
be quickly with him, having in a readiness prepared a box filled with beaten
Pepper, and where he has broken the Dove, strewe Pepper aboudantly, and so
have a care that so soon as he shall bare a new place, that you presently
plye that place with strewing more pepper, which will soon make him dislike
such and so hot a diet, and make him so much the more to love him who shall or
has so kindly used him. I would show my self a little negligent, and not with
much haste to take him down, when he were so near that he loves so well, for
now you are so near him, as you would quickly be with him to give unto him
more than he would cate, and thereby make him out of love with a Doue-house.
It may be said this is the next way to kill him; no, he will cast his gorge,
wherein there is no danger or cause of fear; when a Hawke casts his gorge
upon dislike of his meat; for sometimes the lying of a bone awrye will make
him cast his meat, or part of it: but if a hawke casts his gorge, and the
meat stinketh, this is of an other cause, he is then sick, his stomach cannot
digest what nature desires, and so the continuing thereof, with a desire to
put it over and cannot, putrifieth the meat and stinketh, and makes that
hawke in a desperate estate. Your serving your Tarsell thus shall not affect
any such matter, but he will find a difference between such a distasteful
supper, and a sweet pleasing breakefast, which I would advise should the next
morning be given in Cranes, where the sweet hand and kind dealing with him
upon the catch will stay him or any hawke from royling. When he is thus made,
keep him so, and that must be with continual familiarity: If I thought a
hawke so gentle and familiar could be drawn by any means from her keeper,
then I would set down another course, which although you shall never have
need of, I will set down. When he is at the height of this familiarity, cut
out of either wing three of his best flying feathers, and put to his heels a
knocking pair of bells, and so train him when his want of power will hinder
his desire to travail further, then you may with ease follow him; and I would
wish you to follow him so as he should not see it, but be continually thirty or
forty score from him, and sometimes give him your voice. If you find him not
inclined to hear you (which should be more strange to me then any thing
belonging to a hawke, if he be made gentle and in cranes well-comming as
aforesaid) then get one with you that may follow him, but never offer to take
him down, but let him be as near the Tarsell as may be, who when he the
hawke remoueth, by his voice he may give you knowledge thereof, when I would
advise you to give him your voice, and call him, but go no nearer unto him.
When it grows to that hour that you think he will remove no more, then let
a live Dove, by him that is with him, be thrown out in a pair of cranes, and
so soon as he has it, let him be bestowed upon his fist, until he comes
home, where let him fast until you go to be^d; then for his supper give him a
set of stones and knots, (the number and size I will deliver hereafter, with
their profits:) The next morning carry him abroad with you an hour before you
call him, then let him go at liberty: You have your friend if need be to
follow him, whereof there shall be no need; then let him see you kill and pull
off the feathers of a Pidgeon, and before you call he will come so soon as you
throw out the catch, and if he could speak, thank you. When you have made him
such as you would have him, then put in his feathers again, which I hope were
so carefully cut out, and well preserved in a book until you should have this
use for them, that he may be better imped with his own feathers then it is
possible to impe a hawke with any other then his own, and he will not fly one
pin the worse. I cannot in my understanding think of any other fault that my
Hawke has, and therefore hereof I must of necessity leave further to speak;
and so proceed with my cures, which follow in this third and last Treatise.

FINIS.
THE THIRD TREATISE, OF Hawks and Hawking: Wherein is contained Cures for all
known Diseases; all which have been practiced by my self, more upon worthy
men's Hawks that have been sent unto me, then upon any of my own.
First, for the beak, mouth, eyes, head, and throat, and of the several
griefs there breeding and offending.
IN the Beak there is a dry Canker, whereof I have little desire to write,
because it is so common, and the cure as easy; but to him that knows it not,
this shall give him sufficient understanding: That it shows it self white in
that part of the Beak where it is, it may have a crack or slawe in it before
you shall discover it, under that white it eats into the beak. With a knife
pare the white off so far and so deep as it has eaten into the beak: with
a piece of glass new broken you may scrape it, and make it more smooth then
you can with a Knife. After you have fashioned the beak so well as you can,
wash it either with the juice of a Lemmon, or with a little Wine-vinegar, and
it will require to be no oftener dressed.

A Medicine for the wet Canker in the mouth or Beak, which will eat into her
eyes and brain, (and unless it be killed) it will soon kill her: And this is
more common with the long-winged then the short winged Hawke: This of my own
practice, and how dangerous soever it shall appear to him that has not made
use thereof, believe me, in the administering thereof there is nothing but
safety.
TAke Aqua fortis, you shall have it at the Goldsmiths, for there is most use
made of it; there is some of it made more strong then other, but how strong or
weak soever it be, you shall quallifie them in this manner.

Have in a readiness a porringer of spring water, and a feather in it, then
pour some of your Aqua fortis into the deep side of an Oyster-shell, where you
shall see it presently boil, as if it were over a fire, and would soon eat
through the Oyster-shell, take your feather in the spring water, and therewith
of the same water, drop into the Aqua fortis that is boiling, by drops, drop
after drop, until you shall see it leave seething, then for your use put it
into a violl, and we call it Aqua fortis quallified. Now you are provided of
Aqua fortis in his vigor and strength, and you have it also quallified. For
the Canker, I would advise you to take the most speedy and most sure course to
kill it: And therefore for cure thus proceed: With a quill made fit for the
turn, search the sore well, and take off the roof (that covers and grows
fast to the sore,) as clean as may be; and lest the bleeding shall hinder the
true search, have in a readiness a stick with a little clout tied to the end,
which wet in fair water, you may therewith wipe away the blood sometimes,
whereby you may the better see what you have done to the sore; you may perhaps
find a little core feeding within the sore, pull and get out of it as much as
is possible, and then having a little stick, with a little clout, to the
bigness of a small Pease fastened to the end thereof, and wet in the Aqua
fortis, and not to have it otherwise then wet, not that it shall drop; herewith
do but touch the sore once or twice that it may be wet, and it will soon kill
it: Dress it once in four and twenty hours; and if it be not in a very
desperate estate when you begin therewith, twice or thrice dressing shall be
the most it shall need; and if the core shall be at the first taken clean
out, it will not ask more dressing: You may feed within one hour, or an
hour and a half after she is thus dressed.

A Medicine for the Frounce, whereunto the long-winged Hawke is much more
subject then is the short-winged Hawke.
I Have heard many men of this opinion, that the Frounce and Canker are all
one; and such they were as held themselves very skillful: But such as have
skill and judgment know that they were disceiued in their opinions. The
Frounce proceeding out of a heat and drynes in the body, or of a bruise, and
it follows most your fresh Haggard. Although the sore-Hawke or Tarsell is not
free, but are upon heats subject to that infirmity, the older a Hawke is she
is the more hot and dry; and you shall have suddenly grow upon an old
Haggart, although she be well kept, for it will grow upon that Hawke soonest
that is of a fretfull disposition. A Faulconour of judgment will hereupon
work to seek out means to amend the cause, and then Heat and dryness.
every small matter will cure the grief, when it is but little and new bred.
I have know it killed with washing her mouth with the juice of Lemmon, and so
giving her stones out of the same juice; this works as well in the body as
the mouth: But Aqua fortis to be used for the Frounce, as I have directed for a
Canker, is beyond all other receipts.

Otherwise for the Frounce.
TAke of your Aqua fortis that is quallified, and with a quill made for that
purpose, take off the scabbe or roof from the sore, then with a stick and a
cloth at the end thereof, well wet in your quallified water wash the sore: and
although there be so much water as some of it does go into her body, I have
found no hurt but profit thereby; for without doubt it has had an
extraordinary working in her body, without making any show of sickness, but
there has come from her drossie mutes that have stood full of bubbles: I have
herewith recovered Hawks troubled with a sore Frounce, and made them sound.

An approved medicine for the Frounce, that is to be had in every Town.
TAke a piece of good Roche-Allum, and burn it leisurely, and then pound it to
as fine powder as may be, then take a little English Honey, and a little of the
powder, let them be wrought together with a knives point, and then your Hawke
cast, and the scab clean taken away to the bottom, (fear not to make it
bleed, which you may wipe away as you are formerly taught) and this receipt
clapped upon it, without doubt with less then six times dressing, it shall
kill it; and let it be dressed once in four and twenty hours; let her not be
fed in two hours after she is dressed. I could set down forty common
receipts more for this grief, and all needless, for any one of these three
last shall kill any Frounce. I would not have set down this last receipt
butthat Aqua fortis is not to be had in every place.

A remedy for the kirnells whereunto the long-winged Hawke is not subject, but
it follows much the short-winged hawke.
THe kirnells begin and breed under the eye, between the eye and chap,
outwardly appearing, and will very soon show it self as big and long as the
half of an ordinary Bean, and will soon grow greater and swell up the eye,
and kill her if it be not prevented. For cure thereof do thus, lance the
place swelled longwaies, and with a quill take out the kirnells as you can,
they are white as kirnells in cattle, (but I pray understand) that they are of
a very small size; without any danger you may cut the hole large enough, sees
some spring water, and when it has sod, put into it a piece of Roach-Allum,
and some English-honey, let it sees no more, but let the ingredients disolue
therein; then having a linen cloth fastened to the end of a stick, wet in
the water, the water not being otherwise then the cold taken off, wash the
place very clean within, and then put into it some powder of burnt Alum; you
shall need to put your Alum into it but once, and once it must be, otherwise
it will be in four and twenty hours closed up again, and show it self
healed, and so the kirnells increase again, and very soon be as ill as it was
at the first; but the Alum once applied, and the place washed three mornings
together, fear it not, for it is cured and sound.

There is a disease in the head of some, called Vertego, it is a swimming of
the brain, and thus follows the cure.
THis grief is very dangerous, and it appears too plainly, for very seldom
the hawke holds still her head, but continually puts her head over her
shoulder, and so lets it fall to his proper place again, it proceeds of a
cold cause in the body. Take a quantity of Butter out of the Churne, do not
wash it, take a Glove of the middle size, and as much Mace, let them be
bruised, not beaten, and sap them in a little of your Butter, to the bigness
of a stone, such as you gave that hawke; (although it it be very large it will
be a casting litlittle enough) put it into a fine piece of Lawne, and then tie
it fast; give it unto your hawke, and after it, give unto her, her supper; in
the morning she will cast the Lawne again, with the Cloue and Mace therein,
the Butter passing through her, then give unto her a cloue of sodden Garlic.
And because every man has not made use thereof, I will therefore set down the
manner how to sees it, for it is very profitable for very great uses; take the
cloves out of the head, but do not pill them, sees them in fair water, and
with a spoone feel of them very often, lest they over sees, for they must be
soft, and yet no softer, but that if your Hawke will not take them in meat,
they may be put into her without breaking, but now the husk and thin white
filme must be taken off, give unto her, her breakefast before, or therewith,
she will not only indew it, but that will work good digesture for her other
meat; at night give her Butter, Cloue and Mace again, as aforesaid, and so
every night, and every third morning a cloue of sodden Garlic, until she be
cured, keep her warm and continually hooded, if she will not sit quietly let
her be maled up.

The Pin in the throat a most desperate and incurable disease, I have never
heard of a long winged hawke troubled therewith, but I have known many
short-winged hawks killed with it.
THis disease is plainly discovered, for upon any bate she will heave and blow,
and rattle in the throat. In my very friends house, I found a Goshawke at that
pass, it is ten years since, and they did not perceive it until that day; my
advise was desired, which I delivered, and thus put in practice; they did cause
presently some Butter to be made, which I took, not washing it; but I laped or
noynted a wing feather of a Hen therewith, and so twice or thrice in a day
put it up and down her wind pipe, and twice or thrice at a time. Whether this
was the Pin, or no, I know not, or the Pin breeding; but I am sure that in
three or four days the Hawke did well, without any other thing administered.
And by others it was thought to be the Pin. One Sparhawke had the Pin this
last year in her sore-age, and I told her Master of the happy proceeding I
had with the Goshawke, and he did practice the same: But I believe he rather
put the feather which was but small into the throat, then into the winde-pipe,
for within one fortnight or ten days after it begun, she dyed thereof.

One other Goshawke was brought unto me in her rufter-hoode, to be made flying,
as he said that brought her, she had been drawn three weeks, and for a
fortnight and more she had taken every night a casting; the Hawke I knew for
her goodness and good conditions could not be bettered. I was glad of her
coming, my house being full of my friends: I imparted so much unto them in the
evening, having formerly been well acquainted with her good conditions, I
pulled off her hoode, after awhile sitting quietly she made a stout bate, but
so soon as she had done so, she gaped, and ratled so in the throat, as that
she might easily be heard into the next room. If this were not the Pin,
then no hawke has the Pin; but the sight hereof did very much perplexe me.
To be rid of her I could not, for her Master was ridden into the Country a
hawking journey, as his own letter that day sent did testify: Seeing in what
desperate estate the hawke was in, I would willingly have given forty shillings
I had not meddled with her; He was a worthy Knight that ought her, and to him I
stood bound for many former kind gifts, which was in truth the most
especial cause that increased my grief, rather fearing her death, then hoping
for life. The next day by some occasion there were two Knights, both of them
very judicious Austringers, and two Gentlemen of the same family, though
dwelling ten miles a sunder, and diverse others; all which, for my cold
comfort, said she was a hawke not to be recovered. Then I practiced upon her in
this manner: First, I put on her rufter-hoode again, and then with a large
feather lapped about with butter, I did twice or thrice together, and three
times in a day put up and down her throat, (I pray you remember that it was
butter out of the Churne, and not washed.) Whilst I was in this practice, I
must tell you that she did not thereupon leave her rattling in the throat at
all, but it did increase a while after she was dressed, and made a greater
noise; and great reason for it, for she had in her dressing striued very much,
and now laboring in the body, her throat full of butter, she must needs make
the noise the greater, which after she stood still a while and was quiet, she
never made show of: After a weeks pract^se thus, I tied two feathers together,
in such manner, as some Arrows and Bolts for Crolbowes have their feathers
lapped about, then did I clip off half the deep side of the feather, and
being dry, I put that into her winde-pipe, putting it up and down, and
turning it round, insomuch that the feather was bloody, (it troubled me much,
but the cure being desperate, I thus followed on my practice, I confess I
never had that experience before) I had then two other feathers lapped together
with silk as the other two were, about and into which I had laped and wrought,
the powder of burnt Alum and English Honey, prepared as I taught you for the
Frounce, and with that I did well rub her winde-pipe up and down once a day,
for three days together, and so left, knowing that it had wrought much in so
short a time upon a sore Frounce. I continued this Hawke one week longer in
her hoode, when she gave me assured knowledge that she had no Pin, neither
would she blow for one bate, or two, or thrce, if they were not great, and for
that blowing I do not think it was the Pantise, but rather a faintness and
weakness after her sickness, as it is very commonly approved amongst our
selves after a long sickness; and her disease was none of the lea^^: I met
with the messenger that brought her unto me, (within one week after I had her)
unto whom I imparted my grief for the hawke, when he did confess unto me
she had met with two or three mischances, by scratching of her hood before she
came unto me, which might be a cause of breeding the Pin, which being the
greater grief, would not suffer the lesser to be seen until that was cured,
which was the Pantise, if it so prove: You have herein heard my opinion; but
for the Pantise I cannot meddle with, for therein my discourse would prove very
tedious, as to deliver the cause thereof, etc. I should compare it to the
Tissicke in a man or woman, or to a Horse, which some say is broken-winded, and
I should contrary that opinion: And although I should have many against me,
yet I should have many maintain my opinion. And thus I leave that vndiscoursed
of, because it would prove very tedious to set down the reasons, pro and
contra. But for this incurable disease, I am persuaded, that if it shall be
rubbed with two dry feathers, lapped together and clipped, as I have before
said, See the Frounce Capt.
and afterward to wet them in Aqua fortis that is quallified, and so thrust the
feather up and down her throat, I must needs think it should eat away the
Pin, and cure it, having had so good experience of the working thereof, which
does confirm my opinion, and not to danger the Hawke: Admit it should endanger
her life, she can be in no greater danger then the Pin puts her in. I
leave the use thereof to your own consideration.

An excellent medicine for a lash in the eye.
TAke white Sugar Candy, burn it as you burn your Alum, then bruise or beat
it to a very fine powder, and thereof morning and evening put some of it into
her eye, let her be always hooded, until she be well, which will be in a
very short time; yea, although a filme begin to grow over it, because it
has not been looked unto in time; yet rest assured it will cure it.

A Medicine for a salt or hot humor that runs out of the eye, and scaldeth
all the feathers from that part under the eye, and makes it bare.
THis disease will make the one eye seem bigger then the other, and at all
times seem to be full of water, it may be both the eyes be in that ill estate,
the often wiping of the eye against the wing, puts off the feathers, and
makes the eye the worse. For cure, take the stalk of Fennel and cut it off at
one joint, and into that part of the stalk which you leave long, being stopped
with the joint at the other end, you shall put or fill with the powder of white
sugercandie, very finely pounded, and then with wax make very close that end,
and so do three or four, and then bury them in the earth two or three days,
and your powder will be dissolved into fine water, which you shall drop into
your hawks eye, or your own, if you shall have need: It is approved very
good.

For the same otherwise.
TAke a piece of Gum-draggon, and let it lie in three or four spoonefulls of
spring water, until it dissolve and grow soft, then drop of that water into
the eye; it is very good for our selves if we have need.

For a snurt or cold in the head of any hawke, it is most properly to be
learmed thus in long-winged hawks, for short-winged hawks the Rye, and yet
they differ.
I Have known Faulcons that have been washed at the brook in cold and frosty
weather, or so wet with rain, that thereupon they have been so troubled with
a cold in the head, as that in a month or six weeks they could not be
brought again to true flying: The Rye in a short-winged will grow as well upon
her, and sooner, by being ill kept without tyring or plumage, or by being in
poverty, as through cold or wet. Notwithstanding she is the tenderer hawke;
yet if she be full of flesh and have natural means, good and warm diet,
with plumage and tyring enough, and kept warm, she will soon outgrow it; but
for the Faulcon and such like, a wild Primrose root dried in the Oven after
the bread is drawn, and made so dry as that it may be beaten to a fine
powder, and so blown into her Nares, will very soon break it* If you will
take the leaves, be sure they be of the wild primrose in the field or wood,
stamp and strain out the juice and put some of it into her Nares, and it
shall work the like effect. It shall not be idleness for me to deliver, nor
yet unprofitable for you to hear; that one did lie in his bed so troubled with
pain in the head, that upon the least motion or stirring he would cry out in
such manner, as that he showed he suffered much torment. I was talking to one
of this receipt for my hawke, where upon the parties petitions were so
piercing, as that there must be no denial but that some leaves should be
sought for and gotten, and which was done, the juice taken out, I think he
did snuff up into his nose one sponefull, but he was for half an hour after
so tormented, as that I for my part wished that I had never spoken of the
receipt, but that little season so borne out, the party was presently as well as
ever he was in his life; this was sudden and this was strange, administer
neither of these to your hawke but when she is empty, and feed not too soon
after it, but be sure to keep her warm; for otherwise her powers being so
open, she is more apt to increase the cold she has already taken then to
break it.

A medecin for the Mites, some hawks have been so ill looked unto, that they
have not only been troubled about the beak and eyes, but the nicks of the
wings and hinder parts of them have been eaten to the quick.
HIs judgment should much fail him that will not think that hawks so ill
furnished have been neither cleanly kept nor carefully looked unto; by both
which means a hawke may have them, and they are soonest gotten from the perch
or block where an other hawke has sat that have had the mites: If they be
timely discovered, and that they have not overrun the whole body, Aqua vite
and Stauesacre will kill them, only rubbing her Nares therewith when you set
her down for all night, and so will Vinegar and Stauesacre.

The Juice of Hearbe-grasse, the leaves stamped and strained, and the parts
offended about the head rubbed therewith, when you go to take your rest, is as
good as any of the rest: Take heed where you set your hawke, for if she sit
by a hawke that has the Mites, she will too soon find that she has met
with too many ill neighbors. Master Batcheler that was Master of all the
Faulconers by Powles, to whom my love then was such as that I could speak much
good of him now; he I say had a sparhawke, all her body overrun with such
vermin, which he could destroy by no means until he did undertake this
course; He got Staues-acre, and beat it small, and then boiled it in fair
water, making it strong, and then streined it gently through a fine cloth,
suffering none of the Stauesacre to go through; and in that he did well wash
his hawke; and when he had her out of the water, helapped hervpin a Lambs
skin that was made warm and ready for that purpose, and therein kept her
until she was very near dry, when having another skin warmed, he put that
about her, and so continued two hours, into which Lambs skins the vermin
did run, and so the hawke was made clean and freed from her death.

A receipt beyond all other, to take out the Lyme out of a Hawks feathers.
TAke Neates-foote oil, any oil else will never be gotten out of the
feathers, and annoint the place lymed therewith; that done, draw the web of
the feather even as it grows from the quill, between the flesh of your
forefinger and the nail of your thumb; with the nail never leave working,
until therewith you have drawn the Lyme clean out, and then you shall find
the feather look with as good a gloss as any of the rest, and stand smooth as
you draw them.

A receipt to be given to a Hawke that blows, and is short or thicke-winded.
I Was once asked by one of my friends what was good for such an infirmity, I
told him the tops of Rosemary leisurely dried between two warm Tyles, either
made warm, and set upon hot embers to continue them so; or in an Oven, so
soon as the bread was taken out; and when they were so well dried as that they
would be beaten to a fine powder, to give of the powder in good abundance to
his hawke with her meat. I made it known unto him that this was taught me by
one that was an ancient and skillful Austringer; and withal told him, that I
had made no use thereof, neither could I allege a reason why it should be
good; As he was a Faulconour, so was he a Cocke-master, and he told me he had
made use of it in such manner for his Cocks; since when, for a hawke so
troubled I have made proof of, and found it very profitable.

A Medicine for the Worms, wherewith all creatures (I think, as well as
Hawks) are troubled.
FLos sulphuris given in her meat is very good, and so is Corolinum, otherwise
called Seamosse dried, and in powder given the Hawke with her meat. Puluis
contra vermis is to be had at some Pothecaries, given with her meat in the
morning, she will not at all fly the worse at night. Lauender-Cotten, minced
and made into a pill with butter, and rouled up in Sugar, is good. Castings of
Wormewoode, and Saintuary are very good. Sodden Garlic in my practice is
better then any of these. There can no better thing be given to a long-winged
hawke for the Fillenders; if so, it must then be granted, nothing can help
digesture better. You shall find how it is sodden in the Chapter for the
disease in the head. I have given every night a Cloue to a short-winged hawke,
six nights together. Wormeseed given with meat, or Wormeseede with Aloes,
Butter, and two or three chiues of Saffron given in a pill, is very good. And I
think so are a hundred more medicines for this disease; and there are more
Hawks dye hereof, then of all other diseases besides.

A Medicine or Pill to be given to Hawke that has the Worms, whereof I make
the best allowance.
TAke English-Honie and clarify it, take off the scumme with a feather when it
has boiled a little, and then it is clarified; let it boil leisurely until
it grows so stiff as that you may make it up in pills, which you shall thus
approve; take a little out of it upon a knives point, and drop it upon a
Trencher, when it is cold you shall see whether it be stiff enough, or no;
then beat some Wormeseede and put into it, and so make it up in pills. I will
tell you how I do use to give them; I lap them up in a single white paper,
of the thinnest paper I can get, and then I put therein my pill, and tie the
paper close about with a third. I am very careful not to touch the outside of
the paper, after I have handled the pills before I wash, for fear she should
take any dislike in the taste. I put it into so thin a paper that it may the
sooner dissolve; for if it be in a thick paper that will not so soon take
moisture. (I have approved both) and then if she offer to cast it, she may
with so strong paper cast all: Which to prevent, if I know any thing my Hawke
will dislike, I show her that, it will be a means to make her keep it;
otherwise I will have in a readiness a wing of some Foul, wherewith I will
tend her, sometimes with showing it, and sometimes suffering her to plume, by
which means you shall have your pill or pills work kindly. You may give two
as big as a small Hazell-Nut to a Goshawke, one to a Tarsell; it is a good
scouring, besides the benefit of killing Worms. I have heard very experienced
Austringers say, that there is no killing of Worms with any such receipt as I
have mentioned; but their advice is to beat a small flint-stone to small
pummis, and to give it her with her meat: And this they say must first break
the bed of Worms, and then any of these receipts will kill them. I cannot
understand where these worms should lie, that must have this help, and
without which the other cannot profit. I have seen a small grub worm in
long-winged Hawks, and especially in the blancke Tarsels, that have been
muted daily, sometimes two, sometimes three, and sometimes four in a mute and
more. And to kill these I have labored, but I will never approve it more, for
I cannot do it; and besides, I think they rather benefit a hawke then do
any hurt: For I flew a Tarsell so troubled all his sore-age, and when he was an
entermewer, until after Christmas at the Cock, he was a very high flyerthat
years remain; and three years after he was a lead Hawke at the Brook in
Leicester-shiere, and all this time had these worms, and he was called by
that name Worms. I am put in mind of giving a Hawke Brimstone, by speaking of
the pounded flint, and I have very often approved it, to give it in this manner
to any hawke, broken like small gravel, and at night give it with her meat,
and she will in the morning bring it up in her casting: It will help greatly
to clean a Hawke, and breed a good stomach. There is not so common a disease
follows a hawke as the worms, and I have found them in most feathered
Fowls, but never any within the bowels, but in the body most abundantly, and
without all doubt the backe-worme, if a man were certain his Hawke were so
diseased, both the pill and sodden Garlic with continuance would destroy it.

A receipt for a Hawke that has lost her courage, and ioyeth not, or is low
in flesh.
TAke a wild and a well-fleshed house Dove, and draw out a wing, you know what
to pare away, and how to prepare it fit for your Hawke: Take a new-layed egg,
whilst it is warm, and warm a Porringer or Pewter-dish against the fire,
then break the egg, and put the yolke thereinto, let it be broken a little
with a spoone, and then draw your meat through it, and as your Hawke is
feeding, with a feather lay on more. I would have this so quickly done, as that
the Dove nor Egg should lose but little of their natural heat, and by making
it more hot you make it worse then the losing of the heat. Use this but two or
three mornings, and you shall find your Hawke grow bravely upon you. For a
hawke to be proud and full of flesh, is but a spur or whetstone to put her
into all ill conditions if she be wild: But let her be gentle and not wild,
she is able to kill any thing that is fit to be flowne unto.

Another receipt very good for the same purpose.
TAke a pound of Beef of a young beast, or more Beef if you will, make it
very clean, not leaving either fat or string therein: You may the better do
it because the Beef must be sliced very thin, which when it is so sliced, and
well picked, lay it in a still, and put thereto as much Claret wine, of the
best high Country wine you can get, as may cover the Beef, put thereto one or
two ounces of white Suger-Candy, beaten to fine powder, and then still them
together, but let the still be very temperately kept, and through this you may
often draw your Hawks meat.

How to draw a water that is cooling, and the property thereof is to kill any
unnatural heat in the mouth or body, it is a great cleanser, and increases
breath; it will keep the body in good temper, and help the body distempered
with heat.
I Would gladly set down every thing so plainly, as that there might neither be
question made of my meaning, nor that there should be any thing mistaken, for
want of a true description. Prim, of some called Prim-priuet, it is that which
is planted in some Orchards, and in some Gardens, to beautify the walls, and
is kept with cutting, it does carry a white flower, which when they are blown,
I would have cleanely picked, taking nothing but the flower, let not your fire
be kept ouer-rash or ouer-hot, but let them be carefully distilled, and then
put it into a glass until you have use of it, no hawke will dislike the taste
of the water, and the water thus stilled has a very good smell, but it leaves
a most stinking Still. If you shall give her this water with her meat, you
shall find admirable profit therein: It is very good wherewith to ensayme a
hawke of any kind, for a long-winged hawke that is in summer flowne to the
field, there never was or can be used any thing better, it is most true that in
giving something to heat the stomach, you may therewith ouer-heate the liver;
and it is so for the liver, give something to cool that, and so you may
ouer-coole or kill the stomach. But there is such an excellent property in
this water, as notwithstanding it cools the liver, yet it bettereth the
stomach, the use of this water will prevent many diseases, for infirmities and
sickness do continually follow such hawks, as are not cleanely fed; but
flowne foul before they be well ensaymed, it will keep thy Goshawke and
Tarsell in continual health, if you be careful in the ensayming of them, and
not flying of them before they be clean; If you will not be careful, but thy
ouerhasty desire of sport, shall make thee fly them before they be fit to
fly; then you shall have from them for a little season some sport, but then
the conclusion will be confusion: to be weak and sickly is the best hope can
be had of a hawke het or flowne before she be clean, but to be het or flowne
when she is more then foul, so soon as cold weather does come, be assured of
the Pantise, and other diseases which will fall into her feet and legs, and
then as good pull off her head as keep her. I know not any man that has had
the use thereof but my self, and I have used it, this sixteen or seauenteene
years, and I did never impart to any man, but one Knight what it was, who to
my knowledge did never cause it to be drawn.

A very excellent medecin for a dangerous bruise, presently to be given after
the hurt.
TAke English honey and clarefie it, and so soon as you have so done, before
it boyleth any more put into it half so much stonepitch or something less
then there is honey, and then let it boil again: It shall not need to boil
long, because the pitch will make it strong and fast enough to make up in
pills; as soon as you can, give her a large pill thereof, and although she
fast above twelve hours after the receiving, it is the better: I pray let me
make all plain unto you, for this is worthy to be had in good estimation, both
of the Faulconer and Austringer. It is a practice of my own devising; and thus
I used the same: I have had diverse Tarsells flying at the Cock, so hurt
themselves that they have not been able to stand or hold up a wing, I have
presently maled them, to keep them warm until I came home, (I tell you this
because you shall understand that it is very dangerous to let them take cold
before the receipt of this pill or pills, for making of them something less,
you may give two,) when I came home, I would keep her still maled up, lest she
should catch cold until I had made her pills ready, when I would not yet
vnmale her if I found it a dangerous bruise, but keep her so all night or day,
and I would be sure that when I did vnmale her to feed, or to see how she
could stand, it should be in a very warm Chamber, where there should be a good
fire.

I did fly a Goshawke that was not my own, for which hawke I was offered
forty pounds, I could not, and her Master would not sell her; the next year
she had such a bruise upon her body against a small tree, not much bigger then
my leg, crossing to catch a Pheasant-Cocke, that she lay there to the
beholders dead, and there she had been dead but that this accident happened
very near unto one that was with me, when I came unto her I saw her eyes
stir a little, I opened her mouth, and put my finger down her throat, she
stirred no part of her body, I lapped her up in a good-fellowes Ierkin that was
with me, and so I carried her under my arm to a house two miles from thence,
I found she had life in her, and then I had hope; I gave her two pills, such as
I have formerly spoken of, she did lie so lapped up at the least sixteen
hours, and when I did vnmale her to see her strength, she was very unable to
stand, and hardly able to offer to stand, I fed very short, but with my care in
one week I delivered her to her Master, with some directions; in all the time I
had her after her bruise she never cast any meat, but after I parted from her,
she would once in three or four meals cast part or all of her meat, my
consent was asked when I came thither, that her Consulecum vinis.
head might be pulled off, I would not yield to that: but upon easy terms I
took her home with me.

In the Strand I met with that worthy Barron who before had made means to buy
her, and he asked me, if I would not help him to that Goshawke; I told him
truly in what desperate case she was in, and all the truth. He said you will
recover, you will recover that; I promised if she did recover, he should have
her, and at Easter-tearme (she receiving her hurt, near Shrouetide) I did
deliver her a very sound hawke, and I had for her thirty pounds, and her
well-prouing was worth twenty pounds more unto me. One other Goshawke I
recovered, that wanted not much of her danger, and her Master sold her in
Sussex for fifteen or sixteen pounds, and a young Goshawke clean mewed out
of the mew. I dare write no untruth, for this must be ouer-viewed by the
actors: what shall I need to set down any more for this, knowing this to be
so approved good? and which makes it the more excellent, it is to be had in
every place, so is neither Parmasite, nor Mumma, I could mention more but all
worthless in respect: If you will give any thing else, let it be Mumma beaten
into powder and so given with her meat, you shall find it in the morning in
her casting, and it is very good where the other is unknown.

A receipt for a wound or hurt taken either by a Dog, or the claws of a Hare,
or otherwise.
Have a special care that the wind or cold enter not into the wound before
you have wherewith to dress it; If it be where you can have sovereign Balm,
there is nothing better, that is to be had but in few places: And therefore for
want thereof, take a quantity of Springwater, and let it sees, then take it
from the fire, and put into it a piece of Roche-Allum, and some English-Honey,
and so let them dissolve in the water, the water being bloud-warme;
therewithal wash the sore, it will keep it clean from putrefying, and heal
it, but still be careful that it does not take cold.

A medicine for the Cray.
THis grief proceeds of a hot and dry cause, and it is a dainty cure. Hawes
distilled, and the meat drawn through the water is very good. To draw your
hawks meat thorough Cowes-milke warm from the Cow, is very good, and so
approved.

Another for the same.
Milk from the Cow distilled is excellent good for that grief; but thus
follows the discommodity, it cools and hurts the stomach. I have known
this water used for the stone, but the discommodity was soon found. But if you
will distill a pint and half of milk, and withal an ounce of white
Suger-Candy finely pounded, it will rectify all, it hinders not its property
for the Cray, and yet it does now comfort the stomach.

Another for the same, and the best of any for the same.
I Have known some pare the end of a Candle to a small quantity, and so put it
into her tewell gently* and it has done good. But I use Castle-sope, and
thereof cut a piece an inch long in manner of a Supposita, and so put it up,
and so leave it, this is very good: But withal I have pared a little of such
Soap, and conveyed it into the gut of a Foul, being very careful of the
cleanely doing it, not knowing whether the taste might offend, or no; so done,
I cast my Hawke, and put it down, and then I feed upon it, to make her the
better to put it over; this with the Supposita will so open and make glibbe the
passages, that you shall soon find amendment in your Hawke.

Otherwise for the same.
I Was taught to put up in the manner of a glister oil of Roses, with a Syrren.

A receipt for a strain or bruise in the foot.
TAke a handful of Mallows, and boil them either with Neates-foot-oyle,
Goosegrease, Capons-grease, or Hogges-grease, when they are well boiled,
streine them through a cloth, and then mingle with them good Aquavite, and let
them boil all together a little, and therewith annoint the place.

FINIS.

