THE SEVEN GOLDEN CANDLESTICKES. Englands Honor. THE GREAT MYSTERY OF GODS
MERCY YET TO COME. WITH Peace to the pure in heart aduising to UNITY among
our selves. By RICHARD BERNARD, Minister at Batcombe in Somersetshire.

LONDON, Printed for John Budge, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of
the Green Dragon. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM Lord CAVENDISH Earl of Devonshire; JOHN Lord
DARCY, Baron of Meinell; JOHN Lord HOLLEYS Baron of Houghton, his very
honorable good Lords, here increase of all true honor, and hereafter the
fruition of that happiness which is in Heaven. AND TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir
Robert Philips, AND Sir John Horner, KNIGHTS. John Powlet, AND Robert Hopton.
ESQVIRES.
Justices of the Peace in the County of Somerset, lovers of their Country, my
worthily honored good Friends, love and peace be multiplied, internally within
themselves, externally to one an other, with hope of eternal comfort in the
end.
RIGHT HO:) (RIGHT WORCESTER:
YOur ready condescending at my request to grace my Person with your joint
testimony together, makes me now thus bold to crave your favor and
acceptance together to countenance this my labor.

That which here I offer to your view is first the face of the seuenfold estate
of Christ's Church, typed out in the seven Churches of Asia, under the title of
the seven golden Candlestickes. In this you may behold what is already past,
what things are now in present being (in which the Papists make themselves
merry; but it is their Cygnea cantio, before their day of mourning) and what
the estate hereafter shall be, which we are to exspect and look for in the
appointed time. In the second place, is added Englands Honor, wherein is
showed how highly, and that many ways God has advanced this noble Nation, to
encourage us still in his service against that Antichristion power, and
Heathenish Superstition. In the third place, is proved that great Mystery of
the salvation of that ancient people of God, much hindered by that Romish
Religion. In conclusion, is an advice to Peace and Unity at home, that we may
bend our strength against our Enemies abroad.

I humbly crave pardon, if herein I have bin ouer-bold to present your Honors,
and other so worthy Personages, with such small Treatises. I know them little
in show, but not so in substance. The Church is the Spouse of Christ, the very
Queen of Heaven, here she is lively painted out. The glory of our Kingdom
is our Crown, and peace with love the bond of perfection; the taste of these
things, I hope, shall not be unacceptable, neither the good will of him that
offers the same, for no other end verily, but to leave a testimony to the
World of his humble service, and of his duty in all thankfulness, who does and
ever will acknowledge himself,

Batcombe, March. 10. Your Honors and Worships much bounden and to be
commanded, RICHARD BERNARD.

THE SEVEN GOLDEN CANDLESTICKES OR THE SEVEN FOLD Estate of Gods Church here
upon Earth, typed out in the seven Churches of ASIA.
IT is not a conceit, but an opinion more then probable, that the seven
Churches of Asia, are Types of the whole Church militant; which opinion, though
it be in a sort only barely delivered of some, and by some others so set out,
as thereby many take occasion to reject it, but more out of a sinister respect,
then of any sollid ground; yet if they please to weigh the reasons, and to
consider well how these and the times do answer one another, they will more
easily yield unto the Truth.

1. Is it not plainly said, in the end of the whole Prophecy, that Jesus
Christ sent his Angel to testify these things unto us in the Churches, to
wit, in those seven Churches of Asia? for no other are mentioned in the whole
Prophecy; so as whatsoever in the Revelation was after delivered, the same was
represented generally in the foresaid Churches before.

2. The number of seven, as in the other places of this Prophecy, repeated
thirty seven times, is a number of perfection; and is put for all of that,
whereof the number is given, as the seven Stars for all the Angels of the
Churches; the seven spirits for the seuen-fold Graces thereof; so the seven
Churches, for all the Christian Churches, or rather the seuen-fold estate of
one and the same Church of Christ. And seeing there were more Churches in those
parts, we may well think that the number of seven was taken for further
purpose, then to note out only the present estate of those seven Churches, to
which John wrote.

3. John in the end of every Epistle, makes a general exhortation, saying, He
that has an ear, let him hear, what the Spirit says, unto the Churches: yet
in the beginning of every Epistle, is he commanded only to write particularly
to the Angel thereof, and of such things as touched him, and the estate of his
Church. Therefore when John concludes so with an exhortation to all the
Churches, what else does he but thereby teach all those Churches, whereof that
particular Church is a Type, or, if you will, so by one, all the seven, and by
them all Christian Churches?

4. In the Epistles there be many things which must necessarily persuade to a
farther extent, then only to the present estate of every of those particular
Churches; as first the marvelous order, according to the course and estate of
Christ's Church, both in the gifts, and graces with decay of them, as also in
the creeping up of Antichrist, and the Churches recovery and growing into a
better estate even to the end, as shall be showed in paralleling of these
Churches and the estate of Christ's Church from time to time. Then some things
spoken of the particular Churches, which cannot possible be taken as only
meant of them. As of the ten days tribulation, which Expositours interpret of
a persecution longer, then can agree by Story to have fallen upon Smyrna in
John's time, or after. Likewise the great honor, which is promised to the
Angel of the Church of Philadelphia, that the counterfeit Jews in Smyrna
Revel. 2. 9. should fall down to him, Revel. 3. 9. and deliverance from the
trial which should come upon all the World, Revel. 3. 10. cannot be
understood simply of that Angel. We find not in any History such renown to
that Angel, neither of such peril, and gracious deliverance; but these things
are spoken with respect to the Churches estate, as this should be a Type
thereof. Again, who can read the terms used, and the persons named, as
Jews, Synagogue, Balaam, and Iesabell, with the degrees and proceedings
thereof: but thereby will be conceived some other thing intended in those
Churches? It is marvelous to see how the degrees of evil are set out, in the
four first Churches; in Ephesus are Satan's Seeds-men, false Apostles; in
Smyrna Satan's Synagogue; in Pergamus Satan's Throne; in Thiatyra the very
Iezabel and Depths of Satan. In the three last, no menton of any of these,
because they do set out the Church delivered from Satan's Seedes-men, from his
Assemblies, from his Throne, and from the Iesabel of Rome, and the Depths of
Satan therein, and do show the threefold estate of the Church come out of
Babylon, as in Sardis a weak reformation, in Philadelphia an excellent
dignity of the Church, and then afterward the Laodicean condition. Who so
marketh these, how can he deem otherwise of these Churches, then of the Types
of Christ's Church?

5. We may be moved further so to think from the situation of these Cities,
and from the order which the Prophet observes in writing unto them, from
Ephesus Northward to Smyrna, and yet more North to Pergamus, from this to
Thyatira Eastward, and so more and more to Philadelphia, and then bends
Southward to Laodicea. Which situation points us out the declining of the
Church to darkness, and then a recovering by little and little light again,
bending East and Southeast, from the North. The Church came from Judea out of
the East, it went a little Southward, but far West, then into these Northern
parts, and so Northeast, and shall circle about till it come to be a Church
again in Judea, at the Conversion of the Jews; when the fullness of the
Gentiles shall come in.

6. And lastly, the answerablenesse of the Type and Antitype will fully give
satisfaction in this point, which that it may appear, I will will here
parallel them together.

THE FIRST GOLDEN CANDLESTICK.
THE FIRST CHVRCH.
In the Type. In the Antitype. The Church of Ephesus. The Primitive Church and
Ephesine State. 1. THis is the first, and as it were chief of the other, set
in the first place. 1. THis is the first Church, and therefore called the
Primitive Church, having place and prerogative above the rest. 2. This was
planted by Saint Paul the Apostle, Acts 19. and 20. and gathered of Christian
Believers from among notorious Heathen Idolaters and wicked men, Acts 19. 28.
Ephesians. 2. 12. and here Timothy was placed to order all things for Doctrine and
Discipline, 1. Tim. 1. 3. 2. This was planted by the Apostles, and gathered of
Jews and Heathen Idolaters, Gentiles, they being commanded by Christ to go
into all the World, to preach the Gospel, and when they had planted Churches,
they did appoint Timothyes, that is, Bishops and Elders for Doctrine and
Discipline for well ordering of the Churches. Mat. 28. Acts 2. and 3. and 8. and
10. 11. etc. Acts 14. 23. 3. This was planted with much affliction to the
Apostle and Brethren. 1. Cor. 15. 32. and there were many Adversaries, 1. Cor.
16. 9. 3. This was planted with great and manifold persecutions; The Apostles
were martyred, and the Christian Pastors and people put to death euerywhere;
for the Gospel of Christ had a World of Adversaries, during the Reign of the
Heathen Emperors of Rome. Acts 7. 23. Eusebius. l. 2, c. 25. l. 3, c. 15. 29. l.
4. c. 15. Oros. l. c. 7. 10. Niceph. l. 2. 4. This has Christ set out unto it,
as having seven stars in his right hand, and walking in the midst of the
seven golden Candlestickes. 4. This had Christ protecting his faithful Pastors
with the power of his right hand, and showed himself in it, in an
extraordinary manner by his holy Spirit, effectually working by his Word, and
making it renowned by Miracles and Wonders, Acts 2. and 3. and 5. and 8. 17.
and 14. 10. Romans 15. 19. Iornand. de temp. and Success. l. 1. in Reg Romans
serie. Theod l. 1. 7. Sleid. de 4. Imp. l. 2. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, l. 8. c. 15.
5. The Angel of this Church was 5. The Angels of this Church, first, the
Apostles, then the Apostolical at the beginning and so continued for a space
full of virtue, very laborious, patiently suffering and fainted not. men, and
others after them, which were advanced to authority, not by money, but by good
report, were full of virtue, painful Preachers, and many made Expositions and
Commentaries upon the Scriptures, and others published Apologies and their
defense of Christian Religion, and patiently suffered for the Truth, as did
Pollycarpus, Just. Martyr. Germanicus and infinite others. Tertull. Apolog. c.
39. Just. Apol. 2. Trithemius de Scriptor. Ecclis. Quadratus. Aristides. Just.
Martyr. Melito Bishop of Sardis and others. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 32. l. 4. and 8. 3.
6. This Church was troubled with false Apostles and wicked Nicholaitans: but
the Angel was zealous, could not bear with them, but used boldly his
authority, and showed 6. So the Primitive Church was troubled with many false
Apostles, Heretics and wicked livers, and Antichrists, but the Angels were
then zealous and could not bear with them but

1. They fled their familiarity (as John did out of the Bath from Cerinthus)
Titus 3.

his hatred against their wicked nesse. 2. They communicated not in words (as
Irenaeus says, cited by Eusebius.) so zealous they were, as Polycarpus his
answer to Marcion shows.

3. Some wept and lamented that they had received Baptism of Heretics.

4. Some confuted them, as Agrippa Castor did Basilides, and Just. Martyr did
Marcion.

5. They kept the wicked from the Sacraments, from Prayer, and being found
obstinate, cutthem off from the body of the Church, as they had learned by
Apostolical precept and practice, 1. Cor. 5. 1. Tim. 1. 20. 2. Cor. 11. 12.
Eusebius. l. 4. Aug. l. de here is. Epiph. de here is. Iren. l. 1. and 3. Eusebius. l. 4.
14. 2. John ver. 7. 1. John 2. 18. 22. and 4. 3. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 8. Eusebius. l.
4. c. 7. Trithem. de Scriptor. Ecclis. Just. Mart. Apol. l. 2. Tertul.
Apologet. c. 2. Origin. on Matthew. tract. 35. and 7. hom. on Ios. Socrat. l. 1.
c. 17. Cyprian Epist. ad Cler. Romans

7. This Angel toward the end, forsook his first Love, so as this Church did
languish and grow remiss in Religious duties, and therefore evils could not
but grow up therein. 7. So this glorious Church, lost of herloue and zeal, her
Angels became more remiss in their duties, neglecting Discipline, and says
Eusebius. through much ease, liberty, and security, they degenerated from the
true rule of Piety. Bishops against Bishops, people one against another, yea,
hypocrisy and malice so raged, says he, that persecution being begun on
others, they had no sense nor feeling thereof. Cyprian. Epist. l. 4 Ambrose on
1. Tim. 1. Eusebius. l. 8. c. 1. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 69. 8. This is
threatened, for the decay of love, to have the Candlestick removed out of his
place 8. So this Church, for the decay of love, and increase of evil, felt so
the LORDS wrath, as if indeed, the LORD had purposed to have had his Church no
more upon Earth. For he sends upon them that raging Tyrant Dioclesian with
his companion Maximinianus, to murder thousands, to burn the Scriptures, and
to raze down Churches from the very foundations of them. Eusebius lib. 8: cap.
2. 3.

Though the Lord does here threaten, yet he promises a reward of happiness.
He then that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches. Thus much for the state of the Primitive Church, unto the days of
Constantine the Great, lively set out in this Church of Ephesus.

CONSIDERATIONS FOR INSTRVCTION AND USE.
WHerein we may observe these things. First, Where God so weth the Seed of his
Word by his Apostles, there Satan would thirst in his false Apostle to sow
Tares. Secondly, That in those Primitive Times there were excellent Angels,
full of good works, patient and laborious. Thirdly, That the faithful Angels
could not endure or bear with those which were evil, so zealous were they for
the Lord and his Truth. Fourthly, That Satan's instruments will assume to
themselves fair Names and Titles. Fifthly, That therefore the Church will try
and examine them, and so either admit them or reject them, as she shall find
cause. Sixthly, That excellent men may decay in their first Love. Seventhly,
that even the decay of love may cause God to remove his Candlestick, except
men repent.

THE SECOND GOLDEN CANDLESTICK,
THE SECOND CHVRCH.
In the Type. In the Antitype. The Church of Smyrna. The Smyrnean state of
Christ's Church. 1. THIS was the next to Ephesus Northward; and so in degree
worse, in respect of the wicked in it. For Satan in Ephesus had but his
seeds-men, false Apostles, but here the Devil has a Synagogue. 1. THIS was
the next to the Primitive Church, from Constantine the Great, to Gratian the
Emperor, Anno 383. The Primitive Church was troubled with Seeds-men of Satan,
but here within this space were Assemblies and Synods of Deuillish Heretics.
Socrat. Scholast. l. 2. c 5. Histor. Tripart. l. 2. cap. 10. Funct. Chronol.
Sozem. l. 3. c. 11. 2. The LORD sets out himself, first in his Divinity, in
more hidden terms, and then in his humanity plainly, 2. For that, at this time
his Divinity was questioned, and denied of many, but no doubt made of his
Humanity: though one Apollinaris held the Humanity and Divinity one Nature.
and both distinctly. Socrat. Schol. l. 1. Hist. Trip. l. 9. c. 3. Basil. Epist.
74. Aug. l. de Haeres. 3. The Angel of this Church was laborious, greatly
afflicted, and poor. 3. There were at this time painful Pastors, but much
afflicted by the fury of the Arians, as may be seen in that one renowned
Athanasius, withstanding Arius and his Associates, also in Macarius, Marcellus,
Paulus, and other Bishops companions with them in the Truth and in affliction,
Eustathius with many Priests and Deacons sent into banishment. Ruff. l. 1.
Ruff. l. 2. c. 7. Hieron. in Catal. Ammianus l. 15. Basil. de Trinit. Socrat.
li. 1. c. 20. 21. and l. 2. c. 7. 8. 10. 12. and 4. 13. 14 17. Athan. Apol. 2.
Athan. Epist. ad vitam solitariam agentes. 4. But this Angel was rich toward
God. 4. So these men were endued with great graces, as appeared by their
Learning, Zeal and holy Constancy, so as (taking Athanasius the
Standard Bearer for an instance) they became honorable and were highly esteemed
of, and wanted not entertainment. Socrat. Scho. l. 2. and 18. Hieron. in
Chronol. 5. This Angel was blasphemed by counterfeit Professors, calling
themselves Jews, and were not, but the Synagogue of Satan. 5. So these Angels
were not abused by Heathen Tyrants, as formerly, but by heretical Christians,
Arian Bishops, counterfeiting sometime to be of the Orthodox Verity, but were
damnable instruments of Satan; of whose blasphemies and slanders against the
true Pastors, and especially against Athanasius, Eustathius Bishop of Antioch,
Macarius and others, we may read in diverse Authors. Socrat. Scho. l. 1. c.
10. 18. 25. Hist. Magd. cent. 4. c. 9. Socrat. l. 1. c. 20. 21. 23. Atha. Apol.
2. Theod. l. 1. c. 26. and l. 2. c. 8. 9. 10. Sozom. l. 2. c. 25. Hieron. in
Catal. Atha. in Epist. ad vitam solitariam agentes. 6. This Angel is
encouraged, and willed net to fear. 6. So the Lord encouraged and raised up
godly men of an undaunted Spirit, not fearing troubles to maintain the truth,
as Atha. Alexander of Constan. Osius Bishop of Corduba, Paphnutius, Spiridion,
Basil, and many others cited by Lu. Osiand. in those troublesome times under
Arian Emperors, and among furiously raging Heretics. Socrat. l. 1. c. 5. 18.
25. l. 4. 21. Niceph. Atha. in Epist. ad solitariam vitam agentes. Histor.
Magd. cent. 4. Ruffi. l. 1. c. 4. Theod. l. 1. c. 7. in Epit. cent. l. 1. c. 3.
cent. 4. 7. This Angel was foretold of imprisonment, and persecution by the
Devil, but yet the persecution should not continue long. 7. This came to pass
under Constance and Valens, the Arian Emperors led by Satan, to practice and
to permit to be practiced all cruelty against the Orthodoxe Fathers, and true
Christian Believers: of which we may read at large in diverse Authors. But the
Lord suffered not long this cruel persecution, nor the Persecutors to reign
long, for this cruel Valens reigned but 13. years, An. 381. Atha. in Ep. advit.
solit. agentes. and in Apol. ad Constan. Sozom. l. 3. 4. 6. Theo. l. 2. and 4.
Socrat. l. 2. 38. and 4. 2. 6. 13. 14. 16. 17. 19. Greg. Nazi. Orat. ad
Episcop. and ad Arian. and in laudem Basil. and Hieron. Socrat. l. 4. c. 13. 8.
This Angel was exhorted to be faithful to the death, and was promised to be
rewarded with a Crown of Life. 8. So there were many most valiant, and
faithfully constant to the death, as is before showed in Athanasius and others,
and here I cannot but mention Basil, and his most undaunted Spirit before the
Arian President of Antioch, Valens the Emperor being there present, by which
holy and faithful resolution they have gotten here the Crown of Praise, and
in Heaven the Crown of Glory. Socrat. li. 4. c. 21. Sozom. l. 6. 16. Theod. l.
4. c. 19.

He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit faith to the Churches. He
that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death. Thus much of the state
of Christ's Church from Constantine to Gratian, set out in this Church of Smyrna.

CONSIDERATIONS FOR INSTRVCTION AND USE.
FIrst, that when the Church decays, Satan's Kingdom increases: In the
former Church were only. Seedsmen of Satan, but the Church decaying in love,
here Satan has his Synagogue. Secondly, the troublesome estate of his Church
is well known to Christ. Thirdly, That such as be under affliction and poor
in outward estate, may yet be inwardly rich before God. Fourthly, that very
Enemies and Blasphemers of God and his people, the very Synagogue of Satan
would yet be held and taken for true Worshippers of God. Fifthly, that God
permits sometime the Devil and his Instruments to vex his people; but yet
both the manner and time is set down by the LORD: And therefore no cause to
fear.

THE THIRD GOLDEN CANDLESTICK.
THE THIRD CHVRCH.
In the Type. In the Antitype. The Church of Pergamus. The Pergamine state of
Christ's Church. 1. THIS was next Smyrna, and the most Northward of all these
three Churches, and so farthest from the Sun, situate in the coldest part. And
whereas Satan in Ephesus had false Apostles in Smyrna, a Synagogue, here be
has a Throne. 1. THis state was next after the other, from after Gratian his
time more darkened by little and little, and more corrupt then the other, till
the Throne of Satan was erected in Rome, and so every thing became worse and
worse, till between the 11. and 12. hundredth year. Plat. in vit. Bonifa. 3.
2. This Pergamus was the most famous and headcitie of Asia, Liuie, Decad. 4. l.
7. Plin. not. hist. l. 5. c. 30. where the 2. So this Pergamine state was under
the power of Rome, the most famous and head-citie of the World, where the
Heathen Emperors had ruled till Constantine the Great, and which seat of the
Roman jurisdiction was for those parts, after that the King of Pergamus called
Attalus Philometer, had made the people of Rome his Heir, Iornand. de Reg.
success. In this City and under the power thereof was the Angel and the
Church of Christ planted. as yet was the chief City of all the Roman power.
3. To this Angel Christ shows him self with a sharp two-edged sword,
threatening to fight with it against the Enemy, verse 16. 3. Because he would
afford his Angels, and faithful Pastors the same in his time, to fight
against the enemies thereof. 4. Here was the Throne of Satan set up,
ouertopping this Angel and Church. 4. So Satan in this state of the Church,
erected up at Rome his Throne, when he made the Bishop of Rome Pope,
universal Bishop, and so. That Antichrist; which Supremacy the Bishop of
that Sea ever sought after, and obtained at length by Bed. in lib. de temp.
Plat. in vita Bonifa 3. Blond. Decad. 1. l. 9. Sleid. de 4. Imper. l. 2. Paulus
Warnfridus l. 4. de gestis Lomb.
Phocas. And thus he crept into that Throne. First, by extolling Rome as the
head-citie of the Empire, keeping ever on foot the honor thereof. Secondly, by
Constantines remoouing and building Constantinople, and afterward in Justinius
days when the Blond. l. 8. Dec. 1. Seid. de 4. Imp. l. 2.
Exarch was established, which Magistrate left Rome, and abode most at Rauenna,
by which elbow-roome at Rome, the Pope crept up more and more. Thirdly, by
neglecting to come Socrat. l. 2. c. 5. Sleid. de 4. Imp. lib. 2. vid. Exemplar.
Leonis PP. ad Theodos. 2. and Martianum, Imp. tom. 2. Conciliorum.
personally unto general Councels from his own place, not standing upon his
own authority, as not bound to come, but making excuses, sometimes one thing,
sometimes an other thing, and so craftily kept away, and sent only his Legates
with Letters of excuse; which pride of his either not perceived or neglected,
he made after-aduantage of. Fourthly, by his wealth which began to be great
from the time of the Bishop Marcellus, as some Polydor. l. 1. de invent. c. vlt.
report. Fifthly, By such Bishops of the East Church, as had recourse to Rome in
their troubles, as Socrat. l. 2. c. 8. 11. 13. 14. 18. l. 4. c. 11 17. Euag. l.
3. c. 15. 21.
Athanasius often, Paulus of Constantinople, Asclepas of Gaza, Marcellus of
Ancyra, with others of the Orthodox Faith. So Macedonians Sectaries; all which
the Pope entertained, as thereby seeing his place advanced, and by which he
took no small advantage to lift up himself, and to become great (the Roman
Emperor either ignorantly furthering, or wisely hindering his proud aspiring
spirit) taking upon him a claim of Superiority over others, alleging a
Sleid. de 3. Imp. l. 2.
Canon of the Nicene Council for his authority, but falsely: by all which
help and means he took upon him, First, Socrat. l. 2. c. 11. 13.
to reprehend other Bishops beyond his jurisdiction. Secondly, Euag. l. 3. c. 8.
to deprive some. Thirdly, Sleid. de 4. Imp. l. 2. Niceph. l. 13. c. 34.
to excommunicate even Arcadius the Emperor of Constantinople, of which Act of
Pope Innocent, Anno Christi 407.
Baronius makes mention in his Annals, and so of diverse other Popes
excommunicating Emperors, yea, and presuming farther, he challenged Socrat. l.
7. c. 11.
Secular power; and as he got authority, so to hold the same with some show of
Antiquity, and as his right, Sleid. de 4. Imp. l. 2.
testimonies of Greek and Latin Fathers have bin pretended, Epistles forged,
Canons feigned, and Councels falsified. For many particulars let the Reader
peruse Master Doctor Sutcliffe, his Abridgment or Survey of Popery, c. 23. and
24. and Doctor Field his fifth Book of the Church, c. 33. 34. 35. 36. And thus
was Satan's Throne exalted in this Pergamine state. 5. In this was one Antipas,
a Martyr. 5. In this time, were many Antipasses Martyrs, such as were Antipapae
against the proud Pope of Rome, who now to uphold his usurped authoritiy, shed
the blood of many holy Saints; of which they that desire Examples, let them
read Doctor Sutcliffe his forenamed Book, c. 44. Doctor Usher. Hist.
Explicatio, de Christianae Ecclesie continua Successione, and Fox his. Acts and
Monuments. 6. In this were such as held fast Christ's Name, and did not deny the
Faith. 6. In all this time there were such as held out the Truth, so as the
faith of Christ was preserved by them, even unto our times, as Doctor Usher in
his Book maintayneth. Morney in his Mystery of Iniquity. 7. In this were there
such as vpheld Balaams Doctrine, provoking to Idolatry and corporal
uncleanness and the sin of the Nicolaitans. 7. In this state the Balaams
Doctrine of Rome was mightily defended, Imagery and Idolatry maintained, and
hither-to vpheld; and for corporal filthiness it is needless to cite
testimonies, fot after that the Popes forbad Marriage to the Clergy, enjoined
single life, allowed Concubines and tolerated Stews, the World was filled with
such filthiness, as a Christian abhors to name. See proofs in Doctor
Sutcliffes forenamed Book, c. 29. 30. But how contrary Anastasius the
Emperor, was to the Popes receiving Tribute from the Whores, read Euag. l. 3.
c. 39 Pau. Diacon. l. 21. 23. Baron. Annal. Carol. Magd. l. 4. c. 11. Hist.
Madg. cent. 8. c. 10. Epist. Adrian. PP. ad Imper. and Imperat. Irenam. Lu.
Osian. Epit. Cent. l. 4. Cent. l. 8. c. 5. Iuels defense of his Apol. 4. part,
p. 344. 8. This Angel and Church is thret ned to have the LORD to come quickly
to them, and against the Enemies with his two-edged Sword. 8. So indeed the
Lord came shortly, after this Throne erected at Rome, unto this Pergamine like
Church; which suffered great affliction with the rest of the World: But Rome,
Italy, and other parts of the Roman Jurisdiction were plagued with the Sword
of the d Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, and other Barbarians, and after with the e
Saracens, and then with the Turks, the scourge of Christendom; and at length
the Lord with the Sword of his mouh, set upon the Antichrist of Rome, as in the
next state of the Church is clearly showed. d Eutrop. l. 13. Blond. l. 1.
Decad. and l. 2. and 3. Oros. l. 7. c. 37. Procopode bello Goth. e Blond. l.
10.

He that has an care let him ear what the Spirit says to the Churches; for
great shall be their reward who over come, even to eat of the hidden Manna, to
have the White Stone, and a new name written therein. And thus much for the
state of the Church, from Gratian to the year 1100. and odd, set out by the
Church of Porgamus.

CONSIDERATIONS FOR INSTRVCTION AND USE.
FIrst, that Satan will strive for Dominion, he will have his Throne; neither
he nor his are willing to be underlings. Secondly, that where the very Throne
of Satan is, there yet may be some people belonging to the Lord. Thirdly,
that the faithful hold fast their profession in the midst of persecution, and
will not deny the Truth. Fourthly, that the Enemies of the Truth are of a
murdering disposition, they will slay and shed the blood of the Saints.
Fifthly, that it is a fault in a Church (though otherwise praise worthy) to have
such in her as openly teach contrary to the Truth, to corrupt the true Worship
of God, and a Christian Conversation. Sixthly, That the Sword of CHRIST'S mouth
is the weapon to fight against false Teachers with.

THE FOVRTH GOLDEN CANDLESTICK,
THE FOVRTH CHVRCH.
In the Type. In the Antitype. The Church of Thyatira. The Thyatirean state of
the Church. 1. THis is next to Pergamus, situate from it Eastward, and so
turning toward the Sun. 1. THis state is next the former, and becomes
better then it was, beginning from after the 1100. and odd years, when the
Lord raised up the Waldenses unto Luthers time, 1516. 2. To this, Christ
shows himself to be the Son of God, with eyes of flaming fire, and feet
of Brass. 2. Because in this state of the Church he showed himself to be so,
and for that he would give light of understanding to many, and expel the
gross darkness from them, and tread down powerfully his enemies, and make his
servants to abide durable like Brass in the furnace of afflictions, against
the Iesabel of Rome. 3. This is commended largely for virtues, and to be better
at the last, then at the first, contrary to Ephesus. 3. Such God raised up in
this space of time worthy praise, who^ he qualified with many Graces, Charity,
Service, Faith, Patience, and Works worthy amendment of life, as may be seen
in those Waldenses and Albigenses, who spread the Truth into all parts of
Europe, so many of all sorts embraced the same, and stood constantly in the
Truth, and were ready to dye for it against the Pope, and his tyrannical
power, pursuing them with fire and sword: but when the Lord raised up John
Wickliffe, and after him John Husse, and Jerome of Prage, the Church of Christ
became much more excellent, and daily better and better: the Lords hand at this
time helping by the Art of printing, found out by a Germane, in Anno 1440. Acts
and Monu. of the History of the Wald. p. 209. Doctor Usher lib. de Eccles.
Christ. Succes. c. 8. 9. 10. Of the Martyrs then see Fox his Acts and Mon. p.
387. Funct. Chron. p. 159. 160. Bucholtz. Chronol. Nauclerus Catal. test.
veritatis. Sleid. de 4. Imp. l. 3. p. 346. Polydo. Virg. l. 2. c. 7. de
inuentione rerum. 4. Here was the woman Iesabel seducing the people to
Idolatry, and corporal uncleanness. 4. Here was the Roman Church now become a
Iesabel, abusing Kings to take her part, setting up Baals Priests and Prophets:
but putting to death the Prophets of God, murdering the Saints of God, but
upholding as before Idolatry, and allowing fleshly uncleanness as is showed in
the Pergamine state, and for this see Sixtus quartus his allowance of
Sodometry; but for the spiritual Adultery of this Whorish Church, every stock
and stone, their mad running on pilgrimage to this he, that she-saint,
proclaims the shame thereof to the World. La. Osiand. Epit. Centur. l. 3. c.
4. cent. 15. Agrip. de vanit. Scient. c. 64. de leonina. Wesellus Gron. de
indulg. Papalibus, cited by Morn. in propos. 64. of his Mist. of Iniquity. 5.
This was threatened to be cast into a Bed, her Favorites and Lovers into great
afflistion, and to kill her children with death. 5. And indeed this Harlot at
this time fell sick of a Consumption, of which ever since she has languished;
upon Kings and Princes her Lovers, the Lord brought great afflictions, sometime
through the factions of the Popes, sometime by their taking upon them to take
Kingdoms from one, and to give them to another, other-while by Kings and
Princes falling out one with another among themselves, neither was it a light
tribulation that fell upon the Kings and Princes subject to the Pope, when at
his command they must arm themselves either one against another, if he pleased
to hold any for Heretics, or did excommunicate any or held any to be
disobedtent to his lusts; or join all against the Saracens to regain Jerusalem
(whilst the Pope played the false-hearted Wretch at home) which cost the lives
of above ten Millions of people, the children of that Iezabel of Rome; And
after these the LORD brought the Turkish fury upon those Antichristian
Kingdoms. Morn. in his Mystery of Iniquity, shows these things at large.
Acts and Mon. 183. 603 p. and 675. Synodus sub In. 3. PP. Anno 1204. apud
Lateranum pro recuperanda Hierus. Chron. Chronicorum. Plat. in vita Inno. 3. 6.
In this Church there were such as knew not the depths of Satan, to whom (if
they hold fast what they have received) a promise was made that they should be
rewarded. 6 In this Church there have bin and yet are under that Antichrist,
and wicked Iesabel, such as know not that Mystery of Iniquity, the depths of
that Romish doctrine, to whom there is hope of mercy and victory in the end, if
they hold fast the Truth which God has revealed unto them. 7. There is rule
and power promised here unto such as shall prevail and euercome. 7. Here it
began to come to pass; for the true Church long hidden, began powerfully to
prevail, of which the LORD gave strong persuasions to many, who so confidently
delivered their minds of the decay of the honor of this Iesabel of Rome, and
how the Word of God, and the true Church of Christ should flourish, as that
their speeches were held as Prophetical. See Morney his Mystery of Iniquity,
in the Opposition after the 64. Proposition, who mentions Sauanarola,
Wessellus, Ioh. Osterid. Paulus Scripto. Ioh. Keiserb Andr. Proles, Ioh,
Hilton, which last foretold plainly the year of Luthers beginning to preach.
Morn. his Mist. of Iniquity. Acts and Mon. p. 768. 769. and 580.

He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.
And thus much for the state of the Church, from years above 1100. unto Luthers
beginning to preach, 1516. set out in the Church of Thyatira.

CONSIDERATIONS FOR INSTRVCTION AND USE.
FIrst, that now in this time the depth of Satan's policies began to be used.
Secondly, that maugre his malice and mischief the true Church gets
strength. Thirdly, that when God purposes to better the estate of his Church,
he will qualify his Servants with better gifts to further his purpose.
Fourthly, that in a sound Reformation, the Church is not the best at the first,
but grows better and better, so as the last works thereof are more then the
first. Fifthly, that the tolleration of a Iesabel, false Doctrine and false
worship, is a foul fault in the true Church. Sixthly, that the end of Satan's
Instruments is to seduce the godly, and to bring them to commit wickedness.
Seventhly, that though God give the wicked space to repent, yet will they be
nothing the better for it. Eighthly, that not only the chief Authors of
evil, but such as consent to them are liable to the same judgment, except
they repent. Ninthly, that neither Iesabel with her Abettors, nor yet the
depths of Satan can hinder the Churches increase in well-doing, when God will
aid her with his Grace. Tenthly, that there may be many, where the false
Church is which may be ignorant of the depth of that sinful state.
Eleuenthly, that the Truth, which we receive must be held fast unto the end.

THE FIFTH GOLDEN CANDLESTICK.
THE FIFTH CHVRCH.
In the Type. In the Antitype. The Church of Sardis. The Sardine state of
Christ's Church, the first of the Reformed Churches. 1. THis was next after
Thyatyra still East ward, farther from the North. 1. THis was the next after
the Thyatirian state, at the end whereof this began more clearly to break
out by the light of Truth, about the year 1516. when Luther began to preach,
and continued to the year, 1558. 2. In this is no mention, as in the former,
of Balaam, Nicolaitans, thron of Satan, or Iesabel. 2. Because now the Church
was come out of Romish Babylon; for neither Balaam that false Prophet of Rome,
nor the filthy Nicolaitans of that Seat, nor that Iesabel the Church of Rome,
had any thing to do with this Church of Christ, which the Lord by Luther and
other famous men brought out from that Spiritual bondage, as before he did
the Children of Israel out of Egypt, by Moses and Aaron, with a strong hand,
and outstretched arm. Sleid. Comment. Fox his Acts and Mon. p. 767 768. etc.
3. In this Christ sets out himself by the seven Stars, and seven Spirits of
God. 3. For that now he would raise up many learned Ministers of the Gospel,
who as Stars should shine and give light to such as should sit in darkness,
and to whom he would give plentifully the Graces of his Spirit to set forth
his Truth: as he did to Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon, Oecolampadius, Bucer,
and to many bright Stars of his Truth in Wittenberge, in Heluetia, and other
places. Sleid. Comment. Lu. Osiand. Cent. 16. Fox his Acts and Monuments, p.
773. 4. This had a name to be alive, but was dead: 4. This coming from under
Antichrist, had a name to be alive, and to be a Reformed Smyrna had not so
good a name as she deserved, but this a much better then she is worthy of.
Church in Luthers days, but she became as dead, being far from that life of
Grace, which should have been in her, and from that lively reformation, which
the Lord required at her hands. For howsoever the Lutheran Churches acquit
themselves of the Pope, and were no more the children of that Iesabel of Rome;
yet retained they such corruptions and errors, and at this day so uphold them,
as their state is rather dying, then living, except they return. See the Book
of Concord, and the Augustane Confession. 5. The works of this were imperfect.
5. So was and is this of the Lutherans reformation, as may appear by the
difference between them and other Reformed Churches, in that which is commonly
called Lutheranisme, the points whereof may be gathered out of their Books,
of the body of Divinity, their Augustane Confession, and Disputations against
us, by which may appear their imperfect works, unworthy a Church Reformed,
and that blessed Instrument Luther, that Lucifer and bright Star of Light,
who did shine well in the dawning of the day, before the Sunshine of Truth
arose, and spread out his beams to his after followers, for them to see more
clearly, if they would not have winked and shut their eyes, against the Light
shining upon them. See Reneccius his Panoplia. Brentius, Iac. Andraeas, Seluec.
and Chemnisius. Lu. Osiand. Epit. Cent. l. 3. cent. 16. c. 30. 6. This is
threatened for the defects and the Lord says, that he will come sudde^ly upon
them. 6. And indeed so did the Lord come upon these. He sent a new, and
strange kind of sickness, called the Sweating Sickness, which in a short
space with an incredible swiftness passed through almost all the parts of
Germany: they were also greatly troubled with Wars, as may be seen in that
which is called the Smalcaldicke War, made by the Emperor through the Popes
instigation: Saxony received moreover great loss by Fires, and also by
horrible Tempests of Thunder and Lightning, and thus came the LORD upon them.
Sleid. Comm. Funct. Chron. Bucholc. Chron. Lu. Osiand. Epit. Cent. l. 2. and l.
3. c. 2. 7. In this Church were some few, which had not defiled their garments.
7. In this imperfect state begun by the Luthera^s, there were some which acquit
themselves more clearly, from the Errors and Superstitions of Antichrist, who
set forth a Confession more agreeing in all things to the truth, then that
Augustane Confession: these were called by the Lutherans Sacramentaries, and
Zuinglians, and afterward Caluinists, for opposing their Consubstantiation,
and other their Errors. Sleid. Comment. Lu. Osiand. Epit. Cent. 16. 8. These
in this Church were most 3: So these few then has the Lord given honor unto,
and approved of Christ, accounting them worthy to walk with him in white.
approved as worthy of his favorable acceptance and grace, for soundness of
Truth, and that by the consent of many Churches agreeing therein. See the
Harmony of Confessions. 9. In this is promised to them that overcome, the
reward of Victory. 9. Now this was very needful for those times, for that many
were put unto the trial; not a few suffered banishment and imprisonment, for
not consenting to the Book of Interim, set out by the Emperors Authority, to
whom many through fear yielded, as those of Wittemberge and Lipsia, who for
the mean which they sought to hold, as appears by the form of Religion
which they published, were called Adiaphorists, and Intermistickes. Persecution
was raised here in England by Queen Mary, by whom many were put to death for
the Gospel of Christ; out of Bohemia were banished above two hundred Ministers
of the Gospel, and in France was a grievous Persecution raised against those
which were called Waldenses: But for all this they shrunk not from the Truth,
therefore the Lord will cloth them with the white garment; he will not blot
out their names out of the Book of Life, but will confess them before his
Father, and his holy Angels. Sleid. Com. Lu. Osiand. Epit. l. 2. cent. 16. c.
70. 71. 72. 73. Lu. Osian. l. 3. cent. 16. c. 20.

He that has an ear let him ear what the Spirit says to the Churches. And
thus much for the state of the Church from the year 1516. to 1558. set out in
the Church of Sardis.

CONSIDERATIONS FOR INSTRVCTION AND USE.
FIrst, that such as be come from under Antichrist, may yet be in a dying
condition. Secondly, that there may be a name of life by profession, when such
parties may be dead in practice. Thirdly, that where there is no care to
strengthen that which is good, it will dye, and evil grow up in the room
thereof. Fourthly, That God allows not of the works which are not perfect
before him. Fifthly, that to amend and to be reformed, is to call our selves
back to the Truths received. Sixthly, that God will surely punish his, if they
will not otherwise be reformed. Seventhly, that some are kept pure and
undefiled when others be stained with uncleanness. Eighthly, that the better
part are ever the fewest. Ninthly, that God in mercy holds them worthy of
reward, which will not pollute themselves with others in sin. Tenthly, that the
better men be, though never so few, the more accepted be they with God.

THE SIXTH GOLDEN CANDLESTICK.
THE SIXTH CHVRCH.
In the Type. In the Antitype. The Church of Philadelphia. The Philadelphian
state of Christ's Church, being the second of the Reformed Churches, beginning
from the Reign of Elizabeth, our late Queen of happy memory, in the year
1558. at which time we may begin this sixth state of Christ's Church, for that
the Popes power began now more to be diminished then ever before, and to be
cast into such a consumption, that hitherto he languisheth thereof in all these
parts of Christendom; God adding the Wisdom and Zeal of our learned
Sovereign, by his Pen to pierce through the heart of his usurped Supremacy.
The period of this not yet come, the year, as in all the former states of the
Church, cannot be set down. 1. To this Christ sets out himself to be holy
and true, to have the Key of David, to open and 1. BEcause now Christ at this
time would chiefly exalt Piety, exalt his Truth, and show that as he is King,
and as power belongs to him; so would he none to shut, and to shut, and none
to open. now exercise the same, that the Church might know, that he has taken
to him his great power, and has reigned. And indeed in what age since the
Apostles time, has true Piety and the Truth been more lively set forth? I
say, true Piety and holiness, not that fained and counterfeit Sanctity so
much extolled when that Roman Beast did bear rule over all. How has the
Gospel shined forth to us the ways of darkness? most powerfully has the
Lord showed himself by his faithful Servants, and great fruit have they
reaped of their labors; Blessed be his Name. cap. 11. 17. 2: Here the LORD
opens a door, and none shuts. 2. For now the Gospel has gotten free
passage, which the Enemies by their Tridentine Council, by their Jesuitical,
or rather Iebusiticall Sect, by their Seminary Priests, by their Conspiracies,
Trecheries, Treason, and raising of Rebellion in England, and Ireland; by their
murdering of Princes, by their bloody Persecutions in France, and most cruel
Massacre, by their Spanish Invasion, by their Hellish Gunpowder-plot have not
been able to hinder: so wide has the Lord opened the hearts of men to receive
the Truth, as no plot, nor police of that man of sin hitherto has been able
to shut them against the Truth: as it is well known to us all at this day.
William of Nass. Prince of Orange. Hen. 4. K. of France, and his Predecessors
before. 3. This is commended for keeping Christ's Word, and for not denying his
Name, having but a little strength. 3. Little was the strength of the Reformed
Churches in this state, for not a few years, in respect of the power of
Princes, true union of hearts (Division being great between Lutherans and
others) and Wisdom of policy, in comparison of the Papists, who were
strongly united, Pope, Kings, and Princes combining in league together, and
using all subtle ways, and forcible means to overthrow the Professors of
the Gospel, who yet keep the Word of God, and did not deny the Doctrine and
Worship of Jesus Christ, to be brought back again to Popery. French Histor.
Mer. Gallobelg. Lu. Osiand. cent. 16. 4. Christ to make his Lona known,
promises to this, that the counterfeit Jews and Synagogue of Satan shall come
and worship at his Angels feet; so much is now the difference of this from the
Pergamine Angel, who did dwell where Satan's thron was. 4. This Philadelphian
state of the Church through the love of Christ, even of mercy and not of any
merit shall become most honorable. The Lord will subdue all her Enemies, those
counterfeite Catholics (who did reign in the Pergamine state: and who, as
Jews, brag that they are the only people of God) and will cause them to
submit themselves humbly unto the true Ministry of his Servants; which we are
to expect how contrary soever it seems to man's reason, and earnestly let us
pray for the same. 5. To this is 5. There remains for made a promise of
deliverance, in the time of temptation, which is foretold to come over all the
World. Christ his Church in this Philadelphian state, a time of trial yet to
came, our sins deserve it, and this so universal a peace, so abused by
carnal security may make us look for troubles: what this temptation is, and
when it shall be, is not so certainly to be defined, except it be that in cap.
16. 18. but be it what it may be, let it come whenever God shall sent it,
the Church has a promise of deliverance, and shall escape the peril of it. 6.
To this Christ promises to come quickly, and exhorts it to hold fast, that
no man take away the Crown of reward. 6. Because (as may seem by these words)
the Church in this her last time of trial, shall be greatly assaulted, and in
danger to perish through the power and force of that temptation, therefore as
the Lord promises deliverance, so he promises not to defer it off, but
will quickly set her free. 7. The Conqueror here is promised to be made a 7.
All this fore-sheweth after the deliverance from this Temptation sore-spoken
of, that faithful Pillar in the Temple: so as he shall go no more out, and
there shall be written upon him the Name of God, and of the City new
Jerusalem, and Christ his Name. Christians and true Church of Christ shall be
in a stable and immovable state, Pope and Turk the Beast and Dragon, open and
secret Enemies being destroyed, and these heavenly Conquerours, shall be
accounted the true Church of God, that new Jerusalem, such as God the Father
and Jesus Christ will claim for his own, as if his name were writvpon them.
C. 19. and 20. and C. 21. 2

He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. And
thus much for this beautiful and lovely Philadelphian state of the Church,
from Anno 1558. to the time determined, set out in this Church of Philadelphia.
In this estate are we in these days.

CONSIDERATIONS FOR INSTRVCTION AND USE.
FIrst, that this is the time of opening the door that men may come into the
true Church Secondly, That none now shall ever be able to shut again this
door, Protestance shall prosper. Thirdly, that a little strength with
obedience to the Word shall be sufficient for the Churches safety. Fourthly,
that the false Church, by the power of Christ, though this to man seem
incredible, shall be made subject to the true Church. Fifthly, that shortly
Christ will make the Enemies know his love, to his own people. Sixthly, that
great trials and temptations shall come upon the World, of which, it may be,
we have now the beginnings, but the Lord will keep his Church. God Almighty
prepare and strengthen us, in his mercy to subdue our enemies, O Lord, save
thy people, show thy power in the confusion of thine and our malicious
Adversaries, that we may for ever sing praises to thy Name, even so be it, O
Lord, of thy goodness, even so be it. Amen.

THE SEVFNTH GOLDEN CANDLESTICK.
THE SEVENTH CHVRCH.
In the Type. In the Antitype. The Church of LAODICEA, the last of the seven.
The Laodicean state of Christ his Church, and the last till Christ come to
judgment, which state follows upon that height of excellency and glory,
which in the Philadelphian state it attayneth unto. 1. HERE Christ calls
himself the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the beginning of the
Creation of God. 1. BEcause now the LORD brings his Church to the last state,
even to the Amen thereof hereupon Earth, in which when all things are fulfilled,
which Christ Jesus, as a true and faithful Witness of his Fathers will, has
foretold by himself, and by his Spirit in the Prophets and Apostles; then
shall he fully declare himself the Author of the heavenly Creation, and of
that glory of his Saints, which they shall enjoy with him in appearing at the
last Day. Reuelat. 21. 2. This became lukewarm, being neither hot nor cold,
2. After the great peace which the Church shall have upon her so high
advancement in her former state, all her Enemies being brought down, and
utterly destroyed, she shall decay in zeal, and become lukewarm, not hot, as
seruently bent unto Godliness; neither cold, as without any affection of
Religion at all, but too carelessly remiss in the duties of Piety, contenting
herself with a peaceable enjoying of the Lords ordinances after an outward
form of Godliness in abundance and plenty of all things: by which it will
come to pass in time, that Charity shall wax cold, and Faith, that is, the
sincere study of godliness, shall scarcely be found upon Earth, when Christ
shall show himself at his second Coming. Revel. 19 and 20. Luke 18. 8. 3. The
LORD 3. So will the Lord loath and threateneth to spew this out of his mouth.
abhor the lukewarm state of this Church, and cast out the same for ever, in
his appointed time. 4. This is taxed for glorying and for too high a conceit of
her happiness, being in a very wretched and miserable case. 4. THIS gives us
to know, that such shall be the outward and flourishing estate, and plentiful
blessings, every way in that respect, of this Church, as through the delight
and full contentment thereof, they shall be too ignorant of their spiritual
estate with God, and not know how far they shall be from the power of
godliness. 5. This is rebuked and chaslened, and is graciously advised to use
the means for reformation. 5. Which shows, that the Lord in his mercy will
not be wanting in all good means offered to seek their reformation by word
and deed, if so be they will turn from luke-warmenes, and become zealous and
so amend: and if they will hear him and receive him, such shall taste of his
spiritual comforts, and be made most joyful in the heavenly taste thereof.
6. To him that here overcomes is granted a Kingly seat with Christ in Heaven.
6. There must be in some a spiritual conflict, who shall strive happily
against the common current of luke-warmnes, and against the death of drowsy
security, from which by striving they shall acquit themselves, and so
graciously preuayling, at Christ his coming to reward every one according to
his works, shall these Conquerours receive glory and honor with him in the
highest Heavens for ever.

He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.
And thus much for this lukewarm state of the Church, the last and fearful
condition thereof before the coming of Christ unto Judgment, which is not yet
come upon us, though we be lukewarm enough.

CONSIDERATIONS FOR INSTRVCTION AND USE.
FIrst, that as now men do, so hereafter they will abuse the great peace and
prosperity of the Church to grow thereby secure. Secondly, that to be
lukewarm is the worst disease of the Church; and that estate which will make
the Lord to spew them out of his mouth. Thirdly, that full contentment of
earthly things makes men highly conceited of themselves, and to be ignorant
of their spiritual estate before God. Fourthly, that men may be wretched,
miserable, poor, blind, and naked, and yet be highly conceited of their well
being, and that they be in a very happy condition. Of such conceited persons I
wish this age were not full.

The Conclusion.
THus we see apparently how the seven Churches of Asia, are lively
representations of the seven fold estate of the Church of Christ unto the end
of the World; not Types of this or that one particular Church; as some do
dream, but are Types of the estate of the whole Church, yet so as there will
be a mixture, some thus, and some so in particular Churches, as we see a
difference in these seven Churches themselves. The times of the Ephesine,
Smyrnean, Pergamine, Thyatirean, and Sardine are past, this is now the
Philadelphian state, in which the Gospel has gotten free passage and must
get; for Christ has opened, and none can shut, howsoever the Adversary may
attempt to hinder and endeavor to overthrow the Professors of the Gospel: yet
shall these our Enemies be overcome, and be made at last to submit unto us;
sure it is that great trials shall be, and whether this present distraction of
all the face of Christendom, be the hour of temptation to try them that dwell
upon the Earth, it is to me uncertain; but certain it is, that the Church God
will preserve, and make her renowned, and this will he do shortly; for the
Enemy is under the Vials of Gods wrath, as it is apparent in Chap. 16. and
what did this Messenger from Heaven, the mighty Comet foreshew? but these
Wars, and good success thereby to the Church. For the Comets now for the
years since Luthers time have ever, with troubles, yet foretold good
prosperity to the Gospel. The date of the increase of Romes glory was out long
since, and now is the time of the Churches increase daily till the ruin of
Rome; which as it is foretold in this Prophecy of Saint John, so shall it
come to pass, and in all probable conjectures, is very near at hand. This may
we undoubtedly look for. The devises of that man of sin, the Machauilian policy
of the Viperous generation of Jesuits, nor all the power of Papists shall
prevent it, for the Word of the LORD has spoken it, and Heaven and Earth shall
perish, before one Iota of the Truth shall fail. Herein let us encourage our
selves, against the crowing of our Adversaries, who see not destruction before
them, as in this Prophecy of S. John is plainly foreshewed.

THE HONOR OF ENGLAND.
OF this Church and Spouse of Christ thus set out in the seuen-fold estate
thereof, the Lord of his mercy has made us of this Nation a most lively
member, and above other Countries has maruellously ennobled this Island, and
famous Kingdom of great Britain.

First, though we live far off, in these Northern parts from Judea, yet
very shortly after our Saviors Ascension, the Gospel of God was brought unto
us; and by whom! was it not by Joseph of Aramathea, the only rich and noble
Counselor, that did the first honor to our Lord Jesus after his death, in
begging of his body, and burying it in his own Sepulcher, where before never
any was laid. This man was the Ambassador (as Stories witness) from Christ to
us, here he also vouchsafed to live, and here among us peaceably to end his
days.

Greatly did the Lord honor us in giving to us the first King that ever was
Christian, named Lucius, who submitted his Crown and Scepter unto Christ.

Was not Constantine called the Great, the first Christian Emperor? and did
not he arise from hence? was he not here borne, and here proclaimed Emperor?
who slew the Heathen Tyrants, and destroyed the greatest Enemies of the Gospel.

The first famous Scholar and public Professor of Divinity opposing
Antichrist, was it not our learned and famous John Wickliffe? By whose Writings
spread into Bohemia, (by occasion of a Marriage between one of our Kings here,
and that Kings Daughter) sprung up the renowned Martyrs John Husse, and Jerome
of Prage.

The first King, like valiant Iehu, marching as it were against the Iesabel of
Rome, that absolutely shook off the Popes Supremacy, that usurped Power, and
Luciferian Pride of that man of sin, and trod it utterly under his feet, was
Henry the Eighth? and yet for all that dyed he in peace.

The first King, that was but a child, and yet set up the true Worship of God,
and banished Popery out of his Kingdom was our King Edward the Sixth, that
noble Prince, a very Josiah, full of the love and zeal of his God.

The first Princess, at whose rising the power of the Popedom began to abate,
which suffered Persecution for the Gospel, which so constantly defended it, as
being to death, semper eadem, at home and abroad, was it not the everlastingly
renowned the late Queen, our Dread Sovereign Elizabeth? Was not She a Succor
to the Saints, and a Terror to all her Enemies round about?

The first King, and so Learned, as has not the like been in the Christian
World, publishing by his learned Pen unto all the Princes in Christendom, that
the Pope is Antichrist, is now our Dread Sovereign LORD and King; who has
helped to pour out the fourth Vial of Gods wrath upon the Sun, that is,
upon the Supremacy of that Antichristian state. The Throne of that Beast
shakes, and Romes ruin is not far too, maugre the rage and fury of all her
Supporters.

Shall I here speak of our wonderful preseruations? Strangely did God save
his poor flock here from the bloody Wolves, in the time of the ten
Persecutions, unto the days of Dioclesian. But then, lest it should want this
honor also, this Nation was renowned with Martyrs. What shall I speak of our
late Deliverances, so admirable and unheard off? The Attempts were many and
sundry against our late Queen and Sovereign. How did Pope and Papal power,
seek to invade her Kingdom! How did Rebels arise to molest her! How did
Traitors seek her blood, and many ways sought her death; yet behold the
protecting hand of God, She dyed in peace, neither did the Enemies hand
prevail against her. And can the Gunpowder Treason, that matchless villainy,
and more then Hellish intended cruelty be ever of us forgotten? At one blast
they mercilesly intended to destroy and that suddenly, King, Prince, and State,
Church and Commonwealth; yet see the mercy of our God, we are preserved, and
in the snare which they made for others, was their own feet taken. Let us
look about and see whether other Princes and States have obtained the like
protection, or rather have they not suffered violence at the hands of these
Miscreants, and been murdered of them? It was an honor to our Nation, that
we stood out so long at first against the Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, for
it was no small time ere she could obtrude her vain Ceremonies upon us, when
other Countries were infected and had begun to drink of her cup.

And it is to us no less honor, that we have so shaken off her yoke, as we
are become an Assail and place of safeguard to such as daily forsake her, so
opposite unto her, and so vexing her, as she through the pain thereof sticks
not to blaspheme the holy Doctrine and Worship of our God, even God and his
Tabernacle, as John speaks; which also makes her to strive by all means
possible above all the Nations to regaine us to her, (which never shall be) or
by more then Machiauilian policies to undermine us, and to bring us to
destruction. Because God has made us, in pouring out the Vials of his wrath
upon the Earth, Sea, Rivers, and Sun of that State, not the least
Instruments, and it may be will also give us, or those that belong unto us,
that high honor to bring her to confusion; and to burn that Whorish City
with fire; great likelihoods there is of this, but the certainty I leave to
God, who knows all things.

And may we not hold it an honor to our Nation, that we should bring forth
men so Renowned, as among our Adversaries are had in high esteem? Have not we
our venerable Beda? And shall we boast of Alexander de Hales, the Father of the
Summists, called Fons vitae? or of Johannes Scotus, termed Doctor Subtilis? or
of John Bachon, or Bachonthorpe, named Doctor resolutus? or of Thomas
Bradwardine, Archbishop of Canterbury, honored also with this Title of Doctor
profundus.

What shall I tell of our fortunate Drake, circling the whole Earth, and
returning home in safety? I let pass many things in this kind, one instance
may serve for all. What an honor was this, that once the Emperor in person
should take wages and serve our King in his Wars. An honor never afforded to
any other Nation in Christendom.

Thus, even thus, has God vouchsafed us glory, and riches, and honor, and
strength. We can live of our selves, succor others we may, and of their aid
we stand in little need. If valorousnesse of spirit be not abated, our Enemies
may be made to fear. I hope as God has thus advanced us, the glory of his
Name is this day before us, and the good of our Country in every action for
advancement of Religion, and the peace of the people.

He that receives much, owes much, and is bound to love the more. Let me
say as once Moses did, the name Israel being changed into England. And now (O
England) what Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk
in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, to keep his Commandments, and his Statutes,
this day for thy good. That so (as God himself wished to Israel) it might go
well with us and with our Children for ever.

Let not (O Nation thus beloved) hautinesse and pride impouerish thee, let not
oppressions bring thee vnderoot, and press thee down. Let not vanities put
contempt upon thee, nor riot and luxury consume thee. Let not prodigality and
the idle race of a disordered route waste thee. Let not bribery eat up thy
Justice, nor wa^tonnesse defile thy chastity, nor worldliness destroy thy
charity, nor this cursed self-love, break the bond of unity, nor thy too
gentle conniuencie increase Popery, nor the too great security in these days
of peace eat up thy devotion, and make the grow into contempt with thy God. Be
this, oh be this far from thee, (thou the Lords Vineyard) of whom the Lord
expects better fruits for his so great goodness toward thee.

I hope the honorable Joseph of Aramethea, will make thy Nobles to contemn
the World, and to give their honor unto Christ. Thy Wickliffe, awake up thy
Clergy to watch the Wolves, which seek to devour thine and their flocks.
Thy subtle Scotus, thy resolute Bachon, thy profound Bradwardine, thy Hales
the Summist, and thy venerable Beda will cause thy Schools of Learning to
flourish, and prick men forward to an emulation, and to strive to excel even
them in excellencies. Thy former Kings and Princes banishing Popery, make the
zealous against it, that it never here any more get footing again within
thee. Thy now Dread Sovereign so learnedly discovering that Antichristian
State, cause thy Apostating Children to be ashamed of the Whorish inventions
of that man of sin, and so at length distaste the smell of the Romish, or
rather Rammish Renegadoes, and leave of their folly and madness.

Lastly, thy wonderful preseruations, thy plenty, thy peace, thy beauty, thy
outward glory move us all, from the highest to the lowest, to render all
praise and thanks possible, to the high God Creator of Heaven and Earth, for
such mercies toward thee, and to endeavor our selves by the lawful right and
religious use of all the blessings in thee, still to preserve, yea, and to make
more renowned thy name and fame among all the Nations, and before the face of
all thine enemies. Thus we ought to do, let us pray, that we all may so do.

Amen.
THE GREAT MYSTERY OF GODS MERCY.
WHereas I made mention in the beginning of the Jews Conversion, I thought it
not amiss here to insert the verity thereof. By Jews, I understand the
natural offspring of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the twelve Patriarchs, called
Israel, the twelve Tribes dispersed, to whom the Apostle James wrote in his
time, who now are James 1. 1. 2.
all known: only by the name of Jews; these are now the Israel of Romans 11.
26.
whom the Apostle speaks, and these shall be converted to Christ, and become
a National people, receive the Doctrine of the Gospel, and make profession of
the Lord Jesus, as of their true Messiah and Savior with us.

This is the Mystery of Gods Mercy, There is a double Mystery. Ephesians. 6. 36.
of which Saint Paul speaks to the Romans. It was a mystery that we
Gentiles, should be fellow-heires with the Jews, which they knew not off, and
it is a Mystery that the obstinate Jews shall return to Christ, and be
visible members of CHRIST'S Church with us Gentiles, which Mystery Saint Paul
would not have us Romans 11. 25.
ignorant of.

The first Mystery, blessed be God, is made known in our salvation; this
other Mystery shall also be made manifest in time in their salvation.

It was not a Mystery to the Jews, that some Gentiles should be converted, for
they had many Proselytes: but the Mystery was, that God would take to him
Kingdoms and Nations of the Gentiles, which thing they could not endure to
hear off. So it was no mystery to the Gentiles in Act. 22. 22.
Saint Paul's time, that some of the Luke 20. 16.
Jews then, and afterward should believe in Christ, for they had examples of
thousands of Jews converted: but the mystery was and yet is this, which the
Apostle would have the Gentiles know, that the obstinate Jews, even the Nation
of them should in time turn again to Christ, and profess his Name publikly
with us.

This is a truth believed, long since Very many learned hold it.
professed, and by learned men of late maintained, as may be seen in the
Commentaries of very many, which have written upon the 11. chapter to the
Romans, and on the 7. chapter of the Revelation of St. John, whose names I
here omit to recite, because I stay not upon men's assertion (though the voice
of so many learned is a very great inducement) but upon such reasons and
proofs of Scripture, as may persuade to the faith of this Truth.

And first, who can consider of the wonderful hand of God, in their so Their
miraculous preservation may move to believe it.
miraculous preservation to this very day, now for the space of almost 1600.
years, in the great confusion of States, but the same may lead him to an
expectation of their future good? They be here and there dispersed, they dwell
but by permission wheresoever: yet have they not been swallowed up of Nations,
nor so mingled, but that they be a known distinct people by name severed from
all others. This is so strange a preservation for so long a time, as the like
has not befallen to any other under the whole heaven.

Where was there ever a Nation, such a people, so wholly cast out of their
Country, and after dispersed, which has not been swallowed up and lost, but
these? This providence so singular must needs prognosticate some future good.
For was not the Jews preservation in their dispersing abroad by their
Babylonian captivity, in an 127 Provinces for this end, to bring them in the
appointed time into Judea again? And for what other end is this so long
preservation of them, but to recall them, and to make them his people, in his
good time? The Israelites, the ten Tribes, called the Kingdom of Israel, were
removed by the Assyrian, and because God would not bring them to that Kingdom
again, as God brought the Jews from Babylon, their place was lost, and they
dispersed, soon became they an unknown people, without distinction mingled
among No Israelites now but under the name of Jews.
the Nations, and are none of them at this day (though there be otherwise
fabulous narrations hereof) but such as go under the name of Jews, which
howsoever so called, are of all the Tribes of Israel. For it is said in Esdra
7. 7. that there went up of the children of Israel with him to Jerusalem, and
Saint James writes to the twelve Tribes dispersed, which he well knew to be
then in the world, else he would not have so written to them. And yet in all
the Acts of the Apostles, only we hear of the name of Jews, under which name
and among whom there were of all the Romans 11. 1. 25. 26.
twelve Tribes, which Saint Paul calls by the name of Israel. And in the
Prophets it is showed that the two Nations should come to be one, the ten and
two Tribes make one people, and so the twelve Tribes to be under one name. And
therefore in the Jews conversion is also the conversion of the Israelites, and
so the twelve Tribes. What if they cannot rehearse their It is not necessary
they should know distinctly their Tribes.
Genealogies, and set down now their Tribes distinctly? There is now no
necessity of it, the reasons of the distinct keeping of tribe from tribe, are
taken away. And where is it prophesied that in their conversion they are to be
known by Tribes distinctly? The twelve may be, and that under one name, which
is enough to make good the prophecy, that Israel shall be saved.

Besides this so wonderful a preservation, Their increase is great, on Romans
11. 25.
there is another thing to move us, to think God will be with them, even
their exceeding increase; for as Beza relates from an universal speech out of
Asia and Africa, that they are so multiplied, as that yet the blessing of
Abraham, to have his seed after the flesh to be innumerable, is plainly seen
upon them, preparing them for the conquest of their own Country, when the
Lord shall assemble them together for that end. For our better assurance and
settling of our hearts herein, let me set before you, how the Apostle shows
this plainly in the Epistle to the Romans, chap. 11. and how it is also
confirmed in many other places of the new Testament.

Romans 11. Chapt.
THe scope of this Chapter is to Scope of the Chapter.
prove, that God has not finally cast away his people the Jews, or Israel his
people, Verse. 1.

This scope the Apostle proves by the conversion of some then in his time, and
by the conversion of the rest, though then left in their obstinacy, when God
should call them.

Of the conversion of those in his time, he speaks in Verses 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
giving an instance first of himself, and then of others, whom he calls the
remnant then saved, in so general a casting off of all the Nation, as aforetime
it fell out in the days of Eliah, which remnant so saved, were so, not for
their works, but they were saved according to the election of grace and of
Gods foreknowledge.

Of the conversion of the other in the time to come, whom he calls the rest,
in Verse 7. the Apostle also does assure us, though for that present time, and
now even at this day, they be blinded, as was foretold in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms, Verses 8, 9, 10. The sum of all that which is in the Chapter
concerning these so blinded and hardened, hitherto is this.

That the rest of Israel left in their The sum of the Chapter.
obstinacy for a time, were not finally cast off, that they and their
succeeding posterity should utterly perish: God forbid, says the Apostle, but
that in the Lords time, when the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, all
Israel shall be saved, that is, as those which were before the reiection of the
Nation were, and as those remnant chosen out in Saint Paul's time; so shall the
hardened and stiff-necked Jews left of God, in the appointed time return to
God. Even the Nation of the Jews, called Israel, shall be saved. For so Israel
is to be understood, in cap. 10. 21. where he takes occasion to enter upon
this disputation, and so also in cap. 11. verse. 7. and in verse. 26. where he
concludes the point.

That the Apostle means the body By Israel is meant the body of that Nation.
of the Jews, it is plain by this, that he speaks of their fall and
fullness, in verse. 12. both which words he expounds himself. Fall is in
verse. 15. interpreted casting away, and fullness, the receiving of them, in the
same verse. Now the fall and casting of them off, was from a visible and
national being of Gods people and Church, therefore their receiving must be
understood, by the Law of Opposites, of their being a visible Church of Christ,
and a National people, professing the true God and worship of his Name. And as
the casting off is meant of natural Jews and Israelites, the posterity of
Israel and the twelve Patriarchs, so must the receiving of them be understood
in like sort, for else should not the Law of Opposites be kept, neither should
the Apostles discourse have dependancy of one thing with another.

But lest this truth might yet be doubted of, the blessed Apostle does not
only affirm it, but does also confirm it by very many reasons, such as
follows.

1 From the end of their stumbling; Verse. 11.
they stumbled not to fall, and so to rise no more: God forbid, says the
Apostle, that we Gentiles should have so desperate a conceit of them. The end
was, says he, not their destruction, but our salvation; for this the Lord
pleased to make, as a way, to bring to us the Gospel, and to make us his
people, which the Jews in their standing did hinder, did oppose, and no way
could endure to hear of. Acts 22. 22. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16.

II. From the end of our Conversion Verse 11.
also, which is in time to bring them back again unto the Lord, by provoking
them to jealousy: of which Moses foretold, Deutronomie, 32. 21.

III. From the great good which Verse 12.
shall come to us by their recalling, even to enrich us the more in grace. This
the Apostle does prove by an Argument, a Minori ad Maius. For, says he, if
their fall and dimishing brought to us salvation, how much more then shall
their return in fullness bring us riches and glory. So then it is thus
between us and them. Their fall was to bring us to God, our Conversion is
appointed in time to provoke them to return, and this their return will
increase our happiness.

IV. From the Apostles magnifying Verse 13. 14.
his office, and from his endeavor in his Ministry among the Gentile, seeking
to win these to provoke them, and to save at the least some of them, though
as yet in his time, he could not recover the Nation, yet he aimed at that,
which he knew should be. Which endeavor he presses himself Verse 15.
unto, from the consideration of the good to us Gentiles, called the
reconciling of the World, and from the wonderful work of God in them, whose
recovery shall be as the raising up people from the dead, of which Ezechiel the
Prophet speaks in chap. 37.

V. From the hereditarie right to Verse 16.
be Gods people, holy to the Lord, as the ancient Israelites were, Ier. 2. 3.
by covenant made with their first Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: which he
sets out by a double similitude, the one from the first fruits, which
sanctified the rest, and the other from the root, the sap whereof is carried
into the branches.

VI. From the humble carriage, Verse 17. to 23
which the Apostle requires us to show toward them, as not being abiects and
flat cast-awayes, but as to those of whose ingrasting in again, there is good
hope. This is the main scope of the Verses 17. to the midsts of 23. and the
particular of the words are to draw the Gentiles on to a humble behauior
toward the Jews, without any proud insulting over them.

VII. From the possibility of their Verse 23.
ingrafting in again, from the power of God, for God is able to do it, though
this their conversion seem never so impossible to man.

VIII. From the easiness of effecting Verse 24.
it, a comparatione minoris. The Lord against nature grafted us Gentiles, cut
out of the wild Olive tree, into the good Olive, which was a hard thing, then
more easily shall they be grafted again into their own Olive tree. If we
that were none of the Church, without the covenant, Aliens from the common
weal of Israel, could be made Gods people, then much more they which were
Israelites, having the adoption, were once in the Covenant, to whom The
prerogatives of the Jews.
the Law was given, to whom the service did appertain, to whom the promises
were made, they also descending from the holy Patriarchs, and of whom Christ
after the flesh came, may be recalled home, and made again the people of God.

IX. From the hidden secrecy of Verse 25.
this point, concerning the length of time, how long they the Israelites shall
continue in this their obstinacy. It was not for ever, but only till the
fullness of the Gentiles should come in; which thing here the Apostle calls a
Mystery, whereof he would not have us Gentiles ignorant.

X. From the Apostles own conclusion, Verse 26.
which he makes upon this Discourse and large Dispute, which is this, and
very confidently set down, that so all Isreal shall be saved, of the meaning
of which words before is spoken.

XI. From the Prophetical authority Verse 26. 27.
out of the Old Testament, foretelling us of this their Couuersion; as also is
proved before.

XII. From Gods love unto the Verse 28. 29.
Fathers, for whose sake the Lord is constant toward you, as he that calls
and bestows his gifts without repentance; being stable, as the Psalmist
says, in his Covenant, Psalm. 103. 17. 18.

XIII. The example of Gods merciful dealing with us Gentiles, he plainly
concludes the like unto the Jews. The Lords mercy in times past unto us
Gentiles, when we were unbelievers, should move us to be well persuaded of the
Jews Conversion, though as yet they be not believers: For in this unbelief,
as the Apostle says, God has shut up all, first, we Gentiles, and then they
the Jews, that both might be saved by Gods mere mercy. Our unbelief
hindered not our calling, no more shall their unbelief hinder their recalling,
so will God in mercy be glorified in both.

To this testimony of the Apostle to the Romans, I will here add other
Witnesses of Scripture, out of the mouth of Christ, and from others also for
more confirmation of this truth. The Testimonies of the Old Testament are
amply produced, by one very lately come forth, who has also cited Mat. 23. and
24. 2 Thessalonians. 8. 8. Revel. 1. 7. and 16. 12. and 19. 5. and 20. 21. 22. which I
therefore omit, referring the Reader to the Book called The Worlds great
restoration. Other places I will here speak of to further this light, that
the eyes of such as see not, may behold how clear this point is.

Luke 21. 23. 24.
THere shall be great distress in the Land, and wrath upon this people, and
they shall fall by the edge of the Sword, and shall be led away captive into
all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the
time of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

Here our Savior fore-telleth, First, the great misery of that Nation in
their own Land. Secondly, that the Sword shall come upon them, and by War
they shall be overcome and slain. Thirdly, that such as remain of them shall
become Captives. Fourthly, that they shall not be lead into any one Country,
but be dispersed in all Nations. Fifthly, that this treading down of Jerusalem
shall be by the Gentiles, all these things are proved infallibly true to the
eyes of all the World. Sixthly, that this treading down thereof by them is not
forever, but for a time, until the times (that is, the fullness, Romans 11. 25.)
of the Gentiles be fulfilled, that is, be come in. Therefore there is a time,
that the Nations shall be brought back again, and be made a people unto God
in the time and season.

Luke 1. 69. 75.
Zachary in this his praises foretells of Christ's Birth, as if then borne,
and then what he shall be to them, even to that people, to wit, a horn of
salvation, He that shall save them from their Enemies, and from the hands of
all that hate them, and shall so set them free, as that they shall all their
days serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness. Which
Prophetical speech, as it may be spiritually understood of the whole Israel
of God, so nothing hinders, but that this may be literally meant of the
Conversion of that people, and of their happy condition under Christ, seeing
the Prophets foretell it, the Apostle proves it, and Christ himself bears
witness hereunto.

Luke 2. 32. 34.
Old Father Simeon in his praising God, tells how Christ was prepared to be
salvation before the face of all people, in Verse 30. 31. then this general
speech of all people, he diuides into two heads, first to be a light to
lighten the Gentiles, and then to be the glory of his people Israel. In thus
placing one before the other, he fore-shewed how Christ should shine as light
to the Gentiles, whose eyes should be opened by his spirit, to take him for
their Savior, and then the fullness of them being come in, he should be a
glory to Israel, and make them renowned and glorious. Which glory as yet they
have not attained unto: for hitherto he has bin to them a stumbling block,
and a stone of offense, and not glory. And it is further obseruable, that this
holy man tells the blessed Virgin, that Christ shall be set for the fall,
that is, the reiection of that Nation, as it is taken in Romans 11. 15. and
rising again, that is, the receiving to grace, of many in Israel, The fall we
see; the rising of them again we must see in time: for God is true in the
one, as well as in the other.

Acts 1. 6.
HEre the Apostles, upon the very day of Christ's Ascension, asked our Savior,
whither he would then restore the Kingdom of Israel? They did exspect an
outward restoring of state and glory to their Nation. Our Savior does not
find fault with the opinion, as an error, neither denies he the thing, but
implies rather that such a thing should be, only the times and seasons, says
he, was not for them to know, which his Father had put in his own power.

2. Cor. 3. 16.
THe Apostle, as he taught the Romans, so here he speaks of their
miserable estate, blindness of mind, and how as yet the veil was over their
heart, thus he speaks of the Nation and whole people of the Jews, whom he
calls the Children of Israel, of the blindness of their mind, and of the
veil over their heart, his words are to be understood. And having thus
spoken of their miserable condition, he turns his speech to the hope of their
Conversion, and says. Nevertheless, when it shall turn to the Lord, that is,
that Nation or the heart of that people, the veil shall be taken away. This
shows that the Apostle did look for their Conversion, though he could not
set down the time, which is, as Christ said, kept secret with the Father. Acts
1. 6.

Being by these Scriptures, and former Reasons persuaded of the Conversion of
these Ancient people of God, so much for the honor of Christ and our good, let
us use such means as may further the same, even also in compassion to their
poor souls, and our mutual solace together. Means to be used for their
Conversion.


First, To pray with all earnest affection of spirit, that God would in his
mercy take away the veil, that lies over their hearts, to open their eyes to
behold and see with us their true Messiah, and David their King, our Lord Jesus
Christ, that so their might be one Shepherd and one Sheepfold, even so. Amen.

Secondly, To send able instruments among them to reason with them, and to
write unto them; that so if it were possible, we might save their souls, some
of them in our time at the least, as the Apostle endeavored in his time, as we
have heard, Romans 11. 14.

Thirdly, To labor to remove the main let (which hinders chiefly their
Conversion) that Beast and false Prophet, that Roman Antichrist, with his
usurped Dominion. For the Jews detest Idolatry, and are very cunning in the
Law and Prophets, where they see it forbidden, and spoken against, and knew
that their Forefathers were grievously punished for it, and therefore they
cannot imagine, that such Christians can be Gods people, that live in such
gross Idolatry, which is a continual stumbling block before their eyes, to
keep them from Christ. Let us therefore seek the overthrow of that Romish
Religion, as for our own souls safety, the peace of Christendom, so also
for the blessed Conversion of this miserable people, who can never be regayned
to the Truth, and brought to the profession of Christ, till Papistry be
destroyed.

Fourthly, Let us frame our lives aright, to all holiness and righteousness;
that so they may see our good works, and glorify God in the day of
Visitation, which shall not only provoke them, but shall redound to the
amplification and improuement of our own, both temporal and eternal
happiness; which the Lord grant, so be it,

Amen.
PEACE TO THE PVRE IN HEART. OR Good advice to walk wisely, to preserve UNITY
among our selves, that our united Forces may be stronger against the common
Enemy.
Receive wholesome instruction thou that read. If thou be desirous to walk
in a strait way, yet let it not be framed after thine own will, but look it be
the right way chalked out by Gods Word. The Golden Mean is a sweet measure,
when a man will be neither foolishly superstitious, nor lewdly presumptuous;
the two rocks of offense, the one on the right hand, the other on the left,
menacing destruction. It is good to walk with an even foot; and it is grace to
endeavor to be what we ought to be, though we cannot attain to be what we
should be.

Be no Atheistical Securitan, acknowledge God in all thy ways; nor yet a
Wil-worshipper; man's corrupt will is at odds with God; if it prescribe any
thing in Religion as matter of worship, the same turns to wickedness.

Be no fantastical Anabaptist, the true Spirit informs the mind out of the
Word: nor an Arminian the new coined Opinionist: nor a Palagian an old
Heretical Dogmatist: No blasphemous Arian, nor Lullianisticall Rosacrucian. Be
no Schismatic Brownist, nor the fond and foolish Allegorizing Familist, nor
any new Nouelist, to arrogate any thing to thy self above others, to be an
author of new Devices, thereby to draw Diciples after thee. Beware of Heresy
and Schism, hate also hypocrisy and profaneness. Heresy razeth the
foundation; Schism cuts off Communion; Hypocrisy is a painted show without
substance, never affording inward comfort; and profaneness stayneth the glory
of Christian profession.

Be no Pseudo-catholike doting upon the deeds and doings of that man of
sin. Allow antiquity; but be not deceived with the pretense thereof. The old
way is the good way when it can be showed by the Word. Traditions of men
besides the Truth often make Traitors to God. Custom not against conscience
is good; but it may not be a Law to any in an ill path. Examples of men worthy
imitation are not to be neglected; but their Errors and crooked treadings are
not to be opposed to divine Precepts. God must in matters of Religion bear
sway; man is only to further what in his worship he wills to be done, and
that obey readily.

In the truth a man must be constant, not a Time-seruer, a Protestant in
earnest, not a Laodicean Conformitant, nor yet a preposterous Reformitant: but
be discreetly zealous; yet so as discretion may guide, but not blunt the edge
of zeal, as it does in too many.

In a word hold the ancient, Catholic, Orthodoxall Verity and Truth, agreeing
with the Word, and contentiously gainsay not laudable Customs of the Church,
not against the Word. In such things be not ready to take offense and also be
very loath justly to give offense, and thus shall thou show thy peaceable
disposition. To further thy godly inclinablenesse hereto, consider well of
these so friendly given Christian Aduertisements and wholesome Counsels of
Peace. Read (good friend) advisedly, I beseech thee, post not on apace: though
thou have a quick apprehension to understand, yet take time to settle
affection. Some good things are soon known, but in heart for the most part
lightly intertayned: whence it is, that many do only talk of that often,
which not once they ever made use of. But my purpose of setting down these
things, is to bring them into practice: and therefore so read thou
deliberatly, as thy will may be to perform them conscionably, Amen.

How a man ought to carry himself in a Christian State, wisely, peaceably, and
yet religiously.
FIrst, uphold the manifest good therein.

Secondly, the manifest evils, labor in thy place by the best means to have
them amended peaceably.

Thirdly, Bear with lighter faults for a time, till fit occasion be offered
to have them amended.

Fourthly, Likelihoods of evil, make them not apparent evil, by ill
interpretation, where neither the State intends it, nor so maintaynes it.

Fifthly, doubtful things take in the better part, it is ever Charity.

Sixthly, iudiciously discern between the abuse of a thing, and that which may
be well used; lest in abhorring the abuse, thou also do utterly condemn the
thing it self and the use thereof.

Seventhly, let the corruption of the person and his lawful place be
distinguished: and where person and place are not so lawful, and in the
proposed end not against thee, wisely labor to make them for thee; and make
that good of them thou can, and wholly condemn not that Ministry which a
godly man may make for good.

Eighthly, pattern not a Monarchy to an Oligarchie, nor to any other State,
Aristocratie or Democratie: let not the well being of a foreign State make
thee unthankful for the present good thou do enjoy, and to loath thine own
being, lest malcontentednesse break into contention, so thou lose that good
thou have, and procure the increase of evil, which thou do dislike.

Ninthly, in thy zeal for Religion against corruptions; let the Book of God
well understood be thy warrant, and in thy hatred against wrongs in the
Commonwealth, let the knowledge of the Law and the equity thereof move thee
to speak: this is Religion, this is reason. Lest beginning of an ignorant
uncertainty, thou may lose the fruit of thy labors, and be condemned as a
busy medler, and contentious in a needless matter.

Tenthly, refuse not to obey Authority, in any thing wherein there is not to
thee manifestly known a sin to be committed against God: let fantasies pass;
be more loath to offend justly a lawful Magistrate, then to please the humor
of any private person. Where thou can not yield, there humbly crave pardon:
where thou may not be tolerated, be contented with thy crosses of
afflictions, for safety of conscience, and bear what thou can not avoid,
with a patient mind.

The Kingdom of God is not meat nor drink, but righteousness and peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost: for whosoever in these things serves Christ, he is
acceptable to God, and approved of men, Romans 14. 17. 18. How to avoid
scrupulositie of Conscience, and contention in seeking for reformation.
FIrst, Omit no evident and certain commandment imposed of God. If there be
nothing but probability of sinning in obeying the precepts of men; set not
Opinion before Judgment.

Secondly, Let ancient probability of Truth be preferred before new
conjectures of Error against it.

Thirdly, Mark and hold a difference between these things, the equity of Law
and the execution; between established Truth generally, and personal errors
of some; between soundness of Doctrine and erroneous application; between
substance and circumstance, the manner and the matter; between the very being
of a thing, and the well being thereof; between necessity and conueniencie;
between a Commandment and a Commandment to thee; between lawfulness and
expediencie; and between that which is given absolutely or in some respect.

Fourthly, Use the present good which thou may enjoy to the utmost, and an
experienced good before thou do trouble thy self, to seek for a supposed
better good untried, which thou enioyest not. Dislike not ever things present,
as men discontented commonly do: praise not things past foolishly, to disgrace
what now is in being: and desire not a change, hoping for better vainly. These
be ever the humors of men, the diseases in all States breed them; and light
occasions make the unwise and inconsiderate soon to express them.

Fifthly, Endeavor for things which are of necessity, wish also the well being
of the same for conueniency: but for this contend not forcibly against public
peace; lest in seeking for the been, thou do utterly lose the benefit of the
necessary esse.

Sixthly, Do not trouble thy self either to take part with, or to be against
that thing, the holding or denying whereof makes nothing for or against
Religion, to further salvation, or damnation.

Seventhly, In a common cause make one, but out of thy own judgment convinced
of the Truth and within the compass of thy calling; and not for company sake
to make up a number, or for that thou will be doing, because other are so; or
for affection to the parties, not being certainly persuaded of the lawfulness
of the action.

Eighthly, Never presume to reform other, before thou have well ordered thy
self: See at home, then look abroad; redress that which is faulty, and in
thy power to amend, before thou do meddle with that which is beyond thy
reach. Be not fair in public, and foul in private, hate hypocrisy, and
avoid vain glory.

How to avoid Popery, Schism, and uncharitable contentions among one another.
FIrst, Receive no opinion in Religion, but what the Word evidently does
warrant: beware of apprehensions out of thine own wit, but let the Word first
give thee sight, and so entertayne it, as thou art enlightened. As thou may
not of policy for fear of trouble, by thy wit get thee distinctions, to lose
sincerity where the Word is plain: so may thou not of scrupulositie,
imagine sin to trouble thy conscience, and to vex thee with fear of
transgression, where there is no Law: the one does breed Atheism, the other is
the Mother of Superstition.

Secondly, Let thy own knowledge ground thy opinions in thee, and not the
mere judgment of other: see into the Glass of the Word by thy own sight,
without other men's Spectacles; and hold what thou iudgest truth, only in love
of the Truth: beware of by-respects; hold so constantly the Truth, as one never
to be removed; but every error, be willing both to see, and to be reclaymed
from; though thou happenest to err by frailty, yet become not an Heretic by
obstinacy.

Thirdly, Witness the Truth, for the Truths sake: inform other lovingly;
desire that they may see the Truth, but never urge them beyond their judgment,
neither take it grievously, if thy words do not prevail, but wait with
patience. Beware of rash judgment, neither condemn nor contemn other that
are not as thy self. Think not to make thy gifts another guide, nor thy
measure of grace their rule; for to every man is allotted his portion.

Fourthly, Whomsoever thou do see to do amiss, judge it not to be of
wilfulness, but either of ignorance, and so offer to inform them, or of
infirmity, and so pity them, them, and pray for them. Be charitable, so shall
not his sin hurt thee, and much shall thy Charity advantage thy self in the
end: and add this withal, Be slow to anger, let never another man's
distempered passion bring thee to disorderlines in affection.

Fifthly, Love not to be in Controversies, it argues Pride and a spirit of
contention: but if thou be drawn unto them and called thereunto, undertake
the right, and choose the Truth.

How a man ought to carry himself in handling of Controversies.
FIrst, Never come to it with a preiudicate opinion, but with a mind to find
out the truth, and not of contention.

Secondly, Take words doubtful in the better sense, as the cause and
circumstances will bear; evident Truth embrace willingly, manifest errors
deny plainly, likelihood of falsehood eschew friendly, likelihood of Truth bend
them the best way: pervert nothing wilfully, acknowledge thy ignorance and
error when thou see it, and yield the victory for the Truth, sake to an
Adversary, and seek not to wrest it from him by wicked Sophistry.

Thirdly, Be sure in answering that thou have the Authors meaning, either by
which, or to which thou do make answer. Allege no testimony rashly, and
especially beware of this evil in quoting Scripture. Wresting of Scripture is
a great abuse of the Word; and if thou be in error, and do by the
Scriptures presume to maintain it, thou would have the Truth to uphold
falsehood, and wickedly do make the Holy Ghost a maintayner of a lie.

Fourthly, Follow the matter strictly, avoid idle excursio^s, pass by weak
nesse, take heed of hasty passions, and in defending a cause abuse no man's
person.

How a man ought to carry himself in things indifferent, and what to do
inscrupulositie and doubtfulnesse of Conscience.
IN things indifferent make no question for conscience sake: so it be that
neither holiness, merit, nor necessity be put therein; nor used for any part
of Gods worship, but for decency, order, and edification.

If thou be in a doubt, and thy conscience, as thou think, does trouble thee
about the use of a thing indifferent.

I. Quaere, Whether this doubt arises simply of a tender conscience from
judgment convinced; or that it be but a niceness of dislike, coming from a
desire not to be troubled with them, or for that thou have not used them, or
because some cannot away with them, or from a godly jealousy and suspicion
only, for from hence will scruples arise: so also from a continued custom,
likewise from ignorance and the want of certain knowledge, and a settled
persuasion of the lawfulness of a thing. If the Note well.
ground be not a judgment enlightened and convinced, it is not trouble of
conscience, but a dislike working discontentednesse upon some of these former
grounds, which thou may easily remove by settling thy judgment upon the Word
and sound reason.

II. Quaere, Whether this doubting arises through thy own default, by looking
out reasons to increase thy dislike, and neglecting to search for arguments to
give thee satisfaction. If thus thou have offended, as many do, take as great
pains in Gods sight to resolve thy self, as thou have done to bring thy self
into doubting, else dealest thou but partially.

III. Quaere, If it be trouble of conscience indeed, and yet the thing be not
plainly forbidden, nor so commanded; why (where a special warrant to a
particular is wanting) a general rule, or a general commandment to obey, may
not give thy conscience satisfaction.

IV. Quaere, Why a man should be more scrupulous to seek to have warrant
plainly for every thing he does in Ecclesiastical causes, even about things
indifferent, more then about matters politic in civil affairs. Men in these
things know not the ground nor end of many things, which they do yield unto
upon a general command to obey authority, knowing them not to be directly
against Gods will: and yet every particular obedience in civil matters, must
be, first, of conscience: secondly, as serving the Lord (so must every Servant
his Master:) which cannot be without knowledge and persuasion, that we do
well even in that particular, which we obey in; which men usually for
conscience sake inquire not into, but do rest themselves with a general
commandment of obeying lawful authority, so it be not against a plain
commandment of God. What therefore does let, but that a man may so satisfy
himself in matters Ecclesiastical?

The curious searching so particularly into every thing to have full
satisfaction, has so wrought in these days upon men's wits to bring
distinctions, that the more men seek in doubts for resolution, the further are
they from it. Oh days full of distractions! what counsel shall I here take
and give?

How to settle a man's conscience to prevent scrupulositie, and perplexity.
I. Keep all main truths in the Word, which are most plainly set down, and
are by the Law of nature engraven in every man.

II. Believe every Collection truly and necessarily gathered by an immediate
consequence from the Text.

III. Follow evident examples fit for thee, either as a Christian, or as thy
special calling requires.

IV. Avoid that which is plainly forbidden, or follows necessarily by an
immediate consequence.

V. Entertayne true Antiquity, and follow the general practice of the Church
of God in all ages, where they have not erred from the evident Truth of God.

VI. If thou suffer, let it be for known Truth, and against known
wickedness, for which thou have examples in the Word, or examples of holy
Martyrs in story suffering for the same, or the like. But beware of
farre-fetched consequents, or for suffering for new devices, and for things
formerly unto all ages unknown, seem they never so holy and just unto man.

If yet thou do judge a thing commanded a sin, and not to be obeyed, for
thy help herein, consider,

How a thing unlawfully commanded, may be lawfully obeyed.
I. QVaere, Whether that which is wrongfully or sinfully commanded, may not yet
nevertheless be without sin obeyed; as Ioab obeyed David in numbering the
people. Then be not thou to blame, but do what thou ought, albeit others
do what they should not.

II. Quaere, How thou do reckon it evil: if simply, then find a
prohibition; else, Where no Law is, there is no transgression: if accidentally,
that is in the abuse that may be removed; or in respect of thy ignorance of the
lawfulness, making thee to doubt, and so fearing to offend, use all diligence
for resolution. And if it be not a known sin to thee certainly, but only
by probabilities.

Quaere, Whether probabilities of sinning may give thee a sufficient discharge
for not obeying a plain Precept, and to neglect necessary duties otherwise,
both to God and Man.

If yet thou do think thou shall not do well (albeit the Gospel may be
freely preached thereby) to yield so much to the evil disposition (so
supposed) of men, think how Saint Paul valued the liberty of preaching the
Gospel; who since the Ascension of Christ, after that the ceremonial Law was
abolished, when he had preached against it, and against Circumcision; yet did
check himself publicly, and with a place of Scripture, for speaking as he
did against a Simonicall, a false (in respect of his entrance) a persecuting
and murdering high Priest: he observed legal Rites, he circumcised Timothy,
and did not find fault with things not altogether to be approved, so long as
they were not made a part of Gods worship; and all this he did to procure free
liberty to preach the Gospel.

And for yielding somewhat to men's evil dispositions, I say but thus:

Quaere, How it could stand with Moses faithfulness to grant a bill of
diuorcement (contrary to the Law of marriage, contrary to the first
institution from the beginning) for the very hardness of the peoples hearts,
and to prevent a greater mischief?

If this happily trouble thee (in doing what thou may and ought) that thou
shall offend many whom thou would not offend, then consider,

How we ought to carry our selves in offenses taken.
I. QVaere, Whether it be an offense justly given by thee, or taken without
just reason of them; thou not offending, and they displeased, the fault is
their own, and thou art not chargeable therewith.

II. Quaere, Whether they be offended in respect of what themselves know, or
but lead by affection, disliking from other men's dislike? Entreat the former to
let thee abound for such things in thine own sense, and show them that herein
thou may brotherly disagree: for the later, inform his judgment, if he
will yield to reason, if not, then,

III. Quaere, Whether thou art bound to nourish up such a one in his folly, and
to respect his partial affection, being more carried away with an ouerweening
of some men's persons, then any thing at all with the right understanding of the
cause? If they be men of judgment, and will contend with thee, be not
troubled with what wit can invent to say, but what is truly spoken from the
Word, not by far Conclusions, but by a near consequence, and plain evidence
of holy Writ. If thou can answer the substance of that which is objected,
let their vain conceits or subtilties pass; neither think that thou art
overcome, or art bound to yield unto them, as one convinced in judgment,
because thou can not see every deceivable reply, to give thereto an
unanswerable reason to take it away. If ignorance make a conviction, and
sophistry be the means, then should men be easily carried about with every
wind of doctrine. There is no Heretic but has his arguments, nor any Sect
but has conceited reasons, and Satan by his sophistry helps both, the more
to beguile others, and even so to deceive their own selves.

IV. Quaere, What authority may do in things external for outward rule in
the circumstances of things; and then, Whether Authority commanding does not
take away the offense, which might otherwise be given in a voluntary act?

V. Quaere, Whether a man should stand more upon avoiding dislikes in private
persons, then offense to public authority? Whether this be not an humouring
of men, to increase discontentednesse, rather then to endeavor to preserve
(wherein thou may) the public peace and welfare of a Christian State; or,
Whether it were not better to cross some men's affections without sin to God,
then that otherwise thou should stay the passage of the Gospel, neglect
most certain duties, let people perish, open a gap to the enemy, lose thy
liberty, and no whit better the Church? It were better, wherein thou lawfully
may, after the Apostles practice, that thou did become all things to all
men to win but some.

Do thou not behold the times? we have among us the Pseudo-Catholikes, are
they not crafty Foxes? division they seek to hold on foot; they know, a
Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand. By union they strengthen
themselves, by disunion we grow weak. If we support one another in love,
their enemitie can do us no harm. They are subtle, our innocence is not
enough, but we had need to be as wise as Serpents; and let us labor to be of
one mind, that we may jointly turn our forces against them.

Therefore let us all, as the Apostle exhorts, study to be quiet, and to
follow those things which concern our peace with God, within our selves, and
one with another. And to attain to this: let us keep patience within us, and
be charitable abroad toward others. Let us attempt nothing rashly, but first
know things as they be rightly. We may be, yea we must be zealous, yet in
sound judgment without distempered passion; and not without compassion to the
transgressor. In doing any thing (that our course may be good and approved)
let us make ever the Word our warrant; the circuit of our calling our bounds
and limits; the Spirit of God our Director; our conscience our Comforter, godly
wise our Counselors; the glory of God our end; truth and honesty the matter
for which we contend; the Enemies watchings caueats to us, to prevent
miscarriage, and to cause us to walk more warily, and all our life to be such
as may witness our readiness for death, having ever a holy remembrance of our
end, and we shall never do amiss: Even so, Amen.

FINIS.

