A WEEKS WORK. AND A WORK FOR EVERY week.

By R. B. The third Edition.



LONDON, Printed by Felix Kyngston, and are to be sold by Nathanael Newbery.
1616.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND RELIgious Ladies, the Lady Elizabeth Barkley of Bruton,
the Lady Elizabeth Barkley, of Yearlington, and the Lady Anne Horner; that
wisdom which is from above; that true peace, which is from within; and the
manifestation of both in the fruits of the spirit, to their perfect joy.
AS I consider with my self how Mary did make choice of the better part, I
cannot but bless God for the work of grace: So (Right Worshipful) on the
contrary, marking the mad choice of others, I follow the counsel of the
Prophet Esaiah, I stay and wonder. Eve had free will, the choice of an apple
and Paradise was before her: God said, eat not, and live: but eat, said the
Serpent, thou shall not die. The devil was credited, God not believed: the
apple was eaten, and Paradise lost: a miserable choice. But led she the way in
this point of folly, and has she had no followers? What, none of her
posterity to walk in her steps? Behold the sons of God chose the daughters of
men, and forsook the generation of the righteous. Lot left Abraham, and made
choice to dwell in Sodom: Esau loves his belly, and for a present mess of
pottage sells away his birthright. The mixed people among the Israelites,
rather desire garlic, and onyons, and to sit by the fleshpots of Egypt, then
to eat that sweet Manna from heaven. Yea, so mad are men in their choice, as
the Jews from the highest to the lowest, cry out to have a rebel, a thief, a
murderer, even a Barrabas, instead of that just one and innocent, Christ the
righteous.

As I have stayed in my thoughts upon these; so now should I wonder, but that
among our selves, I find many as foolish, and as unreasonable in their
choosing. They esteem more of pleasure, then of peace wiih God: they will sell
godliness for earthly gain: they prefer profit before piety; worldly goods
they like of better then heavenly graces: they choose rather to rest upon an
idle conceit in themselves of salvation, then upon the witness of Gods word,
and a truly informed conscience; they will plead rather custom, then divine
precepts; men's examples now for liberty in sin e, rather then the holy lives
of the godly recorded in Scripture: most, in a word, choose rather to be reputed
religious, then so to be indeed.

But perhaps you (Ladies) will say, what of all this to you? Surely, that you
beholding nature corrupted, and your selves, through Gods mercy, sanctified by
grace, may in your more happy choice, give due praises heartily unto God, who
affoordeth you from above so much power and strength, that you may in some
measure with holy Elizabeth, walk in the Commandments of the Lord; with
religious Mary, sit down at Christ's feet and hear his word; with that blessed
Virgin Christ's mother, ponder the words, and lay them up in your hearts; with
afflicted Hannah, pour out in your necessities, your souls by prayer unto
God; and with that devout Anna, serve God in fasting and prayers day and night.

For this end and purpose, to further every well disposed Christian, in the
path that leads unto life and glory; I have now this third time published
this Weeks work, and work for every week. I have presumed to send it forth
under your names, not in any merit of the work, but in my true esteem of your
godliness, and certain persuasion of your good desires to please God; which
the Lord increase in you more and more with such inward comfort of spirit, as
you may persevere in every good work of grace, to go boldly to the throne of
grace, in every state and condition, to the end of your days; even so, Amen.

Your Ladyships in all Christian duties, RIC. BERNARD.
Batcombe July 14.
A DIALOGVE BETWEEN JOHN the beloved Apostle, and his beloved Gaius.
Epist. 3. verse. 1.
John. GRace be with thee (Noble Gaius) mercy and peace from God the Father,
and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, with truth and love.


Gaius. Reverend Father, let this thy prayer, this day prevail with God: for
Grace and Peace, Mercy and Truth in Love I much long after.


John. Well may we wish for these things, (friend Gaius) as the foundation of
all good favors with God and all good men.


Gaius. Oh (my Lord) I thank God, these things with me are of greater price,
then any thing which may seem most precious with the world. For Grace makes
me acceptable to God: Peace comfort me within my self: Mercy from God
affords me remission of sins, and Mercy from me, showed toward others,
makes them both to pray and praise God for me. The Truth of God warranteth my
course and way; and truth observed of me, justifies my words and works: Love
in God to me, procures peace, brings forth mercy, and confirms truth; love
in our selves maintains peace, urges to mercy, and binds one to another,
and all unto the truth. Therefore (Sir) do I in soul desire earnestly after
the same, but I cannot attain unto that measure which I would. I hunger after
the perfection of all true holiness; but (alas) I cannot be satisfied. I
thirst after righteousness, but (ah miserable man that I am) who shall deliver
me from the body of this death, which so much does hinder me in my heavenly
progress.


John. I rejoice greatly (worthy Gaius) that I find thee thus well prepared
for further instructions; blessed art thou for so hungring and thirsting after
the best things, for thou shall be satisfied.


Gaius. My Lord, I am not ignorant (blessed be God for this knowledge of my
self) that I am here indeed in this present world, but not of this world; one
as a pilgrim and stranger, without any certain mansion; hither sent of the
Lord for a time to be employed in his service, and so to stay till he call
me hence; which hour I wait for, looking for death daily, and the Lords
coming to judgment. And therefore I desire to be ready prepared, and to
learn whatsoever may be needful both for continuance, and increase of grace in
the way of life. Especially seeing how the world grows so on to worse and
worse; and this our present age declining so fast unto wickedness; lest I be
intrapped, and become guilty of the common sins, and so perish in the
deserved plagues.


John. Indeed (good Christian heart) well may thou so term these Evil
days.
our present times. Is not piety turned by many into policy? sincerity by
others into schism? true zeal is decayed, conscience is now but a customarie
fashion graced with conformity: faith is altogether a formal service without
fasting, without true fear of God and feruencie of spirit, without gracious
words tending to edification, or good works assuring us of salvation: godly
government is grossly abused by covetous persons, and made a base course for
filthy gain: true devotion is not known from Popish superstition; religion
is held but an opinion, or a point of state, which is therefore often
pretended, but seldom truly intended. For many indeed loathe the word of life;
they love riches, they reckon not of Christ's righteousness; if they can enjoy
a present honor and prosperity, they will hazard heaven, and the eternal
Paradise. Such profane Esaus will sell their future hopes for a present mease
of pottage: if ever such Atheists have recourse to God at any time for mercy,
it is then only, when they perforce come under the hand of his justice. For
where is that man, which, in only hatred of the worlds vanities, in true
detestation of his own foul corruptions, upon good assurance of life
eternal, will in his health and highest prosperity begin heartily to sing the
song of Simeon, and to say, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, embracing Christ by faith, as he took
him in his arms?


Gaius. Alas (my Lord) this is our carnal state, indeed in a fleshly security,
for the most part. For many have a religion without the virtue of the spirit,
and power of the word: they frame a God all of mercy, without terror in
execution of justice: they imagine a Christ without a fan in his hand, to
divide the chafe from the wheat to burn it, and without an iron rod, to
break the wicked in pieces. But what should I thus complain of others? Oh
that I could pray and mourn for them, and amend my own ways, which verily I
desire; and therefore do I humbly crave of thee farther directions, how I may
daily exercise my self in true holiness and righteousness, that so I may
avoid what is evil, and in the end find death advantage unto me, and the last
judgment, the day of my perfect redemption.


John. (Well-beloved Gaius) this thy heavenly desire, holy purpose, and most
gracious affection, disposed so happily to goodness, do cause me greatly to
rejoice. It is a rare thing now a days, to find so humble a spirit in so
learned a person; such piety in so great prosperity: such hunger and feeling of
wants still, in so great abundance of grace. I know not whether I more admire
thee, then love thee: both are so high in degree in my thoughts and meditations
upon thee.


Gaius. Reverend Sir* I thank you for your undeserved love; but I cannot cease
to marvel, how my mean gifts and graces should be esteemed of so great worth
with you; when I know, that of my self I am nothing, and have nothing but of
God; that more strength of corruption is in me, then power of grace; much more
yet to be desired, then I have attained unto, and wherein many thousands
excel me.


John. Good heart, upon this thy humility, the Lord in mercy look, and will
exalt thee, as he has promised them that are humble and meek.


Gaius. If God be pleased to show me mercy in any measure, I will acknowledge
it his good grace without my merit. But may it please thee (thou holy man of
God) to cease to admire my poor deeds, and no deserts; and with the eye of
pity to look upon my great defects, and by thy gracious words instruct me yet
further how to demean my self, that my wants may be supplied, my present
state of grace preserved, and by little and little, through prayer and
practice, good things may by Gods mercy be increased unto the end.


John. It pleases me well (good Gaius) though not to cease to admire thee, yet
willingly to advise thee (wherein I can) to the utmost. Therefore for the
present take this my counsel and advice: thou shall do well to observe these
rules following, for the general course of life.

First and above all, set General rules for the whole course of life.
God ever before thy face: think him always with thee, present by thee, and
earnestly looking upon thee, judging rightly, and as thou deseruest, justly to
reward thee.

Secondly, behold his glorious Angels attending thee; perfect patterns of
piety, and all purity; in well doing they do guard thee; through wickedness
they fly from thee.

Thirdly, have an awful regard to all Gods Commandments, omit no duty; commit
no iniquity; fear to offend in the least sin, and be zealous of every least
good work; esteem not lightly of any of Gods Commandments; judge every part
of his will set down in his word, worthy of all holy reverence, and that with
obedience in fear.

Fourthly, in the matters of God, and holy motions, abandon thine own will;
shut out carnal reason; seek not thine own glory, favor, or praise of other
in thy service to God; but only respect his good pleasure, and a conscionable
discharge of thy own duty.

Fifthly, have always a love unto the Word, a reverend estimation of his
Ministers, and a religious care to sanctify the Sabbath; three things most
usually of a very profane carelessness, neglected and despised.

Sixthly, in what estate soever thou do stand, take wisely an occasion from
thence to become more holy toward God, to man more just, and in thine own
heart more truly humble and gracious. If it be in abundance enjoy thy wealth
with thy brethrens welfare; supply their wants, by giving freely, or lending in
true love. Think not thy self an absolute Lord of thine own, but Gods
Steward, who gives, and can take away; look so upon the poor, as on thy
self, who may be in their stead. Make not riches thy hearts habitation, nor
the power of revenge upon thine enemy, nor the prop to bear up iniquity, nor
as fuel to maintain the fire of lusts, nor any evil whatsoever; but with thy
riches honor God; do therewith public good, in maintaining religion,
justice, truth, charity, and every good way. If thou be in honor, be not
puffed up; contemn no inferior, he may be thy equal: presume not to
equalize thy self to thy better; acknowledge thy equal every where, as thy
fellow: and to such rather give then take honor from. Pride is hateful, but
true humility (not a base spirit) is a badge of true honor. For know this,
that meanly borne are in place of honor evermore high minded, and of a more
presuming disposition, with contempt of others, then the truly descended of
ancient noble progenitors. In adversity, of what kind soever, take it from God
always thankfully; be quiet and contented, look to the Lords promises; and
use all good and lawful means for deliverance; wait with patience; give God
glory; judge it thy desert; know thy offenses; and cease to sin. Ever being
persuaded, that thy present estate is best for thee, and most for Gods glory:
and withal believe, that in the end thou shall have a comfortable issue of all
thy troubles.

Seventhly, live to the world as a stranger, and as an enemy to thine own
corruptions. When thou see other grow rich, envy not their prosperity: but
if they be godly, rejoice and praise God: if wicked, admire Gods mercy, and
pray for them. Think that what thou thy self have, is more then thou well
deseruest, or rightly can use, without Gods special grace: the less thou
have, the less account thou art to make. Strive to be well pleased with Gods
will and his disposing of all things: and for this end pray much and
fervently; fast often, but beware of hypocrisy: read the holy Scriptures
diligently, and that with all reverence, attention, and faith: make them thy
counselors in all thy enterprises; thy comforts in adversity, thy guide in
prosperity, and the rule of thy whole life.

Eighthly, be much addicted unto heavenly meditations, lifting up thy heart
unto the Lord, sending forth spiritual eiaculations upon every occasion;
though prayers be but short, yet may they pierce the heavens, by sighs that
cannot be expressed. If thou do think of God, let it be with high reverence
to his Majesty: speak of him with fear, as his glorious excellency
requires. So know him, as thou may in acknowledging him, never dare to
disobey his Commandments. Behold him in his goodness to love him, in his
justice to fear him: in his word to know him, and to believe in him. Behold
him also in his works, his wisdom and How to behold the Lord in his creatures
power in the works of creation: his mercy and justice in the work of
redemption: his ever being in our continual preservation. Acknowledge his
providence, in providing for his creatures; his strength in the mightiness of
mountains, and powers irresistable; his holiness by his Angels purity, and
his Saints piety; his inuisibility by the air and strong winds; his miraculous
hand by the Ocean sea; his glorious Majesty by the brightness of the Sun;
his bounty by extending his goodness to every creature; his dominion and
sovereignty by his rule over the world; his patience, by not speedily
confounding some presumptuous sinners, yet his justice in due inflicted
punishments upon others. His beauty by the heavens brightness, the Sun in his
glory, the shining stars, the glistering gold, and the lively colors set
upon his fair creatures full of admiration to the beholders. His truth by the
performance of his word; his stability, by the certain and unchangeable course
of things; and his infiniteness by the earths roundnesse, the heavens
circumference, and the immeasurable spatiousnes betwixt both. Praise this God
in all his proceedings: disgrace none of his works, magnify his goodness for
the least of his gifts: be silent when he crosses thee: fear, when he is
using upon his children the rod of his correction: but tremble at his wrath, in
his work of destruction, and ever submit to the powerful hand of his
providence.

Ninthly, in the next place, with thy thoughts of God, savor also the things
that are of God; that is, his word and ordinances, ministry and magistracy,
also all divine truths, though above all reason; likewise all holy motions,
pressing down the corruptions of thy heart; yea, sharp rebukes for
reformation; show patience in bearing of wro^gs, and manifest love to the
godly, though never so poor; and let their account of thee be more esteemed
of, the^ the countenance of the mightiest, that be enemies to goodness. Let
mourning and sorrow for sin please thee better then wicked mirth. Prefer Gods
honor and divine worship, before thine own life, and al thy wealth. Hold it
thy greatest preferment and glory to be a true Christian, and a companion to
all that fear God, professing the truth with them in the way of life. Judge it
no disgrace to be noted for zeal in religion, for following the holy Saints
in true devotion. But desire and strive to be like the best; follow David in
feruencie; Josias in tenderness of spirit, and a melting heart; Barnabas in
charity, Nathaniel in sincerity, without guile; Moses in the spirit of
meeknes, and Joshua in his resolution to fear God, and that alone with all
thine household; and be as Cornelius in his holy estimation of the ministry,
and alacrity of spirit, to join with the people of God. Step forward ever with
these and the like, in the way of virtue, and that unto the death, as holy
Martyrs have done constantly, and look to the reward of glory in the end.

Tenthly, as thou art religious; so be also righteous: serve God, and do thy
duty unto men: obey lawful commands of such as have authority over thee. Look
on God in the Commander, and for a reward at his hands. Be of a peaceable
spirit: offer Of our carriage toward men.
wrong to none, and wrongs received, seek not to revenge: desire only that
which is thine own; require yt peaceably, which other withhold wrongfully; use
law, but as a moderator, and not as an auenger; hate no man, though he have
deserved it; by love win him, and by thy weldoing hold him fast to thee: make
account of thy neighbor, as of thy self: let his honor be thy joy; his
sorrow, thy grief; and his life to thee precious, his chastity preserve, as
thine own honesty: think thy good name touched, in the crack of his credit,
for the Gospels sake: wish him ever well; do as thou would be done unto. If
in his absence thou speak of him, let it be good; and in his presence only
for his good. Covet not to be preferred before him; that is, pride: not to
have his life; that is bloody cruelty: nor to satisfy thy lust; that is
filthy dishonestie: nor to get his goods, that is the every: nor to take away
his good name; that is worse then death. Though he dislike of thee; yet love
thou him: fail not thou of any duty, albeit other do not observe thee
according, as is meet. There is in thee, the more grace; and the greater praise
thou do deserve, when thou can subdue thy passions, pass by contempt,
neglect thy self, and teach other men their duties only by thine own
weldoing. This will procure love, make all thy paths peaceable, and get thee
praise and due honor with men: if not; yet God sees, he will judge, and
plead thy cause for thee in their consciences, revenge thy wrongs upon
obstinate enemies, and recompense fully thy goodness upon thy self. Let this
comfort thee against their unthankfulness, and remember the end, observe the
commandment of love, live ever in daily expectation of death, and the reward
of life, the crown of glory, and by the help of Gods spirit, thou shall never
do amiss.


Gaius. O blessed Lord God! how do I hunger, to have part in this blessedness!
my soul is as the thirsty land. I preceiue hereby my great wants, and
bewail my imperfections. I see now the narrow way, and the straight gate to
life, and fear. Ah how much is professed, how little practiced? I should
utterly despair of my safety, but that I rest upon Gods mercy, and rely only
upon Christ his merits. Now the Lord vouchsafe me his spirit, and the help of
his grace, that I may be a true obseruer of all these things, thus to do his
will, thus to perform my bounden duty. Oh (Sir) that I could in this manner
live toward God so in holiness, and toward men so righteously: Oh that I might
pass thus through this sinful world, with that peace of conscience, with that
joy of the spirit, with that preparednes for death, and with that longing after
our Lord Jesus his coming, which is gotten hereby, and which the very
creatures do groan for, and all the godly true repentants heartily wish for.
Oh how grievous is it now to me to consider, how far I am from this practice
of piety, especially when I do weigh my own weaknesses, and also want of
grace to attain to the due and full performance of this so conscionable a
course? Oh what shall I do? Oh what shall I do? I am so laden with
corruptions, and the world so full of tentations, compassing me about with
examples of wickedness, that I fear my fall. He that seeks goodness, oh how
little is he regarded! virtue wants praise, vice is not abhorred; innocence
made a prey, justice set to sale; sincerity reputed folly, and just dealing is
held the high way to beggerie. If yet for all these things I should disclaim
the way of well doing, I should therewith loose the hope of heaven: if I should
embrace ungodliness and vanity, I am sure to be damned in hell. As (Sir) what
shall I do? Ah my poor imprisoned soul! oh that I were dissolved! let me
loose (O Lord) out of this prison of my body: O come Lord Jesus, O come quickly,
and make an end of these days of sin; I desire be dissolved, and to be
with thee.


John. Alas (good soul) what moves thee thus to bemone thy self? thou art a
happy Creature, and have no such cause to complain in this so sorrowful a
manner. Comfort thy self (my heart) in that large portion of piety given unto
thee: thy desire in time shall be satisfied, upon thy lowliness, assuredly,
the Lord does look. Fear not to find mercy and favor, he will refresh those
that travel and be heavy laden. And therefore let us proceed on, as we have
done hitherto, and if thou would know more, wherein I may inform thee,
demand, and I will make answer; show wherein, and I will instruct thee, and the
Lord direct thee in the way that thou shall choose.


Gaius. Sir, seeing I have thus found favor in your eyes, and that you judge
me among the faithful; I desire to be informed more particularly, The use and
end of this book.
how from time to time every day, as a work for every week, during life, I
may behave my self religiously in the way to eternity?


John. Is it thy desire (beloved Gaius) to have me set down, how thou The sum
and parts handled herein.
should exercise thy self, first in the morning, on the day time abroad, in
the evening returning home, and in the night time awakening, and so in the end
of the week, for a preparation to the Sabbath?


Gaius. Even so, this, indeed (Sir) is my desire: for having particular rules
so set before me, I may the better understand what to do, more orderly go
forward, and according to the distinction of times, look over daily my
precepts, till I become cunning by a conscionable practice: which the holy one
vouchsafe me of his great goodness and mercy.


John. Even so be it (my Directions for every morning.
bowels). Now therefore awaking in the morning forthwith before other things,
I. Consider how 1. Duty.
graciously God has renewed his mercy toward thee, preserving thee alive in
the night, and giving thee (as it were) in the morning a new life, awaking thee
(perhaps) by the voice of man, by the crowing of a cook, by the sound of a
bell, or otherwise, and opened again thine eyes in darkness, to behold the
shining light; for which mercy give him hearty thanks and praises; and withal,
desire him to give thee sight to thy soul, as thou have light for thy body:
and that as he expels darkness from thee, and affoordeth thee day light
and Sunshine, to the eyes of the body: so in like manner to be pleased to
remove ignorance, that spituall darkness from thy mind, by the light of his
illuminating spirit, that thy soul by the sunshine of the holy Scriptures,
may see how to walk in this veil of tears, and through this darkness (in
which the world lies without sight of sin, or remorse of conscience) unto
thy heavenly harbor.

Then secondly, fall to 2. Duty. Meditations upon our awaking.
meditation, and first, how God can awake us from the sleep of sin, and open
our eyes, to see the light of the truth, either by extraordinary means, or by
ordinary, and these weak, or more forcible, as it pleased him to awake David
by Nathan, and Peter by the cock; although we have slept as many years in
sin, as hours in our bed.

Secondly, that after a sleeping, though long, if there be life, there
follows a wakening: so is it with the elect, though they fall asleep again
in sin, and lie therein a long time, yet because they are not utterly without
the life of God, they shall at length awake again.

Thirdly, that as awaking in the morning by the day light, in the appointed
time to arise, and men up and in health, there is not by and by a returning to
sleep in bed again; no more shall bodily death seize upon any, there shall be
no more returning to rest in the grave, in the day of the last resurrection.

Fourthly, that as a careful husband, aiming at his thrift, is ashamed to lie
sleeping in bed, as if it were still night, when the Sun is up, yea shining
upon him, and he called to his business: even so should every good Christian
careful of salvation be ashamed to lie sleepiing in any sin, when the clear
light of the Gospel shines upon him, and is called upon by faithful Teachers
to the performance of his duties.

Fifthly, by thy rising up, Meditations in rising.
think upon thy resurrection, which is twofold: first, from the kingdom of
darkness, and our natural corruption, to the true light and kingdom of
grace; and of the second resurrection, from the darkness of the grave, to the
heavenly light of the kingdom of glory.

Sixthly, in arising up Meditations upon our naked* nesse.
without clothes, as naked; 1. consider how naked we be by nature of all
holiness and righteousness, when we come into the world, so to bewail our
wretchedness. 2. That we shall arise naked at the last day, as Adam was in
his innocence. 3. That as in this bodily nakedness without clothes we be
ashamed, for the vncomelines thereof, to be seen so of men, unless we be
fools, or mad: even so should we be ashamed to be seen of God, of his
Angels, and of any good men naked, without the covering of grace and goodness,
because of the filthiness of sin. And as none but fools and mad men come
naked before men; so do none but mad men, wicked fools, and men desperately
leaud, live naked of goodness before God, and his Church. 4. Think also, that
thou shall arise out of thy grave as thou do arise out of thy bed, and so,
indeed, appear in judgment.

Seventhly, being up, and Meditations in putting on of our clothes.
putting thy raiment upon thee, meditate of these things. That as thou look
for raiment for thy body; so must thou look for clothing to thy soul, which
is Christ's righteousness. 2. That, as without a hand thou can not array thy
self; so without faith, thou can not put on Christ. 3. That as bodily
raiment is to cover our shame (and not therefore to be proud of it) so is
Christ's righteousness for to cover our sins. 4. That as a raiment fitted
unto thee, then does thee good, affords thee comfort, makes thee comely,
preserves thy body from dangers, which by walking naked it might be annoyed
with, and thy self brought to destruction thereby: even so Christ his
righteousness, applied unto thee, does thee then good, affords thee comfort,
makes thee comely before God, and is thy preservation, to save thee from the
burning wrath of God for sin, and other perils of destruction, which all that
walk naked without it fall into, and perish utterly. 5. That, as when thy
raiment is on, thou dare then boldly be seen, and go before men; so having
on this robe of Christ, thou may come boldly to the throne of grace before
God. 6. As thou do provide a covering for every part of thy body, and, being
able, do beautify thy clothes with other ornaments: so labor for
spiritual graces to every part of the soul, and beautify thy profession with
the comely ornaments of good words, and good works: adorn thy ear with the
earing of attention to the word, thy neck with the golden chain of Peter's
Evangelical virtues; thy hands, with the bracelets of Alms* deeds to the
poor; let thy white linen put thee in mind of inward purity; thy other
outward raiment of common honesty; thy well shapt apparel, of decent
behavior; thy clenly going, of avoiding spiritual uncleanness; the mask (to
one of that sex) of modesty; the long garments of chastity; the mufler of
womanly silence; the fan, of Christ's ran, with which he will win now the
wicked chafe from his Church to consume it with fire. Let thy old garment, put
thee in mind of thy old habit in sin cast away; and thy new raiment of thy
better estate, and regeneration.


Gaius. Surely I do perceive well hereby, that a wise and godly minded man,
may make good use to himself of many things which we do lightly regard,
either through ignorance, or want of grace.


John. True it is ( Gaius) that holy and sanctified meditations afford, as it
were, food to the soul, even in those things which all men can use, by nature
and reason, for the benefit and beauty of the body, but few can make good use
of for the soul; with which yet, the godly man's mind is delighted, and thereof
reapeth no small profit.


Gaius. But (Sir) when I am up and thus apparelled, what other good meditations
may be made upon the rest of my actions?


John. As thou go to Meditations in washing.
wash, consider, 1. that as thy body needs washing, so does thy soul of
cleansing. 2. That, as water washes away the filthiness of the flesh; so does
Christ's blood sin from thy soul. 3. that, as therefore thou do wash,
because thou would be clean, and hate filthiness: even so, in hatred of
sin, and love of purity must we have recourse to the blood of Christ, that
we may be cleansed of all uncleanness. 4. As thou have washed to go to thy
meat; so be washed in innocence to go to the Lords Table.

In brushing and making Meditations in brushing and washing of clothes.
clean thy garments; think that as thy raiment is subject to dust, and other
uncleanness, in the use, or to mothes in lying still: even so art thou thy
self subject to corruptions, both in travel and rest. 2. That as thou can
not endure to have thy garments dustie, or unclean, but will brush them, to
have off the dust and filth, so should thou not endure to have the dirtie
filth, or any dustinesse of sin to cleave unto thee. 3. That as some spots
and for incklings will not off with light brushing; but need more forcible
means, and therefore thou will use rubbing, yea and washing too; if otherwise
the dirt will not out* even so, some sins will not off with easy means, but
we must use rubbing and washing, that is, ardent prayer, and much fasting, and
wash them with abundant tears of a penitent heart: yea and bring our selves
unto the fountain of grace, and desire of God to rinse us thoroughly in the
blood of Christ, that throughout we may be purged and made clean. 4. That as
washed clothes* need wringing, and also the warm Sun to dry them again, so
needs the penitent spirit, sorry for sin, and wrung with contrition, the
comfortable promises, of the warm Sun beams of the Gospel, to dry up his
deep sorrow, and to refresh the heaviness and sadness of his soul. 5. That
as, when thou have bespotted thy clothes, or else others have besprinkled them,
thou yet do not cast them away desperately, but use the best means to
make them clean, to use them again: even so, though thou through thy own
frailty, or Satan and the wicked by tentations have bespotted thy profession
and good name; yet despair not, neither utterly cast of thy profession and
care of a good name, but use good means to recover again these things by well
doing.

In looking into a glass, Meditations in looking into a glass.
consider, that as this is a means for thee to see thy self bodily; so there
is a means, even Gods word, by which (as in a glass) thou may behold thy
self spiritually. 2. That as without a glass thou can not see thy self, no
more can thou know thy self without Gods word. 3. That as a glass shows a
man his deformities to himself, yet the man which wants eyes, cannot see how
the glass does set him forth; so, albeit Gods word show to every man his
estate: ye, for want of the eyes of the soul (knowledge and divine wisdom)
men do not see their corruptions. 4. That as a glass is true or false, so
does it represent the person looking into it, if a true glass, truly; if
naughty and false, falsely and corruptly: even so, there is a true glass, Gods
word, showing us truly our selves; also a false and corrupt glass, which if we
do look into, it does deal corruptly with us, not showing our selves truly
unto our selves; such a glass is man's corrupt reason, men's praises of us, the
traditions and doctrines of men in will worship, the witty discourses of mere
moralists, in their Naturals, and such like; these be all corrupt and false
glasses, which we must not look into to see our selves, but into the only true
glass, the word of God. For as a true glass, 1. shows thy self to thy
self, as thou art foul or fair without flattery or deceit; so does Gods
word show either thy fair graces, or foul vices without partiality. 2. As
thou delightest to see thy comely parts, and so more to grace them; and as thou
do see thy spots, and look after them, that thou may wash them off:
even so, behold thy graces in Gods word, to delight therein, and seek to
beautify them the more; as also thy deformities and spots of sin, to wash
them away. 3. As thou approuest of a glass, and delightest to look into it,
because it is a true glass, though it show thy spots; so should we allow of,
and delight in Gods word, albeit it discover unto us our iniquities and sins.

After these meditations, 3. Duty.
betake thy self to In the morning is prayer.
prayer; and cast down thy self before the Lord; crave pardon for every
sin: nights pollution, natural corruption, days transgression; desire the
spirits illumination, the direction of the word, the graces of the spirit, the
protection of Angels, the help of his holy hand to bear thee up in all thy
ways, whatsoever thou put thy hand unto in the day following, according to
thy vocation and course of thy lawful calling.

Having thus called upon 4. Duty is to read the Scriptures.
God, take some time to look into Gods word, to read some portion of
Scriptures. As thou can look into a glass every morning; so have a care to
look into the law of God, to see the state of thy soul; behold what thou art
by nature; what by grace, what here now, and what thou may be in the life
to come. Also consider of thy place and standing, thy course of life and
calling: what thy duty is therein either to God, or to man: what charge thou
have upon thee, whether of a child, a parent, a married person, a ruler of a
family, a master, or of a servant, a publke or private person, a pastor, or one
of the flock, a labourer, or trades* man, and so forth* and according to the
several respects; consider of thy duty. By this glass, look into the order
of thy family, thy conversation with men, and thy dealings in the world; by it
set modestly thy countenance, frame reverently thy gesture, guide thy unruly
tongue, set thy hands on work, and order thy footsteps; and so reform
whatsoever is amiss. If thou do look into it for thy attire, consider by
this glass of truth, not only how thy raiment does Consideration of apparel.
become thee; but also how lawful to be worn, how convenient for thee in
respect of thy place, degree, age, sex, and ability: thereby to prevent just
occasion of giving offense; and if yet thou will needs excel in bravery, and
go with the best for outward garments; see that thou also be as ready to
imitate the most holy in heavenly graces: else thou art but the devils
ensigne-bearer, lifting up the standard of pride to thy own confusion.

After all these things 5. Duty.
weigh seriously with thy self before thou go Godly considerations in going
abroad.
forth. 1. What business thou have abroad. 2. What warrant thou have for thy
intendments therein from God and his word. 3. How lawful thy proceeding and act
it self is in it self. 4. How lawful unto thee, what calling thou have
thereunto. 5. What means to effect it, what hope of a blessing, what honor may
be thereby to God, what good to others, what profit to thy self. Do nothing
rashly, nor any thing at any time, against religion, charity, public peace,
equity, or common honesty, lest thou sin against God, against men and
against thy own soul.

To conclude, consider that thy preparation to thy business in thy Christian
calling, is a preparation to go forth unto the battle with thy spiritual
enemies, and therefore forget not to keep ever within the City, the new
Jerusalem, The Christian Garrison.
the true Church of God, under thy General Jesus Christ, guided by his
Vicegerent his holy spirit, following his Ensign the preaching of his word,
having upon thee the whole Armor of God, the girdle of verity, the brestplate
of righteousness, the helmet of salvation, the shield of faith; on thy feet,
the preparation of the Gospel of peace; in thy hand, or rather in thy heart,
the sword of the spirit, the word of God and use all these with fervent prayer;
attend the Ensigne-bearers, the true Preachers of Gods word* displaying their
colors, openly and lively teaching the truth. Keep with the court of Guard,
the fellowship of the faithful; under the Castle of Gods gracious protection;
being to watch, stand firm in thy holy profession, and abide in thy particular
calling. Let the Captain religion command thee, the Lieutenant soundness of
judgment in the truth settle thee, the Sergeant prudence order thee; let thy
Corporal apprehension, set thy attention Sentinel, when thou shall hear the
Gentlemen of the Round coming, godly discourses and holy motions: keep the
watchword, the witness of Gods Spirit diligently; if thou shall perceive any
secret conspirators, inward corruptions, outward tentations, make an alarm,
let fly from thy heart spiritual eiaculations unto Jesus Christ for aid
against them. If the common soldiers corrupt reason, and loose affections
begin to be disorderly, and to mutiny through vain pleasures, against
Captain religion, complain presently to the General the Lord Jesus, that by
his Spirit he may suppress them, and by the power of conscience keep them in
obedience, lest the terrible shot of thundering judgments bring an utter
destruction: In all assaults fight valiantly, resist thy enemies with courage,
and be persuaded in the end of victory; howsoever for thy bodily life care
not; never yield to thine enemies, but fight it out as a soldier of Jesus
Christ to the death, rather then to be taken and led captive; for that is
worse then a thousand bodily deaths.

Lastly, going forth thus 6. Duty. In being abroad.
well resolved, set God before thee; hide his commandments within thee; cleave
to the rule of his word; purpose wholly to do well, and endeavor it; take
heed of ill intendments. Avoid ill company, beware of ill counsel; favor
not thy own corruptions; seek not thine own will* aim principally at Gods
glory; and thus go forth in the name of the Lord, be confident that thou
do go under Gods protection, and expect a safe return. For blessed is such
a one in his going forth, and blessed shall he be in his returning in again.

But if before thou go Meditations in going to meat.
out, or afterward (when thou will) thou shall receive any bodily nourishment:
consider these things, 1. That as thy body stands in need of food, so does thy
soul also. 2. That as hunger makes meat pleasant, and forces thee to look
for food, and to receive it thankfully; even so a soul hungering after grace,
makes the word pleasant, causes us to seek it, and having it, to thank God
heartily for it. 3. As nothing makes us delicate in feeding, or to desire
variety of dishes, and dainty fare: but quezie stomachs, or a custom in nice
feeding, want of appetite, or weakness in digestion: so nothing but
daintiness and an appetite to variety, weak spirits, yet withal full of
proud conceits, fleshly apprehe^sions, itching ears, want of good stomackkes
and hearts vnhumbled, do cause the fine and delicate cooking of Gods word, and
saucing it with the froth of men's wits, to make it fleshly sweet, and pleasant
to vain persons. 4. Consider how thou can lay aside thy worldly businesses,
thy pleasures and profits to take thy bodily repast either at home, or as
occasion serves abroad, where thou may have it; even so should thou lay
aside thy pleasures and profits at times fitting, for to get food for thy
soul, either at home or abroad: for as food is necessary for the body; so is
the word of God preached for thy soul. 5. As thou know that food preserues
not life without Gods blessing, and that the least crum may bereave thee of thy
life, if it go wrong: and therefore do thou pray to God before: even so,
know also, that hearing, and preaching of the word does not give, not preserve
the life of the soul* except God bless the same; yea the least mistaking in
the chiefest points (if God prevent it not) may cause thee to err even unto
death. And therefore before we come to the word, let us pray heartily to God
for a blessing. 6. As thou will not sit down to receive food but with clean
hands; so come not to Gods word, or the Lords Table, without a clean heart:
and as thou will sit down, if thou have a good stomach, when meat is prepared
for thee, laying aside thy business for a while; so indeed if our hearts be
good, when the Lord has prepared by his Ministers food for us, let us, as we
ought, lay aside worldly businesses a while, to hear his doctrine, words of
instruction, for our strength and edification.

And being set down Meditations being set at the table.
at a feast, then let the house in which thou art, put thee in remembrance of
Gods Church: the Master of the house, of Christ Jesus the head of his Church,
and Lord of the feast; the table, of the Lords Table: thy sitting down, the
spiritual rest at the heavenly banquet: the fair linnens, of purity; the
furnishing of the Table, the variety with plenty of all things, of the things
prepared for us by Christ. Let the cleanly and decent service, put thee in mind
of the pure worship of God: the wholesome food of sound doctrine, the orderly
placing of dishes, the orderly administration of holy things. The seruitours,
let them remember thee of Gods Ministers; the bread, of the word of God, and
Christ's body in the Sacrament; the drink and wine, of the water of life, and
blood of Christ; milk, of the principles of religion and catechizing; strong
meat, of harder points of doctrine; salt, of the ministry of the word; sauce,
of afflictions mingled with Gods mercies, to make them taste the better. The
cunning caruing, and cutting up of the food, of the right dividing of Gods
word; the reaching of it cut, of the giving to every man his part and portion;
thy hand, of thy faith; thy chewing in thy mouth, of thy meditation in heart;
thy digestion, of thy true receiving of the word. Remember by thy company, the
communion of Saints; by their talk together, the holy conference; by their*
idle speech, the nature of vain and iangling spirits; and by their grave and
sober speaking, the wisdom of their words, which are wise in heart. By the
music, (if any be) consider of the sweet melody, in concord of loving hearts,
living in unity; and of the ioies in heaven, and mirth unspeakable; by the
chearing of the heart with meat and drink, causing thee to be merry, weigh
the sweet comforts of the word refreshing thy soul making thee glad in the
peace of a good conscience, which is a continual feast. When thou offerest of
that thou have unto any, let it put thee in mind, of the communicating of thy
graces, and gifts of heavenly things unto others. When thou receiuest willingly
with thanks what other offer to thee, think how willingly and thankfully thou
should receive the food and means of salvation from other, when any shall
offer the same unto thee.

Being at length well refreshed Being refreshed and ready to arise from the
table.
and ready to arise, think what a blessing of God it is to have food to
refresh the body; and so in like manner to have means of instruction to thy
soul. Let him that gives thanks in the end, call to thy remembrance, how the
Minister gives thanks at the end of the time of the public worship, which
thou art to stay for them, as at the Table for saying of grace.

To conclude this, as thou feel strength of body by taking corporal food:
so labor to feel strength of grace, by receiving the food of the soul. And
as thou perceiuest that the body will famish, without nourishing of it daily;
so the soul will perish where there is no vision. And as thou can find in thy
heart to be at cost for the bodily food, and can labor and go far for it:
so, such a love and hunger should thou have for the food of the soul, that
thou should willingly be at cost for it, to labor for it, to seek it, as
silver, and to search for it as treasury; that thou may come to the fear
of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.


Gaius. Alas my heart is heavy, my soul is perplexed within me; Oh how
wanting hitherto have I been of these duties, and ignorant of these
meditations. I confess, I have risen without any true reverent remembrance of
God; a few prayers, perhaps, I have made, more in sound of words, then with
sighs and groans from an earnest affection of the heart. But now have I better
understood how every morning, I am to demean my self; the Lord give me
grace, what now I know, and thou (good man of God) have so largely instructed
me in, hereafter never to neglect.


John. Comfort thy self (my bowels) thou have a large portion in the Lords
inheritance, I wish chiefly, that thou may prosper, as well as thy soul
prospers: thy beginnings in goodness; thy desire to increase in grace, and thy
faithful endeavor to attain thereunto, by Gods blessing, shall bring thee to
perfection, and to thy desired wish in the end.


Gaius. Thou have spoken (I thank thee) comfortably unto thy servant: but if
that I have now obtained thy grace, and that I be acceptable in thine eyes,
before thou proceedest any further, I beseech thee to frame me a form of prayer
for every morning, as may fitly agree with my former meditations.


John. (Faithful Gaius) I very willingly condescend to this thy holy desire;
if therefore it please thee, in this or the like manner, thou may frame thy
prayer.

Blessed be thy name, (most A Prayer for the morning.
gracious Father, the Lord of life) for that thou have of thy goodness and
mercy thus preserved me this present night past; and have awakened me, raised
me up, given unto me comfortable meditations, and a most sweet taste of thy
heavenly graces; Oh my Father, my Father, how is my spirit delighted with these
celestial joys! afford me still, I humbly beseech thee, the like measure of
thy mercy daily, that I may ever feel these comforts, and never cease to
praise thy goodness.

Indeed (O Lord) I freely confess unto thee, that I have lien in the bed of my
corruptions, and slept in the dark ignorance of my mind, and therein took
such delight, as if thou had not sent out the sweet beams of the light of
truth, and called me up by thy faithful teachers, I had yet remained in the
night of misdeeds, and perished in my sins.

Sythen therefore (O Lord) thou have thus brought me from darkness to the
light, and opened mine eyes to see that which before I could not discern;
cause me now, I beseech thee, to shake off al fleshly drousines, that in so
broad a sunshine of the Gospel, I may not, as careless of spiritual thrist,
sloathfully lie down again in the sinful corruptions of mine own heart: but
so partake of the first resurrection in the state of grace, as I may enjoy the
blessing of the second in the kingdom of glory.

I do acknowledge to thee, how without thee, I am (O Lord) very miserable,
poor and naked, so as I am ashamed to come before thee; but in mercy do thou
pity me, and clothe me with that fair raiment of Christ his righteousness,
that I may be bold to draw near to the throne of grace; this best robe by the
spirit put upon me, and give me the hand of faith to apply the same unto me,
that I may thereby be preserved from the heat of thy wrath for sin, and
escape eternal destruction. Give me grace (good Lord) to beautify my holy
profession with ornaments of grace, good words, and good works; let me never
want the linen of inward sincerity, nor the outward garment of Christian
honesty, that I may be welcome to the company of thy Saints, the only comely
creatures, whom thou (O Lord) have washed and made clean.

Wash me (O Lord) with them, for I confess my self polluted with manifold
sins; and that they stick so hard and cleave so fast unto me, that I cannot be
delivered nor cleansed, except thou (my God) by thy merciful hand, the work of
thy Spirit, do rinse me in the precious blood of Christ. Surely, if it were
not for the hope which I have of thy gracious favor, I should verily despair
of my salvation. For when by the glass of thy word I see my self so unclean,
my corruptions also to be so many, and withal, feel them so strong in me, I
cannot but mourn with tears, and lament with heaviness of heart, my present
estate deserving death, and justly causing me to fear rather damnation, then
to have any hope at all of salvation.

But there is mercy with thee, (O thou blessed God of mercy) to which I now
appeal, humbly craving at thy hands the full pardon of al my sins; behold
(dear Father) the merits of my Redeemer, the price which he has paid to
satisfy thy justice, that so of thy goodness, thou may be well pleased
with me, that my prayers may be granted, and my requests, which I now put up
unto thee, may graciously be heard of thee.

It is thy will (O Lord) that every one should have a calling to walk in, and
that we should perform such duties diligently as do belong thereunto, now
(Lord for thy mercy sake) as thou have given me a calling, and desire to
perform the charge laid upon me thereby; so, I do earnestly beseech thee, to
help, guide, aid and strengthen me therein; put upon me that whole furniture
of thine, for my spiritual warfare, that I may be armed at all assayes, to
resist, and also to prevail against all my ghostly enemies.

O Lord, thou know well how manifold the tentations be, which do follow
all those that desire to live in, and by their callings religiously, and
honestly. Thou do also know, how I desire like a true Israelite, to walk
before thee in godly simplicity, and toward the world without fraud or guile
peaceably; but Satan is so powerful and often in his tentations, the world so
full of deceitful allurements, and my heart so weak, and unable to resist,
that (unless thou by thy spirit do aid me, by thy power defend me, by thy
word instruct me, and by thy grace prevent me) I shall undoubtedly go astray
from my intended purpose of well* doing.

O my God, help me, help me therefore (O my God). In all my just proceedings
protect me: make my good purposes prosperous, if it be thy will, I heartily
pray thee. Bend my mind ever to thy good pleasure and will, that I incline not
unto wickedness, by ill company, ill counsel, ill examples of others, though
for a time they flourish by il means

Make me (O Lord) to delight more in thy favor and love, then in the gain of
all earthly goods. Possess so my heart with uprightness, and true intendment
of just dealing, and peaceable walking toward all, in all my courses, that I
may boldly come to thee, and make thee (my God) the Judge of all my actions.

Go out, Lord, before me, and let my eyes be this day as at all times, ever
upon thee, that so before I speak, I may consult with thee; before I do any
thing, I may be advised by thee; that so in going out, and in continuing
abroad, thy care may be over me, thy provident hand may help me, thy mercy
also may cover me, that so, I may by thee return home in good peace and
safety, through Jesus Christ, our Lord and only Savior, in whose name I
further call upon thee, for my self, and for the whole Church, and every member
of the same, in that holy form of prayer which he taught his blessed Apostle,
saying, Our Father which art in heaven, etc.


Gaius. For this (thou blessed servant of God) I most humbly thank thee; now
if it please thee, proceed on to the second point, how I may carry my self
abroad on the day time.


John. Hold thy self ( Gaius) to this mornings work constantly; then go forth
in Gods name, fear not, neither be faint-hearted, for the Lord is with thee.

Walk as a Saint among Directions for the day time.
men, striving daily to perfection: let them as apparently see thee to be come
out of Satan's house of bondage spiritually, as they can behold thee out of
thine own house bodily.

Live in the light of Gods word, with respect unto all and every one of Gods
Commandments, as thou do walk with thy body, and sight of the eyes in the
shine of the Sun.

Behold and look up often to the heavens, as thy eternal mansion; consider of
the earth, as but the place of thy pilgrimage, not any continuing habitation.
Think of thy remove all, prepare for a better home. Provide for thy self with
God; thereupon often set thy mind: but upon this world, vain and fading away,
no more the^ needs must: knowing that he, which is least entangled in mundane
affairs, is most fit for God, and can with the greatest ease bid farewell to
this world.

Make all the day time the manifestation of thy graces; thy calling, the
circuit of thy walking, thy just dealing with men, the true trial of thy faith
toward God: thy painful labor in thy vocation, the ordinary means of thy
maintenance; be never either idle, or ill exercised.

In thy conuersing with How to behave our selus in conuersing with others.
men, do as thou would be done unto; buy and sell in truth and equity,
moderate by mercy, what thou may have by law in extremity. Seek not gain
unlawfully; neither that which may undo thy brother. Make no unjust prey upon
thy poor neighbors necessity: neither seek advantage upon mere mistakings
in word or deed. He that trusts thee, fail him not; frustrate not a
hopeful expectation of thy goodness. Secrecies in friendship reveal not, no
though the party become thy deadly enemy.

Be not hasty to promise, but thy word being past, keep it faithfully: deal
warily, and yet live innocently. In company with persons unknown, have a wise
respect to thy words and behavior: and be religiously suspicious: fear the
worst till thou know more; as thou shall find men worthy thy love, so afford it
them, and therein proceed by degrees, and abide constant. Love only for
virtues, and forsake not friendship because of human frailties.

Intermeddle not in other men's matters; be no busy body to speak or do
without the compass of thy vocation. If thou be entreated to interpose thy
self between parties, let thy words and advice tend to peace, and judge
without partiality, be alike just therein to friend and foe.

To conclude, so live in the view of all, as none may justly condemn thee,
though some maliciously slander thee: so also as all good men may behold thee
in thy journey toward heaven, and as Gods steward in thy course ready at every
hour to give up thine account to the Lord, with a cheerful heart.


Gaius. A men, amen, I beseech thee good God of Israel. For if every man would
thus behave himself abroad, The good which comes by men's just and faithful
dealing.
then would fraud and falsehood be sent packing; oppression would be
suppressed; cruelty would be turned into Christian compassion, and friendly
courtesies; biting usury, into works of mercy; unjust gain, by perjury,
briberie, robbery, and symonie, into just dealing, equity and piety. We
should hear no more of hard hartednesse, extortion, malicious revenging, the
extremity of justice: the mischiefs of injustice: for all misse-deeds would
be turned into almsdeeds, and duties of love, by which peace is preserved,
and charity practiced. And so, though we were abroad, we should neither
offend, nor easily be offended; and when we be returned home, we might sit
down with joy to meditate upon Gods mercies, to sing praise to him, to
confer of the best things, and to be think our selves in the evening how to
prepare our selves to our nights rest; in which point also I desire to be
instructed. For having learned my mornings meditations, and the duties thereof,
also how to carry my self abroad on the day, I would be glad (my Father) to
know how to behave my self returning home, sitting in the house, and going to
my rest at seasonable hours.


John. (Good Gaius) I Directions for the eue^ing.
perceive thou art loath to break off, before thou have perfected the work: it
is my joy to go on with thee, being sure that thou do willingly turn every
good precept into a co^scionable practice. When therefore thou do return
home:

First, give thy self to Meditations in returning home.
meditation upon these things, 1. That as the end of the day cuts off thy
worldly business abroad, and causes thee to return home; even so the worlds
end shall cut off all earthly businesses, and bring us to our everlasting home.
2. That as the setting of the Sun, and the darkness of the night covering
us, does make us, that we cannot follow our callings abroad; even so, by the
declining of Gods grace, the loss of the light of truth, blindness and dark
error possessing us, we cannot follow the works of piety, nor do the
duties of good Christians. 3. That as after thy long travel and absence from
home, yet thou do return again; even so, there is a time coming, when thou
must, though here stayed very long, return to thy home, thy everlasting
mansion. 4. That as thy house, being fair and Heaven.
pleasant, they also which live in it, lovely, peaceable, and joyful at thy
coming, do much rejoice thy heart to enter in, and to sit down with them,
having sustained much trouble abroad; even so, may it be great joy to us, after
this miserable life ended, to enter into heaven, into that pleasant Paradise,
and to sit down among that lovely, peaceable and joyful company of elect men
and Angels. And on the contrary, as man having had pleasures, honor, and all
contentment abroad, returning home, to a filthy house, Hell.
the people in it most disorderly, and nothing among them but wickedness, and
the punishments thereof, woes, miseries, and much lamentations, as such a man,
I say, would be exceedingly cast down to think that he must go to such a
home; and it would be as bitter to him as death, to enter into his house; even
so will it be to all such as here live in this world full of honor, pleasures
and riches, with all fleshly and carnal contentment, when they must needs go
to their home, even hell, the harbor for all those that live and die
irrepentantly, there to be tormented with the devils and his Angels for ever.

Secondly, being entered Another duty being set down.
into thy house and set down, then call to remembrance what God has done for
thee; what mercies he has showed, what benefits bestowed, what friends
raised, what comforts affoorded, and so forth. And again on the other side,
what evils prevented, what dangers avoided, how peaceably continued and
preserved, and such like, that so the Lord for them may be most worthily
magnified.

Consider what thou have done, what duties performed, to see the continuance of
grace, what duties omitted, and sins committed, to behold thy imperfections,
and decay in goodness, except thou repent.

Thirdly, after these A third duty at night.
things, take Gods book into thy hand, read it for thy self, and others, if
thou have a family, and conclude with prayer, and a Psalm of praises unto the
Lord. And withal, meditate upon the candle, brought for thee to read by, that
as thou can not read without light; no more can thou understand without
the illumination of Gods Spirit. 2. As the light of the candle, being in our
eye but a little light; yet gives a great light to the whole house; eue^ so
does that heavenly enlightening of God, though it seem never so little to
worldly wisdom, yet does it greatly enlighten us. 3. As while the candle is
light, we can read, and it being out, we cannot see: no more can we see
heavenly things, if once the light of Gods spirit be taken from us. So likewise
meditate, that the word is as fire, which thou sit by. The fire thaweth off
frostines, and expels cold: so the word melts frozen hearts: it comfort us
going to rest; so does the word, going out of the world: it tries metals, so
the word does men. It divides things, sending some upward, and leaves some on
the earth; so the word divides people, some sending upward, some leaving
below, etc.

Fourthly, in going to thy 4. Duty. Meditations in going to rest.
rest, think upon the end of this earthly toylesomenesse, in the eternal
rest: in putting off thy clothes, think how thou shall at length be unclothed,
and as thou art naked in a shirt, so shall thou be naked in a sheet. Think
also as thou arisest naked in the morning, and so returnest to thy bed naked in
the evening: even so came thou naked into the world and so naked shall thou
return again.

Fifthly, in lying down 5. Meditations in lying down.
in thy bed, consider thy bed as thy grave: thy lying down, the laying of thy
body in the place of the dead; the covering, the earthly molds upon thee: the
closing of thine eyes, the representation of death: the sleep possessing thee,
deaths ceasing upon thee: the impossibility to prevent sleep ever, the
ineuitablenesse of death: the ringing of the bell, the sound of the last
trumpet. Think by thy companion in bed, of the dead with thee in the grave;
and that two may be together, the one received, the other refused.

Consider how, as a flea in the bed may bite thee, so the worms in grave shall
eat thee: as sleep takes away all care of the world from thee; so shall
death in like manner set thee free from the same. And as thou do not fear
to sleep, because thou art in hope to awake again: so be not afraid to die,
for that thou shall arise afterward to life eternal.

Lastly, as thou know thou have a soul awaking; though thy body be
sleeping: so know, that albeit thy body lie a while asleep in the grave; yet
thy soul even then lives and partaketh of joy: let this be for thy comfort.

Thus by these thy heavenly meditations, thy last thoughts being so fixed upon
God and good things, before thou do fall asleep, they will cause thee to
lift up thine eyes to the Lord, to entreat him to take protection of thee,
(for he neither slumbreth nor sleeps, which keeps Israel.) These will
prevent vain dreams, idle fantasies, and prepare thy soul to better
cogitations. Yea, thus graciously exercised, albeit thou do lie down to rise
again in the morning; yet will thou so rest secure, and lie down without
fear, as one assured of life, though for this light thou behold it no more
with bodily eyes, until the day of judgment. It is ever therefore best to have
thy mind full of godly meditations, in betaking thy self to rest: and it shall
not be amiss so to lie down, as thinking no more to rise till the last day:
the preparation to death, does not any whit sooner hasten it, but makes it
more comfortable when it does come.


Gaius. Blessed is that man, that thus meditateth of his mortality: happy is
he, surely, that thus prepares to his rest; undoubtedly he shall find the
sweet fruits thereof in the end.

But I now desire to hear of some godly directions, how to meditate in the
night season, if happily I do awake; but I think, I heard thee speak of
prayer before I should go to my bed; therefore as it has pleased thee, to set
me down a form of prayer for the morning, so I beseech thee, afford me the
like help for the evening.


John. It is, indeed ( Gaius) as necessary to praise God, and to pray unto him
in the evening, as in the morning; and therefore have thou well done to put me
in mind hereof. In the name therefore, and mediation of Christ Jesus, thus, or
in some such like manner, may thou make thy prayers unto the Almighty.

Honor and praise be given A Prayer for the evening.
to thee (most holy Father, my most gracious Lord, and strong protector) which
have of thy great goodness this day, both led me forth safely, and now brought
me home in peace. This has been thy mercy wholly, of which I have abundantly
tasted, blessed be thy name therefore for ever and for ever.

I confess to thy praise and glory, O God, that by thy light I have walked, by
thy power I have been preserved, by thy grace prevented from sins which I
might have run into, from perils which I might have fallen into, and by thy
spirit have I been directed in that, which has been comfortable unto me, and
wherein I have cause to rejoice

Albeit I do acknowledge, that in my best actions I have showed much human
frailty, and not a little offended thy divine Majesty, in thought, in words,
and in deeds; which yet, of thy great mercy, thou have passed by, and not laid
unto my charge, as thou might justly have done.

Now (O Lord) I beseech thee, so be still gracious unto me, for Jesus Christ
his sake, and continue thy favorable countenance, and be ever with me; as
heretofore, and this day past, so also the rest of my life, and this present
night now come upon me.

Unclothe me, I pray thee, of my old rayme^t of unrighteousness, and make me
to throw away all my unclean rags of filthy corruptions, that I may go in
the whiteness of sincerity and holiness unto my eternal rest.

In the mean space, give me the candle light of the truth to shine unto me in
this dark world, and make thy word as a fire to heat and inflame my
affections with the love of thee (O God) and all goodness, that I may see the
way, and go with a warm zeal of thy spirit, unto my grave.

And seeing I came naked into the world, and so must lie down naked, bringing
nothing, neither carrying away any thing; Oh bless me from covetousness, and
greedy cares of this fading world; If I have but to live, let me be
therewith contented.

Put away from me the fear of death, seeing it is but as a sleep, and cannot
deprive me of life. Yea, sythen I am mortal, make me willing to go unto my
rest, that I may cease to sin, and be freed from the manifold tentations,
and troubles which accompany us here, that although my body lie in the grave
asleep, my soul may ascend unto my blessed Savior, with whom I desire to
be.

Sanctify unto me my rest, keep my mind in heavenly meditations, from
unclean, unquiet and foolish dreams: and so refresh me by the quiet benefit
of sweet sleep, that I may arise more cheerfully and comfortably in the
morning to the labors of my particular calling.

While I do sleep, watch, I beseech thee, over me; cause thy holy Angels to
pitch their tents about me, that so I may rest, and also arise in safety, and
thereby be moved to laud and praise thee, still renewing my thanks, as thou
do renew thy mercies daily.

And now (Lord) going to my bed, I commend my self, my soul and body into the
hands of thy fatherey protection, for thou art awake, when I sleep, and thou
only art able to preserve me. If it so please thee now this night to take my
life from me, and to remove me out of this vale of misery, this do (O Lord)
of thy great mercy, pardon me all my sins, wilful transgressions, negligences,
and ignorances, evils committed, and duties omitted in any measure, manner, or
any way displeasing to thy Majesty, and that for the death and passion, the
righteousness, the merits and intercession of Jesus Christ thy Son, and our
blessed Savior, I humbly beseech thee; and for his sake take up my soul to
thy heavenly habitation, there to rest, until I come wholly body and soul
unto thee, in that great day of the resurrection.

But if it yet please thee, still further to prolong my life; then I heartily
pray thee (good God) of thy tender mercy, herein to hear me; that as days be
added to the time of life, so graces may be increased; that as I grow in
years, so may I also be fruitful in good works, increasing in grace, to thy
praise, my better preparedness to death, and to my eternal comfort at the
last day, the time of my perfect redemption, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom with thee, and that blessed Spirit be given all honor, glory and praise
of me and all thy people, as is most due for all thy loving mercies, past and
present, for the future hope of eternal bliss, this night and for evermore,
Amen.


Gaius. Now, if it please thee (my Father) proceed to the next point, and show
unto me, what meditatio^s I should have in the night season, if it happen, that
then I should awake.


John. Let it, 1. put thee Meditations upon our awaking in the night.
in mind of awaking from sin, as thou have awaked from sleep, that thou
perish not by death. 2. Think also how God can make men which are dead in the
grave, to live again, as easily, as he has made thee to awake out of thy
sleep. 3. By thy sudden awaking, to consider how suddenly thou may be
raised up and summoned to judgment.

Secondly, by the darkness Of darkness.
of the night, first, think of the spiritual darkness, in which natural men
sinfully and desperately do sleep, to pray that God would open their eyes, to
see the wonders of his law: then of the utter darkness, into which all such
impenitent sleepers shall be cast, to move thee to mourn for them alive, that
they may not be damned when they be dead; further, by this darkness so
comfortless, behold also their comfortles estate; for as they cannot, which
are in darkness, see either themselves, or others, or their way, or house, or
friends, or enemies: no more can men in spiritual darkness, know themselves
nor the Church of God, nor discern the godly from the ungodly, nor the way of
life, from the way of death: nor foresee perils, or the pit prepared for them,
no more then men which remain in darkness can see to avoid the dangers,
which they may fall into, until the light do again shine upon them.

Thirdly, (if thou can) Of dreams.
call thy dreams to remembrance, by their vanity, judge of thy leuity; by
their uncleanness, thy filthiness; by their idleness, thy foolishness; by the
fury in them, thy madness; by their much uncertainty, thy wavering and
inconstancy; the delight in* their deceits, thy easiness to be led by
delusions; the fearfulness in them, thy timorous heart; the seldom thoughts
of goodness, thy much delight in wickedness, and little care of godliness.

Fourthly, in the silent night upon thy bed, it is good to fall into an
examination of thine own heart: it is the time freest from disturbance, in
respect of outward impediments, thou may have with thy soul free and
peaceable conference. By a true and serious search, thou may find out thy
self, and so be better known to thy self, and the more thou art acquainted
with thy own corruption, the more will thou bewail thy wants, and seek after
the grace of sanctification.

Fifthly, in thine inclination to sleep again, note thereby how a man may
awake from sin, through Gods mercy, and yet be ready to sleep again in
sin, by his own infirmity.

Sixthly, before thou sleep again, commend thy self in some short prayer to
God, according to the former meditations, and so asleep for refreshment,
taking so much as may suffice nature, for more strength of labor, but not to
satisfy the flesh to grow thereby lazy and lustful.


Gaius. Oh what conceited Laodiceans are we! we, out of an ordinary
profession in any measure above our brethren, hold our selves full of devotion;
we judge our selves goodly Christians; rich in graces, flowing in goodness,
lacking little to perfection; but, alas, now I see by the neglect of these
things, that we are wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked:
and I confess that the Lord has cause to rebuke and chasten us, except we
speedily grow more zealous and amend.


John. Indeed ( Gaius) men are too wickedly careless of a holy conversation,
and how to keep a good conscience toward God and man. Men seem to hate so
very much popish superstition, as they neglect altogether Christian devotion;
it is judged enough to be no Papist, though otherwise a man be little better
then a very Atheist in all his courses.


Gaius. Right so (my father) such as see it, may lament it, but not remedy it;
I pray for better unto him that can reform it. But leaving this, proceed on, I
beseech thee with me, as thou have begun, and come to the last particular, how
I may make my self ready for the sanctifying of the Sabbath.


John. I perceive that thy heart thirsts after grace, the Lord more and more
perfect the same so happily begun in thee.

First, besides these things Directions for a preparation to the Sabbath.
before mentioned, carefully have in remembrance every day the Lords day, to
keep it holy when it comes; therefore foresee thy business, neglect no
ordinary labor, order thy worldly affairs so, as that day be set apart for
the special and public worship of God, that so thy devotion be not hindered,
nor the day profaned: he has utterly lost the power of religion, that is
careless of the Sabbaths sanctification.

Secondly, in the end of the week, judge by this holy course of thy growth in
religion, of the death of sin, the strength of grace, of thy contempt of the
world, and of thy desire to be with Christ: for by a constant course in this
daily exercise thou shall see these things more and more to increase upon thee,
if, indeed, this work for every week, without formal and customarie
hypocrisy, in a holy and conscionable respect of thy duty, be religiously
and constantly performed.

Thirdly, consider how thou have passed over so many days, the allotted time
for worldly labors, and so have brought the week to an end, that so thou
may meditate of thy shortening of thy days, and drawing nearer unto
judgment. Also how thou have ended days and weeks, and so should end thy
sins, and as times renew upon thee, and years increase, so should thou be
daily renewed in mind, and be increased in goodness; that so the longer thou
do live, the better thou may be; more holy to God, more upright to men;
more spiritual, less worldly, more desirous of immortality, less regarding
vanity; so living as thereby leaving a blessed name to posterity; so dying, as
thou may enjoy a better life in eternity.

Fourthly, with the rest of thy former daily devotions, and every nights
exercise and godly meditation, going to bed, add to this night these two
considerations. That the week is as the end of the world, and the seventh day
following, as the eternal Sabbath, when all the elect of God shall be
assembled to worship him for ever and ever.


Gaius. Reverend Sir, although thus be ended the duties and meditations for the
six days in the week, yet is not this work for every week fully finished.
One thing remains, of which, though many have spoken, I beseech thee say
something, and set down in a few words how I may behave my self upon this day
of rest to sanctify it, and to keep it holy unto the Lord.


John. Friend, and faithful Gaius, thy desire is good, and I cannot but
condesce^d to thy request, to make up this so little a work for him that
reads it, which yet will be a most holy labor to him that practices it.
Concerning this, thou art to know three things; first, 3. Things to be known
for the keeping of the Lords day holy.
what to do, before thou go to the assembly, then how to demean thy self
there; and thirdly, how to behave thy self afterward.


Gaius. What am I to do, I beseech* thee, in the morning?


John. Thou art not only now to perform thy every day mornings devotion, but
thou must make a special preparation for this day.

First, awake early, and What to do upon the Lords day in the morning.
arise be times as thy age and health will suffer thee: the sooner up, the more
ready for holy exercises, and longer time for them: It is meet thou should
as soon rise for the Lords service to the souls safety, as in the week day
for thy self, or earthly master to get maintenance for the body.

Secondly, being thus risen and ready, be earnest and ardent in prayer, and
therein, first, for thy Pastor and Teacher, that God would enlarge his gifts
upon him, that he would give him utterance and liberty of speech, that he
might speak powerfully, that the spirit might work both in him, and by him
effectually; that so he himself might be a preacher in word and works, a
lively pattern of his doctrine in a holy life and conversation: then for thy
self, and the rest of the hearers, that they might have prepared hearts as good
ground for the Lords seed, that they might bring forth plentifully for the
Lords harvest, for your ministers encouragement, and your own comfort. After
this, read some portion of Scripture, with the text to be handled, if he go
on with a scripture, calling to mind what he has spoken, and where he left,
that so you may prepare your selves better to that which remains: and so with
some sweet Psalm of Psalm. 14. and 92. and 95.
comfort praise God.

Thirdly, and lastly, after all these things speedily dispatch all business of
absolute necessity, avoid whatsoever is superfluous, leave as few as possibly
may be at home, make have to the assembly, and think whether thou art going,
looking to thy feet before thou enter into the house of the Lord, and be more
ready to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools.


Gaius. Oh Lord God, Of men's vnpreparednesse to Gods house.
how vnpreparedly come most into Gods house, we do usually rush into the holy
assembly, without doing any of these duties; from worldly business stuffed
with cares of this life, which choke the seed of Gods word: some out of the
Alchouse, with red faces, bidding defiance to all sober spirits: other hardly
gotten from their beds, having not shaken off their idleness, and perhaps
their wantonness; other spend all the time in dressing and attiring
themselves, that they may come to see, and to be seen, into the congregation,
as the devils ensigne-bearers of vanity and pride. Some come with covetousness,
as Judas; some with hypocrisy, as Ananiah; some with envy, as the Pharisees;
some with Profaneness and mocking spirits, like the Jews; some to cavil and
catch advantage, as certain did in Ieremies days; some come for company, as
good fellows, not for conscience; some only of a fashion, and of a custom
taken up upon a kind of religion, but neither knowing why, nor wherefore, nor
ever learning any thing for their reformation. Some come for fear of man, but
not of God; most that come, come as the people did to Ezechiel, to hear, but
very few to do; because, indeed, they come not thus in a conscionable
preparation. But I have been too long in this sorrowful complaint, show me, I
pray thee, what I am to do, in the open congregation?


John. 1. Be thou respective How to carry our selves in the open congregation.
of Gods presence, and the presence of his holy Angels.

2. Show a reverent behauior in thine eyes, countenance and gesture of thy
whole body, whether it be standing, sitting, or kneelings.

3. Wholly addict thy self to attentive hearing, joining with the minister and
the rest of the congregation in all the public exercises, is the preaching of
the word, in administration of the Sacraments, in distributing to the poor in
their necessities, in prayer, and singing of Psalms unto God.

4. Avoid all wandering thoughts, idle gazing, drowsy sleeping, superstitious
praying there alone; also private reading, and whatsoever may show either
neglect, or contempt of the public administration of holy thing.

5. Continue constant with the congregation, abide to the end, and conclude
with the rest; depart with a heart lifted up unto God, for such heavenly means
of salvation: and so go forth with a reverent and a holy behavior in respect
of God, of his Angels, of Gods Ministers and his people, and in respect of
departing so immediately from such holy and heavenly exercises, and also in
regard of the place (but without superstition) set apart to so holy an end.


Gaius. Alas, alas, how contrary heereunto are the most, and how defective are
the best? I may mourn heavily for the multitude, and much lament my own wants:
but as I hear now my duty, so will I endeavor to perform by Gods grace more
carefully hereafter, the present desire of my heart, and therefore proceed
(thou best beloved Apostle of the Lord) to teach me what to do, when the
public service to God is ended?


John. 1. Prevent al present occasions of worldly unnecessary communication.

2. Betake thy self a Our duty after public service of God.
while to some private place for private meditation and prayer upon that which
thou have heard and remembrest.

3. Receive that day so much nourishment only, as may satisfy for necessity,
avoiding superfluity, arising of variety, which may cause drousines, dullness
of spirit, and hinder thy meditation.

4. Use conference with other, and occasion them to holy speeches: if thou
do doubt, thou may perhaps be resolved, if thou have forgot, the
memories of other may help thee, as also give thee understanding in that thou
thy self know not.

5. Being disposed to be merry, sing Psalms, abandon foolish and leaud sports,
and vain company.

6. Forget not this day to show forth works of mercy, to visit the sick, to
relieve the poor, and to comfort the afflicted.

Lastly, in the end of the day, praise God for the comforts thereof, remember
what thou have heard, and that which especially; concerned thy self; make some
use of all, but forget not that, pray for a blessing, resolve to put what thou
learnest, into daily practice, and then before thy rest, fall to thy daily
devotion, and in all good things be ever constant unto the end.


Gaius. O Lord grant me so great mercy, how happy were I, if thus I could do!
I earnestly desire it, Oh that I could attain unto it. This were indeed a
blessedness here, a heaven upon earth, a celestial felicity in a terrestrial
place in this wretched state of misery. This pearl, if I could purchase, I
offer willingly to give away all my carnal pleasures, al my worldly profits,
all vain honor, and my self wholly for the love of it. For what am I, if I
had all the world, without the effectual saving power and grace of the word?
if I had all pleasure, and had no portion in the heavenly Paradise? If I had
all honor, without certain hope of heaven? Woe would be to me, endless
woes would seize upon me. I will therefore now resolve to walk with God, seek
fellowship with the faithful, and abandon the ways of wickedness, whatsoever
befalls me in this present world.


John. A most blessed resolution: sweet soul go on and prosper: look for
joyful fruits of thy blessed labor by well doing, thou shall have assured
hope of Gods favor; boldness in Christ to go unto God; who will be to thee a
Father, the Spirit a Comforter, as Christ thy Redeemer and Iustifier. Fear not
death, dread not hell; heaven is thine inheritance. The godly pray for thee,
Angels accompany thee, the Law will not curse thee, the Gospel is for thy
comfort, and thy conscience will speak peace unto thee. Satan dare not claim
thee, God does acknowledge thee for his own, and has thee in his safe keeping
to bring thee to heaven.


Gaius. Blessed man of God, thou beloved of the Lord: thou have comforted me,
and spoken comfortably unto thy servant, the Lord recompense thy work, and a
full reward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, and now behold thy
servant, and the servant of the Lord, be it unto me according to all these
thy words.

Yet (good Sir) before I end, I must needs crave a little more help. I was
advised to pray upon the Sabbath day in the morning, before I go unto the
public congregation, and in the evening, when the day is ended, vouchsafe, I
beseech thee, to help my weakness herein also, and to set me down, how to
pray morning and evening, on the Sabbath.


John. Friend Gaius, I am ready to further thy gracious desires in all good
things, much rejoicing in thy unfeigned love to the Lord, and to the holy
exercises of religion; I heartily wish thee herein all happy success, such
feruencie, such growth, such constancy, as thy example may move many to
imitate thy virtues, and to join with thee in the way to eternity. Thus
therefore may thou, or to the like effect, pray in the morning.

O Lord our God, whose A Prayer for the Sabbath day in the morning.
will and commandment it is, that we should keep holy this day, as set
apart, for the public worship and service of thy most holy name.

Now I do heartily beseech thee, in thy tender compassion and mercy, so to
look upon me in Christ Jesus; that my sins may not be a wall of separation
between thee and me, but that of thy gracious goodness through my blessed
Savior, I may obtain full remission of all my sins; and by him the gift of
thy most holy spirit, which may happily prepare and make ready my heart, that I
may go to the holy assembly of thy Saints, as well prepared ground, fit to
receive the good seed of thy most holy word.

Oh Lord, open mine eyes to see thy truth, mine ears incline to harken
attentively, bend my will to follow what I shall hear, that I may not be a
bare hearer, but a doer of thy word.

Give me wisdom to judge of the truth, humility to receive it, faith to
believe it, conscience to practice it; make it unto me the Savior of life unto
life, a word of reconciliation, that I may for ever by it, be won unto thee.

Withdraw my mind and affections wholly from every thing, that may hinder me
from the performance of my duty this day in thy divine service.

Take from me, blindness of mind, dullness of wit, disorderlines of
affections, deadness of spirit, hardness of heart, unbelief, pride,
selfeconceit, presumption of mercy, and wicked prophanenes, that so I may not
contemn, nor yet make light account of thy holy ordinances, the word read and
preached, the administration of the Sacraments, prayer, and thanks giving,
with the whole congregation.

Being set to hear (good Father) bless me from wandering thoughts, vain
imaginations, Satan's suggestions, drowsinesse of the flesh, and whatsoever is
an enemy to the saving hearing of thy blessed word.

Sanctify my understanding rightly to conceive, my memory to retain and
keep, and my heart truly to affect what thy servant shall speak unto me, and
to the rest of thy people this day.

O Lord, open his mouth, that he may speak only thy truth, inform his
understanding, settle his judgment, inflame his affections with that truth
which he shall deliver unto us, and guide so his tongue, that he may speak
wisely, seasonably, aptly, and also with great power of thy spirit to the heart
and consciences of every of us his hearers so, as we may lively feel the power
of thine own ordinance, and may also truly say of him, that thou, Lord, art
most assuredly with him.

Give me, and the rest of thy flock, this grace, (O Lord God of heaven) I do
humbly beseech thee, that as he shall teach soundly, aptly and powerfully; so
we may all most humbly submit our selves unto his ministry, as well when he
conuinceth our errors, rebukes us of sin, and threatens Gods fearful
plagues for the same; as when he preaches peace to the penitent, and
comfort the sorrowful spirit.

Oh let us not make exceptions against any thing commanded him to speak: but
rather judge him the more faithful, and so to love him more for the truth
sake, and for his sincere handling of the same.

Qualify him every way for us, as he may go wisely in and out before us, in
soundness of doctrine, in holiness of life, in humility, in godly gravity,
with wisdom and authority familiarly conuersing among us.

And for his encouragement, make us willing to frequent diligently the Church,
to hear attentively, to abide reverently, and to learn of him gladly, not to
look upon his human frailties, but in true love to pass them by, to make
much of him, lest we stumble at his doctrine. Make us conscionable toward him
in his maintenance, to deal uprightly and liberally, that he may do the
work of his ministry cheerfully.

And when we have heard thy word, bless us (O Lord) with conscience of holy
meditation and prayer; suffer not me, nor any of thy servants, as the common
custom is, to be content only to hear, and to remain still in ignorance and
error, to come and go, and yet never the better; let not thy word so be the
savor of death unto death, to our deeper condemnation.

O Lord pardon my former negligence, and forgive us all this wretched
profaneness, and carelessness of our salvation, as if we were either
soullesse, or senseles: Lay not this sin (O Lord) unto our charge but afford us
thy grace to hear, and in hearing to learn, and in learning to believe, and so
to profess constantly, and practice religiously every day more and more, till
we become perfect in Christ Jesus.

Give me grace (O Lord) to avoid all occasions of profaning this day; keep
me from ill company, and from all vain, carnal, and worldly minded people,
which may withdraw my heart and thoughts from better things. Cause me to make
conscience of my whole carriage, of my thoughts, words, and deeds, that by
vain talk, leaud sports, light behauior, unnecessary businesses of the world,
I may not my self be guilty of profaneness, neither by example may move
others to do amiss.

Let my thoughts be upon that which I have heard, and other heavenly things, my
words uttered to tend to edification. Let my mirth be that heavenly melody,
singing Psalms to thee (O Lord) in my heart; and my company such, as I may
either learn good from them, or do some good unto them; that so the day thus
set apart wholly to thee* and divine exercises, we thereby may the better be
furnished and made able in the week following to do the duties of our calling
conscionably, in all truth and equity, to thy glory and our own co^forts, and
that for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and Savior, in whose name, for
my self, for this congregation, and thy holy Church universal, I call upon
thee further, saying, Our Father, etc.


Gaius. By the help of my God, I will surely make more conscience of this
duty, then I have hitherto done. I well perceive the necessity of prayer
before; for indeed, Paul may plant with his profound learning, and Apollos may
water by his powerful eloquence, but all is nothing, except God give the
increase; except he give eyes to see, ears to hear, and hearts to
understand, the Teacher shall teach in vain, and we also hear in vain.


John. Thy resolution ( Gaius) is very good; and thou have also well considered
of the necessity of prayer before thou do go to Gods house. Verily, the
neglect of this holy duty, and the coming of people so profanely to Gods
worship (as thou formerly have complained) without due preparation, is the very
cause, why men reap so small fruit by the means. Cursed is their irreligious
coming, their cursed customarie serving of God, their hellish luke-warmenesse,
their presumptuous profaneness, without any fear of God, estimation of Gods
ordinances, reverent respect of his ministers or care at all truly, of their
own salvation. Oh days without pure devotion! O times for temporizers!

But go thou on (good Gaius) as thou do; and as thou still resoluest to do;
he that is filthy, let him be filthy still, follow thou not their guise: pray
continually, and the Lord deliver his people from the tentations of the times
of lukewarmenes, and carnal security in a worldly peace, which is the blu^ter
of zeal, the death of true devotion, the very prison of sincere piety, the
breeder of Atheism, the cause of the contempt of religion, the nurse of proud
presumption of mercy, of vanity and wantonness, with all kind of wickedness.


Gaius. Sir, woeful experience has proved this for truth, in many ages; I have
learned it; but by your words I have more reason to consider of it. And
therefore the Lord directing me, and in his mercy making good these fatherly
aduisements upon me, that I may have the grace to follow the same. I hope
hereafter to avoid better the occasions of evil, and the intrapments of Satan,
and this seducing wicked world, which I will daily pray for, and in mercy I
hope the Lord will hear me.

But (reverend Sir) lest I be too tedious, let it please you to finish this
work, in adding that one thing remaining, which is a form of prayer upon the
Sabbath day in the evening.


John. Having meditated somewhat before, of the doctrines, uses and
instructions delivered, of the benefit of the Sacraments, of the excellency of
religion, as also of the public worship, of the divine exercises, and of the
fellowship of the godly; and in like manner, having considered what good thou
have received thereby, wherein informed for rectifying of judgment, wherein
instructed to follow virtue, wherein reproved for amendme^t of life, wherein
convinced of error, wherein comforted concerning affliction, and strengthened
against tentation, thou may thus, or after such a like manner, both heartily
praise God, and humbly pray unto him, as follows.

O Lord God, most gracious Evening Prayer for the Sabbath.
and merciful Father, I do render unto thy heavenly majesty, all humble and
hearty thanks, praising and lauding thy most holy name, for that of thy great
compassion thou have affoorded unto me and thy people, the preaching of thy
word, the effectual means of salvation, to as many as truly believe.

Oh how pleasant is thy dwelling place to all that delight in goodness! better
is one day in thy house, then a thousand years elsewhere: right joyful are
the feet of thy faithful messengers bringing to us poor souls the glad
tidings of peace.

Oh that I might dwell in thy house for ever; I had rather be there a
doorekeeper, then dwell in the tents of the vain and wicked, though mighty in
the world. Surely there is no company comparably to the blessed communion of
Saints, who are Christ's members, the temple of the holy Ghost, and he in the
midst among them.

Make me highly to esteem of the public assembly, where thy word is preached,
and thy name called upon, and cause me ever to be unfeignedly thankful for
the same.

Oh, it is thy exceeding great mercy toward me, and toward us all this day,
that we may with such freedom and liberty enjoy that truth in peace, which
the blessed Apostles taught and sealed with their blood; which many thousands
of Saints after the^ did profess and maintain with their very lives in the
midst of bloody persecution, because otherwise they could not enjoy the
benefit of the word.

What ingratitude were therefore this in us, if we should not laud thy name,
and daily sing praises unto thy most divine Majesty, which have thus in so
great mercy dealt with us, that may without fear of open enemies keep public
meetings, and frequent those places set up in the honor and praise of thy
blessed son Jesus?

How unworthy should we make our selves of this unspeakable grace and favor,
if we should carelessly neglect (as too many do) so great means of our
salvation? Those that died for the truth, may well persuade us to the love of
the truth; and they that shead their blood for preaching it, others also, who
rather then they would not hear it, and enjoy the benefit of it, were
contented to hazard their lives, they may justly condemn us of negligence, and
shall rise up in judgment against us, if we will not leave our vain
pleasures, and our worldly profits for it.

O Lord our God, lay not this iniquity to our charge, the too much neglect, if
not contempt of the saving means of salvation, thou may in thy just judgment
utterly deprive us of all means of our spiritual life, of all grace, and
heavenly comforts; for that, indeed, we do not so esteem of the ministry of
thy word, and of the Gospel of thy Son, as we should.

Turn us of thy mercy (O God) from the accursed loathing, to a blessed loving
thereof. And make us to account of it, as a thing most precious, and to show
the same in a more earnest seeking after knowledge therein, in a greater desire
thereof, with feruencie of spirit for the truth against sin in our selves and
others; against superstition and idolatry, against profaneness, against
contempt of good government, and base account of thy faithful ministers, then
hitherto we have done: and cause us to bring forth also better fruits, worthy
the Gospel of Christ, and our profession. That so it may appear, that we be
Christians indeed, professors in good earnest, sincere lovers of the truth:
that so these thy mercies may be established upon us, continued with us, and
propagated to posterities; whereby not only we, but even our children, and
childrens children may have cause herein with us to magnify thy name for ever,
and for ever.

And here (O Lord) I call not upon thy name for my self alone, and these thy
people known unto me, but for all thy whole Church every where in all the
world: remember them (Lord) in thy mercy: call those that are not yet called;
confirm such as are; bring back such as slip out of the way; resolve such as
stand doubting; raise up such as do fall; comfort the afflicted; stand by such
as be in combat with the devil, with the world, or with the strong and
violent stream of corruptions flowing out from their own evil hearts. Stand
by them (good Lord) help them for the victory, and deliver them from evil,
and by thy grace ever either prevent their falls, or forgive their offenses.

Bless these particular Churches of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and herein
especially the principal member of the same, our dread Sovereign the Kings,
Majesty, the Queen, Prince Charles, Frederick Prince Elector, and the Lady
Elizabeth, the Honorable Council, and worthy Nobles, the Ministry and
Ministers of thy Gospel, and all Schools of learning, for the furthera^ce of
religion.

Lord continue peace among us, unite our hearts in one in the truth, and for
the truth: cause justice in true judgment to be maintained, grievous wrongs
and oppressions to be utterly suppressed good, works of zeal, mercy, and
piety to be every way furthered, and the instruments to be highly adua^ced. And
if there be any enemies to thee (O God) and to thy people maintaining that man
of sin, (O Lord thou mighty God of heaven) reveal them to the world,
discover all crafty Achitophels, set thy self against them, and all wicked
seducers misleading thy people by error into Antichristian superstition and
idolatry, and either convert them, or confound them, for the safety of thy
people and their great peace, yea for the more full manifestation of thy hatred
against that man of sin, against that tyrannical regiment, and that bloody
persecuting power, with all the treacherous, and traitorous adherents to the
same; and this do, (O Lord) for thy own name sake also, even for the merits
of Christ Jesus our only Lord and Savior, in whose name we pray unto thee, as
he has taught us saying, Our Father, etc.


Gaius. I give unto thee, (thou man of God) most humble thanks for this so
great labor, undertaken for my sake, I wish I could recompense this thy so
great goodness: but albeit I cannot, I doubt not, but he that is able, and
has promised to reward every good work, he assuredly will, to whom I shall
daily pray, that he may recompense, and everlastingly bless thee for every
good deed, even so, Amen.


John. I thank thee (good Gaius) I have done but my duty, of God I deserve
nothing: of thee, for a requital, I look for no more, but that, which I know
already thou will do, even constantly make to a good use of al. Therein the Lord
bless thee, and I am satisfied, and so farewell, till our next meeting.


Gaius. The Lord be with thee my Father, my Father, and his holy Angels take
safe custody of thee for ever and ever.


Amen.
FINIS.

