A Short view of the Persian Monarchy, and of Daniels weeks: Being a piece
of Beroaldus works: with a censure in some points.

LONDON Imprinted by Thomas Orwin. 1590.

A short view of the Persian Monarchy, and of Daniels weeks: being a piece of
Beroaldus works.
THe Persian Monarchy is first named siluerie, because the people of God
(after the Temple restored, and the City Jerusalem walled) lived peaceably
under the Persians. But how long this continued, or how many Kings it had,
neither the Historiographers of our time, nor the profane do sufficiently
know: which thing they do declare in their diverse and uncertain Histories,
showed forth and published by them to the world of these matters. But we,
because we know the former Persian Kings out of the holy Scripture, and the
latter the profane histories does mention of this matter: therefore we are
able more certainly to determine, than either Herodotus or Josephus or
Manetho, or Metastenes, or Ctesias from who^ the true report of these matters
is used to be cited. Concerning the time and continuance of the Persian
Monarchy we cannot doubt, seeing the beginning is apparent out of the holy
scripture, and we understand from profane Stories the overthrow to be by
Alexander the Great. Therefore let us first speak of the time wherein the
Persian Empire bare sway; then of the Kings who governed that silver Emperie,
which succeeded the golden Monarchy of the Babylonians.

The Persian Monarchy begins from that year, in the which Cyrus the great was
first advanced by God to the rule of Asia, after Darius the Mede, whom the
holy Oracles call the King of Persia; and ends and is determined in the
death of Darius the son of Arsanes: for then (no man resisting) the Wealth of
the Persians came to Alexander the great, and Asia (which before obeyed the
Persians) became subject to him. Now, the first year of Cyrus the greater, or
of the King of the Persians, falls into the third year of the fourscore
Olympiade; which was from the beginning of the world, three thousand four
hundred seventy two; and was the year since Rome was built 295. forty years
after the Kings were banished and exiled the City: which we understand to be
certain, laying down the times in order, as they be expounded in the holy
Scripture; and the Olympiades conferred and laid together with these, and also
the years of the continuance of the City of Rome. And those things which have
been otherwise defined by profane Writers and Writers of our time, we have
observed to be vnture. Yet the death of Darius the last King of the Persians,
the profane History referres to the first year of the hundred and thirteenth
Olympiade; and that year is the fifth of Daniels nineteenth week; and the
year of the City built four hundred and five and twenty; and the year of
the world three thousand three score and two. From which account of time we
understand, that the Persian Monarchy is to have allotted to it for the
continuance a hundred and thiritie years, although otherwise hereof other men
have determined.

But we cannot miss, because we have the time of the deliverance from Babylon
(which is the beginning of the Persian Empire) certainly set down and defined
by the holy Scripture; and the times which follow, as the death of Darius the
last King of Persia, and of Alexander the great, set down faithfully; and
those who dissent from us, we are able by good reason to disprooue: and that
especially seeing the exact time is set down in the Scripture, when Cyrus the
greater began his Empire, and the death of Alexander the great (which fell in
the next Olympiade from the death of Darius) is agreed, confessed and
determined of many Historiographers. For then there was a more assured
observation of the Greekish History, many learned and notable men having
comprehended them in their writings, agreeing in the setting downn of the
account of those times. But those things which fell out before these times,
have not so faithfully been by Writers collected: whereby it comes to pass,
that the profane story is very obscure: which obscurity we are able to
dispearse and to make clear, by that computation of time which we have laid
down; because this is grounded from a most undoubted observation, gathered
from holy scripture: which is not necessaire for us at this time to handle
more at large, seeing it has been handled before. In the which treatise, we
have set down the exact account of time, determined in the holy scripture:
which as it may be referred to profane stories, if it has little been
observed by former Writers, may yet now be understood by the table of this
Chronicle, continued and successively drawn down from the beginning of the
world, even unto our times.

Now concerning the Kings of Persia, who ruled these hundred and thirty
years, the place of Daniel which is in his eleventh chapter and second verse,
is of great use to the understanding of the truth: which is in this sort;
Behold yet three Kings shall stand up in Persia, and the fourth shall be
richer than they all: and when he is grown great through his riches, he shall
stir up all against the King of Graecia. From this place of Daniel, we
understand that Persian King, which afflicted Graecia with war, to be the
fifth Monarch of the Persians from Rather, from Darius, named in verse. 1.
Cyrus the greater: but the fifth King in order from Cyrus, by those things
which he did, and from the monuments of profane Writers, we do find to be
Xerxes: for the Angel opened these things to Daniel, in the third year of King
Cyrus, as it is cap. 10. ver. 2. Because therefore, besides Cyrus, there were
yet to be 3. Kings of Persia, after whom the fourth was to invade Graecia by
war, whom al profane histories do witness to be Xerxes; by good right
therefore we say, that Xerxes the terror of Graecia, was the That he was the 4.
it shall be showed hereafter.
5. Emperor of the Persians from Cyrus the greater. Now who were Kings in the
times which fell out betwixt these, the holy writings do suggest unto us: who
do pursue and faithfully expound the History of those Mesne times; so far
as their knowledge concerns the Church of God, by these names of Assuerus,
Darius, Artaxerxes: There be several Kings of those names: but for time in
this order. Artaxerxes, to whom an epistle was writtenn against the Jews soon
after their return: Assuerus, and Darius Artaxerxes.
we have these Kings expressed in holy Writ, who that they may be
distinguished from other Kings, who had likewise the same names, they are to be
assigned and set out by those epithites and surnames, which may be most
agreeable and fit the present matter and history which we repeat out of
Esdra and Nehemiah. To Assuerus therefore we will add the surname of
Artaxerxes, Darius we will name Assyrius, and we will surname Artaxerxes Pius:
for he bestowed a great care on the Church of God, as afterward shall be
understood.

And that we may proceed orderly, let us first handle Assuerus, who is made
known unto us from Esdras history. There Artaxerxes and Assuerus are several
men: and the former is named last: because to him was joined the narration of
the letter which caused the temples work to be stayed.
In the which history the 4. chapter and 6. verse, The Enemies of the people
of God are said in the beginning of the reign of Assuerus, to have written an
accusation against the Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem: whereby it came to
pass, that thorough the Edict of the same Assuerus (to whom we have added the
surname of Artaxerxes, because afterward the scripture names him by the same
name) the work of the house of God ceased. Now there is often and usual
mention of this Assuerus Artaxerxes in the book of Ester: who^ by this we
understand to succeed immedi^^lie Cyrus in government because in the 4. of
Esdr. the 5. verse. the work of the house of the Lord is said to be hindered
under Assuerus, all the days of Cyrus King of Persia, even to the reign of
Darius the King of Persia. Now that this Assuerus succeeded Cyrus in government
(whose Viceroy before he had been in Persia, and Vicegerent in Cyrus name) we
may gather out of the beginning of the first of Ester. Where in the first
chapter and third verse according to the Hebrew, it is said, that the strength
of Persia and Media was before him: and it is said, that there were in presence
before him in his Court Noble men and Princes or Rulers over Provinces 127.
over whom he governed: whom many months he entertained with princely
entertainment. But the greater and more able part of the strength of Persia and
Media, which was then said to be in the Court of Assuerus, was before in
expedition with Cyrus the greater. Now after Assuerus we place Darius, whom we
have named Assyrius, for a difference from others, who are called in the said
Monarchy, Darius: because in the 6. of Ezra the 11. the Jews are said to have
kept a solemn feast of sweet bread seven days in mirth, because the Lord had
made their hearts glad, and had turned the heart of the King of Assure toward
them, The Ebrewes, (who should have skill in their own stories) hold this
Darius to be the son of Ester.
to help their hands in the work of the house of the God of Israel. But this
Darius Assyrius is mentioned in the beginnings of the prophecies of Aggey and
Zachary, under whom the building of the temple of God was begun anew. Whose
praise is, that the building of the temple (intermitted under Assuerus
Artaxerxes) by his authority was begun again and finished. This Artaxerxes and
Assuerus (whom being two, he names one person) may be known, not only by this
Author, but also by Dan. 10. 11 to have had a short reign: and Darius (under
whom the Temple was built) was of antiquity holden most commonly, (excepting
some one or two learned) to begin his reign no whit above thirty years from
Babels fall: but rather shorter much, though a shorter time should hardly be
granted. But 107. years from Cyrus (as some would) should be too much for
50000. (being men at Cyrus Monarchy) to be workefull for the Temple.
Which we gather from the Prophecy of Aggey and Zachary; but chiefly we
understand it from the history of Esdras: for in the fourth chapt. 24. verse
it is said, that the house of the Lord was intermitted under Asserus, nor begun
again before the 2. year of Darius the King of Persia: but in the 6. chapt.
and 14. verse. it is thus spoken of the house of God, built under Darius
Assyrius; But the Elders of Judah built and prospered according to the prophecy
of Aggey the prophet, and Zachary the son of Addo: and they edified and
built, the God of Israel commanding them, and Cyrus and Darius Here And might
be held as the Hebrews hold it, for which is.
and Artaxerxes Kings of Persia. Here his judgment staggreth. Any man may know
by the text and the time that Darius also Arraxerxes gra^ting authority to
build the temple, the work being finished in Darius sixth year, and after that
Ezra the the son of Saraiah coming to Jerusalem from Babel is the seventh
of Artaxerxes: either the two terms must needs (as Hebrews assuredly hold)
signify one person: or the two must reign at once.
Now, he in this verse, who is in the last place called Artaxerxes, seems to
be Assuerus Artaxerxes, by whom it has been said before the work of the Lord
was hindered; unless our conjecture deceive us: because by reason of Hester and
Mardochey he favored the proceedings of the people of GOD, the which before he
greatly misliked. For peradventure, when he now waxed old, Darius Assyrius
being consorted in government with him, he also commanded the temple of God
to be built, Darius chiefly busying himself thereabouts, as the divine
Oracles have witnessed to us. Also that Artaxerxes may be he whom we name Pius,
under whom by Nehemias the City was compast about with a wall, and the temple
obtained his ornaments. Others refer the word Artaxerxes to This is most
holden and plain.
Darius Assyrius, as if and were put in stead of of; that is to say, because
the surname of Artaxerxes was proper to the kings of Persia, as Caesar was a
common name to the Emperors of Rome, and Pharao to the ancient Kings of
Egypt, as after Alexander the great the name of Ptolomey was attributed to all
the Kings of Egypt, till Egypt was reduced to the form of a province by the
Romans. But to Darius Assyrius, we adjoined in succession Artaxerxes Pius,
The self same man: as by the Scripture examined, any may see: and Hebrews
with maine Latins hold.
of who^ there is mention made as it were in a new history, in the seventh
chapter and first verse after this manner. After these words, In the kingdom
of Artaxerxes the King of Persia, Esdras the son of The time for the year
seventh, upon the sixth: and the name of Artaxerxes that went before in the
second of Darius granting the building of the Temple: show the two names
signify but one King, as was touched before. Seraias case best discusseth the
whole time of the Persia^s. For seeing Seraias was killed by Nabucadnezzar 52.
years before Cyrus took Babylon: and Esdras is commonly granted to have
seen the Persians last reign. It is as much as old age can suffer in one
man's life (aged 50. years before) that the Persians should reign in that man's
life 130 years more. For so he must match Isaacks years 180: and that so he
did or came near it, may be proved by many likelihoods. It is but a bare
conjecture, for to imagine that Esdras omitted his father or grandfathers, two
or three, betwixt him and Seraias. No man has authority to form more than
is, to the Bible.
Seraias; there is added: This Esdras went up from Babylon, and he was a
slight Scribe in the law of Moses, which the Lord God gave to Israel. And the
King gave unto him all his request according to the hand of the Lord which was
upon him. For (as it shall be touched afterward) Judea did then seem (
Zorobabel was alive the year before, and younger than he.
Zorobabel being dead) to want a Ruler. For which cause, in the seventh year
of Artaxerxes Pius, Esdras is sent into Judea, with commandment to compound
the causes of the people of God. For so in the said 7. chap. 24. verse. it is
said, But thou Esdras according to the wisdom of thy God, which is in thy
hand, appoint Judges and Governors to judge the people which is beyond the
River, to wit, those that know the Lord; yet also teach freely those which
are ignorant. Who was also Darius Pius and Longimanus: and seems to be that
brother of Xerxes, of whose quiet reign Iustine writes. Herodotus writes,
that the son of Atossa (Ester is she) gate the Kingdom, though he took one
brother for the other.
From the same Artaxerxes Pius afterward Nehemias is sent into Judea to
compound ecclesiastical causes in the twe^tieth year, as it is largely
expounded in the second of Nehemias. Seeing therefore Artaxerxes Pius is thus
known unto us out of the History of Esdra and Nehemia we have made him to
succeed Darius Assyrius. Wherefore we know from the holy Scripture, these
Kings to wit Cyrus Mayor, Assuerus Artaxerxes, Darius Assuerus, and Artaxerxes
Pius, whom Xerxes the terror of Graecia succeeds, the fifth in succession
from Cyrus Mayor.

And thus we have named the former kings of Persia, staying our selves upon the
authority of holy Scripture, careless in the mean while of Herodotus and
Ctesias, and of others, who follow Herod. or Ctesias of whom we will speak
afterward. Now who those Kings were, who succeeded this Xerxes in Persia, we
collect out of the profane story.

This would not soon be granted, nor at all: he was elder than Lo^gimanus and
ruler of the wars of Greece and not with the Jews. Ezra. 4.
Xerxes was the son of Artaxerxes Macrochir, that is, the long handed: whom
he succeeded in the Kingdom. From whose twenty year, they who reckon the
beginning of Daniels Seuens, may now perceive how far they are from the truth,
when they take this Artaxerxes Longimanus the son of Xerxes, for Artaxerxes
Pius; who peradventure was the grandfather of Artaxerxes Longimanus. But after
Artaxerxes Longimanus, Darius Nothus (begotten by him) succeeded in the
Kingdom, Artaxerxes Mnemon (that is by surname, the Rememberer) succeeded
Darius Nothus, being his bastard; whose brother was Cyrus, called, the lesser,
(famous in the Greek history, and in Xenophon) who was fellow in Arms with
him against Artaxerxes. After Artaxerxes Mnemon, Ochus his son reigned over
the Persians. Then Arses the son of Ochus, who (being destroyed with his
whole family) had for his successor, Darius the last king of Persia; whom
Diodorus Siculus in his 17. book says to be the son of Arsanes, who was the
brother of Ochus; yet Iustine in his 10. book, names him Codomanus. Against
this Darius, Alexander the great made war, having transferd to him the power
and Monarchy of the Persians, according as it was appointed by God, and
foretold to come to pass in Daniels visions; that we may think no change in
governments nor in the rest of our life, to be without the providence of God.

These therefore are the Kings of Persia, known unto us, partly out of the
holy Scripture, partly out of the profane History of Herodotus, Thucidides,
Xenophon, Ctesias, and Diodorus Siculus, whom also Eusebius does otherwise
order and name: we will yet nevertheless stand to the judgment of those
forenamed authors, and will insist in this description and Catalogue. From the
holy Scripture acknowledged, these are the five former Kings of Persia.

1 The particular Kings of Persia, never were, and never will be known by
Writers. For times touching scripture of 49. years: for the chief work of
walling lerusalem to that Aben Ezra wilagree: and no Hebrew will grant that they
reigned above 130. years but rather come far short. And flout many closely
in Seder Olam, as grosely deceived that give the Persians 250. years though
not the most part were so much deceived. The five generations of Iosuahs
posterity to Iuddue, will compel them to grant nere that sum: but to more
than that, no likelihood can urge.
Cyrus Mayor. 2 Assuerus Artaxerxes. 3 Darius Assyrius. 4 Artaxerxes Pius. 5
Xerxes the terror of Graecia.
The rest from profane stories are made known to us under these names.

6 Artaxerxes Longimanus. 7 Darius Nothus. 8 Artaxerxes Memor. 9 Ochus. 10
Arses, who also is Arsanes. 11 Darius Codomanus, the son of Arsanes, the
brother of Ochus.
This sum will not soon be disprooued, though the particular Kings be not
agreed upon: which yet (...) never agreed upon: not any learned Christians,
for the Bible is compelled to take notice of.
These eleven Kings governed the Persian Monarchy for a hundred and thirty
years as before has been declared. But to these Kings we do not add their
years: because we want the certain knowledge of the Persian history. For
albeit in the holy scriptures certain years are reckoned of the former Kings,
to wit, of Cyrus, Assuerus, Artaxeres, Darius Assyrius, and Artaxerxes Pius;
yet we cannot from these, certainly define the years of their government,
because that is not the purpose of the Scripture, to teach how long they
reigned: therefore it is not greatly necessary to enquire more curiously
after them. But because our time uses much Josephus in these histories, as
also Metasthenes, Metastenes a forged author, yet deceived many.
and I know what fragments added to him of uncertain authors scarce of good
credit; therefore they are especially to be admonished of those errors,
which Josephus admits in this History in the eleventh book of his
antiquities or old affairs. For partly out of Herodotus, who did not so much
purpose to write a history, as to retain and recreate the Reader with
pleasant narrations, partly out of authors I know not what (for they are
almost infinite, who have handled Persian affairs) they reckon the Persian
Kings in this sort: first Cyrius, then Ca^bises the son of Cyrus, then Magus,
after him Darius the son of Histaspis, then Xerxes: after Xerxes they name
another Cyrus, whom he will have to be the son of Xerxes, who amongst the
Graecians is said to be Artaxerxes, under whom (he says) the history of
Ester fell out. From thence he passes to Alexander the great: who subdued
Darius the last King of the Persians: which how discordant they be from holy
scripture, is manifest from those things which before have been spoken, that
there need be no stay made to confute this.

Furthermore (as before we have said) neither Herodotus, nor Ctesias, or they
from who these broached their stories, we have followed in the enumeration of
the former Kings of Persia; because we have certain testimonies out of the
Scriptures, of these kings who reigin Persia unto Xerxes. So, after Cyrus we
do not name Cambyses, nor after him Magus, nor after him Darius Histaspis:
which names, because they are never found in Scripture, by us are pretermitted.
For we must wholly rest in the authority of holy Scripture, which handles
the Not all the Kings, because they touch not the common weal.
history of these times, and neither to Herodotus, nor any other whosoever
he be, that says he brings a true History from the Persian Records, as
Ctesias is bold to profess of himself. Who being taken in the war of Cyrus
the lesser by Artaxerxes Memor, because he was a Phisician, was admitted into
the Kings Court; in the which living long, he grew more skillful (as he
himself says) of the Persian estate, than either Herodotus or any other, who
(before him) entreated of the Persian affairs: yet he after Xerxes names
Artaxerxes the son of Xerxes, whom they call Longimanus, after whom they
reckon Xerxes the son of Longimanus; who when he reigned some months, was
slain by the treachery of Secundianus another son of Artaxerxes, but a
bastard: who therefore reigned after Xerxes the second, but yet a short time,
because another son of Artaxerxes Longimanus (called Darieus or Darius) made
him away, by the same policy as he made away his brother. For they say, that
Darius the son of Artaxerxes by his concubine, trusting to the learning of
the Persians, contended for the Kingdom with Isogeus the legitimate son of
Artaxerxes Longimanus; and that both of them referred the cause to the Council
of Persia; in the which Darius Nothus or bastard, became victor, and got the
upper hand: from whom (afterward) the Persian Kings are lineallie derived. For
Artaxerxes was the son of this Darius Nothus named Memor, for a difference
from the other called Longimanus; then Ochus the son of Artaxerxes Memor,
who^ Arses succeeded, surnamed by Iustine Codomanus, as before we have said. In
the rehearsing of the genealogy of the Kings of Persia, we have pretermitted
Xerxes the second, and Secundianus (whom some call Sogdianus) because either of
them reigned but a few months, although Diodorus Siculus remembers the^ out
of Ctesias, whom nevertheless others pass over. The years of these Kings
uncertain and ill reckoned in profane history, we have not particularly
remembered, because the Historiographers confound them. Therefore we are content
with the sum of their years, which they reigned in all, which we have
observed to be certain from those things, which before have been propounded.

But before we give over this history of the Kings of Persia, because there is
nothing in it so illustrious, as Xerxes going down into Graecia, let us see in
what Olympiade he by war invaded Graecia: for this is handled by many Greek
Historiographers; but how truly, that we are now to see. Pausanias sets
down in Arcadie, that then Xerxes passed over into Graecia with that infinite
host, (which the Historians report of, that the Medes at one dinner drank up
all the Rivers) when Gelon governed in Syracusa; whom the Athenians and the
Laced aemonians (by their Ambassadors) solicited to take part with them
against Xerxes, as it is in Herodotus in his 7. book. The same Pausanias in
Eliac, affirms the same Gelon to have obtained the government of Syracusa,
in the second year of the seventy two Olympiade. Moreover he affirms in his
Eliac, that those Persians which Xerxes left behind him in Graecia with
Mardonius, were overthrown at Platea, in the 75. Olympiade. But Diodorus
Siculus in the eleventh book of his Library, affirms Xerxes to have moved
war against the Graecians in the 75. Olympiade; in which time he says, Gelon
governed in Syracusa. Polybius Megapolitanus is of the same opinion in his 5.
book with Diodorus Siculus: who says that the Romans first joined league
with the Carthaginians. After the Kings were exiled Rome, the Consulls had
ruled the Commonweal eight and twenty years before the first passage of
Xerxes into Graecia. But Rome was in subjection to Kings 243. year (as Sextus
Rufus makes computation) deducting the times of the Kings. From that time (if
you reckon 28. year) we shall come to the 3. year of the To teach the vanity
of this consent: we may mark out of Pausanias other accounts for men of that
age: as Oebotas is in Olympiade the sixth: and Xenopho^ in 25. but in Triclinius
in 79. both winners of the footerace. Of Xenopho^ Pindarus made an Ode.
Infinite variety of Writers disanulleth this consent.
74. Olympiade. Now it is manifest and apparent by this, that Pausanias and
Diodorus Siculus, as also Polybius, moreover Dionisius Halicarnasseus who is of
their judgment, and others who have likewise noted these times unto us, have
all erred: because Cyrus Mayor (King of Persia) ruled the Kingdom after Darius
the Mede, in the third year of the 80. Olympiade, as the times determined by
the testimony of holy Scripture do conclude. And after Cyrus, these three
Kings succeeded in Persia, Assuerus Artaxerxes, Darius Assyrius, and Artaxerxes
Pius. But the 20. year of Artaxerxes Pius the Temple was wholly restored, and
it is noted that the City Jerusalem was compassed with a wall, as afterward
will appear out of the history of the seven first seuens of Daniel. But the
seventh seven, which is the limit of this time, is ended in the third year of
the 92. Olympiade.

Moreover there is reckoned the 32. year of Artaxerxes Puis in the 13. of
Nehem and the 6. verse, which falls out in the third year of the 95.
Olympiade. So it appears how far these Writers are from the true observing
of the times; seeing it may seem, that the passing of Xerxes into Graecia, was
only about the 90. Olympiade: because Artaxerxes Pius must have reigned in
Persia before Xerxes the terror of Graecia: Nay rather later in part than he,
for he seems to touch the Persia^s overthrow to have been for hindering of the
Temple. Ezra. 6. 13. and Dan. 11. The power of Persia raised against Greece,
was to look for a sharp punishment from him whose eyes were a flame of fire:
for the sorrow caused to Daniels people.
as it is apparent out of the Prophecy of Daniel: in whose eleventh chaper and
2. verse it is plainly said; After Cyrus 3. Kings shall rule in Persia before
Xerxes, who shall trouble all Graecia. Yet Xerxes might go down into Graecia
under Artaxerxes Pius, when he was elected King. For even as under Cyrus
reigned Assuerus, so under Artaxerxes Xerxes might reign: and the Persian
Monarchy (eue^ as the Romans) at one time might have many Imperators.

By this it appears, that the errors admitted by profane Historiographers,
and the Chronicles of our time, in the supputation of times, may be espied, and
in some part amended: But it is requisite for us for this time to pretermit
that care, and to refer it unto some other time least by handling of other
matters, we may seem to have forgot our own purpose. These things have been
thus laid down by us out of the holy Scriptures concerning the Persian
Monarchy, and the Monarchs of Persia, to lay open (in some part) the truth of
the Persian History, and to purge it from fables.

But now we are to come to the The term weeks much entangleth the weak, and
requires a comment in English: for a term plain in Ebrue or Greek.
seuens of Daniel, which in the chapter going before, we have taught to have
been divided by the Angel into three parts; yet so, as he has selected seven
out of them, and has appointed them to the restoring of the Temple and the
City. Then he does enumerate sixty two: in the which the Church of God was
afflicted diversely. In the third place, the last which is the seuentieth, has
been set down: which has with it the conclusion and end of all the
ceremonial of the law. But the seven forenamed seuens in the first place,
because they signify a yearly time, do make forty and nine years, for that
number seven times seven does amount unto: the History whereof, the writings
of Nehemias and Esdras do contain; which the Latins comprehend in one volume:
so as the book of Nehemias, they call the second book of Esdras. And Jerome
in his Episle to Paulinus concerning the books of holy scripture, says that
Esdras and Nehemias were straightened into one volume: from the which this
present History of seven seuens or weeks is to be derived. And in the first
chapter of Esdras, the Edict of Cyrus is laid down, by the which the people of
God is Daniel prayed for restoring of the City, and the Angel accordingly
ioineth to the grant ofreturne the building of the City: that we should not
seek for sundry times to take the beginning of our account: unless when God
makes a thing plain, we will be finding out inventions.
restored to his liberty after 70. years captivity in Babylon. The people
being returned into their Country, the third chapter teaches, that the Altar
was first built, in the which they offered sacrifices to God, which gives us
also to understand, that in the second year after the return into their
Country, the foundations of the temple were laid by Zorobabel the son of
Salathiel Prince of Judah, and by Joshua the son of Iosedeck the high Priest.
In the fourth chapter, Esdras teaches that the building of the Temple was
hindered by the commandment of Assuerus Artaxerxes, nor begun again to be
builded before the second year of Darius Assyrius. But in the sixth chapter he
shows, the Temple was finished in the sixth year of Darius Assyrius,
Zorobabel and Joshua, employing and busying themselves chiefly about it, being
thereunto incited by the Prophets Aggey and Zachary. The Temple being restored
and almost finished, Zorobabel Prince of Judea may be thought to die, because
Esdras is sent to Judah from the King of Persia as Viceroy, with agreat company
of voluntary Jews: who remained in Chaldea after the Edict of Cyrus, and the
departure of their Country men; who being by God awakened, had rather leave
their wealth in Babylon to live in their own country, than by enjoying it to
live in a strange Country. Yet Esdras is sent to Judea, chiefly to constitute
Rulers and Judges, who might minister justice to the people, thereby to
establish the state of the Jews Commonweal: which is done in the seventh
year of Artaxerxes Pius, as it is in Esdr. the 4. and the 24. After Esdras,
the same Artaxerxes Pius sends (as his Ambassador) Nehemias, with authority
and commandment for covering the gates of the Temple, that is, for finishing
the building of the Temple, as also for walling the City Jerusalem, as it is
in 2. Nehem and the 8. Now Nehemias had this Embassage in the twentieth year
of Artaxerxes Pius, as it is in the first verse of the 8. chapter; which was
13. years after Esdras was sent Ambassador to Judah. Yet Nehemias was ruler and
protector over Judah 12. years, as it is declared in the 5. chap. and 14.
verse. But how great pains Nehemias took in fortefying the City Jerusalem
and compassing it with a wall, is declared from the second chapter to the
seventh. And in the 6. chapter and 15. verse. is declared, the great diligence
which both he and the Jews used in fortefying the City Jerusalem, so great a
work being finished within fifty and two days, being the five and twentieth
of the month Elul, which in our account is August. And thus we have the first
seven seuens fully ended, that is in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes Pius,
in the which Nehemias came to Judah. For so the Angel foretold, Dan. chap. 9.
verse. 25. that to the building again of street and walls, should be seven
seuens, and that in a troublesome time. The hostile attempts of the adversaries
of the people of God, and their detestable counsels practiced against the good;
also the niggardlines of the rich toward the poor: all which are described
very largely of Esdra and Nehemias, do manifest the troubles and miseries of
these times.

The twentieth year therefore of Artaxerxes Pius walleth Jerusalem and
finisheth the temple with all his appurtenances; to the finishing whereof,
Nehemias had gotten and obtained stuff of the King. By reason whereof, the
Jews say truly in the second of John and the twentieth verse: This Temple was
in building forty and six years; and will thou raise it up again in three
days? Which truly the Jews may be thought to speak, as thereby to mention
the twentieth year of Artaxerxes Pius, rather than the sixth year of Darius
Assyrius. For by what reason that place may receive other construction I
understand not, unless we will say, The very matter does still drive him to
grant these two names to mean one King: or two beginning reign together Esters
son he should be thought that so favored the Jews.
that Darius Assyrius and 1. ^^^axerxes Pius (whom by the Scripture we
understand to be diverse kings) to have reigned at one time, and in the mean
time to have favored the people of God, and to have taken that care upon them,
because they were devoted to Religion. This not withstanding we shall be always
compelled to affirm, that the Temple was built in the sixth year of Darius
Assyrius, as it is in Esdras 6. and 15. ver. to the complement whereof, many
things wanted, which were added under Artaxerxes Pius: If any ca^ speak better
tha^ this to the text of Daniel, he shall do very well to help the world
with it.
under whom (in his twentieth year) we will say that Jerusalem was fortified,
as we do understand out of the 2. of Nehemias the 2. verse. and the 6. cap. and
15. ver. Wherefore we will think (and not without reason) that the Temple was
finished with all his adjuncts (which before were wanting) under Artaxerxes
Pius, as peradventure there might be additions to the Temple for the rooms of
the Priests ministering by course in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and barnes or
garners for to lay up the first fruits and tithes of the Priests. And we may
say, that the same time the City Jerusalem attained her fortification.

But the place of the Gospel before remembered is not to be past over; whereby
the authority of Josephus, Josephus regarded custom of speech, rather tha^
truth, sometimes unawares he speaks well: the^ he is void of parcialitie.
Often he follows heathen: or of malice crosses prophecies and his whole
nation: the^ his authority is nothing.
Writer of the Jewish story (whom our time too greatly esteems of) is to be
diminished: who truly in many places shows himself to be ignorant of those
things which he handles, and argues himself to be a stranger in his own
Common wealth. And it is requisite for this which we have in hand, to show
himto be scarce advised and circumspect, nay, most notable impudent and a
liar, that we may understand that his writings must be more narrowly looked
into and examined of us. For he in the 15. book of the Jewish antiquity, the
14. chapt. says, That Herod the son of Antipater erected the Temple from
the foundation far more sumptuously and largely than it was: and to have
finished it with his additions and gates, in eight years and a half. But the
Jews that lived in that age, convince him of lying, who (casting their eyes to
the old building) say, that that was built in the space of 40 and 6. years.
Besides, we know that the second Temple, that is, that Temple which Zorobabel
(with Joshua) built, and the rest of the Company of the Jews, which returned
from the captivity of Babylon; to have been overthrown and subverted, about
forty years after the death of Christ, with all the pomp of the ceremonies of
the law: which the And the Talmud Zoar, and commentaries commonly.
Jewish Historiographers also do acknowledge, to have bin done by Titus,
referring the destruction of the second Temple, to the Romans and their
Imperator Titus. And we know by the certain predictions of the prophets, that
the same Temple stood when Christ Jesus our Lord being man, conuersed in mount
Sion. For Aggey says in the 2. chapt. 10. verse. That the glory of the second
Temple built by Zorobabel, should be far greater than that was of Salomons
Temple, looking unto the presence of Christ the Lord, who was therewith to
beautefie their Temple. Yet if (as Josephus says) Herod had built that Temple
in which our Lord was conversant, that should not have been the second temple,
but the third; the form whereof should have been far otherwise, as Ezechiel
describes it in the latter end of his prophecy. Therefore many of our time
are to be condemned of sloth and ignorance, who stand so affected to the
writings of Josephus, and the like Writers, that presently they assent unto
them, and believe those things to, be true which are propounded by them; the
book of the holy scripture in the mean while past over and neglected, and the
divine histories carelessly read over: which histories must be first and
chiefly learned; by the which all other are to be judged of and examined,
none but a most unjust judge will deny.

But because it is said, the second Temple was finished in six and forty
years: and yet nevertheless seven seuens which amounts unto forty nine
years, is assigned to the absolute finishing of the temple: therefore it must
thus be understood, That the Temple was absolutely finished, with the City
walled about in the nine and fortieth year after the liberty restored by
Cyrus. Yet six and forty years to be only bestowed in the building of the
temple: because three whole years were passed before Zorobabel and the other,
which returned out of captivity, came to do that work. For after Cyrus Edict
published for the liberty and restoring of the people of GOD, a great time was
requisite to consult of the manner of their return, and for to compel those
that should return, and to settle their affairs, who determined to leave
Chaldea, to return to their Country. Let us therefore grant a year for
these matters: which being ended, let us admit the Jews returners, to have
begun their journey the second year from the publishing of the Edict; and so
we shall understand these returners to have come into their Country a year
and almost a half after the Edict of Cyrus. For from Babylon to Judea, the
journey to those that have lets, is of four months travel, as it is written
in the 7. of Esdr. 8. verse, in this sort. And they came to Jerusalem the fifth
month, which is the seventh year of the King: because they begun to go from
Babylon in the first day of the first month: and came into Jerusalem the first
day of the fifth month, according to the good favor of God toward them. Now,
the foundations of the Temple were not laid as soon as they came to Jerusalem:
for we read in the third of Esdr. and the 8. verse, that this was not done till
the second year after their return. From whence we gather, that there were To
the foundation in some plain forwardnes: wherefore in the 3. of Cyrus, Daniel
was in heaviness for the work hindered.
three years from the Edict of Cyrus, to the foundations of the Temple laid:
to the which, if we add six and forty years, we have nine and forty years
which are assigned to the first seven seuens, which ended and expounded,
according as they were propounded by the Angel we must pass over to the
sixty and two seuens which follow: Josephus in Eusebius, them. 8. to the full
finishing of the Temple, reckons 49. years.
which we will handle shortly, least we be tedious.

The sixty two seuens, which succeed the seven before spoken of, begin from
the twenty and one year of Artaxerxes Pius, which is the fourth year of the
ninety two Olympiade, Though he make some account of a number certain in
Olympiades: he might rather for this than any thing else blame the heathen of
uncertainty.
from whence begins the eight of Daniels seuens. But this time is ended and
compassed in the beginning of the seue^tieth seven, which falls into the
second year of the hundred and one Olympiade, when Quintus Tiberius Nero
reigned in Rome after Octauius Augustus, the year from the City built, seven
hundred seauentie eight. Now what was the state of the church in these seventy
two seuens, is opened and taught by the visions of Daniel, as before we have
said. Therefore in the seventh chapter of Daniel, four Monarchies are
propounded under four terrible beasts; under whom the people of GOD was
diversely afflicted. Whom although earthly and sen suall men desired to
destroy and consume, yet they could never remove the people of God from their
constancy and faith, God miraculouslie preserving and defending his Church.
But the Jews Commonwealth lived prosperously enough under Artaxerxes Pius;
when that Persian King (unto whom the rest of Asia and Syria obeyed) cared for
it and the people of God. For he (after the death of Zorobabel) compounded and
established the Church causes, as may be understood by the Commentaries of
Esdras and Nehemias. After this Artaxerxes Pius, we have taught the Empire of
the East, or the Persian Empire, to succeed to Xerxes the terror of Graecia:
but from this Xerxes immediately to Alexander the great does the Angel pass,
passing over the other Kings of Persia, because they were inferior in renown
to Xerxes, neither greatly regarded the causes of the Church, but suffering
them to pass according to the time; being over seriously busied exacting and
gathering up of tributes, and the yearly revenue.

By the going down of Alexander into Syria, it might be thought, that the
Church of God should sustain great damage, by reason of his war against
Tyrus, and against Egypt: for the going down out of Phoenicia into Egypt, is
through Judea; and Alexander the great was very angry with the Jews, because
they had denied him aid and provision, and because they took the Persians
part, whom they then obeyed. Besides, religion and true godliness, dissenting
from others who were idolaters, provoked wicked men and contemners of God,
against the people of God. But God (in whose hand are not only the hearts of
Kings, but of all men) reconciled Alexander to his people; and brought the
insolency of a foolish and proud young man (intolerable through success of
his victories) to a moderation, and caused him to perform great signs and
arguments of favor to those with whom he seemed to be most displeased.
Therefore in this History, we may observe the same, which we understand to
have fallen out in the first times of the Church of Israel, between Laban and
Iaacob. Genesis 31. 24. For Laban with an exasperate mind and with a great band
pursued Iaacob (who fled from him), in hope to find Iaacob unprovided, and to
overthrow his substance. Yet this boldness of Laban God in a wonderful manner
kept under, forbidding him, not only not to deal rashly with Iaacob, but not
so much as to speak rashly to him; so God repressed this furious man, and
compelled him to seek his friendship, whom he went about to destroy. In the
same manner, God made Alexander the great (an insolent and proud king,
displeased with his people (that is) the Jews, whom in hope he had now
devoured and destroyed) so quiet as a sheep, and brought him to wonder at
the^, and to preserve them whom he went to destroy.

But the Successors of Alexander, some of whom ruled Asia, and some Egypt,
afflicted the Jews afterward with diverse miseries, because when the one lay
in wait for the others life, wealth and Kingdom, and destroyed themselves
through mutual wars, both of them aimed at Judea, as a reward of victoire.
These Histories which Daniel has set down in few words, profane Writers have
at large laid down in their Writings: In the Image legs, chapt 2. fourth
beast chap. 7 buckes horns chap. 8. and in a proper speech, chapt. 11. and 12.
from which we understand the word of God to be most true, and all things to
be governed by divine decree and providence. Neither do we acknowledge the
Church of God to be subject unto the injuries of tyrants, without his certain
appointment. And there are extant learned interpretations upon Daniel, not
only of ancient Divines, but also of later, and of our time, by the which his
Visions and the Histories theretoo pertaining are expounded. There are also
added to Daniels writings, certain men's Cronicles, by the which many
histories of Scripture are opened and explaned: wherefore we need not (in this
place) be any longer in the expounding of the Greek and Roman Monarchies,
There is no word in Daniel which handles the Romans dealing against the
jews: until they deny and kill Christ, after the 490. Y. for which time
their city was called, the holy City. There only the Romans be noted, and
termed a wing or camp of Infidels, or abominable.
which are handled shortly in Daniels writings; yet to those Monarchies Judea
became subject, even as to the Persian Monarchy these sixty and two seuens.
But we will only by the way note this in this argument, that the Greekish
Monarchy is called that power of Alexander the great and his Successors,
which was afterward overthrown by the Romans: as afterward also the Romans
(which obscured all others) was overthrown by the Goths. But it is therefore
callec the Greekish Monarchy, because in the 8. of Daniel, the 21. verse. the
Goat bucke (which is Alexander the great) is said to be the King of the
Graecians. For by a common consent of all Graecia, at a Council held at
Corinth, Alexander the great was declared Emperor of Graecia to pursue the
Persians by war. The not able horn in the forehead of the Bucke is the first
King of Iauan Dan. 8.
Whereby it came to pass, that the Macedonian Empire of Alexander is named in
Scripture the Grecian, long before that Alexander was borne. But Philip the
Father of Alexander the great, having overcome the Graecians at Chaeronea,
commanded himself to be called (not the King, but) the Duke of Graecia, as
Iustine in his ninth book declares: whose example Alexander the great
following, summoning the Cities of Graecia to appear at Corynth, after he had
settled the state of the Kingdom, he caused himself to be chosen Duke of
Graecia in his fathers place, as Iustine declares in his eleventh. Therefore
being chosen the Revenger of Graecia (so oftentimes invaded by the Persians)
invaded Asia: which he subdued with that speed, as the holy Oracles before
opened to Daniel, and had declared and denounced; that those who marvel at
the felicity of Alexander, His Kingdom is a Leopard with 4. wings. Dan, 7.
and (as it is commonly called) the fortune, are to be sent to the divine
decrees over Kingdoms, and to be admonished of the divine will and providence;
on which the condition and state of all men depends. Therefore, what the
Kingdom of Alexander the great was like to be, and how to be divided unto
maine, it is easy to be found out of Daniel. In the which, it is to be
marked, that by reason of the situation of Judea, the Kings of the North are
said to be the Kings of Asia, and the Kings of the South are called the Kings
of Egypt, proceeding from Ptolomeus the son of Lagus.

Now there rests and is remaining one seven, which is the last and the
seuentith; whereof also sme thing must be said, seeing it comprehends the
Ministry of Christ the Lord and his death, Ephesians, 1.
in which is the fulness of times. Of the which it is thus prophesied in the 9.
of Daniel the 27. ver. But he shall confirm the covenant for many in The
Hebrew might be better translated for plains but for small things men should
not fight.
one seven, and in the half of the last seven shall cease offering and
sacrifice, and in the Temple shall be abomination of desolation, and desolation
shall continue until a consummation and end. Which words in part are rather
taken out of some Greek Interpreter, than out of the Hebrew text; and whether
they be taken out of the seventy Interpreters, the proper interpretation of
this verse in the Greek Copies printed at Strausburge in the year of our Lord
1526. makes somewhat doubtful.

If any enquire after the Hebrew, The Greek and Hebrew are omitted (which bare
English men need not to be troubled with) though he set them down.
and desires to know, let them hear and understand that the words may be thus
translated, And one seven shall confirm the covenant for many: and the
half of that seven shall cause to cease Sacrifice and Offering, and every one
shall be amazed, for the extremity of abomination and desolation shall drop
upon the astonished, Whereas Mat. Beroaldus expounds the half seven, and not
only the time of our Lords death, to contain the ministry of doctrine,
which makes strong the covenant for many, that is, the heathen: and the same
time to cause sacrifice to cease: as well by the doctrine teaching of that, as
by the Lords very death: Of this the reader is to be admonished least he
should think him to say, that Christ should die in half that seven: whereof
he is of some unjustly blamed: as also an other of his judgment.
even unto a certain destruction.

But in this place, we must chiefly look unto the Hebrew, because the Latin
and Greek does expound and signify, in the half of that last seven the
sacrifices shall cease. Which was not so, neither do the Hebrew words teach
that: which say, The half of that last seven will add an end to the
sacrifice and ceremonies of the law. But the half of that seven, signifies
those things which are done in the last seven of all, which brought an end to
the ceremonial law of Moses, the eternal covenant of God, concerning our
salvation by Christ the Lord, being declared stable and firm. But afterward
there was nothing to be looked for to the City Jerusalem and to the unbelievers
(who contemned God calling them) but a beadroule of miseries, which should
destroy Jerusalem, and enwrap the Jewish people, rebellious and disobedient to
God, in infinite calamities.

But those things brought an end to the ceremonies of the law, which were
done in the half of the last seven; which teach that Jesus Christ was made
manifest, John Baptist being the publisher and foremessenger of so great a
good. To whom God spoke whilst he lived in the desert, giving him
commandments which he should put in practice, then when it was the 15. year
of Tiberius Caesar's Empire, as it is written in the third of Luke: where these
things are thus set down; But in the 15. year of the reign of Tiberius
Caesar, Pontius Pilate being Lieutenant of Judea, and Herod Tetrarch of
Galilee, and his brother Philip Tetrarch of Iturea and of the Region of
Traconitis, and Lysama Tetrarch of Abilena, Ananias and Caiphas being the high
Sacrificers, the word of the Lord came unto John the son of Zachary, being
in the wilderness: And he came into all the country of Jordan, preaching the
baptism of repentance for remission of sins. It appears therefore out of
these words of the Evangelist Luke that after his commission and commandment
given from heaven, John came into all the Region nere Jordan, preaching the
baptism of repentance for remission of sins: who whilst he baptized the
people, washes Christ the Lord (beginning to be thirty year old) with the
washing of baptism, as it is taught in the same third chapter of Luke the
Evangelist, in these words; And it came to pass when all the people was
baptized, and Jesus had been baptized and was praying, the heaven opened: And
the holy Spirit descended in a corporal form as a Dove upon him, and a voice
came from heaven; Thou art my son, in thee I am well pleased. And Jesus began
to be as it were thirty year old.

Now this observation of the age of the Lord, and of the Roman Emperor
Tiberius is not lightly to be passed over, because from thence is the
certain knowledge of the death of the Lord and his age, as also of the end of
the seventy seuens of Daniel. Now we have already showed the death of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to be the limit and end of Daniels seauentie seauens, which
we can easelie gather into what instance of time they fall out. And we know
from the history of the Gospel, that Christ the Lord was crucified that day in
the which the Passover was to be offered by every family; which was the
fourteenth day of the first month, that is March, as the account of the old
year was usually taken, as before has been declared in the account of
months and years. Therefore the 14. day of the month of March (which to the
Hebrews is Nisan, and is the first month of the civil year amongst the
people of God) is the end and conclusion of the seauentie seauens; because
then the Lord is dead: whom Daniels Prophecy witnesseh (in the time of the
half last seven) to have performed amongst men the duty of a true teacher
and savior. Also the history of the gospel, which remembers four feasts of
Easter after his baptism (as Andreas Osiander has learnedly gathered and
expounded in his edition of the Harmony of the gospel) from whence is
gathered both the certain age of Christ while he lived upon earth, and the
certain time of his death. For because Christ the Lord was baptized the 15.
year of Tiberius Caesar, and was then baptized, when he began to be thirty
years of age, (as it is expounded in Luke the Evangelist the 3. chapter)
truly he must suffer death for us on the cross the eighteenth year of
Tiberius, then when he was three and thirty years old; that is, when he had
fully accomplished thirty two years and a half: for the half of the last
seven co^teineth three years and a half; in which is anointed the Holy of
Holiest, Christ Jesus, and declared King of his heavenly Father upon Mount
Sion, by whom our sins were the^ to be purged. Moreover, the sacrifices of
the Law were to be taken away by the death of the immaculate Lamb; that is,
the Lord lesus Christ, after he had on earth finished the duty of a true
teacher and prophet. But he began to teach and to manifest himself to be the
true Messiah or Christ, when he began his 30. year, but in that function he
spent three year and a half. From whence the thirtieth year of his age is the
first of his Ministry, then the 31. the second, and the 32. the third: in the
which Christ the Lord was the Minister of circumcision. From whence the thirty
and three year of his age, in the midst where of he fully finished his
ministry, shall be said the half year of the last half seven, in the which
were fulfilled all the prophecies of the Prophets concerning our salvation
purchased by Christ the Lord the three and thirtieth year of his age. But that
three and thirtieth year of the Lord vnexpired, falls into the eighteenth Y.
of Tiberius Caesar; because in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, begins the
thirty of the Lord: whereby the one and thirtieth year of our Lord falls
into the sixteenth year of Tiberius, and his thirty two year runs into
the seventeenth year of Tiberisn, then the three and thirtieth year of the
Lord, must needs be referred to the eighteenth year of Tiberius: which
because they be grounded on the testimonies of holy Scripture, and not on the
uncertain opinions of men, they appear to be true and certain.

But that the Lord Jesus Christ accomplished two and thirty years and a half
on earth, the ancient Church also acknowledged, as reverent Bed a has
witnessed in his book of the Nature of things, the forty seventh chapter:
whose words are these; For the faith of the Church (if I am not deceived)
embraces this, that the Lord lived in the flesh somewhat more than two and
thirty years unto the time of his passion; because he was baptized at thirty
years, as the Evangelist Luke witnesses, and preached three Y. and an half
after his baptism, as John teaches in his Gospel, not only by the time of
the Passover, but also in his Revelation. Daniel also in his vision appoints
the very same propheticallie. Surely the holy and apostolic Church of Rome
testifies, that she reckons this faith even by those notes, which she uses
yearly to write in her wax things: In Cere^^.
where calling into the peoples mind the time of the Lords passion, notes
always three and thirty year less than Dionysius reckons from his
incarnation. These things Beda delivers of the age of the Lord Jesus. But I
am ignorant Carthusianus ap. 11. expounds Beda That by days 1260. must be
understood all the time of the Euangel call law: because Christ had preached
so long a time: Beda understood that time to have been an allusion to the time
of our Lords preaching.
what place of the Revelation teaches it: but we may think that this was
confessed in old time by some received Cabala or tradition. Eusebius in his 8.
book and second chapter of the demonstration of the Gospel confirms this,
saying; Surely it has been recorded in written Story, that all the time of
the teaching and doing of miracles of our Savior was three years and a
half: which is truly the half of one seven. In a sort John the Evangelist
will declare this to them who shall attentively consider his Gospel. Thus
far Eusebius. Afterward Abbas Vspergensis says in the life of Tiberius; The
three and thirtieth year of his incarnation, our Lord Jesus suffered in his
flesh and rose again. Also Nicephorus Callistus concludes the first book of
his histories thus; This first book of histories contains three and thirty
years, the beginning taken from the two and fortieth year of the reign of
Augustus Caesar now wexing old; in the which our Lord Jesus Christ (with flesh)
came forth of the holy Virgin: but the end ending in the eighteenth year
of Tiberius Caesar's reign: which truly is from the creation of the world He
follows the Greeks most gross error by mistaking the Septuaginta upon Genesis
15* and 11
5538. but was from the birth of our Lord three and thirty. These out of many
may suffice: from which it is apparent that the time of the life of the Lord
Jesus on earth was well known to the ancient Fathers. Whereof yet the Divines
of our time do so dispute, that a matter of it self plain enough, they do
so enwrap and infolde, that it is very hard for them to unloose themselves from
their trifling lets.

Therefore in the eighteenth year of Tiberius, and the three and thirtieth of
Christ the Lord, we have concluded the seventy seuens of Daniel; which, to
what years of the Olympiades, The 4 year of the Olympiad 202. supposing his
own account to be true, as he placed Cyrus: otherwise Olympiades are of no
certainty.
or to the City of Rome, or to the creation of the world they are to be
referred, may most certainly be gathered out of the continuance and comparison
of times, determined by the authority of holy Scripture as is noted in the
Table. But the eighteenth year of Tiberius is the fourscore and 4. year from
the building of Rome; 784.
but of the world created three thousand nine hundred sixty one: For one
years difference, a modest student will not strive.
which notation of time to be diligently considered, and not to be ouerpassed
careless or slothfullie, the oracles of the Prophets concerning these matters
do declare. A special point. For if by proper scripture from Adam derived,
our Lords time of suffering might not be showed, a matter most needful and
wished of al, had been omitted, but God omitteth nothing good for us.
But so diligent a care and carfulness which the Scripture uses in noting
down these times should sharpen our diligence and shake out of us all
sluggishnes; wherefore there is no reason why this our pains should be
despised of any or misliked, seeing it consists and is grounded on the word
of GOD, and not on the traditions or opinions of men. But by this we understand
that the knowledge of these times do chiefly concern us, because they were
written for us, who are come to those acceptable times and to that grace, which
we have also obtained; which truly now long ago has been prophesied by the
oracles and foretellings of the Prophets. For as the Apostle Peter says in the
first chapter of his first epistle; Of this salvation the Prophets enquired and
searched, who prophesied of the grace to come on you, searching in what time,
or after what season the spirit of Christ which was in the^, did foretell the
sufferings which should come to Christ, and his glory to come: to whom it was
revealed, that not for themselves but for us they did show those things which
now are declared unto us by the^ who preach the Gospel unto us, the holy
spirit having been sent from heaven, which things the Angels desire to behold.
So Peter the Apostle commends the greatness of the grace communicated unto us
in his time, foretold and foreended by the Prophets; that the Angels also do
admire it, and do desire to behold the complement thereof; whereof that the
elect be not defrauded, we must strive by all means.

The fruit also which flows from these times is not to be omitted, because
the The Jews fear disputing upon this text: more than any other, and lest
meddle with it in their comments.
Jews by the demonstration of them, may be co^uinced, to yield yet at the
length unto Christ, and rest themselves in Christianity, and leave off to
blaspheame. To which purpose we must not only join Daniels seuens, but also
Iaacobs prophecy, which is in this sort in the 49. of Genesis 10. The Scepter
shall not be taken from Judah, nor a Ruler out of his loins till Silo come:
that is his son, to wit Judah, and he shall be the expectation of the Gentiles.
Zoar upon that place does confess the nature of God contained in Shiloh, and
most Rabbines expound that place of Christ.
For that this ver. is thus to be interpreted the Rabbines also confess, the
truth compelling them: for they say, Silo signifies Beno, that is, His son;
which is the Messiah Christ the Lord, the son of Judah. For Christ the Lord
rose from Judah, as is confirmed and taught by the Scriptures. Heb. 8. 14. To
this the Prophecy and testimony of Aggey the Prophet being added is of no
small force, in which the ancient Rabbines acknowledge the presence of Christ
the Lord to be signified, with the which he was to beautefie the second
Temple, which place is cited out of the 2. Aggey the 8. And I will move all
Nations, and the desired shall come to all the Gentiles, and I will fill the
house with glory says the Lord of hoasts. Thus far Beroaldus.

Now that the said seauens of Daniel may the more easelie be understood,
because many Interpreters both Graecians and Latins, have in certain places
departed from the Hebrew text, shall be added in this place an interpretation
as near answering the Hebrew words as we can Dan. 9. 24. Because it is not
good to have differing translations for small points is one kingdom this for
his, was borrowed from a defender of his judgment.
SEVENTIE SEVENS (of years) are cut out, for thy people, and for thy holy
City: to consume wickedness, and to abolish sins, and to make reconciliation
for iniquity, and to bring righteousness everlasting, and to seal Vision and
Prophet, and to show CHRIST the HOLY of HOLY. Know then and mark: from the
outgoing of the Word, to return and to build Jerusalem, unto CHRIST the
GOVERNOR, shall be seven seuens (of years) and sixty and two seuens: in the
other it shall be restored and builded, Street and Wall: and troublous shall
these times be. Though these words be not in the text: yet for light of the
argument, they may well be used: so do the best that profes following of the
Hebrew. They think it no departing from the Hebrew to add words for
explication, and nothing is more usual. It is marvel that some of judgment
blame so usual and lawful a matter.
In that after the sixty and two seuens CHRIST shall be killed, and not for
himself: thereupon the City and holy place shall he destroy, the GOVERNORS
own people to come: and their end shall be with a Flood: and at the end of
war, it shall have a final judgment to desolation. But he shall confirm the
Testament for many the last Seven: when in HALF THAT SEVEN he shall finish
the Sacrifice and Oblation. Afterward by an Army abominable he shall make a
desolation: even till utter destruction and final Judgment flow upon the
desolate.

The judgment of Henry Wolphius touching Beroaldus, may fitly be joined here.
THe fourth Article of the time changed, being the seventh of the old
testament, contains four hundred and ninety years, Daniels seauentie
weeks. It begins from the first year of Cyrus, and ends in the joyful
and most famous Iubilee of all Jubilees, in the year wherein Christ suffered,
being the truth of that type or figure.

Daniels words concerning those seauentie seven are diuerselie interpreted by
the learned: but in my judgment of all other most learnedlie and most truly
has Matthew Beroald, in his Cronicle delivered the mind of the Prophet. The
seventy begins from the going forth of the Word, to repair and reedifie
Jerusalem, to wit of that Word which is set down in the second of the Chr. and
the last. verse. Neither from any other time can this beginning be set down:
for the City and Temple are not repaired in one year.

Furthermore, when the Prophet divides the seuens into two parts, into seven
and sixty and two seauens: the first Seven he referres to the troublesome
times, in the which the street and ditch are said to be renewed and built
again: which is certainly known to have been finished in forty and nine
years. Thirdly, he does so interpret the words of the Prophet (that is, And
after sixty and two seauens Christ shall be killed) that he says these seuens
be ended in the passion of Christ, and after this that there was nothing to be
looked for, but a final destruction and desolation of the City and Temple;
all which are most notorious. And in the 24. ver. he does so describe the end
of the seuens, that it cannot otherwise be understood then to fall out in the
passion of Christ. For he says, To consume impiety, to shut up sin, to
purge iniquity, to bring in everlasting justice, to fulfill vision and prophet,
and to anoint the Holy of Holiest. Who knows not that these things were
performed when Christ said, All things are finished? To conclude that which is
said, And in the half of the seven he shall cause to cease oblation and
sacrifice, is truly expounded of Christ's preaching which he began in the
fourth year of the last seven.

To this may be added a parcel of Bucholcerus words touching the exposition of
the last half seven for the use of them that little are acquainted with this
part of Scripture: but some words of his where the matter well suffers,
shall be omitted: such as would require a long speech upon them.
LEt us come to the declaration of the residue of the 9. of Daniel, in the
which the end of the seventy seuens is described. The first seven seauens
are 49. years, because every seven co^teineth seven years. Those former
49. years run out under Esdra and Nehemias reedifying the Temple. To these
let there be added sixty and two seauens, that is to say 434* year, and they
surmouut unto sixty and nine weeks, or 483. There remains one seven, that
is the last seven: in the half whereof Christ did teach three year and a
half, till by his death upon the cross he purged sin and ended the seuens.

Diversity of exposition grew by reason of this; He shall confirm the
covenant for many in one seven. For that the seventh year, or last of the
last seven might be complete: many have extended the end of the seauens,
unto the preaching of the Apostles, and to the 4. year after the death of
Christ. Others have been of another opinion.

We (by their favor) do think that Daniel plainly pointed out the person
and the course of life of the only Messiah, and that by great advise the last
seven is derived from all the former. For the half of the last seven does
belong unto the Messiah and to his wonderful works: that seven told the
Messiah to be come, in that seven Christ the Anointed began to teach, he
established a new law and abrogated the old, he took away sin, cleansed
iniquity, fulfilled the prophecies, he finished the work of redemption and
brought eternal righteousness. Neither can these seuens which Daniel here
mentions, be ascribed unto the Apostles, that is, to cleanse sin, to take
away iniquity, to bring righteousness; for this is the duty of the only
Messiah: to the finishing whereof, Daniel says the last seven is appointed:
and he says this twice, first generally and then specially. Generally, He
shall confirm the covenant in one seven. Specially, In the half of the
seven he shall make to cease the Sacrifice. So that is general, After 62.
weeks Christ shall be slain. Where it might be doubted, whether immediately
after the 62. weeks fully ended, the Messiah was to be slain. The particular
therefore which teaches the confirmation of the covenant or Christ's preching
to be tied to the half of the last seven, expounds the generality of both.
Therefore it is not Daniels meaning, He will confirm the covenant in one
seven, that is to say, the last yet running out and continuing. Yet least the
time of Christ's ministry should be referred unto all the last seven, or to
the beginning thereof; he adds by way of correction, in the half of the last
seven: that at once he might teach Christ's ministry should be referred to
the last half of the last seven. Though many Translaters run on the middle
of the seven: yet many the eldest and the late, follow the propriety of the
Hebrew word: which most often is taken for half, and never for middle, but
when the matter forces that signification. But the whole sum of 490. year
here suffers it not to be wrested.
Otherwise, if 3. year and a half be reckoned from the beginning of that
seven, and be ended in the midst thereof; seauentie weeks should not be
accomplished but 69. seauens and a half that is 487. year, not 490.

Reverent Beda saw this: who in his book of the account of times the 7.
chapter, writes after this manner; Christ was not stain immediately after the
62. seauens, but in the end of the seuentieth seven: which so far as we can
conjecture he separated from the other, because he was to speak more of this
hereafter. For both Christ was crucified in that, and of a faithless people he
was denied, not only at his passion, but continually from the time when John
began to preach him. The half of the last seven was the 15 year of Tiberius
Caesar, when after the baptism of Christ, the cleansing by sacrifices amongst
the faithful began to be contemned. Thus far Beda. More of Bucholcerus the
Reader may fetch from himself.

The Conclusion.
This Treatise was thought needful in this time, wherein some would make this
Prophecy of Dan. 9 to be worse than nothing: as speaking of a certain number
of years, to men's opinion hethertoo, but not so to be understood. Therein the
Jews would triumph over all Christians, that viged this prophecy for
describing Christ's time: and Christian should ken small thanks for that new
opinion, as also little to them that cannot see this point to be of special
use. Here Strangers opinions were brought, to stay the rashness of the
unlearned, who think all things new that they know not. The Writer of the
observations upon this, translated by I* A. (a friend of his) in an Apology of
his own writes more at large upon that. The Lord give judgment in all
points.

FINIS.

