THE LETTERS PATENTS OF THE PRESBYTERY: With THE PLEA AND FRVITS OF THE
PRELACIE.

Manifested out of the Scriptures, Fathers, Ecclesiastical Histories, Papists,
and sundry other Authors.

By James Peregrin.

LVK. 16.14.15. All these things also heard the Pharisees, who were coueteous,
and they derided him.

And he said unto them, ye are they which justify your selves before men, but
God knows your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed amongst men is
abomination in the sight of God.

Printed, MDCXXXII.

To the sacred honor of the Lord God, Creator of all things, and Judge of all
men.
Almighty and everlasting God, who have set thy king upon thy holy hill of
Sion, and given him a kingdom that all nations, and languages should serve him,
a kingdom that shall have no end; give us we beseech thee to know what it
is to have him for the Christ, the only King and Lavvgiuer of his church, the
Anointing that thou have given us* and to see that we have, no need that any
man teach us, but as the same anointing teaches us of all things, by himself,
and by his Apostles, and Prophets. O teach us at last to abide in him, as he
has taught us, that when he shall appear, we may not be ashamed before him
at his coming. Thou only, O Lord, can best judge what are the things that
truly belong to his kingdom and gouerument, what subordinate officers thou
have given to guide thy church, and who are Intruders and usurpers: who serve
aright to maintain thy Truth and government, and who to obscure and oppress
the same: who serve thy kingdom in a right way, and who only pretend it, not
serving thee the Lord, but their own bellies. To whom then, but to thee, O
dreadful God, should I thy poor servant dedicate these his vveake labors?
For thou, o Lord God, best know the work that thou have wrought in thine,
thou art best able to try, and teach others to try the Spirits whether they
be of God, or not: thou searehest the heart and the reins, the end and scoape
of every man's undertakings, who are led by thy Spirit into all Truth, and who
are only lifted up in an opinion thereof: who finding thy guidance in some
things, presume that thou teach them all which they believe, or to which
they are conformable, and do not rather think it better to believe all that
thou teach, to be conformed to that, and be reformed by it: who have thy
Truth in respect of the persons, authority and benefits of men, and who in
respect of thee alone, the only fountain of Truth. Thou, o God, the righteous
Judge, see whether I have collected these proofs and observations for the
cause of Christ alone, or for sinister respects; thou best know thy own
Truth, and art best able to defend it, and all them that seek it. Princes are
men: such as trust to much to their judgment and protection, do often find
themselves revvarded accordingly: Thou have the hearts of kings, and all other
men, in thy hand, thou can turn them to see and acknovvledge thy truth. Thou
only, that make light to shine out of darkness, can shine in their hearts,
to give them true knowledge and obedience. Other Patrons can a little
countenance a book with their great names and favors: but thou, o Kings of
kings have a name above all names: thou only can persuade Iapheth to dvvell
in the tents of Shem. Thou only can inform and assure the heart in thy own
Truth. Who is able to hinder the light thereof, when thou vvilt have it
known and acknowledged? O therefore be merciful unto us, and cause the
light of thy countenance to shine upon us, that thy way may be known upon
earth, and thy saving health unto all nations; that they may see the things
that belong unto their peace, least haueing them hid from their eyes, they
groape at noone day, strain at a gnat and swallow a Camel. Thou art the great
God that vvilt take account of every man's works, and bring every secret
work, and counseil unto light. It is thy grace and protection that I stand in
need of. O be with me, and forsake me not, but show thy might in my
weakness. This grace and what else thou know needful for me, the
Reader, or any of thy afflicted people, grant unto us all for Jesus Christ his
sake, the Son of thy love, to whom with thee, and thy holy Spirit, three
persons and one God, be ascribed, as due is, all honor, might, majesty and
dominion, now and for ever.

To the Christian Reader.
IF a man, Christian Reader, living in Rome, Spain, or any other kingdom,
where the truth is in any point oppressed, should to convince and convert his
nation, be desirous to set out a book on that subject: he would easily
conceive, that by making himself public he should nothing benefit the cause,
he might fall and perish in the inquisition before three men could come to
read it: and that therefore it were better to live obscurely, and get it
secretly printed and dispersed: who could for this either blame him, or under
nice pretenses, reject his proofs fairly deducted out of Gods word? So, if I,
considering that I have lived an obscure life, a^ small and of no reputation,
that in this case to make my self public would do no good, but rather raise
against me many mighty and undeserved ennemies, and get my labor in Christ's,
cause the sooner suppressed, have therefore took a like private course, to the
end that Gods Truth might find the more vnpreuentible passage: think not,
that it will excuse any man, to say of me, he is a libeller, or as the Pharisees
did of our Lord and Savior, As for this fellow we know not whence he is.
Ioh. 9.29.33.
But if God, by so weak a means as I am, open thine eyes in a point of any
consequence, say rather of the poor servant, as the man borne blind of the
Lord and master, If this man were not of God, he could do nothing. Let me
not be reckoned an Gal. 4.16.
enemy for manifesting Gods truth: but remember that herein thou show thy
1. Ioh. 5.3
love to God, if his doctrine, his commandments be not grievous unto thee For
his sake therefore read this small treatises and hereby thou may see a
reason, why many learned ministers do not or will not know or regard the truth
in this point: why the most in England are so unwilling to know any thing
thereof, seast it should hinder them from subscribing, and having of a good
living, or cause them to be put to silence, if they should either preach,
write, or speak against the government of the Bishops.

If I have proved that it makes greatly to the salvation of the Church, and the
preserving of the faith it self, in that purity and simpliciue, wherein it
was left unto us by the Apostles and Prophets, that the Truth of God, be well
known and manifested, in this point: remember it is thy duty, not to have that
blessed Truth with respect of persons: but in a right receiving of it, Iam.
2.1.
to Kiss the Son least he be angry, and even to cry mightily to God, Psa.
2.
to reform that Church, by whose power, any part of his Testament, lies
darkened under a corrupt gloss, or being cleared, is forced to seek corners.
And thus hopeing that God will raise up many friends to his own cause, and
give them hearts to use all ho^^st wisdom and diligence in such a case, I rest
Thine in Christ Jesus

James Peregrin.

THE LETTERS PATENTS OF THE PRESBYTERY, With the Plea and fruits of the
Prelacie.
MAn, fallen in Adam, going after his own understanding in spiritual things,
walks on in darkness, and often thinks himself in the right way, when he
erreth and knovveth not whether he goes: wherein who is many times mort
blind in some things, then he that thinks himself perfect, a Scribe, and a
messenger fit for the kingdom of God? wherefore our Savior thanketh his
Father, that he had hid these things from this wise and learned, Mat. 11. 1.
Cor. 1.20.
and revealed them to babes. And the Apostle says, where is the wise? where
is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? Has not God made foolish
the wisdom of this world? But least some man might here say, If this be often
the case of Rabbis, Doctors and Guides, what shall become of their poor
Disciples? If the Shepherds err, the sheep must needs wander, and be in a
worse estate: the Lord in his great mercy promised, Joel 2.28. Isa. 44.3.
Chap. 42.16. 1. Cor. 1.27.
that he would power out of his spirit upon all flesh, upon theirs seed and
offspring: and make the blind to see. Which he so fully performed, as to
choose to foolish things of the world to confound the wise. And yet because
many would pretend the Spirit that manifest little, but some fevv well known
principles, and the vision of their own heart, and that they wrest the
Scriptures to confirm it, he bids his people try the spirits, and adds,
these gracious promises, fulfilled in the Gospel, Ier. 31.34.
They shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest of them. 1. Cor.
2.16.
The spiritual man discerns all things. Neuerthele^s to show they should
come to it by a Rule, he had said, A law shall proceed from me, Isa. 51.4.
and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people, mine arms
shall judge the people. chap. 2.3.
The Isles shall wait upon me, and on mine Arm shall they trust. That is on
my word. For the Prophets had said, Mich. 4.2.
The Law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem,
And he shall judge among the nations: 2. Tim. 3.15.16.
even in this world: The revealed word is sufficient in all matters of faith
and salvation, For doctrine reproof, and instruction, that the man of God may
be perfect.

The holy Ghost teaches that which Christ has spoken, Ioh. 16.
and no other doctrine, for says our Lord, He shall not speak of himself,
but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show you
things to come (as the things in the Revelation, Revel. 4.1.
that some shall depart from the faith, and the like.) He shall take of mine
and show unto you. Ioh 15.15.
For he had said, All things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you: Act. 20.27.
therefore the holy Ghost brought all these to their remembrance: and they have
declared to us all that council of God. That which is written, is that
which Christ has spoken to them, 1. Ioh. 1.3.
as John says, That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you,
that is to say in these our vvritings, that ye also may have fellovship with
us, that is in the knowledge of these things, and truly our fellowship is
with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ, that is in knovving the 1.
Cor. 2.16.
mind of God. He excepteth nothing revealed, whether it be about the
conversion and perseverance of the Saints, or Predestination it self, so far
as it is revealed in the Scripture. This word is an Cant. 3.4. Psa. 45.1.
ointment powered out. It ministers grace in them that art his. Grace was
powered into his lips: and says John, ye need not that any man teach you, but
as the same anointing teaches you of all things, 1. Ioh. 2.27.
and is truth and is no lie: Which I will no further urge against the
unwritten verities, presumptions, errors and blasphemies of the Church of
Rome. For he, who is the word, says, I am the light of the world he that
follows me shall not walk in in darkness, but shall have the light of
life. Ioh. 8.12.
And this is not only meant of Apostles and Doctors, but of every true
believer, as he says, I am come a light into the world, chap. 12.46.40.
that whosoever believes on me should not abide in darkness. And to show us
that in all matters of faith we ought to be judged by the revealed word
now, since we must, whether we will or no, be judged by it at the last
day, he adds, He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one
that judges him: the word that I have spoken, he shall judge him in the last
day. Certain it is, that Christ as he is the eteernall word manifested and
preached, is the only Judge and Governor of his church in matters of faith and
salvation: therefore it is said to him, Rule thou in the midst of thine
enemies. Psa. 110.
The kingdom, Dan. 7.14.
and dominion under the whole heaven is given to him, who is the Arm of God
that should rule for him. God rules by his power for ever, that is by his
word; Isa. 40.10.
of whom is said, I will give thee for a covenant of the people, Psa. 66.2.
for a light of the Gentiles. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. He
shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever. Luke 1.33.


But because heretics, and profane and unruly persons, would arise in the
church: and there must needs be some orders and officers in the church, before
whom such might be conue^ted, and by whose pains in alleging the
scriptures, they might be convinced, reformed and ordered: Act. 20.
he ordained some to be overseers of the flock, that should not be nouices, but
well gronded in the faith, 1. Tim. 3.6
to hold fast the faithful word as they have been taught, Tit. 1.9.
that they may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and convince the
gainsayers. Which while they faithfully do, without pressing for doctrines
the commandments of men: it is not so much, they that rule, as Christ the
word that rules in them: Isaie 9.6. chap. 11.4.
therefore it is said: The government shall be upon his shoulders. He shall
smite the earth with the rod of of his mouth. And so they are subordinate
Shepherds and Bishops to feed the flock, to keep and reduce the sheep unto
the obedience of the chief Shepherd and Bishop of their souls, 1. Pet. 2.25
chap. 5.4.
which is Christ. In regard whereof, the weapons of their warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, 2. Cor.
10.4
casting down imaginations, and every high thought, that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.

The greatest question is about the dignity, jurisdiction, power and
authority of these Officers, and especially of the office of a Bishop:
whether by Gods Testament, and ordinance it be to superintend over other
Pastors and Elders in a diocese or Province: or, as others affirm, Pastoral,
over one flock and congregation, wherein he is an Elder, and with other
Elders an ouerseer of the same. In which controversy, men, that are not
willingly ignorant, or vvilfully obstinate and blind, may receive full
satisfaction by the clear testimonies of Scripture, and consent of the
Fathers, shevving us the old and good way that all should seek and follow.
Whereas he that comes with a scoffing, or preuidicate censure, speaking
evil of the things he knows not, Jude 10. Pro. 3.22. Pro. 14.6. Psa. 25.14.
or in frowardnes will not know, can not so easily discern the Truth. Ascorner
seeks vvisdome, and finds it not, but knowledge is easy to him that will
understand, The secret of the lord is with them that fear him, and he will
show them his covenant.

When Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles had first preached the Gospel in
diverse of their cities, he and Barnabas returned again to Lystra, and to
Iconium, and Antioch, Act. 13. chap. 14.21.22.23.
to confirm the souls of the Disciples, and exhort them to continue in the
faith: and then it is said expressly, They ordained them Elders in every church
by election. The word in the Greek is Presbuterois Presbyters or Elders. Of
it comes the Latin word Presbyter, which signifies an Elder: and which, as
all confess, in the primative ages of the church, was given (if not to some
others, yet at least) to every ordinary Pastor, of every congregation, in
regard, that he, vvatched over the flock, to keep them sound in the says, and
holy in life and manners. In place of those that men call parsons, or Curates
of several Parishes, there were then presbiters of several congregations.
Nicod. Dictionar. French and Latin.
Our word priest seems to come from the French word Prestre a priest,
which, as Nicod observes, properly signifies an Elder or presbiter: though
after the mass was understood to be a Sacrifice, offered by the hand of
presbiters, the name prestre or priest remained, but was also corruptly
applied to a Sacrificer or Mass priest, and in time was only taken in that
sense both in France, and elsvvhere. Wherein we may answer with our
Savior, from the beginning, it was not so; but a Priest, that was a Presbiter
or Elder: therefore throughout the whole book of God, where there is any
speech of those orders of Aarons Sons, that vvaited at the Altar, the french
Protestants do not in their Bibles translate it priest, but Sacrificer: and
blame us that we do not the like, to distinguish them and all mass mongers
from the presbiters or priests ordained in the new Testament. Indeed Revel.
1. Christ is s^^de to make us kings and Hiereis, Sacrificers, where you have
the same word that in the Septuagint, and in the Gospel is put for the
Jewish Sacricificers: but this is by John mystically applied to all true
Christians, and is not here Presbuterois, Presbiters, but a word far
different, and therefore can not be understood of the office, and ministry of
the Presbyters ordained by the Apostles. In the new Testament mention is often
made of these Presbyters or Elders. Act. 15.2.4.6.
Paul, Barnabas, and others were sent to Jerusalem unto the Apostles, and
Elders: when they came thither. verse. 22.
They were received of the church, and of the Apostles and Elders. And the
Apostles, and Elders came together, Act. 16.4.
to consider of this matter. Then it pleased the Apostles, and Elders, with
the whole church. And vvrote letters, The Apostles, chap. 10.17.18. etc.
and Elders, and brethren send greeting. They delivered them, the decrees that
were ordained of the Apostles, and Elders. From Miletus he sent to Ephesus,
and called the Elders of the church: and said unto them, ye know from the first
day that I came into Asia etc. verse. 28.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over which the
holy Ghost has made you Bishops, to feed the church of God. The new
translation reads it Overseers, but the word is Episcopus, Bishops, the same,
that is used 1. Tim. 3. A Bishop must be blameless etc. Indeed both there,
and here it may be translated a Bishop, or an Ouerseer. For in the original, as
a Presbiter is an Elder, so a Bishop is an Ouerseer. But mark he says to the
Presbyters, Take heed to all the flock over which the holy Ghost has made
you Bishops to feed, etc. Whence it is infalliblie plain 1. That the
Presbiterall government is the express ordinance of the holy Ghost, Ioh. 16.
who changes not: and of whom Christ says, He shall not speak of
himself: for he shall take of mine and show unto you. Heb. 13.
Now Christ is yesterdaie, and to day, and the same also for ever. This
ordinance is therefore unalterable. 2. That Elders by Christ's ordinance are, or
ought to be, over every congregation. Take heed to all the flock over which
the holy Ghost has made you Bishops. Act 14 23
So Paul and Barnabas ordained them Elders in every church by election, and
Paul says to Titus, I left thee in Creete, to set in order the things that are
vvanting, Tit. 1.5.
etc. ordain Elders in every city, as I had appointed thee. For a whole
province, or diocese is to great a flock for one man, he can not take heed
to all the flock, as the Elders of one church may.

3. That their office is to feed the flock, and church of God, which one man
can not do in a whole Diocese, and when they have occasion to bind or
loose, to reprove, correct, or comfort, to excommunicate, or restore, that must
also be by the word: for it is he that in just causes gives them authority,
themselves are not Lords of Gods heritage, as S Peter says, 1. Pet. 5.3
to do it at their own pleasure, by their own rules, and traditions, but
1. Cor. 5.4
with the power of Christ. For he smites the earth, with the rod of his mouth.

4. That the holy Ghost has made the Presbiters Bishops over the flock. For
the words are peremptory, Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock,
over which the holy Ghost has made you Bishops: there were diverse Elders of
the church of phesus and the places that bordered near it, as of that of
Philippi, or Jerusalem act. 21.18. to them all Paul says, The holy Ghost has
made you bishops, to feed the church, So Phil. 1. To all the saints which are
at Philippi with the Bishops and Deacons: that is, with the Elders,
presbiters, Phil. 1.1.
and deacons: for ye see the presbiters are bishops: or otherwise you must
grant, that there were more bishops then one in (...) city: therefore
Theodore well understands it of the presbiters: which Bellarmine, observing
can not deny, Bellar. de Clericis l 4 c. 14. Tit. 1.5.6.7.
but that here also presbiters are called Bishops. Which is yet more clear by
that to Titus, I left thee in Creete, that thou should ^^daine presbiters in
every city, if any be blameless, the husband of one wife, haueing faithful
children not accused of riot ^r unruly for a bishop, (that is the Presbiter
before mentioned) must be blameless, etc. Vbi supra.
All which places are so clear that Bellarmine confesses, that in them all
the presbiters are called Bishops, and consequently, that the Trent fathers
cried, who would prove, that Diocessan Bishops are instituted by Christ and
superior to Presbyters iure diuino, Histor. of the council of Trent. page 597.
598. english.
because Paul says, Take heed to all the flock over which the holy Ghost
has made you Bishops: which by his own confession is spoken to Presbyters:
therefore he answers to all the three places verrie poorly, that in those
days, these names Bishop and Presbyter were common to all priests, as if
Phil. 1. with the Bishops and deacons, the sense must be thus, With the
Priests and their ministers the deacons: which is a vveake shift of a Jesuit
and so learned a Cardinal. For did the Apostle call the presbyters, Bishops in
all these three places, and say the holy Ghost had made them Bishops over the
flock, and yet are they not so? And if it were then a name so common to all
priests, why should it now be thus restrained to one in a county or province?
and he accounted an heretic, that with the holy Ghost affirms, the
presbiters to be Bishops, as in these three places?

And therefore out of all doubt, 1. Tim. 3.
when Paul says, If any man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a good
work, etc. That is the office of a presbiter or Elder, who is a Bishop, and
that so he adds, These things write I unto thee, that thou might know how
thou (a Bishop or presbiter) ought to behave thy self. Otherwise he would
not have passed, as he does from the duty of a Bishop to the duty of a deacon:
but rather first from the duty of a Bishop to the duty of a presbiter or
pastor, that is, if it had not been one and the fame office, sometime set forth
under the name of an Elder or presbiter, Tit. 1.5.6.7.
and sometime of a Bishop, as in that to Titus before alleged (which shows
us that when it is said of Titus, that he was ordained the first Bishop of
the Cretians, that must needs be the first presbiter, Chrisost. in 1. Tim. 3.
and so Timothy. (2. Tim. in fin.) which in effect is acknowledged by
Chrysos. in his Comentarie on that chapter to Timothy, who, though he lived
in a time when canons, custom, and cloaked ambition had made a little
difference, says, There is almost no difference between a Bishop and a
presbyter, seeing the care of the church is also granted to the presbyters:
surely by giving of orders only they are their superiors, and herein they only
seem to be more then the presbiters. Bellarmin acknowledges that Primasius,
Bellar. de clericis, l. 4. c. 14.
Theophilact and Oecumenius, in their Comentaries upon the same place do teach
the same thing, and almost in the same words. VVherin they come but little
short of that, which is more plainly affirmed by Hierom, on the first of
Titus. Hieron. in Tit. 1.
A presbiter and a Bishop is one and the same thing: and before by the instinct
of the devil, factions were made in religion, and it was said among the
people: I am of Paul, I of Apollo and I of Cephas, the churches were governed
by the common consent of the presbiters: but after every one thought those
which he had baptized to be his, not Christ's, it was ordained in all the
world, that one chosen from among the presbiters should be set over the rest,
unto whom all the care of the church should pertain, and the seeds of
Sbhismes should be taken away. And a little lovver. As therefore presbiters know
themselves to be subject by the custom of the church to him that is set over
them, so let the Bishops know, it is rather by the custom of the church, then
by any disposition of the divine truth, that they are greater then the
presbiters, and that the church ought to be governed in commune. Vbi supra.
Bellarmin does not only cite these places thus, but confesses farther that
Hiero^. has the like things in his 85. Epistle to Euagrius. Yet he would
feign have it thought that Hiero^. held a Bishop to be greater then a presbiter
iure diuino: contenting himself, for lack of a better, to take that for a
sufficient proof, where he says to Euagrius, what does the Bishop, giueing
of orders excepted, which the presbiter may not also do? whereas indeed
this does rather prove the contrary, namely that presbiters had decisiue
voices in councels, might excommunicate, or do any thing else in their flocks,
belonging to government, save the giving of orders, this being all the
difference of power and authority, the Bishops had them gained.

Wherein you must needs understand him as before, that it is rather by the
custom of the church, then any disposition of the divine truth, that they
were herein greater then the Elders: the same or the like humain ordinance and
custom, which restrained the title of a Bishop to one in a Diocese, which
before was common to all presbiters, gave him also the sole power of giving
of orders, which before belonged to presbiters in common, 1. Tim. 4.14.
as is clear by that, Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given
thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbiterie.
Kemnitius therefore does well observe here, Vbi supra.
that a Bishop may be ordained by Presbiters, therefore there is no difference
between a Bishop and a presbiter. Bellarmin hereat offended answers with the
Greeks very vveakely, By the presbiterall name, they understood the quire or
company of the presbiters, that i^ of the Bishops, which laid their hands on
the new bishop. They that laid their hands on him were presbiters, but that
is (say Bellarmin and others) Bishops. So says S. Paul, and so say we,
presbiters are bishops. Indeed Bellarmin and the Greeks, do rather mean the
bishops were presbiters; but it is as true the presbiters are bishops, and
that the love of proffit or preeminence, or men's care to save the honor of
their church, and customs, have blinded many, that they can not see a thing so
clear, that by imposition of hands of the presbiterie, he was made a
presbiter, that is a bishop. Where we must understand, that they only laid
their hands on those that were chosen by voices or hands. For it is said. They
ordained them Elders by suffrages, Act. 14.23, Beza annot
as Beza observes out of the Greek word Which comes from a custom of the
Greeks, who gave their suffrages, by holding up their hands. And, says he,
the force of this word Keirotonesantes, is to be observed, that we may know,
that Paul and Barnabas did nothing of a private will, neither excercised any
tirannie in the church, like that which is used by the Romish harlot, Idem
Annota. in 1. Tim. 4.14.
or her pages, which they call ordinaries. So as he shows, was the gift of
prophecy, given to Timothy with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbiters. And thus is that to be understood, lay hands suddenly on noe man,
etc. that is do not, what in thee lies, suddenly to admit any man to any
Eclesiasticall fu^ction, Idem in cap. 5.22.
for neither did all authority reside in the power of Timothy alone, but the
Election was made by the suffrages of the whole church, as we said on Act.
14.23. and as is clear by the election of Mathias, and of the deacons, and
lastly by this that with the laying on of the hands of the Presbiterie, the
man chosen was consecrated to the Lord, as 1. Tim. 4.14. Idem in Tit. 1.
By these places, as he shows, is that of Titus to be expounded, That thou
should ordain them Elders, that is by suffrages, as Act. 14.23. by which
place you may understand why he adds, as had appointed thee, see also 1.
Tim. 5.22. For in the choice of Mathias, nothing is carried by Peter, Idem in
Act. 1.
as by one endued with more excellent dignity but by the suffrages of the
whole church, there assembled: It is said: They appointed two. So for deacons
the Apostles said: Look ye out among you seven men, etc. then it is added.
And the saying pleased the whole multitude, And they chose Steven, Act. 6.3.
etc. And set them before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid
their hands on them. Therefore lay hands suddenly on no man, that is till he be
well, and advisedly chosen, and prayers be made with fasting. Which is
spoken to all presbiters in his person, and especially to himself, as being
both a presbiter and an Evangelist, which is greater. And thus indeed Paul
left Titus to ordain them presbiters in every city, Tit. 1.5.7.
that is by suffrages, as he had done Act. 14.25. Otherwise Titus should seem
to have had an office like that, Histor. of the counc. of Trent. page 611.
which the papalins in Trent challenged for the Pope, to be a bishop of
bishops, that other bishops should receive institution and jurisdiction from
him. For these presbiters are called Bishops verse. 7. but this makes not Titus
a presbiter of presbiters, that is a Bishop of Bishops, much less does it give
it to any other or infer that he must have one to succeed him in such office.

It is objected that Paul says, 1. Tim. 5.19.
against a presbiter, receive not an accusation, but before two or three
vvitnesses. Vbi supra
Where says Bellarmin, we see a Bishop, in the time of the Apostles, the
Judge of the presbiters: therefore their true prince and superior. I answer
this can not be 1. Mat. 20.25
Because Christ says to his Disciples, ye know that the Prince of the Gentiles
exercises dominion oner them, and they that are great exercise authority upon
them, But it shall not be so among you. And S. Peter says to the presbiters,
take the oversight of the flock, not as being Lords over Gods heritage: much
less as Lords over other presbiters, for that were to make one a Bishops of
Bishops, or the Pope of a province. 2. That Timothy was the first presbiter
or Bishop in that church, and not only an Evangelist, which is greater, but a
man of exterordinarie gifts: therefore S. Paul writes to him an Elder, what
course he and all Elders are to take, if any of their number be accused before
them, as he says, that thou might know how to behave thy self, 5. tim.
3.15
etc, For all the Elders used to meet in such great cases: and often times
other brethren also of the congregation Act. 15.6.20.23. Paul says to the
Corinthians when ye are gathered together, 3. cor. 5.4.
and my spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 18.17
deliver such a one unto Satan. In which sense Christ says, If he shall
neglect to hear two or three, tell it to the church: but if he neglect to
hear the church, let him be unto thee as a heathen. And Paul bids the
presbyters to take heed to themselves, Act. 20.
and to all the flock over which the holy Ghost had made them Bishops: for of
your own selves shall men arise speaking Perverse things: sometime the devil
may bring an Elder to that wickedness, and then ye see the other Elders are
the Bishops that are to look to it, and reform it, 1. Cor. 14.31.
that office is not given to one in a diocese. For as the Spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets. So the Spirits of the Elders must in such
cases be subject to the Elders. VVheras if a Bishop fall into such faults like
the Appealer, he will be subject to none: who dare ask him? you will say
the Archbishop: but if the Archbishop be corrupt and mighty in court, who
dare once tax him? The Pope. Add he can not err, or all is nothing. Such an
endless labarinth, follows this human invention of diocessan, and
provincial Bishops: which has and does make wickedness abound, because it
has not so good means to stay and repress it, as the Eldership has: 1. Cor.
12.28.
which v^ as ordained for that end, not by man but by God himself. God has
set some in the church first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers
then miracles, the gifts of healing, helpers, Governors, etc. these last are
two distinct offices as Ar. Montan. Beza, and others read them, Beza. Annot.
in hoc lec.
understanding the helpers to be deacons, that helped the poor and sick And
Governors to declare the order of the presbyters, who were keepers of the
discipline of the church, as we said elsvvhere. To whom then belongs the
Government, but to those that God has set in the church? Now we can read
of no others that he set to govern, besides the Apostles and Evangelist, but
presbyters. Has God then set them for Governors in the church, and will men
presume to supplant them, and set others? Dare men say that the government, by
diocessan Bishops, ordained by men is better then this of Elders, ordained by
God? To whom indeed God must needs give a better blessing, as being his
own ordinance, he has set them in the church. Neither does that prove the
contrary, because in Amsterdam, and some other cities of Holland, there are
many Religions: for neither Bishops, if they had such, nor Elders can hinder
it, if the policy suffer them. But look into the reformed churches there, in
France, and elsvvhere, and you shall find them better governed: and much
better would be, if some burgers to enritch themselves, and get places of
authority, or a league, and trade with Spain, did not wax negligent in
religion, and for such ends turn Arminians and nevvters. If an Apostle were
now living, and should write an Epistle to Mr. Moulin pastor and Elder in
Sedan: Against an Elder receive not an accusation under two or there
vvitnesses, that would not argue, that he were over other Pastors and Elders
in the province; nor as a Lord in his own congregation: but rather what
were his duty, yea the duty of all Elders assembled in such a case.

The Apostle recounting all the officers, and Governors of the church, Ephesians.
4.
says, He gave some Apostles: and some Prophets: and some Pastors, and
Teachers: where he neither names Bishops nor Elders, much less both, as two
distinct callings, because the Pastor by his place was a Presbiter, and so a
Bishop properly, and the deacons had the care of the Alms. In such a church,
as that of Ephesus or Philippi, there were diverse, who were teachers and
helpers, but one who was somevvhat more properly the Pastor, and so the
bishop of that flock: therefore though the charge go to all the Elders, Take
beede to your selves, Revel. 2.
and to all the flock, etc* yet this is somvvhat more especially applied to
him that is pastor, and so the first Elder or bishop. Unto the Angel of the
church of Ephesus write, that is to the pastor. Even as in the church of Paris
at this day, which is one congregation, of about six thousand communicants,
there are three preachers, who are all Elders to feed the flock, yet one of
them is reckoned the pastor, and the other two helpers: the like in Diepe, and
diverse other cities, where they live among persecuting Papists, as the old
Christians did among the heathen: having but one congregation or flock in a
city. In some lesser cities, or where there are fewer protestants, there is
only a pastor with lay Elders. And thus out of all doubt, Act. 14. Tit. 1.5.
it was in the primative church, till after the death of the Apostles, who
ordained Elders in every church, and city, where one was the pastor, yet in
matter of government, all the Elders of a church ruled together, by common
consent: even in Jerusalem things were not done without the Elders, but the
decrees went out in all their names. When Paul went last to Jerusalem, there
were diverse with him: But, says Luke, Act. 21.18.
Paul went in with us to James, and all the Elders were present. The Apostle
would do nothing without them. Therefore Paul says, 1. Tim. 5.17.
Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor,
espectiallie they who labor in the word and doctrine. Whence also some
collect, that there were some Elders, that were not ministers, but laymen of
the more understanding, and best governed sort. Howsoever, ye see they had all
share in the government were it with Timothy, Titus, or whosoever. For
these were not greater then the Apostles, which was the highest calling in
the church: yet even with them in Jerusalem, there were Elders, as it were
in joint commission for matter of government: they themselves took on them
this office, and disdained not to be reckoned with other presbiters. Peter
says, 1. Pet. 5.1.
The or Elders. 2. Ioh.
presbiters which are among you, I exhort, who am also Sumpresbuteros a
fellovv presbiter: and John, that might have said, The Apostle, chooses rather
to say, The Elder to the elect lady, The or Elder.
Presbiter to the well-beloved Gaius.

None of the Apostles are in the new Testament called bishops, but presbiters,
because a presbiter was a bishop, and then a name of no less honor, but
rather of greater, being. Indeed one and the same pastoral office in every
congregation, it was the highest in the church next the Apostles, Evangelists,
and pastors, the Elders being the officers, which God had appointed to govern
his church to the worlds end. The holy Ghost says not Bishops, least
afterward it should have been taken for diocessan Bishops but Elders. Neither
does John set the Pope, or any Bishop, but Christ among them, as their only
head, for chap. 5. Christ stands in the midst of the throne, and in the midst
of the Elders, to show they truly belong to his government, as diocessan
Bishops, so that of Antichrist It was stoutly defended in the council of
Trent, Histor. of the concell of Trent. page 599. and 613. Romans 13.1.
that they held, of the Pope and not immediately of God True not so rightly as
the Elders do: nor yet in a manner so little digressing as the first diocessan
Bishops did, as we shall further see in the sequel: therefore they are not so
truly of Gods Kingdom, but rather of a contrary, For indeed There is no
power but of God: The powers that be are ordained of God. Whence it follows,
that all powers, much more those that govern the church, must be ordained of
God, or else they be not lavvfull. Now this can not be said of the Pope and
Cardinals nor of Diocessan, Bishops: for these were not ordained of God, but
of men. Ergo etc. They are indeed against Elders which are the powers
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists these powers, resists the
ordinance of God. One of the Elders speaks to John concerning the Martirs,
Revel. 7.
that suffered in the ten persecutions, signified by those troubles that
follovved the opening of the seven seals, then past and gone. And though
whilst the woman, the true Church fled, and remained in the wilderness from
Antichristian titannie and superstition, their government must needs be hid,
and persecured with her: yet when the Gospel is restored, the Temple of God
opened, and diverse kingdoms of this world, became the kingdoms of our Lord,
Revel. 11.
and of his Christ, the Elders worship and give thanks: as also when Babylon
is destroyed: and hereupon it is said: The Lord God omnipotent reighneth: that
is in his word and ordinances. ^hap. 194.5.6.
Elders are then restored, whereas before she and her traditions, and
hierarchy governed churches. For in that they are ever thus about the throne,
on Seats, both before and after Babylon is destroyed, this shows that they
are the only spiritual Rulers, ordained by God; to govern his church under
Christ, to the worlds end, and by him set about his throne, as those which by
his ordinance have had the Ecclesiastical government, ought still to have it
by the furtherance of Christian kings, and princes, that are nursing fathers,
and in Gods good time shall have it again. Christ vviloe in the midst of the
Elders. Both that of the Bishop of Rome, and of all other diocessian, and
provincial Bishops, shall be overthrown: Isa 9.7. Heb. 2.8.
and then of the increase of his government, and peace there shall be no end.
but he will put all things in subjection under his feet. Which all as well
high as lovv, should endeavor to know, that knovving it, when in prayer they
say, thy kingdom come, in heart they may both pray, that God would sent it,
and use the best means they can to effect it.

By all which is manifest, that the Presbiters, were the Bishops and
Governors of the church, in the time of the Apostles, and a while after: and
that the preeminence, which after some one in a province obtained, was by
consent and custom, and not by authority of Scripture. Which is ingeniously
acknowledged by S. Austin. August, in Epist. 19. ad Hibron. quae iam Ecclesiae
vsus obtinuit. Ambros. comment. in cap. 4. ad Ephesians. Bellar. de clericis l. 4.
cap. 4.
For although according to the terms of honor, which now the use of the
church has obtained, a Bishop which is greater then the Presbiterie,
nevertheless, Austin is in many things less then Hierom, Note those words,
which now the custom of the church has obtained, he says not which is given
in the new Testament. Ambrose says, that of old the antienter Presbiters,
were called bishops, that the eldest dying, the next might succeed him: but
because the following presbiters, began to be found unworthy to hold the
primacie, the reason was changed vvisdome foreseeing that not order but merit
should make a bishop, he was ordained by the choice of many priests. Whence
we see, that the little primacie, and authority the bishop had in his time
gained, was not obtained all at a time, but by degrees: vvherin things had
been still altered. Bellar. 'de clericis lib 4. cap. 14.
Which Bellarmin would feign deny, but can not: striving to make nothing of
these, and al other proofs: without daring to task these fathers of heresy:
which yet he boldly fastens on Calvin, Calvin. l. 4 Instit. c. 4.
Kemnitius, and others for holding the same things, and producing these
proofs. Calvin, says he, speaks thus, Such as to whom the duty of teaching
was enioined, were named presbiters, they out of their number in diverse
cities, choose one to whom they specially gave the title of a bishop, least
out of equality, as it is wont to be, discords should arise: yet was not the
bishop so the superior in dignity, and honor, that he should have lordship
over his colleagues: but look what priueleidges a Consul has in the Senate,
to make report of the buisnesses, that by aduising, warning, and persuading he
may preceede others, govern the whole action by his authority, and put in
execution that, which is determined by common consent: the same office had the
bishop in the company of the presbiters: and that this very thing was
brought in for the necessity of the time by human consent, the ancient
fathers themselves confess it, ye have heard their testimony. Against this
Bellarmin for lack of better proofs alleges the Acts of the Council of
Trent, Vbi supra.
wherein the bishops were Judges in their own cause, as they had ever been
since the Council of Nice.

In Trent it was alleged that the Augustine confession put noe difference
between a bishop, Histor. of the Counc. of Trent. page 606.
and a priest, but by human constitution, and affirmed the superiority of
bishops was first by custom, and after by Ecclesiastical constitution.
Which those Trent fathers would feign have disproued, but could not. For
though in the age after the Apostles, custom had brought in a kind of
diocessan bishops to preside in Synods, yet in other respects, they were
reckoned among other presbiters, Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 5. c. 22.23.24.
till about the year 195. when Victor presbiter or bishop of Rome, took on
him to excommunicate the churches of Asia, about the feast of Easter, and for
it, as Eusebius shows, was reproved by sundry bishops: among the rest by
Ireneus in an Epistle to Victor. The Priests, says he, which before Soter
presided in that church, which you now govern, namely, Anicetus, Pius,
Higinus, Telesphorus, and Xistus, neither observed that day themselves, nor
suffered others to observe it, yet they kept peace with others that did: where
note he calls them not bishops but Priests, or presbiters.
notvvithstanding the eminency of that church, and the custom of presiding
among other presbiters, as a kind of diocessan: because a presbiter was a
bishop. Again, But the priest which were before you sent unto them, etc. So
fared it between Policarpus, and Anicetus the priest, that is the bishop of
Rome. It is true that after this proud and rash act of Victor, the bishop of
Rome grevv greater, and the name of a bishop came to be more restrained to
those that lived in great cities, and presided in Synods: as also by that act
of Steven bishop of Rome, who attempted ^o restore Basilides and Martialis
two bishops of Spain about the year 250. And as Monsieur du Plesses
observes Myster. of Iniquit.
in the council held at Rome under Syluester an. 324. the Priests stood behind
the place where the bishops sat. And in the concell of Nice, held the year
after, Council. Nicen. 1. can. 6.7.
the 6. canon is read in these words, let the ancient customs be observed,
which are in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, so that the bishop which is in
Alexandria have authority over all these, because such also is the manner or
custom of the bishop of Rome. Which is but a vveake authority for prouincial
bishops, seeing the canon confesses, that it had been only a thing of custom:
vvheras if it had been an Apostolic institution, the concell would rather
have alleged that. Mounsieur du Vbi supra.
Plesses proves that many of the Ancient call it a custom.

Other things advanced this dignity, and the wrath of God for it. Cyprian. l.
de lapsis. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 1.
Cyprian yealdeth this reason of the persecution of Decius, because every man
slept in the coueteous desires of his own heart. Which he shows in the
clergy. Eusebius gives a like reason of the succeeding persecution of
Dioclesian, There was, says he, amongst us naught else, but cursed speakings,
and continual iarres of prelates, falling out with Prelates, and
congregations with congregations: They also which seemed to be pastors,
casting of this law, and rule of piety kindled contentions between
themselves, seeking only to increase debates, threats, iealousies, heart
burnings and revenge, with an immoderate desire to command and sway, as in a
Tyranny. It is easy to conceive, that when peace and plenty came in, all
things would wax worse. Constantine to bring his people to Christianity,
Anno 330. Damasus and Anastas. in vita Sylvest.
as he pulled down Idolatry, so he applied the revenues of their Temples, to
the maintenance of the Christian churches: and besides gave them other great
gifts: his greatest Princes, being converted, did the like, as appears in the
life of Syluest, and by Cedranus his History. S. Hierom, complains of
Priests that vvrunge rewards from ladies, Cedrenus page 243. Hieron. ad
Eustich. Epist. 22. Ad Nepotian, 2. In God. Theodos.
and from others. Others there are, who spend their whole times in learntng
the names, houses, and qualities of these ladies. Ovid in another place, There
be Clerks, which possess more under poor Christ, then erst they did under
the rich devil. This contagion spread so far, that the Imperours, Valentinian,
Valens and Gratian, made laws against it, prohibiting Clergy men to set
foot within the doors of widows, or Orphans to receiuee gifts by
Testament, etc. With plenty came in corruption in life and religion. Baronius
confesses that men at that time hallowed heathenish rites and ceremonies,
Baron. To 1. art. 44. art. 88. etc. To. 3. art. 324. art. 78. and 79.
by bringing them into christian churches: That Constantine ordained, That the
bishops of the Christian law, should thence forvvard have the same
priueleidges, which the idolatrous priests had enioied. That the Pagan priests
had a chief among them, Rex Sacrificulus, and their sovereign Pontife,
arbitrator of all questions among them. And who, says he, can think, that
Constantine would long endure, that these should exceed the Christians in
pomp and glory? then he proves the Pope and Cardinals to have the like glory
in riding, clothing, salutations, and crovvning. Which is to show the Pope in
habit of a pagan. Thus while diocessan Bishops were ordained, to vvithstand
dinisions, on the contrary they were increased thereby, as appears by the
reasons Cyprian, and Eusebius give of the persecutions, and others about the
feast of Easter, appeals, pride and errors, in such as was Paulus
Semosateneus, Arrius, Nestorius, and others, by whose great names, Fuseb. de
vit. Constant. lib. 1. c. 37. and 38.
gross errors were received, and propagated. Constantine, by reason of sundry
dissentions which he saw daily to arise between bishops, assembled Synods.

Now to see more exactly how from so small beginnings bishops came to the
great power, they have, Hist. of the coure. of Trent page 226.
we may sinde it proved in the history of the council of Trent: That at
first the churches were governed by the common council of the presbitery, and
how after to withstand divisions, the monarchical government was instituted
giving superintendency to the bishop. The neighbor bishops, whose churches
because they were under one province had commerce, did govern themselves also
by Synods: and to make the government more easy, attributing much to the Bishop
of the principal city, they made him as it were head of that body: and so the
Bishop of the city, where the Ruler did reside, gained a certain superiority
by custom. These prefectures were the Imperial city of Rome: the prefecture
of Alexandria, which governed Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis: of Antioch for
Syria, and other Provinces of the East. This government, brought in and
ap^^^ued by custom only, was established by the first council of Nice. The
Pope had no other ground of his greatness, save this, and the translation of the
seat of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople, till about the year 607.
when he obtained of Phocas, that murdered his master, to be called universal
Bishop, which title, was a little before proved to be Antichristian, by his
Predecessor Gregory, 1. The inundation of the Goths, and Vandals had eclipsed
his glory, Guiciard.
and so did the Fxarchs of Rauenna, till the Lombards, having gotten that
Exarchat, and long oppressed all Italy, Pipin chased them away, and gave this
part to the Bishop, and church of Rome: which was confirmed by his Son
Charles, that utterly rooted the Lombards out, and was by the Pope crowned
Emperor: yet the Popes were subject to him, till his posterity growing
vveake, seven Electors were ordained, and the Imperial power, being
translated to the Germans, and noe longer hereditarie, was much diminished,
and that of the Popes thereby increased, espetially, after they obtained of the
Emperor Henry the second, that the Cardinals only should choose the Pope, and
then the Cardinals also waxed great.

If this show not how bishops, but rather how the Pope grevv great, it is
supplied by another discourse in the History of the council of Trent, where
it being considered, in what cases Christ says, Mat. 18.17.
Tell the church, and what power is given to a congregation, in that place to
the Corinthians, we may see how things were carried after diocessan Bishops
were thus ordained. 1. Cor. 5.4.
The judgment of the church (as is necessary in every multitude) was fi^,
Histor. of the concell of Trent page 330. to page 335.
hat it should be conducted by one, who should preside, and guide the action.
This care, due to the most principal, and worthy person was always committed
to the Bishop. And where the churches were many, the propositions, and
deliberations were made by the Bishop first in the college of Priests, and
Deacons, which they called the Presbiterie, and there were ripened, to receive
afterward the last resolution in the general congregation of the church. This
form was still on foot in the year 250. and is plainly seen by the Epistles
of Cyprian, who in matter concerning those who did eat of meats offered to
Idols, and subseribe to the Religion of the Gentiles, writes to the
Presbiterie, that he does not think to do any thing without their counsels,
and consent of the people: and writes to the people, that, at his return, he
will examine the causes, and merits thereof, in their presence, and under their
judgment and he wrote to those Priests, who of their own brain had reconciled
some, that they should give an account to the people. I must here refer you
to the History it self, which shows how this government had been defended
against the Canonists, and only recite some things to show how it decayed, and
how in the ruin thereof, that of the Bishops increased; wherein if I strive
to much too abridge things, co^sult the with place it self for better
satisfaction. The goodness and Charity of the Bishops, I them vbi supra.
made their opinion for the most part to be followed, and by title and little,
was cause that the churches, charity waxing cold, not regarding the charge
laid upon them by Christ, did leave the care to the Bishop: and ambition, a
witty passion, which does insinuate it self in show of virtue, caused it to
be readily embraced. But the principal cause of the change was the ceasing of
the persecutions. For then the Bishops did erect as it were a tribunal, which
was much frequented: because as temporal commodities, so suits did increase.
The judgment though distering from the former in form, to determine all by the
opinion of the church, was yet of the same sincerity. Which Constantine
observing, made a law, that there should lie no appeal from the sentences of
Bishops: and if in a cause depending before a secular tribunal, either of the
parties shall demand Episcopal judgment, the cause shall be remitted to him.
Here the tribunal of the Bishop began to be a common pleading place. The
Emperor Valence enlarging it in the year 365. gave the Bishops the care over
all the prizes of vindible things. Which troubled Austin, and other good
Bishops. Afterward some Bishops beginning to abuse the power given them by
Constantine, that law was 70. years after, revoked by Arcadius, and an
ordination made that they should judge causes of religion, and not civil,
except both parties did consent, and declared that they should not be thought
to have a court. Which law being not much observed in Rome, in regard of the
great power of the Bishop, Valentinian, being then in the city, an. 452. did
renew it, and made it to be put in execution. But a little after part of the
power taken away, was restored by the following Princes: So that Justinian
established unto them a court, and audience, the causes of Religion,
Ecclesiastical faults of the clergy, and diverse voluntary surisdictions over
the laietie. By these degrees they got domination.

The Empire being divided, and kingdoms erected, Idem page 332.
the Bishops for the most part were made counselors of the Prince, which by
mixture of spiritual and temporal charges, caused their jurisdiction to
increase exceedingly. Before 200. years were past, they pretended absolutely
all judicature, criminal, and civil, over the Clergy, and in some things
over the laietie. After the year 1050. All the causes of the Clergy being
appropriated to the Bishops, and very many of the laiesie, under the title of
spiritualitie, and almost all the rest under the name of a mixed judicature,
and placing themselves above the secular Magistrates, upon pretense of justice
denied, they came to say that the Bishop, had that power to judge, not by
grant, or conniuence of Princes, or by the will of the people, or by custom,
but that it was essential to the Episcopal dignity, and given it by Christ.
And though the laws of the Emperors remain in the Codes of Theodosius and
Justinian, in the capitulars of Charles the great, and Lewis the debonaire,
and others of later Princes, which all show, when, and by whom this power was
granted, and all Histories Ecclesiastical, and profane agree in the same:
yet so notorious a truth has been overcome, by a contrary affirmation only,
without any proof. Page 334.
In the council of Trent a defect was considered, that the charity of the
superiors was turned into domination, and that thence grew appeal upon
appeal. Johannes Groperus, who assisted there as a divine, and a lawier, spoke
honorably of appeals, and said that while the hear of faith remained in the
breasts of Christians, Appeals were not heard of. But charity in the Judges
waxing cold, and place being given to passion, they entered into the church, for
the same reasons, which brought them into the secular courts, that is, for the
ease of the oppressed. And as the first iudicatures belonged not to the bishop
only, but to him with the council of his Priests, so the Appeal was not
diuolued to one man, but unto another congregation. But the Bishops taking away
the Synods, did institute courts and officers, like the seculars. Neither did
the mischief stop there, but passed to greater abuses then in the secular
court. Which he shows in that Appeal, was made from Appeal, till it came to
the Pope, and sometime by a leap to him without more a do. John Baptista,
Castellus was made to salve up these soars, by a cunning oration, Page 335.
and 336.
in the next congregation. And so, to restore Synodall iudicatures was rejected
almost by all, because it did diminish the Episcopal, and was too popular. For
proceeding against the persons of the Bishops, no man desiring to facilitate
the judicature against himself, the restoring of it to parochial Synods, unto
which it did formerly belong, was not spoken of English Bishops in like wisdom
suppress all books, and Preachers that speak of the right of Elders, or of
such Synods and the like things, that neither theu nor their own usurpations,
may be known. By all which we may see, that it is a vveake defense, for the
authority of Bishops, and against the Eldership, to allege the grant of
Emperors and Kings, or as Bellarmin does the Acts of any council, much less
that of Trent. Gods ordinance and word, should ever be of more force, and
esteem with true Christians, then any of this kind whatsoever.

By these affirmations of this impartial Author, whom they can not call a
Brovvnist, or a Puritan, we may see, that they in the church of England, who
understand this clause, Tell the church, as if it were meant, tell the
Bishops, or their Officials, do not only vvilfully understand it, as Christ
never meant it, and of such as he never ordained, but even contrary to the
interpretation, understanding, and practice of the primitive church till the
time of Cyprian, that is for 250. years after Christ. Which shows the
Government of Diocessan Bishops, and their Officials, Chancellors, Courts, and
proceedings to be popish, novel, and intolerable: such as make the ordinance
of God of none effect, and take things upon them, which belong not to them. If
a man dwelling in the Isle of Ieresey, in the Isle of vvight, or in Surrey,
find himself much vvronged and molested by a neighbor, would Tell the
church: should he run to the Bishop of the Diocese, or to his Chancelour at
Winchester, and not rather to the flock, and the Elders thereof, whereof he
and the offendour are members? which flock should, have the power the church
of Corinth had.

It is remarkable, that when Christ would reprove the seven churches for
certain corruptions crept into them, he does not say write, and send it to
the chief officers of the church, to the Archbishops, bishops, or their
officials, Chancelours, etc. For there were no such officers then, but write,
and send it unto the seven churches, Reu. 1.11.
that is to the whole flock in Ephesus, so to that in Smyrna, and so in all
the rest. So it is still added, Let him that has an ear, chap. 2.7.
hear what the Spirit says to the churches. Every man that was a member of
the church must hear it, and take care to redress it. Indeed he bids him
write to the Angel, that is to the Pastor of the church of Ephesus, and so of
the rest, because the Pastor as the principal man, and a President in the
congregation, should propound, and make it known to the rest, he being one
whom it did a little more concern then the rest, as he was Shepherd of the
flock, and so one that should look to such faults: yet all the Elders of
every church, were also to look to it, as those that had share in the
government, and things were determined by voices of all men, members of the
church. The Epistles were written to them all, as appears also by that to
the church of Smyrna: the devil shall cast some of you into prison. Verse.
10.22 23.
I will give unto every one of you according to his works: And unto you I
say, the rest of them of Thiatira, as many as have not this learning, etc.
When he says, of some churches, that they had kept his name, and not denied
the faith, etc. and of others that they had left their first love, or had them
which held the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, of Balaam, or the woman lezabel:
It is sensles to think, that only the Angel of each church is commended or
taxed. The reproves, and incitements to repentance are not to him alone, but
to the church. Paul speaking to the church of the Colossians, Col. 4.17.
says, Say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry, that thou have received
in the Lord, that thou fulfill it. He writ his Epistles, wherein their are
directions for government, to the churches. He wills the church at Rome,
Romans 16.17.
to mark them which cause divisions, and offenses, contrary to the doctrine
they had learned, and to avoid them. In that great business, Act. 15. the
brethren were at the discussing of it, the decrees went out in all their
names. It seemed good to the Apostles, Act 15.22.23.
and Elders, with the whole church. Letters were written after this manner,
The Apostles, and Elders, and brethren, unto the brethren, etc. And in that it
is said, Verse. 12.
All the multitude kept silence, and heard Barnabas, etc. All this shows they
had liberty to speak in due time, if they had seen cause. Act. 6.5.
The saying pleased the multitude. This shows their consent, and that they
had voices. For as Paul informed by the house of Cloe, that there were
divisions among them, 1. Cor. 2.
convinced them as an Apostle with words, which are the word of God: so
when by them, or by such others, he was informed of the incestious
Corinthian, he convinced them, yet he referred the censure to the church, Chap.
5.4.
and would not do the thing himself, though as an Apostle he was a general
officer in all churches. He wishes them to excommunicate him: and after when
he had repented 2. Cor. 2.7.
to forgive him. It is true that the Keys of binding, and loosing in this
kind, were principally given to the Pastors: but ye see they did not
excommunicate, and restore without the consent of the church.

And yet it is not meant hereby, that this parochial Government should be
ouerloaden with businesses: much less with friuilous contentions. For some
things may be ended by the arbitration of two or three neighbors, and many
causes are fitter for the common laws, and those courts where the Kings
Chancellor, and other Judges sit, but only that such matters should be in the
churches power, as are fit, that the church should take care of them, and
judge them. So that this does not overthrow the authority of Christian
Magistrates, and their courts. Neither can this be a cause of confusion, making
that which is all men's business, to be no man's: so that thereupon carelesnes
should arise, or pride, and contention. For we see, that after this manner,
many things have been well discussed, and determined in the high court of
Parliament, where all things pass by voices: as likewise in civil
corporations, and common counsels: In which, things are best, and most
vncorruptlie carried, when men may speak their minds freely, and are not
oueravved by such great ones, as are the Bishops, that have power to sit on
their skirts that displease them. For in this case men should think of that,
Mat. 23.8.
One is your master even Christ, and ye are brethren. Do ye not know that the
saints shall judge the world? 1. Cor. 3.6. chap. 2.15.
He that is spiritual discerns all things. And think we then, that they
may not as well be fit Judges of manners now, as they were in the Apostles
time, and the age next after them? If it were once in use, men would soon be
well enabled to the work.

Besides the proofs out of Cyprian above mentioned, Tertull. Apol. c. 39. lib.
3. contra a pist. Parment.
Tertullian makes the officers to be only Presidents in the assembly: Hierom
ad Demet. affirms, that the church it self has right in excommunication, as
the Elders have in other church censures. Augustine thinks that it helps much
to the shaming of the party, that he be excommunicate by the whole church.
Zvvinglius, Artie. 8. explanat. speaking of the contention which has been,
what a church is, acknovvledges no other churches, but 1. the company of
sure, and firm believers dispersed through the whole world, called the
Catholic church. And 2, several congregations which conveniently meet
together in some one place, etc. of these he affirms Christ to speak Mat. 18.
Tell the church. Peter Martyr in his common places, Pant. 4. chap. 5. Sect. 9
making the church a Monarchy in respect of Christ, an Aristocracie in respect
of the Elders, adds also, that because in the church, there are matters of
great weight, and importance, referred unto the people, as excommunication,
absolution, choosing Ministers, and the like, it has also a consideration of
popular government: and upon 1. Cor. 5.4. The Apostle, as great as he was
would not excommunicate alone, but did take counsel with the church that
the thing might be done by common authority. Which notvvithstanding both
Romish, and English bishops dare do. The Apostle indeed goes before the rest,
which is the duty of the ancients of the church, that the more ignorant
multitude, by their ^uffrages goeing before, may be directed, judging. Lib 1.
de regno Christi cap. 9.
Bucer affirms, that Paul accuses the Corinthians, for that the whole church
had not excommunicated the incestious persons. Bastingius, Loc. 4. quest. 85.
of his Catechism, speaking of the difference betvveene the two keys, that of
preaching, and the other of discipline, places it in this, that the former,
which is of the preaching of the Gospel, is committed to the ministers, the
other, because it pertaines to the discipline of excommunication, is permitted
to the whole church. I omit that which Mr. Fox, Mr Cartwright, and other
English men had said to this purpose, because it would be too long for this
place.

It will be objected, that many learned English men, hold better with the
Episcopal government. I answer, the necessity of conformity, imposed on
them furnishes them with arguments to that purpose. They know the Bishops
can not look to all things necessary in every parish. But, say they, there
are church wardens, and side men: They might add whose office serves to
little, but to look to the observation of their traditions, and ceremonies, and
therefore not for the kingdom of God, but for the dominion of Bishops: they
are but a mockery of the Eldership. They know, that if the parish be full of
profane Svvearers, drunkards, fornicators, extortioners, defrauders, and the
like, all these in their turns may come to be churchvvardens. If they be but
conformable to ceremonies, and do but speak well of the book of common
prayer, though they have no true love to preaching, and hearing of the word,
whereby, knowledge, faith, and other graces are wrought in the soul, but
scorn, and mock them that have: they yet think themselves the better
subjects, the better Christians, yea fitter to be churchvvardens then
professors: and the Bishops, finding them to be a bridle to such religious
spirits, are well contented, kow^ng such ignorant conformists, are fittest for
their turns. (If the person or curate be also a Droane, a non resident, or a
good fellovv, there is a flock strangely governed) such are not apt for the
kingdom of God, the blind can not lead the blind, the drunkard reform
drunkards. These will never inform the Bishop of corruption in manners, much
less in doctrine, such as shames the Christian profession. And if they did, he
is but one, he can not look to things in every flock to know every sheep,
as Elders may in one congregation. If men had not the ceremonies, and service,
to serve them for an entire religion, or a cloak of one, they could not for
shame, but make some profession of love to the word, and good conversation. If
there were but three, or four religious men in a parish to be the officers,
their example might move the rest, such could not be scorned as they are. In
the reformed churches men are ashamed to scorn professors, if they did, they
should be reckoned profane, and soon be questioned; it would not serve them
to say they love the common prayers, they should soon be taught to know, that
He that turns away his ear from hearing of the law his prayer shall be
abominable. Pro. 28.9.


3. By all this we may see, that those abuse the world, who for the
authority of English Bishops, and the Hierarchy there, allege the succession
of lames at Jerusalem, of Peter at Antioch, of Mark at Alexandria, of Timothy
at Ephesus, and Titus in Creete. For we see there were no such Lord Bishops,
Courts, Chancellours, and proceedings as are now. The Apostles often stayed in
these places, and looked to things as general officers in all churches: but
used no such Ep^sc pall authority as ours do, who come not in by the word,
that is by Christ the Door, but clim up another way, by the traditions, Ioh.
10.
and corruptions of men, like thieves that come to steal to fle^ce and not to
feed the flock. Civil governments may upon good reasons be altered, and a
new sor^ of officers ordained. But Christ that changes not, set officers in
his kingdom to govern, and therein the perfect form of his kingdom: the
church is a kingdom, which can not be shaken. Timothy was an Evangelist,
Heb. 12.28.
but has no successors in that office, noe more can the Apostles in theirs:
they left to several congregations, the choice of Presbyters, consuring of
offenders, and debating of matters as is already proved. Other successors
they have not, To govern. Bellarm. de clericis l. 1. c. 14.
as Papists are ans^vered for Peter's being at Rome To as good purpose
Bellarmin, and others think to make men ^lee from this opinion, as from a
monster, by s^ying it was the herisie of Aerius. Medinae cited by Bellarmin
affirms, that S. Hierom was herein wholy of the opinion of the Aerians, and
that not only S. Hierom was in that heresy, but also Ambrose, Augustine,
Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumemus and Theophilius, And so
says Medina, the opinion of those fathers, otherwise very holy, and expert in
the holy Scriptures, was by the church first condemned in Aerius, then in the
Waldensis, and lastly in John vvicklife. And again Of old therefore this
opinion was dissembled, and tolerated in Hierom, and those Greek Fathers for
their honor, and reverence: contrariwise in the heretics, because they are
also estranged from the church in other things, it has been always condemned
as heretical. Bellarmine sticks not to say, Medina wanted wit, Hist. of the
counc. of Trent. page 591.
in being thus plain knowing it had been maintained in Trent, and that men
would be ready to affirm, if this be not heresy in Hierom, and those other
fathers, neither can it be justly called so in Aerius, who lived in the same
times. Which Kemnitius spares not to manifest, Examen. conc. Trid.
shevving that it was an ordinary trick in those times, when they could not
answer a man's arguments, to disgrace him with the name of heresy. Bellarmin
says, Vbi supra.
That all the fathers constantly taught that bishops suceede the Apostles, and
Presbyters the 70. disciples. I answer 1. we have proved the contrary out
of Hierom, and others, 2. That Presbyters who are Bishops may succeed the
Apostles, Mat. 28.20
as they were Pastors, and Elders of any church, as Peter and John call
themselves, and as Timothy, and Titus were, and so that may be understood, I
am with you alvvaies to the end of the world, in their successors as they
were, Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, but not as they were Apostles, and so
over Titus, Timothy, and all Elders. For to be an Apostle is to be sent
immediately from God, to have an Embassage from him, and as a master builder to
lay the foundation for others to build upon: 1. Cor. 3.10. Tit. 1.5.
and to ordain, and appoint things, as Paul did. This did the Apostles in
their Gospels, Epistles, and Acts. But this can not Bishops do: for they are
not so sent immediately from God, having an immediate embassage: they have
theirs from the Apostles, and Prophets, and so mediately. Neither are they
master builders, to lay a fondation for others to build upon, though they often
assume it in imposing their traditions, and rites for laws: for other
foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Therefore
the Apostles can noe otherwise have Successors, then as they were Pastors,
and Elders, and that must be in teaching the same, and Gal. 1.8.
noe other doctrine, Medina alleged by Bellarmin, Vbi supra
says, The heretics the waldensis used the testimony of Hierom, they
therefore, and Hierom were of one opinion, that is, that the church ought to
be governed by Presbiters, and that the government by diocessan Bishops is of
human authority, and invention: and consequently the vvisdome of the flesh,
Romans 8.7.
which is en^mitie with God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be. As we may see in those great defendors of the Hierarchy in
the church of Rome, and in England, that will not be convinced, in this point,
by the Testament of Christ. So much are they blinded by the proffit, and
honor, that follows it, but cry out that this is nothing, but the madness of
the Brovvnists, and some others that seek innovation, and change, that these
are private spirits, and that they give a private interpretation of the
scriptures, and Fathers, because it agrees not with theirs, who are more in
number, and greater in power. Which yet is the private interpretation,
because not according to the express meaning of the holy Ghost. The consent of
many clocks, and watches in a city, does not prove them to go true, unless
they accord with the Sun: No more does that of many Bishops, and Councels,
unless they agree with the word. One Paphnutius having that on his side is not
a private spirit, but ought to be preferred before many of a contrary concord,
as the Council of Nice shevved in him. Therefore, it is but a shift, and a
mockery to call this Tenet Brovvnisme, when they know this of the Eldership
is the government of the reformed churches in France, Germany, etc. and that
to condemn this for an error, is to condemn them all, yea the fathers before
alleged, and the very Apostles themselves.

It will be objected, Diocessan Bishops came in, soon after the death of the
Apostles: and if the church governed by Elders be the true church, where was
the true church from the first coming in of diocessan Bishops, till the Nicene
Council, when they were first confirmed by a general council, and
Imperial authority, and the woman fled into the wilderness, and was
follovved by a flood of Goths, Revel. 12.
and Vandals: I answer, Bishops were then diocessan, and provincial, rather
nomine, quam re, in name then indeed, excercising title power, and authority
over them, as ye have seen out of the testimony of Cyprian, Hierom, and
Chrysostom. What does the bishop, giving of orders excepted, which the
Presbyter may not do? He was not then come to his power, and strength, but
was then little other then a Presbyter in ^atter of government, had a Pastoral
charge over one con^regation, yea governed like them, and with them: the
Pres^yters had their voices in Councels, they neither were nor would be so
soon thrust out. So that for a time, they had still the essential parts of a
true church: at least till such stains, and blemishes grevv greater, and the
Hierarchy excercised more authority over the Presbiters, and became the mint,
defense, and authority of human invention, error and superflitio^, and to be
made a mark of a true church. Then the mystery of iniquity, that had long
before wrought, in that invention, began to show the fruits thereof: then
that was true which one says of episcopacie, It was invented against an
evil, but the remedy proved worse then the disease. For out of these small
beginnings, issued. 1. The insupportable power, and impiety of the Pope, and
church of Rome: which have brought so many, and so unspeakable evils on the
church. For though perhaps those ancients meant to do noe hurt, but rather
much good, in ordaining diocessan Bishops, and giving them but little power: yet
hereby the mystery of iniquity wrough^ for they thus presuming to set one over
others in a diocese, this power increased: and with like reason, and
authority Archbishops, and Patriarcks were set over Bishops, and in the end a
Pope over all. For grant they may ordain diocessan Bishops, and that their
ordinance is by a divine instinct, and of good authority, and it will
fellovv, that others after them, may as well ordain the rest: and that their
ordinance also is by divine instinct, and of good authority: and so indeed to
ordain Cardinals, and as many vpstart orders of Priests, and friars, as are
among the Papists. I might add setting up of Images to be worshipped, and all
other popish Tenets, and customs, which have been authorized by councels, and
kings, if that were sufficient, as some think it is.

Hence therefore as from a spring have issued all the errors of the Romish
church, established by Bishops in councels for sound, and good doctrines, and
all the vast authority, and power of Bishops, and the multitude of those
traditions, and ceremonies, vvherevvith, they as Rulers, have burdened the
church, and by which the word of God has been made of none effect: So that
now neither the Romish, nor English, Bishops, will endure that the scriptures
should be alleged in these points of their Hierarchy, and traditions: and
many as well of the Princes, and Clergy, as of the common people, seeing the
name, and office of a Bishop in the Scriptures, are contented with the
Bishops, to take it for granted, that it is meant of diocessan Bishops, that
the government of the church, was in the new Testament given to them, and not
to Elders: or at least as others infer, As the church was enlarged, under
the old title of bishops a new order of government might be ordained by
counsels of men, and authority of Emperors, and kings, for the better
government of the church. As if any thing could be better devised, or bring
forth better fruit, then the ordinance of God: who has punished, that
presumption with so ill fruits of it, to make us see the contrary: or as if
the Testament of God were insufficient, and he had not as sufficiently
provided for his church in this point, as in others. He will teach us at
length to know the tree by the fruit: and that these great places in the
Hierarchy, are but mere baits to corrupt men: and make them to please such
bishops, and courtiers as can advance them, ofters bribes, wrest the
Scriptures for the Hierarchy, Arminiaisme, and such popish points, traditions,
and ceremonies, as make the word of God of none effect.

Neither is it any reasoning from the time of Augustine, and those fathers, that
savv Diocessan Bishops, and said not much against them, but rather seemed to
think their use, tolerable, and proffitable, and them to be heretics, that
denied it, being established by councels.

1. Because the power of Bishops, as we proved in those days, was nothing
like that they now have, but as one says, as unlike, as the power of the
Duke of Venice in the Senate, is to that which some Monarch has in his
dominions, and over his subjects.

2. Those Fathers had not seen such fruits of it, in Antichrist, and
Antichristian power, as we have: and so what it is to take such a custom,
or an ordinance of a Concell, for a good vvarrant. So many traditions, and
superstitious rites were not then invented, much less proposed as laws by
the Episcopal power.

3. That it is no reasoning from the consent, or continuance of the fathers, if
the institution be not vvarrantable by Gods word. Neither they nor a general
Council, nor Emperors, and kings, can make that to be ex iure divine, which
is not so by Gods Testament. Men will not presume to make other Overseers to a
man's Testament, then he has appointed, to see it performed, much less ought
they to do it to Gods, as they have in ordaining diocessan Bishops, and
suffering them to obscure, and annihilate those places of scripture, wherein
God gives the Ecclesiastical government to the Presbyters, or sacrilegiously
to usurp, and apply them to any government, so contrary to the Eldership, as
that of the Hierarchy is. These passages of the new Testament are the letters
Patents of the Presbytery: and yet diocessan Bishops do not only usurp them,
as Papists do some places for the Pope, and make them serve to authorize a
contrary government, most pernicious to the ordinance of God, but quite exclude
the Presbyters, to whom they were granted, from the government, and from
that effectual power in Synods, which is due to them. and not to Bishops:
who could not well be opposed in the Nicene Council, because the hurt, and
vvrong that Bishops do to Christ^ kingdom could not be so manifest to
Constantine, and his ^onnes, nor so evident in the time of Cyprian, and
Atha^asius, as it was since, or now is. Even as the Lion, or Leo^ard does but
little harm, while it is but a little vvhelpe. For ^^deed they had not such
dominion over Presbiters, nor ^^ch courts, Chancellours, Officials, Dea^es,
power in pro^^ues of vvilles, and Testaments, much less in forbidding ^he
defense of the truth against Pelagians: nor such Rules, and ceremonies to
suspend, and silence about surplesses, ceremonies, etc. Neither can the church
give it them, much ^^sse, some in Synods, that bear the name of the church, if
^he things given, and commanded be against the kingdom, and ordinance of God,
or make religion rediculous, and the word of none effect, as may be said of the
Hierarchy, and ^ome ceremonies.

As namely that in baptising an Infant, they should sign ^im, with the sign
of the cross in token, that he shall not be shamed to confess the faith of
Christ, and manfully to fight under his banner against sin, etc. and yet
when he comes page, he is prohibited to contend for that faith against
Arminian and popish, errors: yea a minister is also forbidden ^o do it,
though at his ordination he is made to promise to be ready with all diligence
to banish, See the ordering of Bishops Priests, etc.
and drive away all ^rronious, and strange doctrines, contrary to Gods word:
What ^^ockeries are these? And now in these days of the churches ^rouble,
and persecution, have the English, that stand so much ^or these signs, and
ceremonies, proved better soldiers of Christ, in such cases as that of the
Palatinate, and the like, ^hen they of other churches, that have them not? or
have ^hey not rather proved worse? Do they more fear God, ^re they more
obedient to his ordinances, and keep the church more vncorrupt, then those
Protestants that wear ^o surplesses, bovv not to the Altar, nor kneel not
when they receive? Surely not more, but less. Such a one as Doctor Lamb, or
other profane men, amidst all their known abominations, may live in more
peace with them, then one, that without just cause they call a Puritain. God
is much better pleased when churches, and their learned defenders, are more in
deeds, and less in such signs of human invention, as are but mere
mockeries, and burdens.

That ancient Bishops and Synods have used, and ordained these, and the like
things, is no warrant for them. For you may see the case of the ancient Bishops
in their successions, by the English, and their most learned defenders: who
(as many now living have seen) because they received not the love of the
Truth, 2. These. 2.
in matter of the Eldership, traditions, and ceremonies, but their Isa. 29.
fear toward God has, in these cases, been taught by the precepts of men:
therefore God has given them over to believe some popish, and Arminian lies:
and because they receive not the love of the truth, in those matters of
Arminianisme, wherein also their fear toward God is taught by the precepts of
men, God must needs give them over to stronger delusions, to believe worse
things, and the vvisdome of their wise, and learned men, must needs be more,
and more hid, and perishing: and they must needs fall more, and more into
earthly polecies, practices, and factions, to color, and maintain what they
have done amiss, and to hold up* and increase their power against
parliaments, and all their opposers: which is not to preserve order, but to
confound it, nor to be true, but false helpers to kings, and States: whereby
Romish religion is more helped, then the Protestant, the House of Austria, then
the house of God, the great whore, then the reformed churches, and all true,
and effectual confederacy, with those churches, against the common enemy,
is hindered: for indeed to desire Romes overthrow, were to seek their own,
in that which is Romish: they can not truly love them, that are governed by
Presbiters: 2. Cor. 6.10.
for what communion has light with darkness?

Hence it is that foreign Protestants, who, trusting to ^he help of the
English have suffered for it, and in stead of help have seen many dangerous
divisions in English par^iaments, and counsels, which could not have been so
carried away, but by the help, and counenance of the Bishops, ^ay, that these
evils in England, and all others, that by these means have be* allen the
reformed churches, have sprung from the English prelacie, and Hierarchy,
which bring forth ^uch Protestants, and Bishops, and which maintain a
nevvtrall, or mixed religion, partly popish, in the Hierarchy, traditions, and
ceremonies, maintained with most zeal, partly of the reformed, in points of
faith less regarded, and partly of Arminianisme lately received: all which
makes them lukevvarme Laodiceans, or nevvters, that as much help the one side,
as the other, in treaties, leagues, succors, etc. And so the Prelates, with
their Hierarchy, and traditions, are like to the ^iuer Euphrates, that ran
betvveene Babylon, and her enemies, watered both sides, and hindered the
surprising of her, as these must needs do the sacking of Rome, till their
dominion, and ^iches, that makes them thus corrupt, be taken away, and their
^euenues turned to better uses. And therefore their saying against us, that
this is Cham like to discover the nakenes of ones Father, or mother, 1. Sam.
6.16. 2 Samuel 6.
with the Bethshemites to pry into the Arc, with Vzzah that offered to
support it, to meddle in things that belong not to us, but to the Bishops:
there must be such to preserve order, and all the other parts of their plea,
are plainly a bused, made mere shifts, and mights as vv^ll have served the
Papists against VValdo, Luther and Calvin, as them against the Eldership. If
they would speak truth, they might rather say, as by Constantines, so by
Queen Flizabeths coming to the crown, with peace entered plenty, and
honor, and with them anibition, coueteosnes, and corruption. So in short
time, and by degrees, it fared with those ancient Bishops, their fear tovvard
God in matters of their Hierarchy, traditions, and ceremonies, began to be
taught by the precepts of men: with these ambition, and coueteousnes entered
into the church: therefore first in these, and then in other things, their
vvisdome began to be hid, and perishing, so that they could not see the
mischiefs follovving diocessan, and provincial Bishops.

4 The church of Rome at that time the Bulvvark, and authority of diocessan
Episcopacie, was not then known to be the Whore of Babylon, and mother of
fornications: but for her integrity in other matters, as against Arrians, and
other heretics was thought the pillar of truth: and for the greatness of her
Bishop not opposed by many, but rather applauded (...) the most: therefore fevv
or none would then speak against her custom, and tenets: which indeed made
their own Episcopal authority to be held the more lavvfull; and necessary,
the rather because of the honor and profit, that accompanied it: So prone is
all mankind to incline to those vanities, and be blinded by them.

5. Though it were without all true authority of Scripture, yet custom, and
consent of Synods had established, and increased it, as they also did the
primacie, and power of the Pope in the Nicence, Sardean, and other councels:
and therefore it was thought an heresy in Aerius to dissent from them
whereas the heresy was rather in them that dissented from the institution,
and practice of the church in the time of the Apostles: but indeed the mystery
of iniquity could not other wise have wrought, that the church of Rome
should become the great whore, and her Bishop the Antichrist. For these
ordinances, that set up diocessan Bishops, Archbishops and Patriarchs, with
many many new rites, and ceremonies, furthered the greatness, and authority of
the Bishop, and church of Rome, and such was then the custom, and doctrine of
that church, implying, that they were necessary: therefore it was counted
Schism, and heresy to hold any thing to the contrary, though taught in
scriptures, the name of the church did carry it against all proofs
whatsoever. If any opposed, and said, these things were Jewish, heathenish.
or Antichristian, or tended that way, they could not want isntrumental
daubers, to quiet or confound them, with abusing such places as that, Gal.
5.15. Ephesians. 4.3.
If ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not devoured one of
another. Keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Dispute not about
things indisterent, but rather observe unity, and uniformity, with due
obedience to the church, to Bishops, to Synods, and their ordinances: and never
say they are ill carried: be not so seditious, schismatic or perverse: they
are your guides, and you should be guided, and ruled by them. By these, and the
like means, and devises, they passed from error to error.

Even as at this day in England, the Supporters of the Hierarchy, and
Arminianisme prevail by the same reasons, by abusing the same, and the like
places, and by saying, the ancient Synods ordained Archbishops, and Bishops,
and the custom, and doctrine of the church of England do implie, and teach,
that they, and their traditions, and government are necessary, therefore it is
schism, and heresy to dissent from them, that is, though you hold with the
scriptures: the name of the church of England must carry it against all
proofs whatsoever: and therefore though they will not be accounted Papists,
as those are who stand for the Pope, yet are they Pontificians, such as
maintain diocessan, and provincial Bishops, and the opposers thereof to be
schismatics and heretics. For they know, that as it was of old, so at this
day, the calling of them heretics, is (next to power, custom and human
constitution) the best argument to defend their Hierarchy, and the traditions
thereof. For while they scoff at them, and their Tenets, and call them
heretics, Puri^ains, and perverse Spirits, that labor to prove that the
Hierarchy ought to be abolished, and the Eldership restored, this makes
Princes, nobles, ministers, and people to stop their ears, and eyes, against
all the best reasons, and proofs of Scripture, in these cases, and in like
manner to scoff at them. Luke 16.14. John 9.29.
So the Pharisees derided Christ, like as at this day, the greatest defense of
Romish religion, is scoffing at the Protestant faith, calling it heresy, and
them heretics that profess it: this makes Princes, Priests, and people to
look no further, but to stop their ears against all proofs, as against the
Sophistry of heretics. With this devise also has the church of Rome
prevailed from time to time, and by it ran from one error to another, till she
became full of abominations, and to have such power, that no man durst
undertake to convince her. And so may the church of England, who has begun
such a progress, in some popish ceremonies, and Arminian errors, which are
maintained by practices, as being such, as they will suffer no man to dispute
against: but with power, and cunning pretenses prohibit all from gainsaying
her Prelates in any thing, 2. Cor. 1.24.
as the church of Rome did. This is to have dominion over men's faith, which
the Apostles abhorred, seeing the truth of God, is in these points revealed,
and things revealed belong to us, to whom it is given to contend for the
faith. Whence it must needs follovv, that they also will get a power to
do, and teach what they list, and yet no man shall dare to convince them. For
Christ says, He that is unjust is the least, Luke 16.10
is unjust also in much.

Let no man therefore say these are small differences, that the authority of
Bishops should be received in them, or that they are matters too high for the
people, seeing they are not higher then the mysteries of the Trinity, which
being also taught in Scriptures should be held of all, and not forbidden, as
these are, to open a gap for Which is the drift of the pro^ectors and Abettors.
popery to enter. For such ever have been, such are, and such must needs be
the fruit of greatness in the clergy. And therefore whereas some say, as the
church grevv larger, and larger, so there might be new offices, and officers
ordained, having greater honor, and more ample jurisdiction, and command, over
whole countries, and Provinces, they see here the fruits of it, in Rome, and
in England. It is not the putting of religious men into the papacy, or into
English Bishopvvricks, that will help these things, if the callings be of
men, and not of God, as is proved in both. For out of this opinion Antichrist
arose to his greatness, and the church of Rome to her authority, error, and
tyranny, Luke 16.15
and that which is highly esteemed amongst men is (often times) abomination in
the sight of God, that punishes men's inventions, and presumptions. Which in
this case were very absurd. For the church was much enlarged in the Apostles
days, yet did they not appoint diocessan Bishops, and Archbishops: Act. 14.23
Tit. 1.5.
but as churches were daily founded in any kingdom, so they ordained them
Elders, and deacons in every church or congregation, having no other spiritual
head then Christ; nor no other means to repr^sse error, and Schism, then
was in the Apostles time, to wit, calling of Synods to reduce doctrine, and
discipline to that of the Apostles. Which indeed should be furthered,
cherished, and maintained by kings, and Magistrates, as by nursing fathers.
Wherein all should remember those things. Remove not the ancient bounds, Pro.
22.28 Eccle. 10.8
which thy Fathers have set. He that breaks an hedge a Serpent shall bite
him. The Inuentours, enlargers, and maintaimers of Diocessan Episcopacie, have
removed, and broken the bounds, the Apostles set, and have planted Diocessan,
and Provincial Bishops, trees that brought out fruits accordingly many biting
errors have been propagated by the great names of Bishops and Popes, such as
Paulus Semosateneus, Liberius, Nestorius, and many others, after the bounds
were broken, which should have bin better observed. And if in any congregation,
by reason of the largenes of the parish, or the many, and rich people that
dvvell in it, some ministers come to better means then other, happy man by his
lot: that is the greatest difference, that ought to have been betvveene one
Pastor and an other. The choice of ministers lying most in the parish, and such
ministers, and Elders, as dvvell near about them. And this way ministers, and
people should have been better provided for, then now they are, when some
have double benefices, Bishopvvricks, Denaries, comendaes, and in a word some
fevv have all, though they preach little, but the most have little or never a
whit, though they would preach, and instruct. Therefore whereas some say
these places are better encouragments to make Scholars studdie, then the
paritie of the Puri^ains: we see here that they are rather nurseries of
superstition, briberie, simonie, non residencie, idleness, ambition, and error,
and mere allurements to make men studdie, to maintain such traditions, and
ceremonies as make the word of none effect, to get dominion over men's faith,
and even to mold religion after the pleasure of such as can advance them to
those great places: so exceedingly do they corrupt the church. And therefore
that has, and will more fully be found of them which Zanchie says of the
Hierarchy, and ordinances of the ancient fathers, and councels. * All things
by succession of times vver^ brought to an extreme tyranny and ambition:
Zanch. sides de religio. Christia. cap. 25. See. 12.
which is the reason why, by so much the nearer, as men approach in these
orders of ministers to the simplicity of the Apostles, by so much the more
ought they to be approved by us, and we judge th^^ men ought to endeavor
that things may every where be brough^ ^o that order. All the Reformed Churches
hold, and follovv ^he proofs of this opinion. Ioh. 3.20.
Only the Prelates and Doctors of England account them very strange, and
therefore hate ^he light in this point. So that God may say of them, as of
^phraim, I have written to him the great things of my law, Hos. 3.12.
^ut they were counted as a strange thing. They have a better ^pinion of their
own ordinances, and are better acquainted ^vith them: they suffer Princes,
and people to hear, and ^novv them, and all the reasons they have for them;
but not ^he proofs that are for the Eldership, though our Lord say: He that is
of God, hears Gods words: Ioh. 8.47.
ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. chap. 18.37
Every one that is of the Truth hears my voice. Wherein they are not the
more ^xcusable, because these or the like things have been in some ^ort used by
the ancient churches, or are commanded by Kings and States, when indeed it
has commonly been, at the ^nstance of the Bishops or their faction. It is
strange that men, that thus bear all the sway in the church, rule all things,
and ^uen give laws to others, have no other vvarrant for this their office,
and authority, then custom, Ecclesiastical constitu^^on, wherein themselves
have been the Judges, or the con^ent, and appointment of Kings. For as to such
custom, and ^onstitution, that which a learned Author says in a like case, ^s
worthy observation. Histor. of the counc, of Trent. page 18.
The impiety of Nestorius had divided Christ, making two sons, and denying
him to be God, who was borne ^f the blessed virgin, the church to inculcate the
Catholic truth in the ^indes of the faithful, made often mention of her in
the churches, as ^vell of the East, as of the West, with this title, Marie the
mother of God. This being instituted only for the honor of Christ, was by
little, and little ^ommunicated also to the mother, and finally applied to her
alone, and therefore when Images began to multiply, Christ was painted as a
babe ^n his mothers arms, to put us in mind of the worship due unto him, ^uen
in that age. But in progress of time, it was turned into the worship ^f the
mother, without the son, he remaining as an appendex in the ^icture. The
writers and Preachers, especially those that were contem^latiue, carried with
the terrent of the vulgar, which is able to do much in these matters, leaving
to mention Christ, invented with one accord new praises, Epithites, and
religious services: In so much, that about the year 1050. a daily office was
instituted to the blessed virgin, distinguished by seven Canonical hours, in a
former which anciently was ever used to the honor of the divine majesty, and
in the next hundred veers, the worship so increased, that it came to the
height, even to attribute that unto her, which the Scriptures speak of the
divine wisdom. And amongst these invented nouities, this was one, her total
exemption from original sin. Yet this remained only in the breasts of some
few private men, having no place in Ecclesiastical ceremonies, or amongst the
learned. He shows, how it was opposed, and yet after came to be received
by the industry of Scotus, and other Franciscans, which is a Story too long
for this place. From this part of the narration, we see how many evils sprung
from that ancient invention of painting Christ as a babe in his mothers arms,
which it may be, did little hurt at the first, and was beheld, as a thing
indifferent, with little or no offense, and accounted tolerable, if allowed
by authority. The inuentors might mean as little harm in it, yet doubtless the
invention, and allowance gave occasion of all these evils, and was some
breack of the second commandment; as women that frisse their hair, paint, or
lay open their naked breasts are occasions of lust, and break the
commandment, and such precepts, as require modesty, though they do not these
things on purpose to make men fornicators, but for fashion sake, to get
husbands, or the like reason. At this day there is such an Image of the virgin
reedified, and beautified at the cross in cheap side. Besides English
Papists, diverse Spaniards, and others, have been observed to worship it: and
therefore neither the ancient custom of this invention, nor any constitution
allowing it, nor the little hurt it did at the first, or now does to many, can
serve to excuse the Rulers that suffer it. For we see many kings are blamed
for suffering the high places, which some time were little frequented, or at
least not by many. Small faults and errors make way for greater. It may be the
inuentors and maintainers of diocessan Bishops, and some Romish ceremonies meant
^^s little hurt at the first, as any of these; yet seeing they have ^one, do,
and may do so much hurt, it is a great fault to main^aine or suffer them. The
Jesuits know, that the maintenance of them, and suppressing of books against
them, are notable ^nductions to nevvtralitie, luke vvarmnes, ignorance, error,
and popery, as they find in many Arminians, and pontifici^ns: and further,
that no Protestant church in the world has ^o handsome a cloak for a church
Papist, Spanish, or Romish, ^s these serve for. And yet these, as all the
errors of the Romish church, being once received, have been maintained by men
of great pretty, and knowledge in other things. Who are thought to have more
knowledge, holiness, and devotion then some franciscans, that maintain these
errors about the bles^ed virgin, and others of popery. The devil, and all
corrupt men, having once broached any error, ever get some of the most
religious, and learned to defend it, or at least, that it is a thing
indifferent or tolerable: thus the beginnings of Diocessan Bishops, and Romish
ceremonies, some primacie in the Pope, Images in the churches to a religious
use, and the like, being begun with smaller digressions from the truth, have
gained some to defend them, as things indifferent, and tolerable, who were
reckoned, and often were, men of great knowledge, and pierie in other matters
and then these errors, and abuses, being thus defended, grevv greater, and
more intolerable. So the Bishops in England, having gotten some men to
subscribe, that are very learned, and religious, they then get them also to
defend their Hierarchy, traditions, and ceremonies: which doctrine they
know, will be best received at such men's hand, as we have of late seen in
Doctor Burges, and others, much graced by the Bishops, who among themselves
also have some that are, and others, that seem to be very religious in many
things. But we should remember, that these are but men, that engaged a little
in any cause, are subject to fall farther into it; that gifts or hopes of
preferment blind the eyes of the wise, that the church of Rome could never
have gained her cause in so many things, if she had not had the help of men,
esteemed as religious, and learned; that she could never want of this sort,
who had such rewards for her champions, and such power to suspend, and
silence, the opposers; no more can the Bishops.

The 34. Art. 34.
Article says thus, It is not necessary that traditions, and ceremonies be in
all places one or utterly like, for at all times, they have been diverse, and
may be changed according to the diversity of countries times, and men's
manners, so that nothing be ordained, against Gods word. I answer, in some
cases this may be admitted. For the Apostle would not have a man praying, to
be covered in the church, and in those hot countries, if any that might well
endure to be bareheaded in prayer, 1. Cor. 11.4. etc.
as the most might, should have worn a night cap, or the like thing in the
church, it had been as great an evil in him as if he had worn a heart: yet
in ours, being a much colder country, the church, with good reason, allows
such to wear night caps in time of prayer, as can not with safety of their
health be uncovered so long. God requires not the death or danger of his
creatures in such cases. In Muscouie, Svvede, and some colder Climates, men are
so bitten with frost, that they are constrained to keep somvvhat on their
heads. Here necessity requires, that the ceremony be not the same, nor in
some old or sick body, that is not able to kneel all the time of prayer. But
what necessity is there for the cross in Baptism, the surplesse, copes, or
kneeling at the Sacrament, which were not used in the age of the Apostles, are
but mere mockeries, make the word of none effect, and have been so much
abused to idollatrie, as the Image of the blessed virgin? Because the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently, and in order, therefore some infer, the
church or the magistrate may ordain these, and the like. A foolish inference,
that serves as well for the Paplsts, and their trumperies, pretended to belong
to decency, and order, as for them. For how is there more decency, and
order, in these things then was in the time of the Apostles, or is now in the
reformed churches? The Apostle speaks of decency and order, whereby they
should be the better Christians, the women being covered, the men uncovered in
time of prayer: the men speaking in a known tongue, and one after another,
not confusedly, the women keeping silence in the church: of these, and the
like, he says, Let all things be done decently, and in order. But what better
Christians are men for the cross in baptism, for the surplesse, and kneeling
at the Sacrament? what more decency, and order in the surplesse, then in a
shirt of hair, a Jesuits cloak a friars white roabe, a Capuchins gray
govvne, and hood, or the rope vvherevvith he girds himself? what more
decency, and order in the cross in baptism, then in the cross that hangs at
the friars girdle? in kneeling at the receiving of the bread, then in kneeling
at the feet of a Priest in confession, before a cross, or Image, or at their
receiving of the host? what more decency, and order in diocessan, and
provincial Bishops, Chancellours, Deanes, and Archdeacons, and their courts,
and proceedings, then in those of the church of Rome, the Cardinals Generals,
and Canonists, save in the degrees of superstition and impiety?

That place indeed gives vvarrant in some cases, as touching the time, and
place of Gods worship, and needful ceremonies therein. That on the Lords
day, it should begin about 8. or 9. in the morning, and end before noone, and
begin again about two, because men in many places have far to church, and the
days being short, must have time to go to, and fro, and to dine. That though
in the primative church, the place were often in men's houses, a barn, or in the
feildes: yet now it is fit to have a Temple, where it may be had, or a place
set apart for that use. In the reformed churches one reads the chapters, and
begins the Psalms, these things are done in better order, when they are
committed to one, who commonly has a good voice, and skill in tuning: and if
it were not so, there would be some disorder. Order is also taken for the
most decent coming to the table of the Lord, gathering of alms, keeping
silence, and using decent gesture in the church. Now if these things were not
altogether thus in the primative church: yet the alteration in ceremony, is
little or nothing, and rather to things decent, and necessary, then to
hurtful, and unprofitable. But this can not be said of the cross in
baptism, the surplesse, or kneeling at the Sacrament, much less of the
Episcopal power, and Hierarchy, these are not things necessary, but
unprofitable, and hurtful, not better but worse. In England very many
Ministers, and some that have small means, wear beuer hats of great price
(which not many years since were worn of none but Princes) also cassocks,
and dublits of Satin, cloakes faced, and some lined with veluer, and plush:
their vviues also go in loose govvnes of silk, beuer hats, fannes in their
hands, and many other vanities. It is true that both the one, and the other may
go near, and clean, not fordid, and nastie, but yet not thus costly, and
vainly: vvherin they making little conscience, are the easier induced to think
of two livings to maintain it, and a coach to boot, and then of being made
Doctors, Deanes, and Bishops, and sometimes at the instance of their vviues,
because they would have place; yea to buy these honors, and benefices, or
flatter for them: vvherin men's minds are seldom satisfied, but rather more
enflamed, and corrupted: being Doctors they would have a prebendarie* or
another living, and then be Deanes: having a Denarie, they would have a
Bishopvvrick, having gotten that, they aim at a better: and to attain them,
they are still forced to flatter, bribe, bid, and outbid, as in a market, or
where things are sold by the candle, or at an outcrie, to the extreme shame of
the Christian profession. So that if these great places were lavvfull, yet
almost nothing is left to desert, or free election: commonly all goes by money,
corruption, or friends in the court, such as the Duke, who strengthen their
faction, by them* Hence follows idleness, and non residence, lukevvarmnes, and
temporising: they who make no conscience of such things can not but be blind
in others, the spirit of God forsakes them, they are the more easily induced to
defend the Hierarchy, and ceremonies, to let in Arminianisme, some kind of
popery, or other corruption in doctrine, and discipline at the pleasure of
such as can advance them, or at least to vvinke at such proceedings: and thus
they become nourishers of popery, and the steps to it: for our Savior says,
He that is not with me is against me; Mat. 12.30
and he that gathers not with me scatters abroad. But indeed an evil
tree can not bring forth good fruit. These great places in the Hierarchy
being not of God, but of men, such must needs, be the fruits of them. If the
church seeing these evils spring from pride, ambition, and coueteousnes, should
ordain a mean to all, in apparel, and yearly maintenance and such other
things, like that in the reformed churches, doubtless such an ordma^ce were to
be obeyed, the church has power to do it, not simply, and absolutely by any
authority given it in all things, that they please to call indifferent, but in
things thus necessary, and agreeable to the word of Gods, which forbids such
costly apparel, and lordship in them, and commands them to be grave, and
ensamples to the flocks: the churches authority is nothing but in these cases,
and such others of discipline as is above named. In all other, Christ is the
only lavvgiuer of his Church, as the Sole husband thereof, and Lord of the
family.

Not to insist upon other things, what necessary use is there, of Cathedral
churches, of which, some make so much religion, to have them reedefied? In
that of London, the upper, and less part is only used in service. Some of
those great fabrics have been, and might be well employed as colledgiate
churches, for reading of lectures, and preserving of purity in doctrine, good
manners, and learning: things of this nature do indeed make them somvvhat
worthy the repairing. The greatest Temples in the reformed churches are put to
good use, but where there is not such use, there it is not vvorth the cost.
Plesses mist. of iniquit. progres. 24.
Mounsieur du Plesses observes that when religion, and doctrine began to be
corrupted, that they might cover it, and see me no less religious, they fell
to building of Temples, and Altars, to press devout gestures, ceremonies,
etc. even so the Bishops, that want zeal against popery, Arminianisme non
residencie, and such errors, and abuses, as are crept into the church, flatter
such friends, and supporters of them, as are mighty, or able to defend, and
reward them, and in the mean time, to seem no less religious, make great
religion of devout gestures, building, repairing, and adoring of Temples in
both which, the Papists exceed them: and as he says, Plesses vbi supra.
The vvorser sort of men are ever most spendfull in such things to shadow, and
obscure the memory of their evil acts. It is true, that many who worship in
spirit, and truth, and are zealous that doctrine may be preserved in the purity
the Apostles left it, are yet too negligent in devout gesture in prayer, that
some grow too familiar, and sauc^e with God: this is ill, but the other is
much worse, when men seek the outvvard, neglect due preaching, and hearing,
the defense of the truth, and cause of God, in such cases as that of the
Palatinate, the Rochellers, and the like, or flatter their fall friends, and
betraiers, such as the Duke, etc. for while thus the true church of God, Mat.
23.23.
the living stones and Temples, wherein God dvvels, are spoiled and waste,
such men's calling for bodily gestures, and building of Temples, is but tithing
of mint, and annise, and leaving the vveightier matters vn^ared for, like
hypocritical Pharisees. Yet who sees not that these are the chief things the
Bishops look after? who in the mean time think it sufficient, that Synods,
and kings have established their authority.

It is true that Solomon justly deposed Abiathar the Priest, 1. King. 2.27.
chap. 25.13 2 Chro. 17.6.7.
and put Zadock in his room, that Asa removed his mother from being Queen,
because she had made an idol, which he destroyed, as Hezechiah did the brazen
serpent, when it was abused to idolatry: that Ichoshaphat, and Josiah put
down idollatrie, reformed the church, and caused the word of God to be duly
taught: That Christian Kings, as nursing fathers have great authority in like
cases: but all this is, as was said of Synods, in things necessary, as
reformation of abuses supressing errors, abolishing of idollatrie, and
superstitious rites, and governments, reestablishing a preaching ministry, and
Elders, and ordaining ordinances, and ceremonies, so necessary, as those above
mentioned: That God will require it of them, if they do not look after these
things. But for the Hierarchy, and popish ceremonies, so hurtful, to prove
that they may be maintained, I hope they will not say, 1. King. 11 2. King. 16
10.
Solomon built the high places, Jeroboam set up Calves, Ahaz saw an Altar at
Damascus, and made Vrijah the Priest build such a one, so prone are the clergy
to think the will of the Prince a sufficient vvarrant, that any king of
Israel, or Judah did what he list in religion, 2. Chro. 22 34.
that among the reft Ahaziah vvalked in the ways of the house of Ahab: for
after the death of his father they, and his mother were his counselors to his
destruction. They should rather put the higher powers in mind of that, why
tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the necks of the Disciples, Act. 15.10.
which neither our fathers, nor we are able to it bear? The King of Kings
would not do it, but after he had finished his Testament, Reu. 2, 24.
he says, I will put upon you none other burden; and shall men then presume
that they may do it, if they can get kings to authorize them? Kings should
remember that Christ is set upon the holy hill of Sion, Psalm. 2.
as the only Isa. 33.22.
King, and lavvgiuer of his church in matters of religion: in regard whereof
it is said, Be wise now therefore, o ye kings: be instructed ye Judges of the
earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son
least he be angry: as if he said, show your subjection, and love to him, in
setting up Gods throne, and ordinances, not Satan's. Where any Ecclesiastical
power, and dominion is besides, and against his ordinances, there has Satan
his throne, though in some governments, and orders more pernicious, then in
others: among the Papists, in Popes, Cardinals, Jesuits, Regulars, and Bishops.
In the Franciscans, or Capuchins less then in the Jesuits: yet has he it, as
well in the best order of them, as in Mahumetans, or any other wherein it is
vvorst. If English Bishops have a power besides, and against the ordinances of
God, and that is pernicious to his kingdom, Satan has his throne in them,
though not in so desperate a manner as in others.

It helps not to say, that many of them strive to do God service in many
things For so do diverse in all those orders of the Papists, and so far as they
can do it wi^h the safety of their religion, and order: but cast their
crowns ordinances, ceremonies, tradi^ions, and rules at the feet of Christ
Jesus, to have them tried, and judged by the word, they will no^ no more
will the Bishops. When I consider how vveake their usurped and tyrannical
title is, I am amassed that as yet, no English Bishop ever did it. Yet when I
remember again that the Scripture says: Gifts blind the eyes of the wise:
that our Lord says. Luke 16.
No man can serve two masters: ye can not serve God and Mammon. His servants
ye are to whom ye obey: Romans 6.
then I vvonder the less, I marvel not that they do not believe these
things: because indeed our Savior says to such men, How can ye believe which
receive honor one of another, Ioh. 5.44.
and seek not the honor, that comes f om God only? and of such men: If any
man do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, Ioh. 7.17.
whether it be of God or not. These and their de^enders can not v^ell know,
because they are not vvilling to know it, much less so to do it, as to be
reformed by it. They are resolved to hold to the Hierarchy, because they have
subscri^ed, or for the honor, proffit, or peace they have, or may have ^y it,
or under it, and without which, as things are they know ^ot how to live,
much less to preach, and do good Now ^he great and mighty God the father
of lights, with whom (...) no variablenes, and from whom every good, and
perfect gift ^roceedeth: give them, and us all the grace, Luke 9.
that denying our ^elues, our own affections, wisdoms, proffits, earthly
ima^inations, vanities, and delights, we may become true Dis^^ples, and
followers of Christ, such as truly seek the king^ome of God, and the
righteousness thereof, that by his mercy we may once come to see that joyful
day, Revel. 19.
wherein that blessed acclamation shall be heard, Alleluia: For the Lord God
omnipotent reigns.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. line 20. for to read the. Page 2 line 23. for has read has bin. lin
32. art read art. Page 12. line 22. for Ovid. And in an. Page 23. for the
with, read with the. Page 29. for in like, read who in like. Page 41. line
7. for sended, read tended. Page 45. the last line for terrent, read torrent.

