A COMMENTARY OR Exposition, upon the five first Chapters of the Epistle to
the Galatians: penned by the godly, learned, and Judicial Divine, M. W.
PERKINS.

Now published for the benefit of the Church, and continued with a Supplement
upon the sixth Chapter, by RAFE CVDWORTH Bachelour of Divinity.

ALMA MATTER CANTA BRIGIA

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA



Printed by JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1604.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, right virtuous, and most truly religious Lord,
ROBERT, Lord RICH, Baron of Leeze, etc. Grace and peace.
THE holy Scriptures (Right Honorable) given by divine inspiration, and penned
by 2. Tim. 3. 16.
the holy men of God, Prophets, Apostles, and Apostolic writers, not by
private motion, but as they were guided by the holy 2. Pet. 1. 20.
Ghost; are not only commended by God, and left unto the Church as a precious
depositum carefully to be kept in their integrity (for which 1. Tim. 6. 20.
cause the Church is called the ground and pillar of truth. 1. Tim. 3. 15.) nor
to be defended only by the sword of the Magistrate, against Heretics,
Schismatikes, and men of scandalous life, in which respect he is called (and
that truly,) Custos vtriusque tabula: But also to be the pillar and foundation
whereon to rest our faith; the touchstone of truth; the shop of remedies for
all spiritual maladies; an anchor in the blasts of Temptation, and waves of
affliction; a two edged sword to foil and Ephesians. 6. 17.
put to flight our spiritual enemies; the only Oracle to which Esa. 8. 20.
we must have recourse, and whereat we are to enquire the will of God: In a
word, the bread and water of life, whereon our souls are to feed unto
eternal life. Therefore we are commanded to search the Scriptures as for
silver, and to seek in Ioh. 5. 9. Mal. 1 2.
them as for treasures, to read in them continually, to meditate of them day
and night, to use them as bracelets upon our arms, Deuteronomy 6 8.
and frontlets between our eyes; to teach them to our posterity, and to talk
of them when we are in our houses, and when we walk by the way, when we lie
down, and when we rise up. And great reason there is of this commandment,
seeing that (as an ancient writer says) Quicquid in cis docetur veritas est:
quicquid praecipitur bonitas est: quicquid promittitur foelicitas Hugo de S.
Vi^t. de Script. and Scriptor. ^^cris. l^^. 1. c. 1.
est: that is, Whatsoever is taught in them, is truth it self: whatsoever is
commanded, is goodness it self: whatsoever is promised, is happiness it self.
They being of such perfection, that nothing may be added unto them, nor any
thing taken from them: of such Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
infallible certentie, that heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, Matthew 5.
13.
then one title fall to the ground: so pleasant and delightful, that they
exceed the honey and the honey comb: and so Psalm 19. 10.
profitable, that no treasures may be compared unto them: seeing they are able
to make us wiser then our enemies, then the Psalm 119. 98. etc. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Act. 2. (...). Iam 1 21.
aged, then our teachers: to make us wise unto salvation; to give us an
inheritance among them that are sanctified: nay, able to save our souls. Which
being so; I cannot sufficiently wonder, that any calling themselves Christians
should make less account of the book of God, then the Romans in old time,
did of their twelve Tables, and other Heathens of their Rituall books: or then
the Jews at this day do of their Talmud, the Turks of their Alcoran, the
Aethiopians of their Abetelis: especially that those which profess themselves
Divines, should so distaste the holy Scripture, that leaving it the clear
fountain of the water of life, they should betake themselves to the troubled
streams of men's devises, and dig unto Ier. 2. 13.
themselves pittes which will hold no water. Wherein the Schoolmen (I mean
the Sententiaries, the Summists, and Quodlibetaries) are chiefly (if not only)
to be censured, who setting aside the Scriptures have vanished away in vain
speculations in their Questions upon Lombard the Master of the Sentences, and
upon Thomas their new Master. So that had it not been for some few Glosses
(which notwithstanding like the gloss of Orleans do often corrupt the text)
Nicolaus de Lyra, Hugo de S. Charo, and Peter Comestor (whom I should have
named first, being so good a text man, that (as his name imports) he did
eat up the text, as the poor man's horse drank up the moon) we should not
have had among such a multitude of writers, one poor comment upon the Bible
for diverse hundred years. And no marvel, seeing it is an ordinary thing for
young nouices in Popish Universities (and I would it were but there only) not
to lay the foundation of their study in Divinity upon the rock, but upon the
waters: that is, not upon the Scripture, but upon Aquinas, or some such
Summist: and to read the Scripture no further then they give them light for
the understanding of their Schoole-Doctours. Witness one of their own
writers, who testifies Ferdinaud. Vellosill. Epis. Luc. in praef. in aduer.
Schol. Theol Nec Script nec Doctores vel a limino solutaste.
of himself that he had studied Schole-diuinitie and the Canon Law for the
space of 16. years, and yet never so much as saluted either the Scriptures or
the Fathers. Which course they take, either because they presume to understand,
above that which is written, contrary to the commandment of the Apostle, Romans
12. 3. or for that they judge the Scriptures too simple and shallow for them to
wade in, as not affording them sufficient matter for their wits to work upon.
Not considering that whilst they contemn the simplicity of the Scriptures,
and look beyond the Moon, in the mean time with Thales they fall into Laert.
de vit. Philos. lib. 1. in Thal.
the ditch: and that whilst they strive with the wings of their wit to soar
above the clouds of other men's conceyts, they sincke into a Sea of absurdities
and errors. Nor yet remembering that the Scripture has great majesty joined
with simplicity, and as great difficulty mixed with plainnes and facility:
and therefore not unfitly resembled by S. Gregory, to the Epist. ad Leander.
main Ocean in which the lamb may wade and the Elephant may swim. For the
spirit of God has in wonderful wisdom so tempered the Scriptures, that they
are both obscure and perspicuous: in some places like a clasped or sealed
book. Isay 29. 11. in other places like a book that is opened. Apoc. 5. 5.
being both easy and difficult. Easy, in that the entrance into the word,
gives light and understanding so the simple. Psalm. 119. 130. Difficult, in
that some things are hard to be understood. 2. Pet. 3. 16. and hard to be
interpreted. Ebr. 5. 11. Easy, to inuit us to read and learn the^:
Difficult, to exercise us lest we should contemn them. From the easy and
plain places are gathered principles of religion, both articles of faith and
rules of good life, which we call Catechismes. The difficult places require
interpretation, and the Commentaries of the learned. Both which are necessary
in the church of God. Catechismes have a necessary use, both in regard of the
simple, who are to be fed with milk, being but babes in Christ: and of the
learned who are strong men in Christ, that they may have some rule, whereby to
try the spirits, consonant to the analogy of faith, and the doctrine of the
orthodoxe Fathers of the Church: which Paul calls the form of knowledge.
Romans 2. 20. and The form of doctrine. (...).
Romans 6. 17. and a pattern of wholesome words. 2. Tim. 1. 13. which forms of
doctrine were in use in the primative church in the Apostles days, as it is
manifest Heb. 6. 1. where the Apostle sets down the principal points of the
Catechism, calling them the doctrine of the beginning of Christ. And after the
Apostles, we find that they were used by the learned Fathers, both of the
Greek and Latin Church. Clement Alex. had his Pedagogue. Cyril of Jerusalem
his Catechism and Mystagog. books. Origin (that famous Catechist) his books
(...).
of principles. Theodoret his Epitome (...). Lactantius his Institutions.
Augustine his Enchiridion. Hugo de S. Victore his books of the Sacraments, or
mysteries of christian religion. And it were greatly to be wished that as in
other reformed churches beyond the Sea, they have a set Catechism which all
men follow; and in the church of Rome one approved by the Council of Trent:
so there were an uniform Catechism enjoined by public authority to be used
in all Families, Schools, and Churches in this land, that we might all with
one mind and one mouth, judge and speak the same thing.

Now as Catechismes gathered out of plain and easy places are necessary for
the simple: so Commentaries are as necessary for the understanding of such
places as are more abstruse and difficult. Our Savior Christ (the great Doctor
of the Church) has by his own practice given us a president hereof in
expounding the law, Matthew. 5. in expounding all hard parables to his disciples
a part: for the text says, that he unfolded or expounded them unto them. Mark
4. 33. That he interpreted unto (...)
them in all the scriptures the things which were written of him. (...).
Luke 24. 27. That he opened unto them the scriptures. v. 32. And (...).
they have bin always so accounted in the Church of God. For the Jews (as we
know) had their Per^shim, the Greek church their Scholia, the Latin Church
their Glosses, with other Paraphrases, and Expositions. Neither was it ever
called in question by any, save by the fantastical Anabaptists, who rest
only Sleidan. lib. 6.
upon immediate revelations. And some preiudicate Papists, who hold the consent
of all Catholics to be the true Scripture, Coster. Enchir. controvers. c 1.
both the gloss, and the text, the written word, but inkie Divinity, and a
dead letter. And certain arrogant spirits who with Nestorius skorne to read
any Interpreters. But how Commentaries Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 32.
ought to be written, it is not so easy to define, there being such
difference as well in regard of the manner of writing, as of the measure. For
besides that the Popish writers make four several senses of the Scripture,
commending Jerome to excel in the Literal, Origin in the Allegorical,
Ambrose in the Anagogicall, Chrysostom in the Tropologicall; they have above
fifty several ways of expounding the Scripture, as their own writers do
record. In the measure, we Sixth. Senens. in praefat. in Bib.
find some too tedious, as the two Alphonsi, Tostatus, and Salmeron, who upon
every small occasion digress from the text, or rather take occasion to enter
into infinite frivolous questions, which breed strife rather then godly
edifying which 1. Tim. 1 4.
is by faith. For there is not so short a Chapter in the Bible, upon which the
former moves not above eight score questions: Sixth Sen. Bibl. lib. 4.
whereupon his volumes grow to that bigness, that one contracting his
Commentary upon S. Matthew. and drawing it into an Epitome, yet could not so
abridge it, but that it Tetrus Ximenes Episc. Cauriens.
contained above a thousand pages in folio in the largest volume, and smallest
character. The other is so short with his 12 volumes upon the Evangelists, that
he might well have contracted leaves into lines, and lines into letters. Which
tedious discourses, and impertinent excursions from the text, serve for no
other end but to cast a mist before the eyes of the reader, and draw (as it
were) the veil of Moses over his face, so that a. Cor. 3.
he cannot see the meaning of the holy Ghost. Others on the contrary are too
short, and compendious, offending as much in brevity, as the former in
prolixitie: by name, Emanuel Sa the Jesuit, whose Commentaries upon the Bible
are shorter then the text it self, like to those of Apollinaris, of whom
Ierom Non tam Commentarios quam indicie (...)lorum. Hieron. proam. in 1. (...)m
Esai.
writes, that a man which reads them, would think he red Contents of
chapters, rather then Commentaries. But as for the manner: the literal sense
(which our author here follows) is the only sense intended by the Spirit of
God: the Allegorical, Tropologicall, Anagogicall, being but several uses and
applications thereof: For the Scripture (consisting in the sense not in the
letters) is profitable to teach, and improoue, as Paul 2. Tim. 3. 16.
says: whereas from the Allegorical sense no necessary argument Symbolica
Theologia (...) (...) argumentatiua. Thom.
can be taken (as their own doctors confess) either to confirm or confute
any point of doctrine: and therefore much less from the Tropologicall, or
Anagogicall. And as for the measure, in regard of brevity or prolixity, the
golden mean has always been judged by the learned to be the best, which is
not only to give the bare meaning paraphrastically, but to make collection of
doctrine and application of uses; yet breefly, rather pointing at the chief
heads, then dwelling long upon any point. Some are of opinion that a Commentor
is only to give the literal sense of the place, without making further use of
application, or instruction: To which I could easily subscribe, if all the
Lords people could prophecy, or if all were able to handle the word of God,
the sword of the spirit: For as to an expert Musician who is acquainted with
the concords or rules of discant, it is as good a direction to have only the
ground as if he had every point pricked out unto him, being inured to the
division upon every point, as it falls out in the ground: So to him that is
acquaynted with the word of God, a short and concise handling of the Scripture,
may be as good a direction as if every point were discoursed at large. But
because all readers are not strong men in Christ, some being but babes, who
must have every thing minced, and cut small unto them before they can receive
it. Neither all teachers expert, and prompt Scribes, like to Ezra, nor mighty
in the Scripture as Apollos, such as are able to divide the word a right, and
apply it fitly as they ought. (Some being deceitful worckmen perverting it
to their own destruction, in pressing the two dugges of 1. Cor. 1: ^3.
the Scripture, the Old and New Testament, that in steed of Volusian. ad
Nicol. 2.
milck, they suck nothing but blood: Others, unskillful, casting wild
Colloquintida into the pott of the children of the 2. Pet. 3 16.
prophets, being too hasty to learn, and too ignorant to know of them
selves, what they should have gathered). Therefore to help the ignorance of the
one, and hinder the malice of the other (and so to profitte the most) beside
the meaning, he has briefly drawn out such doctrines as naturally arise from
the text, showing withal, how they ought to be applied for confutation,
correction, instruction, consolation. Which he has done with such dexterity,
(artificially matching together two things, heretofore insociable, Brevity,
and Perspicuitie) that the like (I take it) has not been performed heretofore
by any Expositer upon this Epistle: which we may well call the key of the new
Testament, in that it handles the waightiest points of doctrine, whether we
consider the necessary knowledge thereof, or the controversies of these times.
Therefore Luther after he had once publicly expounded it, took in hand again,
and interpreted it the second time, beginning (as himself says) where he
ended, according to the saying of Syracides, When a man has done what he can,
he must begin again. Eccles. (...). 6.
Which Commentary, seeing it has found such good intertainement amongst us,
being but a forrainer, and having lost much of his strength, and taken wind
by changing from language to language, as wine from one vessel to another: I
doubt not but this, being a free-denizen, will find the like favor and
acceptance, therather, if it will please your Honor to vouchsafe it your
countenance: To whose protection and patronage I here commend it, as S. Luke
did his Histories to the most noble Theophylus: desiring hereby to testify my
humble duty unto your Honor, and my thankfulness to God for the riches of his
grace bestowed upon you in my sterie of the Gospel, for your zeal of gods
glory, your love of the truth, and of all those that unfeignedly embrace the
truth.

And thus fearing to hinder the course of your more serious cogitations and
actions, I humbly take may leave: Desyring the Lord, who has promised to
honor those that honor him, 2. Sam. (...). 30.
that as he has made you Honorable in your noble progenitors, so he would
make you thrice Honorable in your future successors, and long continue you a
notable instrument under his Highness, of the peace and welfare of your country
as hitherto he has done, accomplishing all your desires for present
prosperity and future felicity. From Emanuell college in Cambridge: August.
10. 1604.

Your Honors most humbly devoted RAFE CVDWORTH.

TO THE COVRteous Reader.
I Here offer to thy view (gentle Reader) a Comment, and a Supplement: the
Comment begun by an excellent workman, and drawn in excellent proportion,
in all points suting to the analogy of faith, and the doctrine of the
Orthodoxe Fathers of the Church, being the substance of his three years
Lectures upon the Lords day. If his former works either of Positive Divinity
in sundry of his Treatises, or Controuersall Divinity in his Reformed
Catholic, or Case-Diuinitie in his Cases of Conscience, have ministered any
comfort unto thee, or given thee content: I doubt not but these Commentaries
will abundantly satisfy thy expectation. For (to omit the variety of matter,
as also the brevity and admirable perspicuitie, in regard of the manner,
being the chiefest commendation of Oecumenius or any Interpreter) in them as
in a mirror thou may more clearly see his knowledge in the mystery of
Christ; and his dexterity in exemplifying Ephesians. 3. 4.
that by practice which he had formerly taught by In his Prophetica.
precept, the^ in any of his writings besides: as having a double eminency
above the rest. First, in that they were penned the last of all his works,
being come to ripenes of judgment: and that upon mature deliberation after
his Sermons (as his manner was.) Secondly, in that they were written with his
own hand, whereas all his other writings (except some short Treatises) were
taken by some diligent auditors, and perused by himself. Herein resembling the
Epistle it self, which was written with Paul's own hand: all the rest (except
that short one to Gal. 6. (...).
Philemon) by his ^^ribes. And as they do exceed his other Writings, Phil^m.
v. ^8.
so I might say (perhaps more truly then discreetly) that they surpass in this
kind, all the modern writers that have gone before them: so that he which
will vouchsafe to read them, shall not greatly need nor desire any other
Interpreter upon this Scripture: the which I speak not as esteeming of
Antiquity no better worth then to be put under a bushel, that Novelty might
be set upon the candlestick: but for that I see not, but that John Baptist the
last of all Ioh 5. 35.
the Prophets, was as goodly a burning and shining candle, as any of the rest:
and that he pointed forth Christ more distinctly then the Ioh. 2. 3^.
rest. But I hope I shall not need to use many words in commendation either of
the work, or of the Author, being so well known and sufficiently commended
by others, for soundnes of doctrine, and integrity of life: which (whilst he
was living) did parallel each other, his doctrine being a pattern of his
life, and his life a counterpaine of his doctrine. And now being dead, his
sauorie-writings which he has left behind him, breathing forth (as it were)
the sweet smell of a sanctified spirit (like a field which the Lord has
blessed) has got him a name never to be forgotten: which gives him after his
death a second life.

I am further to advertise thee, (good Reader,) that there were some places in
the original copy to which the Author would (no doubt) have given some reuiew
and correction, if God had drawn out the line of his life but a little longer:
which I have filed and polished according to my poor skill, though very
sparingly, in such places only as were obscure, or had any phrase of doubtful
construction, or otherwise seemed to be mistaken: pointing and interlining the
rest to fit it for the Press. It may be my unskillful handling of them, has
deprived them of their due luster, yet sure I am it has given them no tincture.

Touching the Supplement: it was my purpose at the first to have made a supply
of that which was wanting, out of the Authors own writings, as it has been
done in Aquinas Sums and others: but afterward perceiving that his works
already extant, would not affoard me sufficient matter to furnish out that
argument, I was enforced to take an other course, and to make a supply with
courser stuff of mine own, as I could. Which if it shall seem not to sure
the former in all points, I shall desire thee to consider that it is not so
easy a matter for As^lepiodorus accustomed to draw with a cole or chaulke
only, to finish a picture he (...)nne by Apelles with so curious a pensill: and
that it is an argument wherein (I confess) I have not been so much conversant
as perhaps in some other: neither chosen out of purpose to make ostentation of
wit, reading, or invention: but left as a necessary task to be performed by
some for the perfecting of the work and the good of the Church: (if this poor
mite may confer any thing to the Treasury of the Lords temple.) And thus
hoping that these respects may entreat for a friendly acceptance at thy hands,
and that thou will afforde me thy good word for my good will, and a favorable
construction for my pains: I commend it to the blessing of the Almighty, and
thee to his gracious protection, unfeignedly wishing to thee as to my self, the
mercy of God in Christ Jesus. August. 10.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, R. C.

Faults escaped in some copies are thus to be corrected.
Page lin. Fault. correct. 25 30 building binding 70 28 degree decree 86 27
Christin Christian ibidem refuse refused 105 4 Prove. 14. 24. 136 3 seach search
153 4 7 47 164 25 begun begin 176 24 happily happily 241 5 revealed conceived
360 33 it is 402 1 come came 440 16 maginations imaginatio^s 461 29 fool foot
469 23 notes motes 472 38 Recidauation Recidiuatio^. 473 7 the thief thief
478 30 Quaerenda Qu^rendo 480 17 Supposes Supposals 482 25 perfunctorie
defunctorie 482 37 the the 490 38 heard hard 505 36 thought though 556 23
equal equal 559 26 our an 585 8 see seeing 612 3 Peter Peter's 647 14 o other

In the Epistle to the Reader, for has read have.

CHAP. 1 THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE GALATIANS.
The Argument.
TWo things are generally to be considered, the occasion of this Epistle,

1. Paul an Apostle (not of men, nor

THe Epistle has 3. parts, a Preface, an Instruction, and the Conclusion. The
preface is in the five first verses: and it has two parts, an inscription, and
a Salutation.

The inscription sets down the persons that write the Epistle, and the persons
to whom it is sent. The persons that write are two; Paul and the Brethren.

Paul is mentioned in the first verse. In which, in comely and decent manner he
commend himself to the Galatians by his [as Apostle] that is, one called to
be a planter and founder of the Church of the new Testament among the nations.
And because the title of an Apostle in general signification may agree to all
teachers: therefore he goes further, and sets down the cause of his
Apostleship. And first he remooues the false causes in these words [not of men]
that is, not called by men as by Authors of my calling, or not called by the
authority of men. And in this Paul opposes himselse to the false-apostles,
who were called notby God, but by men. Again he says [not by man] that is,
not called of God in and by [and God the father] for three causes. The first,
was to signify the consent of will in the father and Christ. The second was to
teach us how we are to conceive of God, namely that he is the Father, and
Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost: [who raised him from the dead] and that for
two causes. One was to prove Christ to be the natural Christ Romans 1. 5.
was declared to be the son of God by the resurrection from the dead: and he
applies the words of the Psalm, (thou art my son this day have I begotten
thee) to the time of Christ's resurrection. Act. 13. 33.
Again, Paul mentions the resurrection of Christ, to note the time of his own
calling: for though the rest of the Apostley

The use. First, whereas Paul in the very fore front of his Epistle begins
with his own calling, I gather, that every minister of the Gospel ought to
have a good and lawefull calling, A man cannot preach unless he be sent.
Christ took not unto Romans 10. 14.
him the office of a Mediator till he was called and sent of the Father.
Therefore the opinion of the Anabaptist is foolish and fantastical, who
think that every man may preach that will the house of Stephanas ordain
themselves to the Ministry of the Saints. Answer, 1. Cor. 16. 15. (...).
the meaning of the place is not that they called themselves, but that they set
themselves apart to the ministry of the are Kings and Priests, and the office
of the priest is to teach. I answer, Apoc. 5. 10.
all are priests in that they are to offer themselves in sacrifice to God: and
to teach privately within their places and callings, as the master his
servants, the father his children, etc, and

Secondly, whereas Paul says (not of men but of Christ) I gather that every
lawefull calling is of God, and not of men as authors thereof: and that the
Right to call belongs to God. The Math. 9. 38. Ephesians. 4. 11. Act. 20. 28.
father thrusts forth laborers into the vineyard: the son gives Pastors and
teachers: the Holy Ghost makes overseers. It may

Thirdly, whereas Paul thus proclaims his calling, (Paul an Apostle of Jesus
Christ) I gather that the callings of the Ministers of the Gospel must be
manifest to their own consciences, and the consciences of their hearers. And
that for diverse weighty causes. First, they are imbassadours, instruments, and
the mouth of God: and for this cause they are to speak in the name of
effectual operation of the spirit in the hearts of the hearers. And he that
wants the assurance of his calling, cannot pray to God in faith for these
things; neither can he apply the promises of God to himself. Thirdly, the
knowledge of our callings breeds conscience of our duties, diligence, and the
fear of god.

The fourth point to be observed is, that Paul makes three we know it to be
so: and we know it to be so, because it was written by the Apostles, who in
preaching and writing could not err. Secondly, hence I gather, that the
doctrine of the Apostles it the immediate word of God, because it was given by
inspiration both for matter and words: whereas the doctrine of 1. Cor. 7. 12.
Not the Lord but I. Answer: the meaning is, not the Lord by any express
commandment, but I by collection and interpretation of Scripture, and that by
the assistance of Gods spirit, v. 40. Seeing then the writings of the Apostles
are the immediate and mere

Lastly, seeing it is the property of an Apostle to be called immediately by
Jesus Christ, hence it follows, that the authority, office, and function of
Apostles ceased with them, and did not

And where paul says he was called by Jesus Christ and not

And whereas Paul was called by Christ raised from the dead; hence I gather the
dignity of the Apostle Paul above all other Apostles, in that he was called
after the resurrection of Christ,

The Text. 2. And all the brethren that are with me, to the Churches of
Galatia.

The Exposition.

By brethren we are to understand such as separated themselves from the Pagans,
and received the faith of Christ, 1. Cor. 5. 11. And here more specially such
as taught and professed the faith, that is, both pastors and people, whether of
Antioche (as some think) or of Rome, as others.

And Paul writes his Epistle as well in their names as in his own, and with
their consent, for two causes. One was, that he might not be thought to deliver
any private doctrine devised of his own head. And this care he had always:
and therefore which was in the writings of Moses and the Prophets, Act. 26. 22.
And this was the care of Christ: who says, My doctrine is not mine but his
that sent me. Joh. 7. 16. And at this day, this must be the care of the
Ministers of the Gospel, to continue in the things which he had learned of
Paul and the rest of the Apostles, 2. Tim. 3. 14. Hence it appears to be a
fault in sundry private persons, when they read the Scriptures, to gather
private opinions, to broch them to the world. This practice has been the
foundation of heresies

Secondly, Paul writes with consent, that he might the better move and
persuade the Galatians to receive his doctrine which he is now to deliver.

Hence it appears, that the Consent of Pastors and people Augustine says, I
had not believed the Gospel, except the authority of the Church had moved
me. And this is all it can do. For it is the word, that is the object and the
cause of our faith: the word it self works in us that faith whereby it is
believed. And Paul in this place uses consent, not to work a faith in the
Galatians, but only to stir the godly; as between Paul and Barnabas, Paul
and Peter: in the church of Corinth there were schisms 1. Cor. 11. Consent
therefore simply, unless it be joined with true faith and true doctrine, is not
of force to declare unto us the true Church. The second error is that the
catholic consent of believers in points of religion is the true and lively
scripture,

The second point is wherein stands this consent? it must have his foundation
in Christ, and thence flow to the members, as the oil from Aarons head, to his
garments. Psalm. 133. and it stands in three things, consent in one faith and
doctrine:

The third point is where it is now to be found? The Papists say that they have
true and perfect consent among themselves, and that fathers and Counsels be on
their side: and that we of gouernemant all agree, but for the manner of
execution and administration, they do not. That Christ is present in the
Eucharist, and that his body and blood is there to be eaten and drunken, all
our churches agree: and the difference is only touching the manner of his
presence; namely, whether it be spiritual or local. And this is the mercy of
God that in all our

Thus much of the persons that write: now follow the churches to which the
Epistle is sent [to the churches of Galatia]. At this time the Galatians had
made a reuolte, and were fallen was afraid of them, Chap. 4. and yet he called
them churches still using great meekenes and moderation. His example must we
follow in giving judgment of churches of our time. And that we may the better
do this and the better relieve our consciences: When the Jews resisted the
preaching of Paul, and had nothing to say but to rail, Paul then separated the
Church of Ephesus, and Rome from them, Act. 19. 8. and 28. 28. It may here be
demanded, why Paul writes to the Galatians as brethren, and calls them
Churches, seeing they have erred in the foundation, and are as he says, verse.
6. removed to another Gospel. I answer,

And though Paul call the Galatians Churches of God, yet may we not hence
gather, that the Church of Rome is a church of God. The name it may have; but
it does in truth openly, and obstinately oppugn the manifest principles of
Christian religion.

If any demand what these Churches of Galatia are? I answer, that they were a
people of Asia the less: and though they were famous Churches in the days of
the Apostle, yet now the country is under the dominion of the Turk. This
shows,

3. Grace be with you and peace

4. Who gave --.

Here is laid down the second part of the Preface, which is the Salutation
propounded in the form of a prayer, Grace and peace, etc. Grace here mentioned
is not any gift in man, but grace is Gods, and in God. And it signifies his
gracious favor the gift that is by grace, Romans 5. v. 15. and sets grace before
the gift as the cause of it. Here comes the error of the Papists to

Peace is a gift not in God, but in us: and it has three parts. The first is
peace of conscience, which is a quietness and tranquillity of mind, arising
of a sense and apprehension of reconciliation with God. Romans 5. v. 1. The
second is peace with the creatures: and it has five branches. The first is,
peace with angels, for man is redeemed by Christ: and by means of this
redemption, one heart and mind, Isai. 11. 9. The third is, peace with our
selves: and that is a conformity of the will, affections, and inclinations of
man's nature to the renewed mind. The fourth is, peace in Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Again, all things Psalm. 105. 15.
turn to the good of them that love God. The fifth is, peace with Romans 8. 28.
the beasts of the field. God makes a covenant with them for his people. Ose.
2. 18. The creatures desire and wait for the deliverance

The third part of peace is prosperity and good success: whatsoever the
righteous man does, it prospers. And all things prospered in the house of
Potipher, when Joseph was his steward,

To proceed, Paul sets down the causes of grace and peace, and they are two,
God the father, and Jesus Christ. And here it must be remembered, that the
father and Christ, as they are one God, they are but one cause: and yet in
regard of the manner of working, they are two distinct causes. For the father
gives grace from none but himself, by the son; and Christ procures grace and
peace, and he gives it unto men from thefather. Furthermore Christ is described
by his property, Our Lord, and by his effects in the next verse.

The use. Whereas Paul begins his prayer with grace, we learn that Grace in
God is the first cause and beginning of all good things in us. Election is of
grace. Romans 11. v. 5. Vocation to salvation is of Grace. 2. Tim. 1. 9. Faith is
of grace. Phil. 1. 29. Justification is freely by Grace. Romans 3. 24. Love is by
grace. 1. Ioh. 4. Every good inclination is of grace. Phil. 2. 13. Every good
work is of grace. Ezech. 36. 27. Ephesians. 2. 10. Life everlasting is of grace.
Romans 6. 23. To avoid any evil is the least good, and every good is of God. It
may be said, that will in man is the cause and

Secondly we learn, that the chief good things to be sought for, are the
favor of God in Christ, and the peace of a good and peace. The reason; true
happiness, which all men desire, consists in peace, and is founded in grace:
they are said to be happy and blessed that mourn, and suffer persecution for
justice sake, Mat. 5. because in the midst of their sorrows and miseries,
they have the favor of God, and the peace of good conscience.

Thirdly in that grace and peace are joined, we learn, that peace without grace
is no peace. There is no peace to the wicked, says my god, Isai. 57. last.
They which make a covenant with hell and death are soonest destroyed. Isai. 28.
18. Laughter (says Solomon) is madness: namely, when it is severed from grace
and peace. When men say peace, peace, then comes destruction, 1 Thessalonians. 5. The
prosperity of the men of this world, ends in perdition. read, Ps. 73.

Paul says not simply that Grace and peace comes from God, but from God the
father and from Jesus Christ: that he may teach us rightly to acknowledge and
worship God. For God is

Again when Paul says, that grace proceeds first from the father, and
secondly from Jesus Christ: he sets down the Order which God observes in the
communication of grace and peace. The father is the fountain of grace, and
gives it from none but from himself. Christ again is (as it were) a conduit,
or pipe, to Of his fullness we receive grace for grace. Ioh. 1. In him we are
complete. Col. 2. Election, Justification, Salvation, and all is done in, and
by Christ. 2. Tim. 1. 9. The use. I. Let them that travel under the burden of
a bad conscience, and a bad life come to Christ by turning from their

Jesus Christ that gives grace and peace, is called, Our Lord, for two causes.
One is to teach us to acknowledge Christ aright, and that is as well to
acknowledge him to be our Lord, as well as our Savior. He is a Priest to
procure life, a prophet to teach the way of life, a Lord to command them to
walk in the way of life. The fault of our times: All men profess Christ: yet
many allow of no Christ, but of their own devising: namely, a Christ that
must be a Savior to deliver them from hell, but not a Lord to command them;
that they cannot brook. The our Lord, is to signify the persons to whom
grace and peace belong, and they are such as acknowledge Christ for their Lord,
and yield subjection to him in heart and life. They find rest to their souls,
that take up the yoke of Christ in new obedience, and the patient bearing

4. Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us out

5. To whom be glory for ever

In these words, the second argument is propounded, whereby Christ is
described, namely the effect of Christ, which is, that he gave himself. And he
is said to give himself for two causes.

In this giving there are five things to be considered. The first, the giver,
Christ: the second, the thing given, and that is Christ himself. The third is
the end of his giving, for sin, that is, that he might make satisfaction for
our sins. The fourth is, another end of his giving, that he might deliver us
out of this men by sanctification, and newnes of life, and by divine
protection, whereby they are preserved from evil after they are sanctified.
Tit. 2. 14. and Ioh. 17. 15. And this deliverance is not in this life in
respect of place, but in respect of quality. The fifth thing, is the cause
that moved Christ to give himself, and that

In the 5. verse there is set down a corollarie or conclusion, which contains
the praise of God.

The use follows. Whereas Christ is the giver of himself, hence it follows
that his death and sacrifice was voluntary.

In that Christ gave himself to be a sacrifice, we learn many things. First,
that the work of redemption exceedes the work of creation. For in the
creation, Christ gave the creatures

The first end of this giving is, that Christ might be a sacrifice, and
ransom for sin. The knowledge of this point is of great use. First, it
works love in us, on this manner. We must in mind and meditation come to the
cross of Christ. Upon the cross we are to behold Christ crucified, and in his
death and passion, his sacrifice, in his sacrifice for the sins of his
enemies, his endless love: and the consideration of this love will have an
Advocate with the father Jesus Christ the just. 1. Ioh. 2. 1.

And whereas Paul says, that Christ gave himself for our sins, he teaches
that every man must apply this gift and sacrifice of Christ to himself. This
applying is done by faith: and the right manner of application is this. We must
turn to Christ, and in turning by faith apply: and when we apply

The second end, for which Christ gave himself, is that he might take us out
of this evil world. And hence we are taught three things. First, that we must
be grieved and displeased at prove what is the Romans (...).
goodwill of God and do it. Thirdly, seeing we are taken out of this world, we
must not dwell in it, but our dwelling must be in heaven. Revel. 13. 6. the
beast out of the sea perfequutes them that dwell in heaven, that is, such as
dwell on earth and for affection have their conversation in heaven. And seeing
this must be so, we must not love the world, but love the coming of Christ,
and every day prepare our selves against the

And whereas Paul calls this world an evil world, he does it to signify that
there is nothing in men but sin, till they be regenerate, yea that civil
virtues, and civil life, that are excellent in the eyes of men, are no better
then sins before God.

The cause that moved Christ to give himself, is the will of God. Hence it
appears that God gives Christ to no man for his foreseen faith, or works. For
there is no higher cause

The will here mentioned, is said to be the will of God, that is, the first
person, the father: for when Christ is opposed to God, then God signifies the
father. And he is most commonly called God, because he is God without
communication of the godhead from any: whereas the Son and holy Ghost

And this God, is called our father by Paul. And hereby he signifies that the
scope of the Gospel is; first, to propound God unto us not only as a creator,
but as a father: secondly, to inioyne

The conclusion annexed to the salutation (To whom be glory for ever)
teaches us so often as we remember the work of our redemption by Christ, so often
must we give praise and thanks to God; yea all our lives must be nothing else
but a testimony of thankfulness for our redemption. And all our praise and
thanks to God, must proceed from the serious affection of the heart,
signified by the word, Amen: that is, so be it.

6. Imaruell that you are so soon removed away to another Gospel,

7. Which is not another Gospel:

Here begins the second part of the Epistle, in which he gives instruction to
the Galatians. And it has two parts: one concerns doctrine, the other
manners. The first part touching If I be immediately called of God to teach,
and my doctrine be

But I was called immediately of God to teach, and my doctrine is true.
Therefore ye should not have revolted from my doctrine.



The proposition is not expressed: because it was needelesse. The minor is
handled, through the whole Epistle. The Conclusion So soone] that is, presently
after my departure. remooued] carried away by the persuasions of false
teachers, to another Gospel.] to another doctrine of salvation, which in the
speech and opinion of the false teachers, is another manner of Gospel, From
him] that is, from me being an Apostle, who have called you by preaching the
Gospel of Christ. In the grace] that is, have called you freely, without any
desert of yours, to be partakers of the favor of God in Christ. Which is not
another] which pretended Gospel of the false Apostles, is not indeed another
gospel from that of Paul, because there is but one; but it is an invention of
the brame of man. But there be some] that is, but I plainly perceive the cause
of your revolt, that some trouble you, and seek to overthrow the Gospel

In these words, two points are to be considered. The first is, the manner
which Paul uses in reproouing the Galatians. He tenders their good, and
salvation, and seeks by all means their recovery. And therefore in his
reproof he does two things. ye are removed, that is, ye are in the act of
Reuolting, and have not as yet altogether revolted. And hereby he puts them in
mind, that although they be in a fault, yet there is nothing done, which may
not easily be undone. According to his example, we are in all Reproves, to
show love, and to keep

The second point is the fault reproved, and that is, the Revolt of the
Galatians, which was a departure from the calling, whereby they were called to
the grace of Christ. If it be demanded, what kind of Revolt this was? I answer,
there be two kinds particular and general. Particular, when men profess the
name of Christ, and yet depart from the faith, in some principal points
thereof. Of this kind was the Apostacy of the ten tribes, and such is the
Apostacy of the Roman Church. general revolt is, when men wholly forsake the
faith and name of Christ. Thus do the Jews, and Turks at this day. Again, a
reuolte is sometime of weakness, and humane frailty, and sometime of
obstinacy. Now the revolt of the Galatians was only particular in the point
of justification, and of weakness, and not of obstinacy: and this Paul
signifies when he says, they were carried by others. Of this Reuo^t, 4. things
are to be considered. The time, so soon: from whom, or what? from the
doctrine of Paul, and consequently the grace of Christ. To what? to another
Gospel. By means of whom? but some trouble you, etc.

Touching the time, it was short, They were soon carried away. This shows the
lightness and inconstancy of man's nature, specially in matter of religion.
While Moses tarried in the mount, Aaron and the people set up a golden calfe,
and departed from God. Osea says, The righteousness of the Israelites, for an
hour or moment. John. 5. 35. They which cried Osanna to the son of David,
shortly after cried, Crucify him, crucify him.

To come to the second point: when Paul says, the Galatians were removed from
him that called them, that is, himself; he shows Christian modesty: because
speaking things praiseworthie of himself, he speaks in the third person: from
him that has called, etc. The like he does, 2. Cor. 12. I know a man taken
up into the third heaven: that is, himself. And John says, the disciple that
leaned on the breast of Christ, whom Christ loved, asked whom he meant. Ioh.
13. 23. After this practice, we are to give praise to God, and to his
instruments, but neither to praise nor dispraise our selves. This is Christian
civility to be joined with our faith.

Secondly, when he says, who has called you in the grace of Christ, we
learn, that the scope of the Gospel is to bring men to the grace of Christ. To
this very end God has vouchsafed

Thirdly, the Galatians are removed not only from the doctrine of Paul, but
also from the grace of God. And the reason

The third point is, To what thing the Galatians revolt? to another Gospel,
that is, to a better gospel, then that which Paul taught, compounded of Christ
and the works of the law. And this forged gospel the false apostles taught,
and the Galatians Lev. 10. 1.
King Achas will offer sacrifice to God, but the altar must 2. Reg. 16. 11.
be like the altar at Damascus. False-teachers beside the doctrine of the
Apostles, had profound learning of their Rev. 2. 24.
own. The Jews beside the written law of Moses, must have their Cabala,
containing, as they supposed, more mystical and excellent doctrine. The
Papists beside the written word, set unwritten Tradition which they make equal
with the Scripture. We that profess the Gospel, are not altogether free from
this fault. We like, that Christ should be preached: but sermons are plowing
with Deuteronomy. 22. 9.
the ox, and the ass, and the wearing of garments of linsi-wolsie. the
itching of the care, 2. Tim. 4. 5.
and it is incident to them that follow their own lusts. The remedy of this
sin, is to learn the first lesson that is to be lear

Paul adds, which is not another Gospel, that is, though it be an other gospel
in the reputation of false teachers, yet indeed it is not an other, but is a
subversion of the Gospel of Christ. Hence Answer. The body, and it was present
to them by means of their faith, which is a subsistence of things that are not
seen; and consequently it makes them present to the believing heart.

Again, hence it appears, to be a falsehood, that Every man may be saved in
his own religion, so be it, he hold there is a

The fourth point, is concerning the Authors of this Revolt: and Paul charge
them with two crimes. The first is, that they trouble the Galatians, not only
because they make divisions, but because they trouble their consciences settled
in the gospel of Christ. It may be alleged, that there be sundry good

On the contrary, the Gospel of Christ (as here it appears) troubles not the
good conscience, but it brings peace and perfect joy. John. 15. 11. Romans 15. 4.
And the reason is plain: for it ministers a perfect remedy for every sin,
and comfort sufficient for every distress. And this is a note whereby the

The second crime where with the false-apostles are charged, is, that they
overthrow the gospel of Christ: the reason of this charge must be considered.
They did not teach a doctrine flat contrary to the Gospel of Christ: but they
maintained it

8. But though we, or an angel

9 As we said before, so say I now again: if any man preach unto you

An objection might be made against the former conclusion, thus: But the most
excellent among the Apostles, James, Peter, John (by your leave) teach an other
gospel then that which Paul had preached. To this objection he makes answer in
this verse negatiuely, that whosoever teaches another Gospel is accursed,
whatsoever he be. In this answer three things are to be

The sin is to preach in the cause of our justification, any other thing
beside that or diverse to that which Paul taught the Galatians, though it be not
contrary. Thus much the very (...).
words import: and the same words are again used in the next verse. And Paul
bids Timothy, avoid them that teach otherwise, that is, any diverse doctrine as
necessary to salvation, beside that which he taught. 1. Tim. 6. 3. And the
reason of this sin, is: because God has given this commandment, We may not
depart all the counsel of God, Act. 20. 27. And that which he preached, being
necessary to salvation, he abundantly sufficient to salvation, whether we
regard doctrines of faith, or manners. For he that delivers any

The second conclusion, is, that unwritten Traditions, if they be tendered to
us, as a part of Gods word, and as necessary to salvation, they are
abominations, because they are doctrines beside that he is accursed which
preaches any thing Praeter quam Contra Petilian. l. 3 c. 6.
beside that which we have received in the legal and Evangelical scriptures.
Again, he says, that he must Non aliud quid amp(...)us?
not teach Debono viduitatis. c. 1.
any more, or any other thing, then that which is in the Apostle, whose words
he must expound.

The second answer is, that to preach otherwise, is to preach contrary. Because
(as they say) precepts and doctrines, may be beside, for contrary. I answer
thus: The Observe the authors of effences, besides the doctrine which ye have
learned. And Paul's mind, is, that they should be observed, that teach any
other diverse, or distinct doctrine, though it be not directly contrary. The
Gospel of John and the Apocalypse, written afterward, propound not any diverse
doctrine, pertaining to the salvation of the soul, but one and

The second point is, the punishment [Let him be accursed] Here are three
things to be considered. The first, what is it to be accursed? Ans. God has
given to the Church, the power of building, and it has 4. degrees, Admonition,
Suspencion from the Excommunication, Anathema. And this last is a censure or
judgment of the Church, whereby it pronounces a man severed from Christ, and
adiuged to eternal perdition, Romans 9. 5. 1. Cor. 16. 22. And he is here said
to be accursed, that stands subject to this censure. The second part is, who
are to be Answer. Heinous offenders, and desperate persons, of whose
amendment, there is no hope. And therefore this judge* meant is seldom
pronounced upon any. We find but one example in the new Testament: Paul
accursed Alexander the Copper-smith, 2. Tim. 4. 14. And the Church afterward
accursed Julian the Emperor. Other examples we find not any.

The third point, how the Church should accurse any man, and in what order?
Answer. In this action, there be four judgments. The first is Gods, which is
given in heaven, whereby he does accurse obstinate and notorious offenders.
The second judgment, pertaines to the Church upon earth, which pronounces
Answer. The word sets down the condition of them, that are accursed; and
experience, and observation whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven. The last judgment, pertaines to every private person, who holds and
then (says Christ) let him be a Publican to thee. Thus must the text be
understood.

Hence we we are taught, to be careful in preserving the purity of the
Gospel: because the corrupters thereof, are to be accursed as the damned
spirits. Hence again it appears, that the Church in accursing, does but
exercise a Ministry, which is, to publish and testify, who are accursed of
God. Lastly,

The third point is, the fupposition of things impossible, on this manner. Put
the case, that I Paul, or any other of the Apostles, should teach otherwise
then I have taught you: neither I nor they must be believed, but be accursed.
Again, put the of God, and God puts his own authority into the word which he
uttered: and he was assisted by the extraordinary, immediate, and infallible
assistance of Gods spirit. From this supposition, sundry things may be
learned. The first, that the word preached and written by Paul, is as certain,
as if it had bin written by God himself, immediately. It may be objected, that
To the remnant, I speak, not the Lord. I answer, Paul says, I, not the Lord,
not because he was deceived in his advise, for he spoke by the spirit of God,
c. 7. v. 40. but because he gave counsel in a case of marriage, whereof the
Lord had made no express law. The meaning then is this, I speak

Secondly it appears hence, that the articles of faith, or the doctrine of the
Gospel, is in excellency and authority, above all men and angeis. And hence
it follows, that the Church and

Thirdly, since the days of the Apostles, sundry doctrines

Lastly, hence we learn, what to think of the writings of Papists, and
Schoolmen, whereof some are called, Seraphicall, cherubicall, or Angelical
doctors. They broch, and maintain sundry accursed. For this cause, students
of divinity, are warily to read them with prayer, that they be not led into
temptation, and they are to use them only in the last place. And they are
greatly to be blamed, that prefer them almost above all writers: they show
that they have little love of the Gospel in their hearts.

9 As we said before, so say I now again: if any man preach unto you otherwise
then ye have received, let

In these words Paul repeates again that which he said before: and the
repetition is not in vain, but for three weighty causes; the first is, to
signify that he had spoken not rashly, but

In this verse one thing is to be observed. Before Paul said, in power and
much assurance. The great fault of our times is, that where as the Gospel is
preached, it is the Sanctuary, are turned to saltpits. Ezech. 47. v. 11.

10 For now whether preach I men or God? or seek I to please men? for if I
should yet please men I

The interrogations in this place, do I preach? and, do I please? are in
stead of earnest negations: I do not preach, I do not please. And when he
says, do I now preach men, or God? his meaning is this: Heretofore I have
preached the Traditions of men, but now being an Apostle, I preach not the
doctrine of men, but of God. And when he says, do I seek to please, men? his
meaning is this; I do not make this the scope of my mini we are to please men
in that which is good, and for their good. 1. Cor. 10. 33. Romans 15. 2.

This verse contains a double reason of his former speech,

Here first we see the proper matter of the Ministry, which is not the word
or doctrine of man, but of God. By this the Ministers of the Gospel are taught
to handle, their doctrine with

Secondly, the hearers in hearing are to know that they have not as the word of
man, but as the very word of God, as the Thessalonians did. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
The want of this consideration, is the cause that some contemn the ministry
of the word, and others are not touched and moved in hearing.

Again, here is set down the right manner of dispensing the word, which must
not be for the pleasing of men, but of God. Hence it appears, that Ministers
of the Gospel, must not be men-plea(...), nor apply, and fashion their
doctrine to the affections, humors, and dispositions of men, but keep a to
the people, but the people must turn to him, Ierem. 15. 19. Thus God shall be
with them, and they shall bring forth much fruit.

And the people must know it to be a good thing for them,

The end of this verse sets down a memorable sentence, Ye believe not (says
Christ) because ye seek glory one of another. Ioh. 5. 44. Ambition so fills
the mind with vanity, and the heart with worldly desires, that it cannot
think, or desire to please God. Wherefore he that would be a faithful
Minister of the Gospel, must deny the pride of his

Lastly, the profession of the servant of God, is here to be observed in the
example of Paul, who says, Do I now preach men? and, do I yet please men? as
if he had said, I have done thus and thus, I have preached the Traditions of
man heretofore, and I have pleased man in persequnting the Church of God: but I
do not so still, neither will I. And he that can say the like with good
conscience, I have sinned thus and thus heretofore, but now I do not, neither
will I sin as I have done, is indeed the servant of God.

v. 11. Now I certify you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached by me,
was not after man.

The meaning is this: that it may the better appear that I have justly
accursed them which teach any other Gospel, and justly reproved you for
receiving it: I give you to understand, that the Gospel which I preached was
not after man, that is, not devised by man, or preached of me by man's
authority, but

In these words is laid down the reason of the conclusion, or the assumption
of the principal argument, which was on this manner: If I be called to teach,
and that immediately of God,

Hence two maine points of doctrine that are of great consequent, may be
gathered. The first is this: It is a thing most necessary, that men should be
assured and certified that the that the Scripture sets down the true cause
of all misery, namely sin, and the perfect remedy, namely the death of
Christ. The third is, the Antiquity of Scripture, in that it fets down an
history from the beginning of the world. The 4. is, prophecies of things in
sundry books of Scripture, which

The second testimony is, from the Prophets and Apostles, who were
Ambassadors of God, extraordinarily to represent his authority unto his
Church, and the penmen of the holy Ghost, to set down the true and proper
word of God. And the Apostles above the rest, were eie-witnesses, and
eare-witnesses, If any teach otherwise, let him be accursed. And they provided,
that no counterfeits should be foisted under their names, after their
departure. And hereupon John, the last of the Apostles, concludes the new
Testament with this clause, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall
add unto him the plagues that are written in this book, Reu. 22. 18. If any
demand, of what value is the testimony of the Church. I answer, consider the
Church distinct; from the Apostles, and then the testimony

Furthermore, that we may be capable of these two testimonies, and take the
benefit thereof, we our selves for our parts, must yeilde subjection, and
obedience to the word of God. In this our obedience, shall we be assured, that
it is indeed of God,

This doctrine touching the certentie of the word, is of great use. For when
the mind and conscience, by means of the double testimony before mentioned,
plainly apprehends it, there is foundation laid of the fear of God, and of
justifying faith: and

The second maine point is, That it is necessary, that men should be assured
in their consciences, that the calling, and authority of their teachers, is of
God. It may be demanded, how consider, that a calling is of two sorts:
Ordinary, and Extraordinary. Ordinary is, when God calls by the voices, and
consent of men, following the laws of his word. Extraordinary is, when God
calls otherwise. And this he does 3. ways, first, by immediate voice. Thus God
called Abraham and Moses, and thus

Thirdly, it is objected, that they which are lawfully called, are ordained by
them, whose auncetours have been successively ordained by the Apostles. I
answer: Succession is threefold. The first is, of persons and doctrine jointly
together: and this was in the Primitive Church. The second is, of persons
alone, and this may be among infidels, and heretics. The third is, of

Touching the Successors of the first preachers, their calling was altogether
ordinary, and they were ordained of their predecessors. It is objected, that
their callings are corrupt. I answer thus. All actions Ecclesiastical, that
tend to binding

This assurance that our callings are of God, is of great use. It makes the
Minister to make a conscience of his duty: it is his comfort in trouble. Isa.
49. 2. 2. Cor. 2. 15. And to the hearers it is a means of great reverence, and
obedience.

12 For neither received I it of

The meaning is this. Paul here says, he received not the Gospel of man:
because he received not the office to teach and preach the Gospel from any
mere man. For here he speaks of himself as he was an Apostle: and then an
Apostle properly is said to receive the Gospel, when he receives not only to
[but by the revelation of Jesus Christ] carry this sense; but I learned and
received it of called the spirit of revelation, Ephesians. 1. 17. Extraordinary is,
with the word preached, and

These words then are a confirmation of the former verse, on this manner. The
authority whereby I teach, and the doctrine which I teach, I first received
and learned it, not of man, but immediately of Christ: therefore the Gospel
which I preach

In the scope and sense of the words, many points of doctrine are contained.
The first, that Christ is the great Prophet and Doctor of the Church, Math.
17. 6. Hear him. and 23. 8. One is your Doctor, namely Christ. And he is
called the great shepherd of the sheep, Hebr. 13. 20. His office is in three
things. The first is, to manifest and reveal the will of the father touching
the redemption of mankind, Ioh. 1. 18. and 8. 26. This he has done from the
beginning of the world (the father never speaking and appearing immediately but
in the baptism and As my father sent me, so send I you, Ioh. 20. 21. He it is
that gives some to be Pastors, some to be teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. And thus
appoints Paul to be an Apostle. The

Furthermore, it must be observed, that this office of teaching, is inseparably
annexed to the person of Christ, and is by him accordingly exequuted even after
his ascension, as appears in the conversion of Paul. And therefore Isai says,
they shall be all taught of God, Isa. 54. 13. As for the Ministers of the he
that plants or waters is not any thing, but God that gives the increase. The
teacher then properly in the ministry of the new Testament to the very end
of

The second is, that there be two ways whereby Christ teaches those that are
to be teachers. One is immediate revelation; the other, is ordinary
instruction in schools by the means and ministry of man. The like says
Amos, I was neither Prophet, nor son of a Prophet, but the Lord sent me to
prophecy to Israel. Amos 7. 14.

The third point is, that They which are to be teachers must first be taught;
and they must teach that which they have first learned themselves. 2. Tim. 3.
14. Abide in the things which thou have learned. Christ taught, that which he
heard of the father;

The fourth point is, that they which are to be teachers are first to be
taught, and that by men, where revelation is wanting. This kind of teaching is
the foundation of the school of the Prophets, and it has bin from the
beginning. The Patriarchs till Moses were Prophets in their families, and they
taught Cireath sephar, Iosu. 15. 15. that is, the city of books, or as we
say, the University. Samuel a young man was sent to the Tabernacle in Shilo, to
be taught, and trained up of Eli the Priest. Samuel when the sons of the
Prophets. 2. king. 2. 3. Christ himself beside the sermons made to the people,
trained up and taught himself, his 12. Apostles, and his 70. disciples. Paul
commands Timothy to teach that which he had learned, to such as shall be fit
to teach others, 2. Tim. 2. 2. Furthermore, this teaching is of great use. For
it serves to maintain the true interpretation of scripture, the purity of
doctrine: and it is a means to continue the ministry to

Here again it appears, that Christ is God, and more then a

13. For ye have heard of my conversation, and wasted it.

14. And profitted in the Jewish religion, above many of my companions, of mine
own nation, and was

In the former verse, the Apostle set down, that he learned the Gospel, not of
man, but of Jesus Christ, immediately. This in the next place, he goes about to
prove at large. His reason is framed thus. If I learned the Gospel of any
man, I learned it either before, or after my conversion: but I learned it
neither

In the example of Paul, two points are generally to be considered. not in him
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy.
Therefore it is a Pelagian error, to think that men, doing that which they
can, do by nature occasion God to give them supernatural grace. The second
point is, that Paul here makes an open, and ingenious confession of and
concealed their own faults, and not to have blazed their own shame to the
world. And therefore the books of scripture, are not books of policy (as
Atheists suppose) to keep men in awe, but they are the very word of God.
Again, the end of this plain confession is, that Paul might thereby confirm,

In Paul's example there be two things to be considered, his profession before
his calling, and his conversation. His profession Answer. In the days of
Christ, and the Apostles, there were three special sects among the Apostles,
Esseis, Sadduceis, and Pharisees. And the Pharisees were the principal, and Lord
I thank thee (says the Pharisie) I do thus and thus. VI. They held a
justification by the works of the law, without the obedience of the Messiah.
Romans 9. 3. VII. Beside the written word and law of Moses, they had many
unwritten traditions, Answer. They had for their parts forsaken God: but God
had not forsaken them, because the Temple was yet standing, and the sacrifices
with the outward worship, yet remained among them. In this regard, they were
still a reputed people of God. Again, they are called a people of God, not of
the bigger, but of the better Answer. They neither loved, nor obeyed the
doctrine of Moses, and the Prophets: and therefore God in judgment left them to
the blindness of their own minds, and the hardness of their own hearts.
Isai. 6. The like may be our case. If we love and obey not the Gospel, more
then we have done,

The second thing in Paul's example, is his conversation, whereby he lived and
conuersed according to his religion. The like should be in us. For the
profession of the faith, and godly from their vain conversation. 1. Pet. 1.
18. Here many of us do amiss, disioyning faith, and good life. And this
fault is the greater, because

Paul's conversation has two parts, his persequution of the church, and his
profiting in his religion.

Persequution properly is the afflicting of the people of god The fault of our
times is, that we build our selves, and our worldly estates, and little respect
the common good of the church.

In the persequution of the church by Paul, two points are to be considered,
the manner, and measure, or accomplishment. extremely or above measure. That
which Paul did in his religion, we must do in ours. The good things, that we
are to do, we must do them with all our might. Eccles. 9. 10. our duty is to
keep our hearts in the fear of God, and we must do it with all diligence.
Prou. 4. 24. It is our duty to seek gods kingdom, and we must take it with
violence. To enter into life is our duty, and we must strive to enter. To pray
is our duty, and we must wrestle in prayer, Romans 15. 30. Josias turns to God
with all his heart. The law requires, that we should love God, with all the

The accomplishment of persequution, is, that Paul wasted what is wasted? and
who is the waster? For the first, it is the church. Here 2. questions may be
demanded, the firist is, how the church can be wasted? Answer. In respect of
the inward estate thereof, which stands in election, faith, justification,
glorification, it Answer. Judgment begins in Gods house: and his

The waster of the church is Paul. By whom we learn that sin, where it
takes place, gives a man no rest till it has brought him to a height of
wickedness. Hatred having entered into Caines heart, leaves him not, till it have
caused him to imbrue his hands in his brothers blood. Coueteousnes makes Judas
at length to betray his master, and hang himself. Blind zeal makes Paul not
only to persequute, but also to wast the

The second part, and point in Paul's conversion, is, that he profittes in his
religion. Thus should we profit in the gospel of Christ. It is gods
commandment be ye perfect as your heavenly father is perfect: that is,
endeavor to come to perfection. Math. 5. 48.
All the faith we have or can obtain is little enough in the time of
temptation. Job that said in his affliction, though the Lord kill me I will
still trust in him, says also that God wrote bitter things Job. 13. 15. v. 26.
against him and made him to possess the sins of his youth. It is a

In Paul's profiting, two things must be considered, the measure, and the thing
in which he profited. The measure in that he profited above many others. Hence
we learn that in matters Paul's modesty must here be observed. He does not say
that he profited more then all but more then many: and he says not, more then
his superiors, but more then his equals for time: and he says not more then
all the world, but more then they of his own nation. This modesty of his,
must be learned of us, for it is the ornament of our faith: and therefore must
be joined with

The matter or the thing in which Paul profited, is that he was abundantly
zealous for the traditions of the fathers. Here I consider three points. I.
What zeal is? Answ. It is a certain feruencie of spirit, arising of a mixture
of love, and anger, causing Answer. For the outward observation of the law, and
withal, for Pharisicall unwritten Traditions: which therefore he calls Answer.
He had the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. For his zeal was
against the word, in that it tended to maintain unwritten Traditions,

Hence we learn sundry things (For that which Paul did in his religion, are
we to do in the profession of the Gospel.) First, we are to addict and set
our selves earnestly, to maintain the truth, and the practice of the Gospel.
Christ was even consumed neither hot, nor cold. Rev. 3. He is accursed of
God, that does the work of God negligently, Ierem. 48. Secondly, we are to be
angry in our And let the Papists consider this.

15. But when it pleased God (which had separated me from my mothers womb, and
called me by

16. To reveal his son in me (or to me) that I should preach him among

17. Neither came I to Jerusalem, to them which were Apostles

Paul before proved, that he learned not the Gospel of any

In the words I consider four things. First, the causes of Paul's conversion.
And here he sets down three degrees of causes, depending one upon another. The
first is, the good pleasure of God, whereby he does whatsoever he will, in
heaven, and earth, in these words [when it pleased.] The second, is, his
separation from the womb; not because it began then, for it was appointed by
God before all times, even from eternity, as all his counsels are. But the H.
Ghost hereby signifies, that all our goodness, and all our dexterity, to
this, or that office, is merely from God: because we are sanctified,
dedicated, and set apart in the Counsel of God, from all eternity, and
therefore from the womb, or from our first conception, and beginning. The
third cause is, vocation by grace; the accomplishment of both the former, in
[to reveal his son to me.] The third is, the end of his vocation, to preach
Christ among the Gentiles. The last is, his obedience to the calling of God: in
the 16. and 17. verses.

To begin with the efficient causes of Paul's conversion: here we see the order
and dependence of causes, in the conversion, and salvation of every sinner. The
beginning of our salvation, is, in the good pleasure of God: then follows
separation, or election to eternal life: then vocation by the word and spirit:

Again by the consideration of these 3. causes, we gather that God has
determined what he will do with every man, and that he has in his eternal
counsel assigned every man his office and condition of life. For there is in
God a pleasure whereby he may do with every man what he will. And by his
eternal counsel, he seperates every man from the very womb the sanctified
ones of God Isai. 13. 3. the men of his counsel, Isa. 46. 11.

The use. Hence we are all taught, to walk in our callings with diligence, and
good conscience. Because they are assigned us of God. Hence we are taught to
yield obedience to our rulers and teachers: because they that are our rulers
and teachers, better then land and living.

Thirdly, it appears hence that the time of all euentes, is determined in the
counsel of God. For God determines with himself the time in which he will
call, and convert Paul. By this we are taught, in our prayers not to limit God
to any time for the acco^plishment of our requests: for the disposition He that
believes makes no have. Isai. 28. 16. Habacuk must wait because the vision is
for a time appointed. Hab. 2. 1. David's eyes and strength failed in waiting on
God. Psalm. 69. 3. Daniel waits on God. 70. years, and then prays for
deliverance out of captivity, the time being expired. This serves to discover
the wickedness of them, that being in any kind of misery, cannot

The second point is, the Form of the calling, or conversion [to reuele his
son in me] that is, to teach me the doctrine of the redemption of mankind by
the son Jesus Christ. Here I consider, to whom revelation is made, and how?

For the first, revelation of the son is made to cruel, and God is much in
sparing Isai. 55. 7. And yet here it must be remembered, that all desperate
offenders, shall not find mercy; great in their repentance as God is great in
mercy. For Gods mercy has a double effect in us, one is, remission of sin,
by the imputaton of the merit of Christ: the other, the mortification of
original sin, by his efficacy. And these two be inseparable, as we see in
Paul, on whom God showed had many sins forgiven her, so she loved much. v.
47. By this we see the great, and common abuse of the mercy of God. Men every
where presume upon the greatness of gods mercy, and they make Christ a
packe-horse, lading him with their burdens, and there is little or no amendment
of life.

The manner that God used in revealing the son to Paul, stands in two things:
Preparation and Instruction.

Preparation is a work of God, whereby he humbled Paul, subdued the pride, and
stubbernenesse of his heart, and made Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? The

The instruction whereby God taught the same to Paul, has two parts. The first
is, the call of God, whereby he inuites Paul When thou said, seek ye my
face, mine heart answered, I will seek thy face, O Lord. And in Zachary, 13.
9. He shall say, it is my people, and they shall say, the Lord is our God. This
is a spiritual Echo, that is made in the heart. The sound of Gods word, goes
through the world, and by drawing, Ioh. 6. 44. And God is said to teach us his
ways, when he guids us by his spirit in the land of by faith, that the son
is our redeemer. The second is, regeneration, which is the putting off the old
man, and the putting on of the new: which to do, by the virtue of Christ, is
to learn Christ. Ephesians. 4. 20. 23. Thus then God reueales the son to Paul, by
preparing him, and making him teachable, by propou^ding the doctrine of
salvation to him, and by causing him inwardly

For the better clearing of this doctrine, five questions are to be answered.
The first is, what was the preventing grace in the conversion of Paul? Answer.
Schoolmen, and Papists generally Come forth, Lazarus, because he was dead: in
like manner, we are dead in sin, and therefore regeneration (which is the
soul of our souls) must

The second question is, whether the will of Paul, were an agent, Answer. No:
scripture makes two sorts of conversion: one Passive, when man is converted by
god. In this, man is but a subject, to receive the impression of grace, and no
agent at all. For in the creating, setting, or imprinting of righteousness,
and holiness in the Active, whereby man being converted by God, does further
turn and convert himself to God, in all his thoughts, words, and deeds. This
conversion is not only of grace, nor only of will; but partly of grace, and
partly of will: yet so as grace is the principal He that made thee without
thee, does not Term 25 de verbi, Apest.
save thee without thee.

The third question is, whether God did offer any violence, to Paul's mind and
will, in his conversion. Answer. There is a double violence, or Coaction. One,
which does abolish all consent of will; and this he used not. The other, draws

The fourth question is, wherein stands the efficacy of the Answ. The
Council of Trent, and sundry Papists, incline to this opinion, to think that
it stands in the event, in that the will of man applies it self to the grace
which God offers. But then the efficacy of grace must be from man's will: and
then works the will and the deed, Phil. 2. 13.

The last question is, whether it was in the power of Paul's Answ. The will for
his condition is apt to resist grace: never the less, if we consider the
efficacy of Gods grace, and the will of God, he could not resist the calling
of God. Every one that has heard and learned of the father, comes to Christ,
Ioh. 6. 45. Gods will determines Ans. Liberty and freedom of will in God, is
perfect liberty: now God cannot will either good or evil, but only that
which is good. And man's will, the nearer it comes to this will of God, the
greater liberty has it. Therefore to will that only which is good, so it be
freely without compulsion, is true liberty, to be able to will that which is
evil, and to resist the calling of God, is not liberty, but impotencie. And
he that can only will that

The use. Ministers of the Gospel must learn Christ as Paul learned him. They
may not content themselves with that teaching which they find in schools, but
they must proceed Hoc urge.

The third point is the end of Paul's conversion in these words [that he might
preach him among the gentiles.] Here I consider what he must preach, namely the
son Christ: and to whom I namely among the nations. Again of the preaching
of Christ, I consider two things: the first is, why Christ must be preached
rather then Moses? Answer, there be two causes. One is, because Christ is the
substance or subject matter of the whole Bible. For the sum of the scriptures
may be thus gathered together. The son of God made man, and working our
redemption, is the savior of mankind: but

Secondly it may be demanded, what it is to preach Christ? Answer: it is a
great work, and it contains 4. ministerial actions. The first, generally to
teach the doctrine of the incarnation of Christ and of his three offices, his
kingly office, his prophetical

The second point is, that Paul must preach to the gentiles. there be two
causes of it: one, that the prophecies of the calling of the gentiles might be
fulfilled, Psalm. 2. and 110. Isai. 2. The second, because at the death of
Christ the division which was between the Jews and gentiles was quite
abolished. Ephesians. 2. 13. Here I observe the difference between Apostles, and
ordinary Ministers. Their charge is a set, and particular congregation;
whereas the charge of an Apostle is the whole

The 4. and last point is the obedience of Paul to the calling of God, in that
he went and preached the Gospel. Here a question may be demanded: whether
Paul performed his obedience, by virtue of the grace which he had formerly
received

In Paul's obedience, I consider 3. points. 1. When he obeyed? Immediately. How?
without deliberation or consultation. In Arabia and Damascus.

For the first, in that he obeyed God in going to preach im mediatly, we learn
how we are to answer and obey the calling of God, that calls to amendment, and
newness of life: namely in all have, without deferring of time. Hebr. 3. 8. To
day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: and v. 13. exhort one
another while it is called to day. Psalm 119. 60. I made have and did not delaie
to keep thy commandments. And there be good reasons, why we should no longer
defer our conuersi on to God. The end of our life is uncertain: and look as
death treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. Romans 2. Thirdly, when we
defer to obey and turn to God, we grow to perfection in sin: and sin
being perfected bringes forth death. I am. 1. 14. us now presently amend, and
turn to God: least if we still defer the time of our repentance, Gods
judgments come forth in have upon us.

The manner of his obedience is, that Paul did not communicate with men: that
is, confer, and consult with them, touching his doctrine, and calling. And
this he amplifies by a comparison He did not consult with any man, no not the
Apostles of Jerusalem. And he adds a reason of his doing: because they were
but flesh and blood, in respect of God: and indeed it is unmeet to consult
with men, touching the matters of God.

Hence I gather, that Gods word, whether preached or written, does not depend
on the authority of any man, no not on the authority of the Apostles
themselves; it is sufficient to authorize it self. Christ receives not the
testimony of man, John. 5. 34. And it is an error, to think that the Church
does authorize the word, and religion, in the consciences of men. For the

Secondly, hence I gather, that there is no consultation, or deliberation, to
be used at any time, touching the holding, or be it known to thee, O king,
that we will not worship thy gods, Dan. 3. When the judge gave Cyprian the
martyr leave to deliberate a while; whether he would deny his religion: he
answered, that in divine matters deliberation is not to be used. By this I
gather, that the Schoolmen

Thirdly our obedience to God must be without consultation. We must first try
what is the will of God, and then absolutely put it in exequution, leaving the
issue to God. Abram is called of god to forsake his country and kindred. Genesis
12. he derectly then gives attendance to the commandment, and goes as it were
blind fold, he knows not whither. God promised him a child in his old age, he
believes God without any reasoning, or disputing the case with himself, too or
fro: Rom 4. 20. But the common manner is, (though we know the will of

In that man is termed here, flesh and blood, we are taught,

The third point is, where Paul first preached? namely, in Arabia and Damascus.
Arabia is a region of the world, where Mount Sina stands, and where the
children of Israel wandered 40. years. The inhabitants thereof, were of two
forts: some more civil, and some barbarous. Civil, as the Israelites,
Amalechites,

Here we see Paul's estate and condition, when he first begins the exequution of
his Apostolical function. God then lays upon him a sharp and weighty
trial. For he goes alone into Arabia, and he must become a teacher to his own
professed enemies, yea to a savage generation of whose conversion he had
persecute him, and to hunt him, as men hunt Partridges in the mountains. Jonas
is called to preach to Niniue, and withal God forsakes him, and leaves him to
himself, so, as he is cast into the sea, and devoured of a fish: and after
this, being delivered, he must go preach at Niniue. When Christ was in his
Reading, prayer; and temptation, make a Divine. Again, by this means they are
caused to depend on the providence, and protection of God, and they are made
fit for the assistance, and presence of Gods spirit, who dwells only with them
that are of humble, and contrite

Again, here we are taught, to acknowledge three things in God. His power, in
that he sets up his kingdom, where it is most oppugned, and reigns in the
midst of his own enemies; namely, the wicked and savage Arabians, according
to that in the Psalm, 110. v. 2. His goodness, in that he sends Paul The kings
of Sheba and Saba shall bring gifts: that is, Ethiopians and Arabians.

18. Then after three years, I

Paul having proved before, that he learned not the Gospel of any man, no not
of the Apostles at Jerusalem: goes about now to answer exceptions, that might
be made against his reason. And first of all, it might have been objected,
that he was seen at Jerusalem sundry times: and therefore in all likelihood,
went thither to be instructed. To this he answers three things: that he went
thither three years after his conversion, and not before: that he went to
visit Peter: that he abode there fifteen days. For the first, where he says,
he preached 3. years in Arabia and Damascus, and then after went to
Jerusalem, to number our days, and, to redeem the time. To number our days,
is to consider the shortness of our lives, and that we are every day subject
to To redeem our time, is to take time, while time serves, specially for
spiritual uses, and for the amendment of our lives. When time is thus numbered
and redeemed, then shall the good account be made before God and men. Wherefore
miserable is the case of them, that spend their days in idleness, in riot, and
sporting, in chambering,

The second point is, that Paul goes up to Jerusalem to visit Peter, that is,
to see him, to be acquainted with him, to talk, and Gods worship, whereas now
in the new testament, all religious distinction of places is abolished, 1.
Tim. 2. 8. Lift up pure hands in every place unto God. Some allege, that
vows, which were not commanded, were nevertheless parts of Gods worship, among
the Jews. I answer: though men were not commanded

In that Paul goes about to visit Peter, the Papists gather the Primacie of
order, and Primacie of power. Primacie of order, was due unto Peter, in that he
was first called to be an Apostle, and he was in the faith before Paul. And in
this regard, he was reuere^ced

The third point is, that Paul abides with Peter at Jerusalem, and that
fifteen days. His abode with Peter, was in token of mutual consent and
fellowship. Like should be the consent of the Ministers of the Gospel. For
their office is to publish and

Whereas he adds, that his abode with Peter was but for 15. days: hereby he
signifies that he learned not the Gospel of him: for it could not be learned
in so short a space: neither could Paul by the teaching of any man become an
Apostle in so little time.

19 And none other of the Apostles saw I, save James the Lords

It might happily be objected against the former verse, that Paul might be
taught of some other Apostle beside Peter, and

Here I gather that if there be any mother church in the world, it is rather
Jerusalem then Rome, because the Gospel

In that James is called our Lords brother three things may be demanded. One,
which James this was? Answer. It was this brotherhood does not make him the
better Apostle, or the better man. Outward things do not commend us to god.
And it is the spiritual kindred, by means of faith, and our new birth, that
bringes us into favor with God. Matthew. 12. 49.

20 Now the things which I

Before, Paul has avouched sundry things of himself:

The words contain 2. parts. An answer to an objection concealed, on this
manner; I may be thought to lie, but indeed I lie not. The second is, a
confirmation by oath, Before God I speak it. Touching the first part, there
be two points to be

A lie is when we speak the contrary to that we think with an intention to
deceive. More plainly, in a lie there be 4. things: the first is, to avouch
and affirm that which is false. The second is to speak with a double heart
Psalm. 12. 2. That is to speak against a mind or intention to deceive, or
hurt. For in the ninth commandment that is a false testimony that is against
our neighbor. The 4. point is, that he which speaks that which is false,
upon a vanity of mind without reasonable cause, is a lier. Thus bosters, and
flatterers, are liers. And these are the things which concur in the making of
a lie.

For the better conceiving of the nature of a lie, we must put difference
between it and sundry other things incident Parable or figure. In a parable
indeed there is something supposed or fained; as for example, when the trees
are brought in conferring, and consulting about their king, Iud. 9. 8.
nevertheless a parable is far from falsehoode, or lying: for by things

Again, difference must be put between a lie and the concealment of a thing
for it is one thing to speak against our knowledge, and another to speak that
which we know. And concealements, if there be a reasonable cause, and if it be

Thirdly, a difference must be made between lying and fayning: simulation: not
dissembling, but rather sembling (if I may so term it.) And that is, when
something is spoken not contrary, but beside, or diverse to that which we
think. And this kind of fayning, if it be not to the prejudice of truth,
against the glory of God, and the good of our neighbor, and let me alone, that
my wrath may wax ho^^ and I may destroy them: Exodus 32. 10. And this he spoke,
that he might stir up Moses to feruencie in prayer for the Israelites, and
the Israelites to unfeigned repentance. Joshua having besiged Ai meant not to
fly, yet does lie feign a flight, that he might draw his enemies out of the
city and destroy the^. Ios. 8. 5. There is a kind of deceit called dolus
bonus, that is, a good deceit, and of this kind was the act of Joshua. Thus
Physicians for their good, use to deceive the senses of their impotent
patients. Thus parents insinuate unto their children, terrible things, of the
bear,

The second point is, whether to lie, be a sin, or no? the answer put away
lying, Ephesians. 4. 25. It is objected, that the sporting, and officious lie, is not
against charity, to the hurt of any, but for the good of

Now then, we are to be exhorted, to make a conscience of lying, and to speak
the truth from our hearts. And there be many reasons to induce us to the
practice of this duty. First, it is Gods commandment, Iam. 3. 14. Secondly,
lying is a conformity to the devil, and by truth we are made conformable to
God, who is truth it self. Thirdly, we are sanctified by the word of truth,
Ioh. 17. 17. and guided by the spirit of truth: and therefore we are to detest
lying, and deceit. Fourthly, truth is a fruit of Gods spirit, Gal. 5. and a
mark of Gods child, Psalm. 32. v. 2. he has the pardon of his sins in whose
spirit there is no guile. and Psalm. 15. 2. he shall rest in the mountain of
God, who speaks the truth from his heart. Lastly, destruction is the liars
reward. Psalm. 5. 6. God will destroy them that speak lies: and they must have
their portion in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Revel. 22. 15

Thus much of the answer to the objection: now follows the confirmation by
oath [before God.] Here it may be demanded, how these words can be a form of
swearing? Ans. In an oath there be four things. The first is, an Asseveration
of the truth. The second is Cenfession, whereby the party that is to
Invocation of God, that he would be a witness with us, and to us, that we
speak the truth. The last is, Imprecation, that God would be a judge to take
revenge The Lord lives, and here only confession is expressed. The form I
call God to witness to my soul, 2. Cor. 1. 23. expresses the third part,
namely invocation. The words, Ruth. 2. 17. The Lord do thus and thus unto me,
is an Imprecation. The common form, The Lord thee help through Jesus Christ,
is partly prayer, and partly imprecation. And the form in this

Here first we learn, that the form of an oath, is to be plain, and direct
in the name of God, and not indirect, or oblique, by his rejoicing in Christ. I
answer; the words of Paul, by my rejoicing, are not an oath, but an
obtestation: for the meaning of his words is this, that his sorrows and
afflictions which he endured for Christ, would testify (if they could speak)
that he died daily. Thus Moses called heaven and earth to witness, without
swearing: for in an oath the thing by which he swears, is made not only
witness, but I call God to witness to (or upon) my soul. Here they are to be
blamed, whose common fwearing, is by

Secondly, here we learn to use an oath, only in the case of extremity,
namely, when a necessary truth is to be confirmed, and when this cannot be don
by any reason, or proof to be found before God, before God.

Thirdly, before we swear, we are to use great meditation, consideration, and
preparation: and therefore Paul in swearing uses a word of attention, and
says, Behold, I speak it before God. This condemns the rash, and customable
swearing

In that Paul confirms his writings by oath, it appears that they are of God.
For if he had sworn falsely, God would have taken revenge upon him, and his
writings, before this: which

Whereas Paul says, Before God I speak it: he teaches us after his own
example to bring our selves into the presence of God, to walk before him as
Enoch did, Genesis 5. 22. and as Abraham was commanded, Genesis 17. 1. and to do
whatsoever

21 After that I went into the coasts of Syria and Cilicia: and I was unknown
by face to the Churches of Judea which were in Christ.

22. But they had heard only

23 And they glorified God in me.

Here Paul answers an other objection, which may be framed thus: Though Paul
learned not the Gospel of the Apostles at Jerusalem, yet might he happily
learn it of them in other Churches of Judea. To this Paul answers three
things. The first is, that he went from Jerusalem into Syria, and Cilicia. he
was not known in person to the Churches of Judea, but only by hearsay: and he
sets down the report that went of him. The third is, that the Churches of
Judea did not disgrace and slander him, but they glorified God for him. Of
these in order. For the first, that Paul went from Jerusalem straight

The second answer, that Paul was known to the Christian Jews, not by face,
but by hearsay: this may seem strange, considering Paul was at Jerusalem, and
travailed through Jury, into Syria, and Cilicia: but it is the truth: and the
reason of it is plain. The office of an Apostle, is not to build upon the
foundation of an other, or to succeed any man in his labors, but where Christ
had not bin preached or named, Romans 15. 20. In this the Apostles differ from
all the Ministers of the new Testament whatsoever. And this is the cause why
Paul was not known to the Churches of Judea. And here we see, that Succession

Again, it is said, that Paul was not known to the Churches of Judea, which
were in Christ. Where let it be observed, that 4. years after the ascension of
Christ, the Apostles had gathered, and planted sundry Christian Churches in
Judea. This greatly commends the efficacy, and power of the Gospel. For
hardness

That Paul might the better show, that he was known to the the increase of
Gods kingdom, and the conversion of wicked men.

In the report, two things are^ set down, what Paul did? He once persecuted
us, and destroyed the faith: what he now does? He preaches the Gospel. By this
we see that verified, which Isai foretold, that the lion, the wolf, the lamb,
etc. should peaceably

Furthermore, the thing which Paul aimed at, in persequuting the Church, is to
be considered, and that was, that he might destroy the faith. By faith, we are
to understand the doctrine of the Gospel, and with all, the virtue, or gift of
faith, whereby it is Satan desired to sift his Disciples, that is, to sift all
their faith out of their hearts, and to leave nothing in the^, but chafe, Luke
22. 32. Here then, it may be demanded, whether faith may be lost, specially in
the children of God, in the knowledge of the Gospel, and Assent to the truth
of it. This faith the devils have, and it may be lost; and believers by this
faith, may quite fall away. The second kind of faith, contains knowledge,
assent, the sense or feeling of spiritual joy, and such like. Again, it may be
buried for a time in the heart, and not show it self, either by fruits, or any
profession: and in respect of the measure of it, it may be lessened and maimed:
and if we respect the nature of it, it is as apt to be lost, as any other grace
of God: for there is nothing by nature unchangeable, but God. Nevertheless,
where I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, Luke 22. 32. And this
privilege have all the godly, they shall not be tempted above their strength,
1. Cor. 10. 13. Indeed, persecutors are said to destroy the faith: because
this is their intent, and they endeavor to do what they can, but God preuents
their desires, by establishing true faith, that it may not utterly fail.

It may be objected to the contrary, on this manner. The

Secondly, touching the pardon of his offense, I answer thus. In pardon there
be four degrees: the degree of pardon before all worlds: the promise of pardon
in the beginning of the word, The seed of the woman, etc. The procurement of
pardon upon the cross: and the donation, or the giving of the pardon. this
giving is not altogether at one instant, but it begins in the conversion of a
sinner, and is often iterated in the use of the word, and sacraments, to the
death. Paul wills the Corinthians reconciled to God, still to be reconciled, 2.
Cor. 5. 21. And we are taught, every day to pray to God, to give us the pardon
of our sins. This giving is twofold; conditional, and Thy sin is forgiven
thee, 2. Sam. 12.

Now then, to come to the point, the child of God has pardon of his fall, in
respect of the decree to pardon, in respect of the general promise of pardon,
in respect of the procurement of pardon, in respect of the conditional
donation of pardon, which is made in baptism: and he may be said to

The use. Seeing the intent of the Devil and wicked* men, is to destroy the
says (as it appears in this place, and in the first temptation wherewith
Satan assaulted Christ, Math. 4.) we must have a special care of our faith.
And first we must look that our faith be a true faith, least we be dece^ued,
as the foolish virgins. Secondly, we must keep and lock up our make
continual experiences, and observations of the love of God toward us, and to
lay them all together, and to build a joyful conclusion thereupon.

The third answer of Paul is, And they glorified God for me: that is, the
churches of Judea when they heard of my calling, and conversion, they
considered therein the power, the goodness, to sanctify God in our hearts, 1.
Pet. 3. 17. And Moses, because he failed in the doing of this duty, was barred
the land of Canaan. Number. 20. 12. In England god has wrought his wondrous
works among us. He has given us peace and

Again, here we see what is the right manner of honoring of the Saints, and
that is to glorify God in them and for them. As for religious worship of
adoration and invocation, it is

CHAP. II.
1 Then 14. years after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took
with me Titus also.

2 And I went by revelation, and communicated with the^ of the Gospel, which I
preach among the Gentiles,

IN this chapter, Paul proceeds to justify

In his journey, I consider four things. The first is, the Manner of his
iourneying, in these words, I went up, or, ascended to Jerusalem. And this he
speaks, because Jerusalem was placed, and seated upon a mountain, and
compassed with mountains, Psalm. 125. or again, in respect of the dignity and
excellency of

The second thing to be considered in the journey is, the time when, in these
words, then after fourteen years. Here two questions are to be demanded. The
first is, of which of his iourneies must this be understood? (for he made five
iournies to Jerusalem.) The first, from Arabia: the second, when he and
Barnabas were sent by the Church of the Gentiles to carry alms to Jerusalem:
the third, when he went to the Council at Jerusalem: the fourth, when he went
up for the keeping of his vow: the last, is mentioned Act. 19. 21. Answ. These
words Ans. It is uncertain. Some think, they must begin at his conversion;
some three years after, when Paul went first to Jerusalem: and

The third point is, concerning the companions of Paul in this journey, namely
Barnabas, and Titus. And Paul takes them with him, that they might be witnesses
to the Jews of the doctrine Why ask ye me? ask them that heard me, Ioh. 18.
21. Therefore great care, and circumspection is to be had of things publicly
delivered. Again, whereas Paul makes Barnabas a Jew, and Titus a Gentile, his
companions, we are taught, to embrace with a brotherly love, not only the men
of our own country, but also such as be of other

The fourth point is, the cause of his journey, in these words, and I went by
revelation. Here we are taught, that for the iournies we make, we are to have
some good and sufficient warrant: though not a revelation, yet a commandment,
or that

Thus much of the journey: now follows the Conference, and I communicated,
etc. Here generally I gather, that Conferences both private, and public, are
laudible, and to be maintained; specially, when they tend to the maintenance of
vni^ie, and consent in doctrine. The Papists blame us Protestants, for
condemning Conferences (as they say) and consisted of such as were of the
Italian faction, whose faith was pinned on the Popes sleeue. Nevertheless, we
allow all Christian Counsels, lawfully gathered: and we desire there might be
a General Council, for the trial of truth, and for the staying of unsettled
minds: these three caueats being remembered.

In this conference, we are first to consider the manner of conferring, which
was used. Paul says, he communicated with them, that is, he laid down unto
them, and expounded the Gospel which he preached; and this he did privately,
that is,

The second point is, the matter of the conference, and that is ascribes to the
written word, a voice, or speech, Romans 3. 19. and the scripture speaks
sufficiently, to the resolving of any man's, conscience, in all matters
pertaining to salvation. Again, they allege, that the Church is before the
scripture; and therefore it being most ancient, must be the Judge. I answer,
that the Church was before the writing of the word, but not before

Again, the Papists hence gather, that the scriptures are to be Ans. Thus much
we grant: yet so, as we hold, that the principal approbatio^ of the word,
(whereby we are moved to believe and obey,) is in the word, and from the word,
and not from the church. For the scripture has his evidence

The third point is, concerning the persons, with whom Paul conferred: namely,
with them that were the chief, that is, with them that were in price and
account, as Peter, James, etc. To the Law and the testimony. Isai, 8.
Secondly, I answer, that we have a commandment, Come out of Babylon my people.
Thirdly, I answer, that the Bishop of Rome is Peter's successor, not in
teaching, but in denying Christ. And the learned Papists confess, that for
this succession, they have but a humane faith, grounded upon humane history.

The fourth point is, the End of the conference, Least I should run, that
is, least I should preach, or had preached in vain. These words of Paul, are
not simply to be taken. For the Ministry of man, and every sermon, brings
forth the fruit

Hence the Papists gather, that the doctrine of Paul was uncertain, and
unprofitable, till it was approved by Peter. I answer, that Paul sought the
approbation of his doctrine, at the

Again, when Paul says, Least I should run in vain, he gives us to
understand, that the Ministry of the word, is not a work of ease, or
pleasure, but a labor: nay a continued labor, like to the running in a race.
It were therefore to be wished, that ministers of the Gospel, would so labor,
and walk I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course. etc. 2. Tim. 4.

Thirdly, hence it appears, that all believers should have a certain knowledge
of their faith and religion. The procuring be as children, carried away with
every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. Gods word requires faith in us: and faith
presupposes certain knowledge. The first, and second commandments require,
that we know God, and his will, distinguish him from false gods, and his
worship, from false worship. Here comes the fault of our times to be
considered: most men among us, do not know their religion, neither can they
distinguish it from error, and false religion. A foul negligence. We take
pains to learn trades, and occupations, that we may have wherewith to
preserve

Lastly, here we learn, that the office of the Minister is, not only to teach
and preach, but also to study, and take care,

3. But neither yet Titus, which was with me, though he were a Grecian,

After the Conference, follows the Approbation, which was given to Paul. It
stands in four things. The first, that the

For the first; the words, And Titus was not compelled to be circumcised,
carry this sense: I, for my part was ready to circumcise Titus, if there had
been a meet occasion: false brethren would have imposed a necessity upon us:
then I and Titus refused: and the Apostles did not urge me to circumcise him.

Here it may be demanded, how this text can well stand with Act. 16. v. 3. for
there Paul circumciseth Timothy, a Grecian: and here he refuses to circumcise
Titus, though he were a Grecian. I answer thus. Circumcision was at this time,
a thing indifferent. From the first institution, to the coming, middle time,
that is, while the Gospel was in publishing to the world, and the Church of the
new Testament was yet in founding, it was a ceremony free, or indifferent. It
may be objected, that the whole Ceremonial law was abolished in the death of
Christ: I answer, it was so: and circumcision was abolished, in respect of
faith, and conscience: yet so, as the use thereof corpse that is dead, yet
unburied, and only laid out; and so it must remain for a time, that it may be
buried with honor. It may again be objected, that baptism

Being then a thing indifferent, it might as occasion served be used, or not
used. Therefore Paul condescending to the weakness of the believing Jews,
circumcised Timothy: and that he might not offend the godly, and hinder
Christian liberty,

Here a great question is answered, whether we may use things indifferent, as
often as we will, and how we will? The answer is, No. Things are not called
indifferent, because we may use them indifferently, or not use them when we
will, and how Things indifferent in the case of scandal, cease to be
indifferent, and are as things moral, that is, either forbidden, or commanded.
Paul says, if to eat flesh, be to the offense of his brother, he will eat no
flesh while the world stands, 1. Cor. 8. 13. And though he circumcised
Timothy, yet would he not circumcise Titus, least he should offend the godly,
and by his example,

Likewise, the good laws of men, whether civil or Ecclesiastical, tending to
the common good, and serving for edification, restrain the use of things
indifferent, so that they which shall do otherwise, then these laws command,
with a contemptuous, or disloyal mind, are guilty before God; yet here two
cautions must be remembered. One, that the laws of men do not change the
nature of things indifferent: for it is the property of God, by willing this
or that, to make it good, or evil. Neither do they take away the use of
things indifferent.

Again, here we learn, that a thing indifferent, when it is made necessary
to salvation, (as Circumcision was) is not to

Here again we learn, to make difference of persons. Some are weak, some are
obstinate. Weak ones are such, as having turned unto God, and carrying in
their hearts a purpose in all things to please God, nevertheless do sundry
things amiss, he became all to all, that he might save some, 1. Cor. 9. 22.
and for their sakes he condescended to circumcise Timothy. And if we that have
scarce a drop of mercy in us, must thus bear with them that are weak, brings
home the stray sheep upon his shoulders: he carries his lambs in his bosom.
Isa. 40. 11. He will not quench the smoking flax, Isa. 42. he spares them
that fear him, as a father spares his child. Malach. 3. 17. This being
always remembered, that weak ones truly turn to God, and carry in their
hearts an honest purpose not to sin against his laws at any time wittingly,
and willingly. Obstinate persons, are such as profess the faith, and yet hold
and practice bad things, of wilful ignorance, and of malice. These persons are
not to be borne

Lastly, in that Titus was not compelled to be circumcised, it may be demanded,
whether Recusants may be compelled to he caused all his subjects to stand to
it, 2. Chron. 34. 32. The king at the marriage feast of his son says of the
guests, Compel them to enter in, Luke 14. 23. It is objected, prove the
spirits, 1. Ioh. 4. 1. and this commandment pertaines to all persons. Therefore
though men may not be compelled to believe: yet may they be compelled to come
to the congregation, to hear our sermons, and

4 For all the false brethren, that crept in: who came in privily to spy



Paul had said before, that Titus was not compelled to be circumcised: now he
adds, For all the false brethren, that is, though the false brethren did what
they could to the contrary. Here then Paul sets down, who were the cause that
Titus was not circumcised, namely, certain persons at Jerusalem, and them he
sets forth by two properties, they are false brethren, and they crept into the
Church. Touching the first, by it we

Again, these adversaries of Paul, are called false brethren, a false Church:
because it ioynes works with Christ, in the case of our justification, and
that as meritorious causes.

Their second property is, that they crept into the Church, which I conceive
on this manner. The Church of God is as a sheepefold, or house, Ioh. 10. 1.
Christ is the only door. Now Pastors, that teach Christ aright, are said to
enter in by this door: they which teach any other way of salvation, are said to
clime in an other way: and they which teach Christ, joining some other thing
with him in the cause of salvation, are said to Creep in: because in
appearance, they maintain Christ; and yet, because they add something to
Christ, they neither enter nor continue in the true Church, with any good
warrant from that they are baptized, and thereby made members of the Church. I
answer: that faith makes us members of Christ, and consequently of the true
Church: and baptism does but seal our insition into Christ, and serves as a
means of Admission into the outward society of the congregation: and the
outward

Again, in that false brethren creep into the congregation, hence it
appears, that no man can set down the precise time, when errors had their
beginning. For the authors thereof enter in secretly, not observed of men. The
envious man sowes his tares, when men be asleep, Math. 13. It suffices
therefore, if we

Paul, having thus declared who were the causes that Titus they come in
privily. Secondly, they spy out their liberty. Thirdly, they labor to bring
them into bondage. Again, Paul sets down the manner of their refusal, in
three things. We gave not place for an hour. We gave not place by subjection.
We gave no place, that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you.

The first degree or step in their urging of circumcision, was, that They
came in privily: that is, they joined themselves in fellowship with the
Apostles, and in show pretended the furtherance of the Gospel: and yet indeed
meant nothing less: though their fraud, and wickedness was not perceived. Here
then the foundation

The second step or degree is, that they spy out the liberty which Paul,
and the rest had by Christ: that is, they confer with the Apostles, and
inquire of them what liberty they have by Christ, in respect of the
Ceremonial law of God: and this they do, not of a mind desirous to learn,
but for advantage sake. There be two kinds of spying: one lawefull, the other
unlawful. Let us search our ways, and inquire, and turn again to the Lord.
Again, we are to play the spies, in respect of our spiritual enemies, that we
may find out the temptations of the flesh, the world, and the devil. Thirdly,
we must be as spies, in searching of the Scriptures. Ioh. 5. 39. that we may
understand the words of the

The third and last degree of urging, is, that the false brethren seek to
bring the Apostles in bondage, that is, to bind them to a necessary
observation of the ceremonial law. Here let us mark the practice, and
policy of the devil. Liberty Thus under the name of Christianity, there be
swarms of Atheists, Epicures, Libertines, worldlings, and profane persons. At
this time, according to ancient custom, we celebrate the memorial of the
birth of Christ: and yet no time so full of disorder as this. For the most that
profess Christ, take and challenge to themselves, a licentious liberty, to
live and do as For being free from sin, they should be servants of nothing
but righteousness, Romans 6. 18. They that be of a corporation,

Thus, we see, how the false brethren urged circumcision: now let us come to
Paul's refusal. The first point is, that they would not give place for an
hour. It seems they were requested to use circumcision but once; but they
would not yield, so much as once: because their act would have tended to the
prejudice of Christian liberty, in all places. Here we learn, that we may not
use the least ceremony that is, in the case of confession; Theodoret. bist.
lib. 4. c. 16.
him. Now Christ in soldiers refuse to do it: and they which had not refused,
afterward recalled their act, and willingly suffered death.

Again, here we learn, that we are not to yield from the There is no
fellowship of light with darkness. 1. Cor. 6. Colacinthus a naughty pot
herb, marred a whole pot of pottage. 2. King. 4. 40. Christ says in the like
case of the Pharisees; Let them alone: they are the blind leaders of the
blind, Math. 15. 14. We may yield in things indifferent, but not in points of
religion. In matters of this world, we may be indifferent, and of neither side:
but in matters of God, we may not. There is no halting

The second point is, they gave not place by way of subjection. The reason is,
the Apostles were of highest authority, Luke 10. 16.
simply to be believed in their doctrine. And they had extraordinary
authority, to punish them that rebelliously withstood Answer. There is two
kinds of yielding: one by tolleration without approbation, the other by
subjection, which is the greatest approbation that can be. By the first, it may
be, Paul was content to give place, but not by the second. Here we

The third point is, the end of Paul's refusal, That the truth of the Gospel
might continue: that is, that the Gospel might be preserved in purity, and
integrity in all things. And by this Paul gives us to understand, that if
circumcision be made a necessary cause of justification, and salvation, the
truth of the Gospel does not continue. Here let us observe, that when
justification,

6 And of them that seemed to be great I learned nothing, or, I was not taught.
--:(what they were in times past, it makes no matter to me: God accepts no
man's person:) for they that are the chief, did not communicate

Here Paul lays down the second sign of his approbation, namely, that in
conference, he learned nothing of the chief Apostles. Of them that seemed to
be great, I was not taught, or, I learned nothing. If the Lord bless me and be
with me; concealing the end of his sentence, I will be thankful, thus, and
thus.

In the room of this concealment, Paul puts an answer to an objection. For
some man might take exception, against his Great, but thou speak fainedly:
for thou know, they were but poor fishermen. To this he makes answer thus:
What they were once, it makes no matter to me. Then he renders a reason of his
answer: God accepts no man's person. This done, he proceeds, and renders they
did not communicate any thing to him, either in doctrine or counsel.

The use. This verse serves to expound other places in S. John. Where Christ
promises to give his spirit to his Disciples, to teach them all things, Ioh.
14. 26. and to led them into all truth, Ioh. 16. 13. Now these promises
directly, and properly, concern the Apostles: and they are here verified in
Paul. Who was so far forth taught by God, and lead into all truth, that the
chief Apostles could not teach, or communicate, any to will is present with
me, but he adds, that he cannot do the good he would. Christ says to all the
Apostles, He that is washed and is all clean, must still have his feet
washed, Ioh. 13. 10. Wherefore they are to be rebuked, that think there must
be no want at all in them that are Preachers of the Gospel: and hereupon take
occasion to despise their Ministry, if they can spy any thing amiss in
their doings. Upon the same ground, they

Again, here we learn, that there is a good, and lawful kind of boasting:
and that is, when a man is disgraced, and his disgrace is the dishonor of God,
and the disgrace of the Gospel. This makes Paul here to say, that he learned
nothing of the chief Apostles. For if he had said otherwise, he should have
bin reputed Let an other man's mouth praise thee, and not thine own, Prou. 27.
2. I answer, it suffices for the truth of sundry proverbs, if they be
commonly, ordinarily, and usually true, though they be not generally true. Thus
ordinarily, men are not to praise themselves: yet in a special and
extraordinary What they have bin, it is no matter to me. Here then we see,
that the Atheists do Paul wrong, who challenge him for pride, and presumption,
as though he could not brook an equal, and withal whereas love binds us as
well to take care for the good name of others, as of our own.

When Paul says, What they were in times past, it matters not to me: we
learn, that we are to esteem of men, not as they have bin, but as they are.
Peter, James, and John, though they had bin fishermen, yet are they honored of
Paul, as Apostles. Tell me not what I have bin: but tell me what I am, and what
I will be. This suffices when we repent.

God accepts the person of no man] By person is meant, not the substance of a
man, or the man himself, but the outward quality, or condition of man, as
country, sex, birth, condition not to accept the person, because he does call
men, bestow his gifts, and give judgment, according to his own wise and just
pleasure, and not according to the outward appearance, and condition of the
person. Read Job. 34. 19. It may God had respect to Abel, and his sacrifice,
Genesis 4. 4. Ans. The condition of man is twofold, outward, inward. Outward,
stands in worldly, and civil respects. yet in every nation he that fears
God, is accepted of him, Act. 10. 34. Thirdly, it may be objected, that God
judges every man according to his works. Ans. Though works appear
outwardly, yet the root and ground of them, is in the heart. And the judgment
of God is according to them, as they are fruits of the faith of the heart.

The use. All men are in this to be like unto God their heavenly father: not
accepting persons in their dealings. As Magistrates

Secondly, we are all taught, to fear the judgment of God, and to prepare our
selves with all diligence, that we may be

Thirdly, we may not set our hearts upon the outward things of this world:
because God does not respect us for them. But we are earnestly to seek after
the things that make us accepted with God; as true faith, righteousness, and
good conscience. Romans 14. 17.

Again, superiors must be admonished to deal moderately with their
inferiors, Coloss. 2. 11. Again, inferiors are to comfort themselves, if
they be oppressed: in that God the judge of all, accepts no persons.

Lastly, here we learn, that when we shall have immediate

In the end of the verse, Paul adds: for they communicated nothing to me. but
to the contrary Romans 1. 12. may be objected. Where Paul desires to come to
Rome, that he might be comforted by their mutual faith both his, and theirs.
Answ. Though the Apostles did communicate nothing to Paul in respect of
doctrine, or judgment; yet might they, or the meanest believers, confer
something unto him, in respect of comfort, or the confirmation of his faith:
and thus much he signifies to the Romans. Here is a good item for them, that
come to no sermons, because they can learn nothing. Put the case they were as
learned as the Apostles, yet might they profit in hearing in respect of
comfort, of faith, and good affection.

7 But on the contrary, when they saw that the Gospel over the uncircumcision
was committed unto me, the Gospel over the circumcision was to Peter:

8 (For he that was mighty by Peter

9 And when James, and Cephas, and John, knew the grace of God that was given
to me, which are accounted

The words of more difficulty, are thus to be explaned. Contrariwise] that
is, they did communicate nothing to me in way of correction, but on the
contrary they gave me the hand of fellowship. Again, the words [Circumcision,
and vncircumcision] signify the nation of the Jews, and the Gentiles, the one
circumcised, the other uncircumcised. And when Paul says, that the grace of
God was given to him, he means specially, the gift of an Apostle. Romans 1. 5.
Lastly, to give the right hand of fellowshippe to Paul, is to esteem and
acknowledge him, for their colleague, or fellow Apostle, by giving the right
hand in token thereof.

The contents of the words are these. Here Paul sets down the third sign of
his approbation, namely, that the chief Apostles acknowledged him for their
fellow Apostle, v. 9. Secondly, he sets down the manner, how the chief
Apostles acknowledged this fellowship: and that was, by making a covenant When
the Apostles saw that I was ordained the chief Apostle of the Gentiles, and
Peter of the Jews, they acknowledged me for their fellow Apostle, and made a
covenant with me, that I should preach to the Gentiles, and Peter to the Jews.

But when I was with them at Jerusalem, they saw that I was ordained the chief
Apostle of the Gentiles, and Peter of the Jews.



This minor is omitted, yet the proof thereof, is set down thus. For they saw
the efficacy of my ministry among the

The use. This text makes notably against the primacie of Peter. First
therefore, let us observe the Ordinance of God here plainly expressed, that
Paul should be the chief Apostle they must first preach to Jerusalem and
Judea, then to Samaria: and in the last place; to the uttermost part of the
earth. Act. 1. 8. And Paul's commission was, that he should first preach to the
Gentiles, and in the second place to the people of Israel, Act. 9. 16. It may
be objected, that the commission of all the Apostles, was to go into all the
world, and to preach to all men without exception, Mar. 16. 15. Answer. This
power and liberty, Christ gave to all the Apostles, and he did not take it
away afterward: nevertheless, he

Hence it follows, that the primacie of Peter, over Jews and Gentiles, is a
supposed thing. For the ordinance of God, is, that Peter shall be chief over
the Jews, and not over the Gentiles, which were almost all the world beside.
And thus the supremacy of the Pope goes to the ground, for if he hold of
Peter, and

Secondly, this Ordinance of God gives us to understand, Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock will I build my Church, etc. and I will give thee the keys of
the kingdom of heaven: does not contain a promise made to Peter, of a
primacie over all the Apostles, and over the Catholic church. If Christ had
meant any such thing, in these words, he would

Thirdly, it is false which the Papists teach, that the place in S. John, Feed
my lambs, and, feed my sheep, gives a primacie

Lastly, whereas Eusebius says in his Chronicle, that Peter was Bishop of
Rome, and sat there 25. years, it has no likelihood

Again, it is to be observed in this text, that James, Peter, John, are made
equal, all being pillars; and James is first named: and that not without
cause. For not Peter, but James was the President of the council of Jerusalem:
because he spoke the last, and concluded all, Act. 15. 13. Therefore the first
naming of Peter, in other places of scripture, is no sufficient proof of his
supremacy.

Thirdly, Peter here is said to make a covenant with Paul, that he shall be the
Apostle of the Gentiles, and Peter of the Jews. But if Peter had bin head of
the Church for 14, years together; and had but known the primacie, which the
Papists give to him, he would not have consented to this order. It is
alleged, that Paul was the chief Apostle over the Gentiles, in respect of
Ecclesiastical person that is, or can be above an Apostle. For he was simply
to be believed in

Again, Paul here says, that the Gospel was committed to him and Peter, that
is, that they were put in trust with it. Hence we

Moreover, in that Paul says, that God was mighty by him, and Peter, to the
Jews and Gentiles, we are to consider the efficacy of the Ministry. Of it
three cautions are to be observed. The first, that grace or power to
regenerate, is not included in the He that planteth, and he that waters is
not any thing, 1. Cor. 3. 7. To regenerate, is the proper work of God, not
agreeing to angels, no not to the flesh of Christ, exalted above men and
angels. For the virtue to renew or regenerate, is not in it, as in a subject,
but in the godhead of the son. The second caution is, that grace is not
inseparably annexed, and tied, to the word preached, for to some it is the
savor of death, to death. The third is, that the preaching of the word is an
external instrument of faith, and regeneration: and the proper effect of it,
is to For this is my body, should transubstantiate the bread, into the body
of Christ. Secondly, we learn, that the Sacraments do not confer grace, ex
opere operato, by the work done. For the word and Sacraments, are both of one
Every branch that brings forth fruit, God purges it by his word and other
means, that it may bring forth more fruit, Ioh. 15.

It is a thing to be observed, that the Apostles at Jerusalem, acknowledged
Paul to be an Apostle: because he had the gift of an Apostle, and because his
ministry was powerful among the Gentiles. Therefore, they which have the
gift of teaching, by whom also God is powerful in the conversion of sinners,

It is worth the marking also, that the Apostles are called Pillars. Here we
see, what is the charge of the ministers of the The charrets and horsemen of
Israel, 2. King. 13. 4. And the Church of God upon earth, is called the Pillar
and ground of truth, in respect of the Ministry of the word. 1. Tim. 3. 15.

Again, in that all ministers in their places (according to the measure of
gifts received) are pillars, they are admonished hereby to be constant in the
truth, against all enemies whatsoever. It is the praise of John the Baptist,
that he was not as a reed shaken of the wind, Math. 11. 7. All believers are
to stand fast in

Thirdly, in that Ministers are pillars, we are taught to cleave unto them, and
their ministry, at all times, in life and death. living stones in the temple
of God, Christ is our foundation, and they be pillars to hold us up: and
therefore not to be forsaken. Deuteronomy. 12. 19.

Furthermore, Paul at this time was not accounted a pillar: for he says thus,
James, Cephas, John, are accounted pillars; as who

Lastly, the example of concord among the Apostles is to be observed: in that
they give the right hands of fellowship one to an other.

10 Warning only that we should remember the poor: which thing also I was
diligent to do.

In these words, Paul sets down the fourth and last sign of his approbation
at Jerusalem, on this manner. At my departing the Apostles warned me to
remember the poor, and of no other thing did they give me warning: therefore
there was a full

In the words, two things are set down, the Apostolical warning, and the
practice of it by Paul. The warning in these words, [Warning only that we
should remember the poor.] In them three points are to be considered. The
first, that the Not many wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble. The like we in experience at this day: the poorer sort among us do
more heartily receive it then they of the richer sort. By this we are taught,
that we may not fix our love, and our confidence upon riches: and they that
buie, must be as though they bought not, and they that possess, as though they
possessed not. Because riches steal away the heart. The second cause of their
they were deprived of their riches for the profession of the name of Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. Heb. 10. 34. Here we are taught to sit down, and to reckon what
the profession of Christ will cost us to the uttermost: and we must put this in

The second point is, Why the Church of Jerusalem must be relieved by the
Gentiles, considering by Gods law Deuteronomy. 15. Ans. We are first of all, debtors
to our own poor, and they must first be relieved: this done (in the case of
extreme necessity) we are debtors to the poor a thousand miles off. And in
this case, did the

The third point is, that the Apostles themselves are careful for the
gathering of relief. Hence we learn, that it is the office of Pastors and
teachers, not only to preach and dispense

Now I come to the practice of Paul, in these words; Which thing also I was
diligent to do it. Here first let us mark, that Paul who had spoiled and made
havoc of the Church of Jerusalem, his theft, must restore either twofold, or
fourefold, Exodus 22. 7. he that maimes a man must pay for his healing, and for
his resting, that is, for the loss of his labor, Exodus 21. 19. Daniel says
to Nabuchadnezzar, O King, break off thy sins with alms deeds, Dan. 4. 24.
that is, whereas thou have bin given to cruelty, and oppression, cease to do
so any more, and make some to borrow, and not to repay, Psalm. 37. 21.
Satisfaction, recompense, and restitution, is the way to life by the
appointment of God. Ezech. 18. 7. and 33. 15. If thou restore the pledge, and
repay that which thou have robbed, thou shall live, and not die. The Lord
says, Are the treasures of wickedness yet in the house of the wicked? and he
adds, that he will not justify the false balance, Mich. 6. 10, 11. Zacheus,
in his conversion for known wrongs, restores fourefold: and for his unknown
wrongs he gives half his goods to the poor. Luke 19. 7.

Let usurers, ingrossers, and all that oppress, or deal deceitfully, remember
this; and begin to make conscience of this du ty of Satisfaction, or
restitution. And that it may the better be practiced, I will further set down
five points.

The first is, who must satisfy and restore? Ans. He that is the cause of any
wrong, or loss to others: and all they that are accessarie. Men may be
accessarie many ways, by commandment, by counsel, by consent, by
partnership, by receiving, by silence when a man ought to speak, by not
hindering when he ought to hinder, by not manifesting that which we ought

The second is, To whom must restitution be made? Ans. To him that is wronged,
and bears the loss, (if the party be known and alive:) if he be dead, to
his heirs: if all be dead, to the poor. If the person wronged be not known
to us (as often

The third point is, What must be restored? Ans. The things which are of
vsvniustly received, or detained, either known to us, or unknown. If they be
known, they are in their own kind to be restored, or in value, Exodus 21. 19.
If the party, who is to restore, be in extreme poverty, and have not
wherewith to make recompense, he must do that which he can, that is, he must
show a ready and willing mind: and this is done by confession, and by craving
of pardon. If goods to be restored, be

The fourth point is, touching the time when? Ans. In respect of preparation of
mind, we must presently satisfy: yet not

The last point is, in what order and manner, Restitution is to be made? Ans.
Things certain must first be restored, and Deposita, things committed to our
trust. If things to be restored for their value and quality be uncertain,

Again, in Paul's practice we see an earnest care and diligence to provide for
the poor. And his diligence is further expressed Ro^. 15. 25, 28. where it is
said, that he ministered to the Saints at Jerusalem, and withal that he gave
himself no rest in this duty, till he had sealed this fruit unto them, that
is, till he saw J am hungry, I am sick, I am naked, I am harbourlesse:
therefore, look what we would do to Christ, the same must we do to them.
Thirdly the poor have title, and interest, to part of our goods: for God is
the Lord of them, and we are but stewards to dispose and use them, according to
his appointment. And his will is, that part of our goods be given for the
relief of the poor. If make haste to keep the commandments of God, v. 60.
Specially

Lastly, let us mark, that Paul being warned of the Apostles, was diligent to
do that, whereof he was warned. The like must we do. It is not sufficient to
hear, but beside this, there

v. 11. And when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to his

In these words Paul propounds the second answer, which he makes to the
objection, mentioned in the beginning of the but the fault was not his, but
Peter's, who was wholly to be blamed.

For the better understanding of these words, three points are to be handled.
The first is, who was resisted? The answer is, Peter the Apostle. For the
intent of this chapter is, to show what agreement there was between Paul, and
the rest of the Answer. Paul: and that not for show and fashion, but in truth,
and good earnest. And this appears, because in the words following, he sets
down a weighty and urgent cause of his reproof. Therefore Ierom and others
are deceived, who think that Paul reproved Peter 'Simulate, non vere.
in show and appearance, and not Answer. To do his office. The kingdom of
God, and all things pertaining thereto, must have free passage without
resistance. The second petition is, Thy kingdom come. John the baptist
preached thus, Prepare the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight, Mar.
1. Saint Paul says, Pray that the word of God may have free passage, and be
glorified, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. Contrariwise, such things as hinder the kingdom of
God, must be withstood. Therefore Peter says, Resist your adversary the
devil, strong in faith. 1. Pet. 5. 9. And thus men

In Paul, here first we may behold an example of true virtue, in that he
resists evil, to the uttermost of his power, following Abhor that which is
evil, and cleave unto that which is good, Romans 12. 9. Have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5. 11. In
like manner must every one of us resist evil; first, in himself, and then in
them that appertain to him. Therefore Paul says to Put on the armor of God,
that ye may resist, Ephesians. 6. 13. Here 2 things may be demanded: first, what must
we resist? Paul answers again, Principalities, and powers, and spiritual
wickednesses: that is, the devil, and all his angels. It may be said, we have
no dealing with them, for they use not to appear unto us. Ans. That the devil
comes not unto us visibly, but in the persons of evil men, and in the badde
examples of all men. This made Christ say to Peter, Math. 16. 23. Come behind
me, Satan, for thou art an offense unto me, when Peter would have dissuaded him
from going to Jerusalem. Again, it may be said, In what things must we resist
them? Paul answers, In heavenly things, v. 12. that is, in things which
pertain to Gods kingdom, and concern either the salvation of our souls, or
the worship of God. For the devil seeks by all manner of evils, to hinder
these good things. Moreover, this duty of resisting evil is so necessary,

Again, we have in Paul an example of bouldnes and liberty in reproouing of
sin. This was a thing commanded to the Prophets and Apostles Isai, 58. 1.
Cry and spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, show my people their
transgression. Ierem. 1. 17. Trusse up thy loins, arise and speak unto them
all that I command thee: be not afraid of their faces, left I destroy thee
before them. Like liberty may the ministers of the word use, observing Paul's
rule. 2. Tim. 1. 7. God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power,
and of love, and of a sound mind. Where he sets down three caueats. First,
that this liberty in reproving, is not the fruit of a bold and rash
disposition, but it is a fruit of Gods spirit, and so to be acknowledged. Read
Mich. 3. 8. The second, that the use of this liberty is to be ordered

Thirdly, here is an example in Paul, of an ingenious and ho nest mind. When
he sees Peter do amiss, he reprooues him to his face. Contrary to this, is
the common practice in backbiting, whispering, and tale-bearing, whereby it
comes to pass, that when a man is in fault, every man knows it, save he which
not to take up a false report. Psalm. 15. And David reproues Soul because he
did but lend the ear to tale bearers saying wherefore give thou an ear to
men's words that say, behold, David seeks evil against thee? 1. Sam. 24. 10.

In Peter, who when he was reproved made no reply, we see an example of
patience and humiltie, whereby he humbled himself before the reprouer, when he
was convicted of an offense. The like was in David when he said, let the
righteous smite me. Psalm. 141. v. 5.

Where as Paul says, that Peter was to be blamed, or condemned, not in respect
of his person, but of his example: we see that excellent men even the chief
Apostles are subject to When will thou restore the kingdom to Israel? Act. 1.
And Peter being bidden to arise, and eat of things forbidden by the
ceremonial law, said, Not so Lord, Act. 10. 1. 4.

Thus then, if Peter was subject to error, the pretended successors of Peter,
namely, the bishops of Rome, cannot be free ignorant persons. Hebr. 5. 2. And
it seems that the error of Peter was, that of two evils, it was the best to
choose the less: that is, to choose rather to offend the Gentiles,

Here again we miserable wrethes are taught to watch and pray, that God would
not lead us into temptation: considering most excellent men are subject to
falling. And men must be warned not to abuse Peter's example in boulstering
themselves in their naughty ways: by saying, we are all sinners, that the
best man alive is a sinner, that the just man falls seven times a day. For the
place in the Proverbs 14. 16. is spoken of affliction and not of sin: the
just man falls seven times, that is, he falls into manifould perils. And
further, we should

v. 12. For before certain came from James, he ate with the gentiles: but when
they were come, he

13. And other Jews dissembled

The Apostle has propounded his second answer in the former verse: now he
proceeds to make a declaration of it. And first, he sets down the cause why
Peter was reproved, and the manner of reprofe. The cause is the 12 and 13.
verses,

The name of the sin is noted, when Paul says, And other Jews dissembled
likewise with him. v. 13. where I gather that Peter's sin was Simulation.
Simulation of it self is a thing indifferent, This was the Simulation of
Joseph, who carried himself as a stranger to his brethren in Egypt, after he
had examined them, and knew who they were. Genesis 42. This was the Simulation of
Christ, who when he was come to Emaus, made as though he would have gone
further, Luke 24. 28. Thus Paul among the Jews, played the Jew, 1. Cor. 9. 20.
Unlawful Simulation is

The second point is, the matter of the sin, or the sin it self, which was
on this manner. First, among the Gentiles at Antioch, he uses Christian
liberty, in eating things forbidden by the ceremonial law: yet after the
coming of certain Jews from Ierus^lem, he seperates himself from the
Gentiles, and plays the Jew among the Jews. Like to this, was the halting

Here we see the great weakness of Peter, in that upon a very

Again, here it must be observed, that Paul in describing the sin,
expresses two actions, his eating with the Gentiles, and his separation from
them, the first good, and the latter evil. The beginning of his action was
good, but the end of it was naught. yet halts at every step. Abraham and Sara
desire ishue, that is from the spirit: but they desire ishue, by Agar their
handmaid, that is, from the flesh. Rebecca seeks the blessing for Jacob: that
is a work of the spirit: but she seeks it by lying, that is from the flesh:
Peter eats with the Gentiles, that is from Christian liberty:

It may be demanded, how the act of Peter should be a sin, considering he did
only abstain from certain meats, that he might avoid the offense of certain
Jews? Answer. The fact of Peter considered by it self, is not a sin: for
Paul did the like in playing the Jew: but the circumstances make it a sin.
Ans.

In Peter's example, we are taught, that we must not offend God, though all the
world be offended. Less offenses must give place, when the great offense is at
hand: that is, when god is dishonored, and the very least part of his truth
is suppressed.

The third point to be* con^idered, is, the cause of the sin of Peter: and
that was the fear of the offense of the Jews. Here two questions are to be
handled. The first, how Peter's fear should be a sin? Ans. There is a
natural fear created by God, and placed in the heart of man. This fear of it
self is good. Nevertheless by the corruption of nature it becomes

The second question is, how Peter could have the fear of God, considering he
feared men more then God, at the least in this one action? Ans. There are three
kinds of fear. One is,

Paul notes fear to be the cause of Peter's sin, that he may malice, but of
infirmity. A sin of infirmity is, when there is a purpose in the heart not
to sin: and yet for all this, the sin is committed, by reason the will is
ouercarried by temptation, or by violence of affection, as by fear, anger,
lust. Thus Peter sinned. And let it be remembered, that to sin of they sin
with all their hearts when they sin.

The fourth, and last point is, the Effect of Peter's sin, in drawing the
Jews, and Barnabas, to the like dissimulation. Here we see the contagion of
evil example. And hence we learn, that Minis^ers of the word must of
necessity join with good doctrine, the Example of good life. For first of
all, it is Be patterns of the flock. 1. Tim. 4. 12. Be an ensample in word,
conversion, love, spirit, faith, purity. Phil. 4. 8. What ye have seen in me,
that do. Math. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works. Secondly, practice in the Minister is a part of his a good
Minister, but because he was a good man, Mark. 6. 20. Thirdly, Ministers have
not the presence and protection of God, unless their lives be virtuous and If
thou turn, thou shall stand before me. Ierem. 15. 19. God reueales his secrets
to the Prophets his servants. Amos 3. 7. Lastly, fearful judgments of God
belong to Ministers of wicked lives. Destruction befalls the sons of Eli and
their families, because they by lewd example made the people of

Again, all superiors are warned to go before their inferiors by good
example. When Moses went into Egypt to be the guide of the Israelites, the Lord
would have destroyed him,

Here again we see that the consent of many together, is not a note of truth.
Peter, Barnabas, and the Jews, all together are deceived, and Paul alone has
the truth. Panormitane says, that a laie-man bringing Scripture, is to be
preferred before a whole Council. Paphnutius alone had the truth, and the
whole Council

14 But when I saw that they went not with a right foot to the truth of the
Gospel, I said to Peter before all men: If thou being a Jew live as the
Gentiles, and not like the Jews,

In these words, Paul sets down the reproof of Peter, and

The second point is, the foundation of the reproof in these words [when I
saw,] and that is a certain knowledge of Peter's offense. Here we are to take
notice of the common fault, and that is, that we use to censure, and condemn
men specially

The third point is, the fault reproved, which is here expressed by an other
name, not to walk with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel: that is, not
to converse with men, and to carry himself so, as he may be suitable to the
sincerity of the Gospel,

Here is a notable duty set down for all men, To walk with an even foot
according to the truth of the Gospel: and this is done, when in word and deed,
and every way, we ascribe all the good we have, or can do, to grace, to
mercy, and to Christ: are carnal Protestants, and all other sorts of men,
that profess the name of Christ, and withal challenge to themselves a
liberty to live as they list. For they walk contrary to the Gospel,
disioyning justification, and sanctification, faith, and good life, remission
of sin, and mortification. This is the rife and common sin of our days. We
are light in the Lord,

It will besaid, how must we perform this duty? Ans. Two rules must be
remembered. The first is, that we must have and carry in us a right heart. For
the want of this was Simon Magus Bind them hand and foot, and cast them into
utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The fourth point is, the place of reproof: [before all men:] for they that
sin openly to the offense of many, are openly to be reproved. 1. Tim. 5. 20.

The fifth point is, concerning the reasons which Paul uses for the
restraining of the sin of Peter. The first is set down in the 16. verse, If
thou being a Jew, etc. Here the meaning of some words are to be opened. To
Iudaise, or to live as a Jew, is to observe (and that necessarily,) a
difference of meats, and times, according to the ceremonial law of Moses. To
Gentilize, or to live as a Gentile is to use meats, and drinks, and times,
compel the Gentiles to Iudaise, not by teaching of any doctrine, (for the
Apostles never erred, in teaching and delivering any thing to the church of
God: this is a principle:) therefore he constrained them by

The first reason then is framed thus: If thou being a Jew, use to live as
the Gentiles, thou may not by thy example

Here first, let us observe the force of evil example: it compells men to be
evil. Therefore let all superiors, Magistrates,

Here again, we see what wonderful subjection the ancient believers yielded
to the ministry of the word. For if the the kingdom of heaven suffered
violence, and the violent took it to themselves. When the disciples Matthew. 11.
1^.
preached in Iewrie, they saw Satan falling down from heaven Luke 10. 18.
like lightning. The weapons of Paul were spiritual, to cast down holds, and
to bring every thought in subjection to God. Here, the (...). Cor. 10. 4.
fault of our time is to be considered. We have the form of godliness, in
hearing and in outward profession, but we want

Thirdly, here we see wherein stood Peter's sin: namely, in that he
constrained men to a necessary observation of the Ceremonial law: by his
example binding the Gentiles to the doing of that which the Gospel has made
free. Therefore great is the wickedness of the Roman religion: in that it
places a necessity in many things, in the use whereof. Christ has procured
us an holy, and Christian liberty. In this respect the vows of perpetual
continency of poverty, and regular obedience, states of perfection: and are
indeed estates of abomination.

15 We which are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles:

16 Know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ: which

Here Paul lays down the second reason of his reproof; it is framed thus.
That, which we defend, both in judgment, and practice, that must we urge, and
not the contrary: but justification

The mayor is wanting: the minor is expressed in the 16. v. and it is amplified
by an argument of things diverse, thus: Though we be Jews, to whom the law was
given: yet we minor is confirmed by a testimony of the psalm: v. 16. by the
works of the law, no flesh shall be justified.

Here two points are to be handled. One, of the distinction of the Jews and
Gentiles: the other, of justification.

Touching the distinction of Jews, and Gentiles, sundry points are to be
handled. The first* what is the cause of this distinction. Ans. The good will
and pleasure of God. Moses says, God chose the Israelites ^boue all nations,
Deuteronomy. 7. 6. he loved them, Deuteronomy. 10. 15. when he de^^ded the nations, lacob was
his portion, He knew them above all nations, says Amos 3. 1. And he chose
them, because he loved their fathers, Deuteronomy. 4. 37. Hence we gather, the free
Election of God: and that they are deceived, who think, that there was no
difference of Jews

The second point is, wherein stands the difference of Jews and Gentiles. Ans.
Here the Jews are opposed to sinners of the Gentiles: and therefore by the
Jews, are meant an holy, and peculiar people. The distinction therefore lies
in this, that the one was holy, the other profane: the one in the covenant, a
schoolmaster to Christ, Gal. 3. and, an introduction to a better hope, Hebr.
7. 19. The second error is, without God, and Christ, Ephesians. 2. 12. and they were
left to themselves, to walk in their own ^aies, Act. 14. 16.

The third point is, how long this difference endured? Ans. Till the death of
Christ. For the disciples were forbidden to go into the way of the Gentiles.
Math. 10. 5. And Christ says, that he was not sent, but to the l^st sheep of
the house of Israel, Mat. 15. 22. It may be objected, that here we see the
difference Ans. Christ in his death did fully merit the abolishment of this
difference. Ephesians. 2. nevertheless the execution of this abolishment was by
degrees: and it was at this time begun by the ministry of the Apostles, yet
not accomplished.

The last point is, that the Jews are an holy people by nature: not because
holiness is conuaied to them by generation, but because even from their
beginning, and birth, by virtue of the covenant, they are holy. If the root be
holy, the branches are holy, Romans 11. 16. If either of their parents believe,
their children are holy. 1. Cor. 7. 14. In a civil contract, the father and
Ans. The parent sustaines a double person. First, he is to be considered as a
child of Adam, and thus he brings forth a child, having with Adams nature,
Adams corruption. Again, he is to be considered as a believer: and thus albeit
he does not propagate his faith and holiness to his child, yet by Ans. The
children also sustain two persons. First, they are to be considered as
children of the first Adam: and thus they are conceived and borne in sin, and
are children of wrath. Again, they are to be considered as children of
believing parents: and thus by means of the covenant, they are children of
God; and original sin which is in them is

The use. There was no absolute necessity of circumcision. For they which died
before the eight day, were borne holy, and consequently, in the covenant: and
therefore might be saved. And thus Baptism was not of absolute necessity: for
the children

Secondly, here we learn, that it is not the act of baptism to If the root
be holy, the branches springing thenee are holy. We are borne Christians, if
our parents believe, and not made so in baptism.

Lastly, if we be borne holy: it is our shame that we have made no more
proceeding in holiness, then we have done: the most remain ignorant, and
unreformed; and they of the better sort, either stand at a stay, or go
backward.

The second point is, concerning Justification in the 16. v. of which sundry
things are there propounded. And first, I will begin with the name. The word,
Justify, is borrowed from courts of judgment, and signifies a indiciall act.
Otherwhiles it is put for the action of the judge, and then it signifies That
we are instified from all things, from which we could not be justified by the
law of Moses, that is, absolved, or cleared. Again, he opposes justification
to accusation, and condemnation, Romans 8. 33. Now the contrary to condemnation,
is absolution. justify, signifies the act of the party judged, or of the
witnesses: and then it imports as much, as to give testimony, or to declare
and approve. Thus James says, Abraham was justified by works, chap. 2. v.
22. that is, declared, and approved to be a just man by works. In the

The use. Here we see how to distinguish between Justification, regeneration,
and renouation. Regeneration is usually in scripture, the change of the inward
man, whereby we are Justification. For by it, they understand nothing else, but
a physical transmutation of the quality, and disposition of our hearts from
evil, to good. And by this mistaking, they have made a mixture or rather
confusion, of law and Gospel. Thirdly, here terrors of the law, he must fly
and make his appeal to the throne of grace for pardon in Christ: and then he
shall be acquit, or justified from all sinner. Thus much does the word,
(...)stifie, import. Thus came the Publican before God, Luke 18, when he said,
Lord be merciful to me a sinner; and departed justified. Forgive us our debts.

The second thing to be considered, is the subject of justification, or the
person to be justified, and that is man generally, a Man is justified. The holy
Ghost speaks thus generally, for two causes. The first is; because all men
without exception have need of justification, even they which are regenerate,
Romans 3. 23. And in this place Paul says, that he, and Peter, and the rest,
have believed in Christ, that they might be justified by faith. Here we are to
take notice of the miserable condition of profane, and secure Epicures, who
never so much as dream of any justification. The second reason is; because God
communicates the benefit of justification, generally to all sorts of men: and
this he does in the Ministry of the beseeches men to be reconciled to God.
2. Corinthians. 5. v. 21. This must be an inducement unto us, to come unto Christ,
humbling, and judging our selves, that we may be justified. God himself from
heaven uses reasons unto us daily, to move us to the practice of this duty.
What

The third thing to be considered, concerns things excluded from
justification, as false causes: namely, the works of the Law. Here it may be
demanded, what works are meant. I answer, by works: for he might have ended
the whole matter in a word or twain, by showing that the ceremonial law, was
abrogated by Christ. Secondly, I answer, that not only works done before
faith, are excluded, but also works that follow faith, and are done in the
estate of grace. For Paul here reasons thus: If no flesh be justified by
works, then not we believers: No flesh shall be justified in thy fight:
therefore I cannot, though otherwise I be thy servant, in keeping thy
commandments. When Abraham was the father of all the faithful, and was come
to the highest a good conscience before God and men, Act. 23. and yet was he
not justified thereby, 1. Cor. 4. 4. And he says, that we are not saved by the
works which God has ordained that we should walk in, Ephesians. 2. 9, 10. And the
works that God has ordained for us to walk in, are the best works of all,
even works of grace. Again, he says, that we are not saved by works of
mercy, Tit. 2. 5. It may be objected, that there is a Cooperation of works and
faith, I am. answer, that this Cooperation is not in the act of justification,
nor in the work of our salvation, but in the manifestation of the truth, and
sincerity of our faith, without hypocrisy. And for the declaration and
approbation of this, faith and works jointly concur. Here then we see it is
a pestilent and

The fourth point is, the Meritorious cause of our justification: and that is
Christ. Here it may be demanded, what is that the Obedience of Christ, Romans 5.
19. And it stands in two things, his Passion in life and death, and his
Fulfilling of the law joined therewith. For by faith the law is established,
Romans 3. 31. Christ was sent in the similitude of sinful flesh, that the
rigor of the law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8. 4. and Christ is the
perfection of the law for righteousness to all that believe, Romans 10. 4. He that
does not fulfill all things contained in the Law, is accursed, Gal. 3. 10.
Seeing therefore we cannot perform the things contained therein, by our
selves, we must perform them in the person of our Mediator: who has
satisfied for the threatenings of the law by his passion; and has fulfilled the
precepts of the law by his obedience, in all duties of love to God, and man. We
owe to God a double debt. One is, that we are to fulfill the law every moment,
from our first beginning, both in regard of purity of nature and purity of
action. And this debt was laid

For the better conceiving of this obedience, four questions may be demanded.
The first is, when this obedience begins and ends? Ans. Satisfactorie
obedience performed by Christ, begins in his incarnation, and ends in his
death. Christ says, Ioh. 4. 34. It is my meat, to do my fathers will, and to
finish his work. But when was it indeed finished? A little before his passion
he said, Ioh. 17. 4. I have finished the work which thou gave me to do.
Again, in the surrendering of his soul. he says, It is finished, Ioh. 19. 30.
S. Paul says, Christ was obedient to the death of the cross, Phil. 2. 8. The
triumph of Christ began we receive the promise of everlasting inheritance,
Heb. 9. 15. and with one oblation upon the cross he perfected them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. and they cannot be perfected, without the perfect
obedience of Christ. Christ Ans. They serve also for our justification, He
as^^nded to give gifts (...), and to fill all things. Ephesians. 4. 8. 10. And Christ
says, When I am exalted, I will draw all men to me. Ioh. 12. 32. And he lives
for ever to make intercession^ for us. Heb. 5. 27.

The second question is, how Christ could obey being God; and satisfy for us
being man? Ans. Christ must be considered; Christ bare our sins in his body
upon the cross. 1. Pet. 2. 24. that he suffered in the flesh. 1. Pet. 4. 1.
that he made a living way by the veil of his flesh. Heb. 10. 20. that we are
reconciled in the body of his flesh. Coloss. 1. 22. God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, 2. Cor. 5. 18. and that God shed his
blood. Act. 20. 28. namely, in that nature which the son of God assumed.
Hence arises the value, price, and dignity of the obedience of Christ.

The third question is, how the Obedience of Christ should be made ours? Ans.
By the freedonation of God. For Christ

The fourth question is, how the obedience of Christ should be our justice?
Ans. It is not our justice in natural manner: for then it should be in us: but
by a divine and supernatural manner, namely, by Gods Acceptance in that he
accounts it ours even as truly, as if it were in us. And because God accepts it
for ours, it is ours indeed: for his willing and approouing of any thing, is
the doing of it: and he calls the things that are

Thus we see what the Obedience of Christ is. And here two errors must be
avoided. The one is of some Protestants, less dangerous, yet an untruth;
namely, that we are justified, only by the Passion of Christ. But if this were
so, we should be justified Cursed is he that does not continue in all things
written in the law, to do them. The passion of Christ procures deliverance
from hell, but alone by it self considered, it does not purchase a right to
eternal life.

Object. I. Christ fulfilled the law for himself: therefore his passion alone
serves for our justification Ans. Christ as man fulfilled the law for himself:
that he might be in both natures an holy high Priest, and so continue.
Nevertheless as Mediator, God and man, he became subject to the law: in this
regard

Object. II. That which Christ did, we are not bound to do: but Christ (say
some) fulfilled the law for us: therefore we are not bound to fulfill the law.
Ans. That which Christ did,

Object. III. The law does exact both obedience, and the Ans. In the estate of
innocence the law threatened the penalty, and it only exacted obedience.
Since the fall, it exacteth both obedience, and the punishment. The threatening
of the law, exacts the punishment; the precepts exact obedience. Object. IU.
Hebr. 10. 19. By the blood of Christ we have entrance into the Holy place. Ans.
By the blood of Christ, we are to understand the Passion: and the passion may
not be severed from active, and voluntary obedience. For Christ in suffering
obaied, and in obeying, suffered. And (as Chrysostom says) the Homil. 2. in
Act
Passion is a kind of action. Christ in the oblation of himself did

The second error is of the Papists: who teach, that the thing by which, and
for which, a sinner is formally justified, is remission of sins, with
inherent justice infused by the holy Ghost. But this cannot be. For inherent
justice, and justification, are made distinct gifts of God. Paul says, Christ
is made unto us of God, wisdom, justice, sanctification, 1. Cor. 1. 3. Again,
But ye are washed, ye are justified, and sanctified. 1. Cor. 6. 11. Secondly,
revealed without the law. Romans 3. 21. Now inherent justice, or the habit of
charity, is revealed by the law: and the obedience of Christ, is the only
justice revealed without the law. For it is a justice imputed that the law
never knew: and in this obedience, Christ performed just in justifying, Romans 3.
26. because he justifies none but such as bring unto a him a true and perfect
justice, either in themselves, or in their Mediator. we are not justified, 1.
Cor. 4. 4. Lastly, a close error is to be noted in this Popish doctrine of
justification. For in Popish learning Remission of sins, is not only an
abolishing of the guilt, and the punishment, but also of the corruption of
sin: so as the party pardoned, and justified, has nothing in him, that (as
they sin dwells in him; and that the law of sin rebels in him against
the law of his mind, and leads him captive to sin. Romans 7.

The use of the doctrine. First, in that we are justified, by an obedience out
of our selves, we are taught, utterly to deny our selves, and to go out of
our selves, as having nothing in us whereby we may be saved. Here is the
foundation of the abnegation of our selves. Secondly, the obedience of Christ
must be unto us the foundation of our obedience: for he performed all
righteousness for us, that we might be servants not of sin, a Propitiatory.
For as the Propitiatory covered the Arc, and the decasogue, so he covers
our sins, and he hides our bodies, and souls, from the furious indignation,
and vengeance of

The fifth point to be considered, is the means of justification, the Faith of
Christ. Of which I consider 3. things. The first, what faith is. The Papists
define justifying faith to be a gift of God, whereby we believe the articles of
faith to be true, and the whole word of God. But thit faith, the devils hanc.
Here they allege, that Abraham was the father of all Ans. First, the object
of Abraham's faith was double: one lesse-principall, that he should have ishew
in his old age: the second, more principal, that the Messiah his Redeemer
should descend of his loins. And this was the thing which his faith in the
promise of God specially aimed at. I answer again, that Abraham believed not
only the power of God, Romans 4. 21. but also his will, which he had revealed in
the promise, In thy seed all the nations of the earth, shall be blessed.
Secondly, it is alleged, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and believe that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. That
Peter's faith was general, Math. Thou art Jesus Christ, the son of the living
God. That the Eunuchs faith was of the same kind, Act. 8. 37. I believe that
Jesus Christ is the son of God. Ans. It is a common rule in scripture, that
words signifying knowledge, signify also the motions and good affections of
the heart. Psalm. 1. The Lord knows the way of the righteous, that is, knows,
and approoues it. 2. Tim. 2. 19. The Lord knows who are his, that is, he
knows and chooses them. Ioh. 17. 2. This is eternal life to know thee the
only God, that is, to know and acknowledge thee for our God. If this be true
in words of knowledge, then much more words of believing My Lord, and my God,
Ioh. 20. 28. And to this speech of his Christ faith, Thou have seen, and
believed. This then is true faith not only to believe that Christ is God, but
also that he is our God.

Justifying faith in true manner is defined thus: It is a gift, whereby we
apprehend Christ, and his benefits. Ioh. 1. 12. to believe in Christ, and to
receive Christ, are put both for one. Ioh. 6. faith is the mouth of the soul,
whereby we eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood. Ioh. 17. 8. To
receive the word of Christ, to acknowledge it, and to believe it, are put all
for one. Paul says, that the Gentiles did apprehend the justice which is by
faith, Romans 9. 30. Again, that we receive the promise of the spirit by faith.
Gel. 3. 14.

This apprehension stands in two things. The first is, to know Christ, as he
propounds himself in the word, and sacraments. The second is, To apply him
and his benefits unto our Ans. I. Faith, and confidence, properly are distinct
we have entrance to God with confidence by faith. Ephesians. 3. 12. And reason
declares as much, for a man can not put his confidence in Christ, till he be
assured that Christ with his benefits are his. We do not rest on his goodness,
of

Furthermore, the grounds of apprehension must be considered. This is the
commandment of God, that ye believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ: and
we cannot believe in Christ, till we believe Christ to be our Christ. Now then,
a general promise, with a commandment to apply the same to our selves, is in
effect as much as a special promise. The second The spirit of God testifies
together with our spirit that we are the sons of God. In this testimony,
four things must be observed. The first, that it is sufficient to certify and
assure us of our salvation. For if the testimony of two or three witnesses
establish a truth among men, then given and felt in the time of great danger
and affliction. For when by reason of misery and trouble, we know not to pray
as we ought, then the spirit makes request for us with groans that cannot be
uttered. Romans 8. 26. And in afflictions, Paul says, the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts. Now mayor or first part, is expressed in the Word; the
minor or second part is found true by experience, and by the testimony of the
conscience, which is a certain Testimony. For Paul says. This is my rejoicing,
the testimony of my conscience. 2. Cor. 1. 12. And the conclusion,

Lastly, we are to consider the degrees of Apprehension, and they are two:
there is a weak apprehension, and there is a strong apprehension, is there is
a weak and a strong faith. The weak faith, and apprehension is, when we
endeavor to apprehend. This endeavor is, when we bewail our unbelief,
strive against our manifold doubtings, will to believe with an honest heart,
desire to be reconciled to God, and constantly use the Ans. Though doubtings
abound never so, yet are they not of the nature of faith, but are contrary to
it. Secondly, we must put difference between true apprehension, and strong
apprehension, and strong apprehension. If we truly apprehend, though not
strongly, it suffices. The palsie-hand is able to receive a gift, though not
so strongly as an other. The man in the Gospel said, Lord, I believe, help
mine unbelief, Mar. 9. 24. that is, help my faith which by reason of the
smalnes thereof may rather be called unbelief, then faith. This is the common

The highest degree of faith is, a full persuasion of Gods Abraham was not
weak through unbelief, but strong in faith, Romans 4. 20. But wherein was this
strength? In that he was fully persuaded, that God, which had promised would
also perform it. This measure of faith is not incident to all believers, but
to the Prophets, Apostles, martyrs; Knock, it shall be opened, seek ye shall
find, ask ye shall receive. After all this, follows an experience in
manifold observations of the mercies of God, and love in Christ: and after
experience, follows a full persuasion. Abraham had not this full persuasion,
till God had sundry times spoken to Doubilesse kindness and mercy shall follow
me all the days of my life.

This distinction of the degrees of faith, must the rather be observed; because
the Papists suppose that we teach, that every

The use. If that be the right faith, which apprehends and applies Christ unto
us, then is it a poor and miserable faith of the Papist, to be baptized, and
withal to believe as the church does, when it is not known what the Church
believes.

Of the same kind is the faith of the multitude among us, whose faith is their
good meaning, that is, their fidelity, and truth in

Lastly, if that be faith which truly apprehends Christ, there is little true
faith in these last days. For though the merit of Christ be apprehended by
faith, yet is not the efficacy of his death: and that appears by the bad and
unreformed lives of

The second point to be considered concerning faith, is the manner how it
justifies. The Papists teach, that it justifies, Apprehension, does not
justify of it self: for it is imperfect, and is to be increased to the end
of our days.

Faith therefore justifies, because it is an instrument to apprehend, and
apply that which justifies, namely, Christ and his obedience. As the
Israelites stung of fiery serpents were cured, so are we saved: Ioh. 3. 16.
the Israelites did nothing at

The last point is, that faith alone justifies. For here Paul says, that we
are justified by faith, without the works of the law: and that is as much as
if he had said, by faith alone. Some Papists to help themselves translate the
words of Paul thus, Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
law, [(...)] if not by faith, that is, except faith go withal: then if faith
be joined with works, (say they) works justify. I answer, that this manner
of translation corrupts the text. For [(...)] must here be translated, but:
as appears by the words following, We have believed in Christ, that we might
be justified by faith in Christ without the works of the law. We cannot do
more in the curing of our spiritual diseases, then in the curing of the
diseases of our body: of which Christ says, Only believe, Mark. 5. 36. When
Abraham abounded both in faith and works, Romans 4. it is said, that he was
justified by faith without works.

This doctrine is of great use. First, we learn hence, that a man is justified
by the mere mercy of God: and that there is excluded from justification, all
Merit of congruitie, all meritorious works of preparation, wrought by us, all
Cooperation of man's will with Gods grace, in the effecting of our
justification.

Secondly, we learn, that a man is justified by the mere merit of Christ:
that is, by the meritorious obedience, which he wrought in himself, and not by
any thing wrought by him in us. Here then our merits, and satisfactions, and
all inward justice, is excluded from the justification of a sinner. To this end
Paul says, that we are justified freely by the redemption that is in Christ,
Romans 3. 24. that we are made the justice of God in him (and not in us.) 2. Cor.
5. 21. that he gave himself to deliver us, Gal. 1. he has purged our sins
by himself, Heb. 1. 3. and not by any thing in us. Hence it appears, that the
Papists err, and are deceived, when they teach that Christ did merit, that we
might merit, and satisfy for our selves: for then we should not be justified
by our faith alone.

Thirdly, hence we learn, that a sinner is justified by mere faith: that is,
that nothing within us concurres as a cause of our justification, but faith;
and that nothing apprehends Christ's obedience for our justification, but faith.
This will more easily appear, if we compare faith, hope, and love. Faith is
like an

It is objected, that true faith is never alone. I answer thus.

Secondly, it may be objected, that being justified by faith alone, we are
saved by faith alone: and so may live as we list. I answer, faith must be
considered as an Instrument, or as a way. If it be considered as an instrument
to apprehend Christ to

Thirdly, it is objected, that not only faith, but also the sacraments serve
to apply Christ: I answer, they are said to apply, in that they serve to
confirm faith, whole office is to apply. And here let us take notice of the
error of the Papists, who teach that our satisfactions, serve to apply the
satisfaction of Christ, and the sacrifice of the Mass, to apply the sacrifice
of Christ upon the cross: whereas nothing indeed applies but

In the sixth place, we are to consider the kinds of justification. The Papists
make two: one, when a man of an evil man is made a good man: the second, when
a good man is made were justified (as Paul here says) by faith, without
works. Again, he says, that the very end of our believing is, that we may
be justified by faith without works. Therefore there is one only
justification, and no more: and that by faith without works.

The seventh point is, the ground of this doctrine of justification by faith
without works. And it is laid down in the end of the 16. verse, No flesh
shall be justified by the works of the law. No flesh shall be justified in thy
sight, and that the other words, [by the works of the law,] are not expressed.
I answer, that the Apostles, and Christ in citing places of the old Testament,
apply them, and expound Him shall thou serve. Deuteronomy. 6. 16. Christ alleging
the same words, says, Him only shall thou serve, Math. 4. 10. David says,
Sacrifice and burnt offering thou would not, but mine ears have thou
pierced, Psalm. 40. 7. the author to Sacrifice and burnt offering thou would
not, but a body have thou fitted me, Heb. 10. 5. And thus the pearcing of the
ear is explaned. For indeed it signifies to be made obedient: and to this
end was a body given to Christ, that he might obey his fathers will.

The eight, and last point is, the practice of them that are justified, and
that is to believe, or put their trust in Christ. Trust in the Lord (says the
Prophet) and ye shall be assured; 2. Chron. 20. 20. And Solomon says, Roll your
care on the Lord, Prou. 16. 2. By means of this faith the heart of the
righteous is fixed and stablished. Psalm. 117. 7, 8. For the better practice of
this duty, two rules must be remembered. The one is, that faith and the
practice thereof, must reign in the heart, and have all at command. We must
not go by sense, feeling, reason, but we must shut our eyes, and let faith
keep our hearts close to the promise

17 And if while we seek to be made righteous by Christ, we our selves are
found sinners, is Christ

For the better understanding of the latter part of this chapter, it must be
observed, that Paul directs his speech not only

Some think, that in this verse Paul makes an objection in the person of the
false Apostles, on this manner. If we be justified by Christ alone, without the
observation of the law, then God forbid. But I somewhat doubt, whether this be
the sense of the words, because Paul does not make a direct confutation of

Therefore I rather suppose, that Paul continues his former speech, even to the
end of the chapter: and that in these words he uses a third reason, to
dissuade Peter from haulting, between the Jews and Gentiles. And the reason
will the better appear, if we search the meaning of the words. If, while we be
justified by Christ, that is, by faith in Christ, without the works of the
law. We are found sinners, that is, found in our sins, not fully justified,
but are further to be justified by the works of the law. Is Christ the
Minister of sin? that is, does it not hence follow, that Christ ministered
unto us occasion of sin, in that God forbid, that is, ye do all hold it with
me as a blasphemy, that Christ should be the minister of sin.

The argument then is framed thus. If being justified by Christ, we remain
sinners, and are further to be justified by

The use. First, we learn hence, that it is a blasphemy to make Christ the
minister of sin, who is the minister of righteousness, He brings everlasting
righteousness. Ioh. 1. He is the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world. Of this all the Prophets give testimony. Act. 10. 43. Therefore
Atheists are no better then devils,

Again, Paul here teaches, that they which are justified by Christ, are
perfectly to be justified; and need not further to be justified by any thing
out of Christ; as by the works of the law. It may be objected, that they which
are justified feel themselves to be sinners. Romans 7. 14. Ans. The corruption
of Ans. Confession of sin is not but covered.

Upon this doctrine it follows, that there is not a second justification, by
works, as the Papists teach. For he that is justified by Christ, is fully
justified, and need not further be justified by any thing out of Christ, as by
the law. Again, the same

Again, by this doctrine we learn, that Christ alone is by himself
sufficient, for our justification. In him (says Paul) are we complete, Col. 2.
14. He is a well of grace and life never dried up. Ioh. 4. 14. Thirdly, we must
content our selves with him alone, and with his obedience for our
justification, despising (in respect of him) all merits, and satisfactions done
by man.

Lastly, here we see what must be the care of men in this to be found in
Christ, having not his own righteousness, but the righteousness which is by the
faith of Christ. Phil. 3. 10. The like desire should be in us all.

18 For if I build again the things,

By things destroyed, Paul means the works, or the justice of by the law I am
dead to the law.

These words, depend on the former thus. Paul had said before, that Christ was
not a minister of sin unto us: and here and Christ does not make us sinners.

Here let us observe the modesty and meeknes of Paul. The things which he
speaks, concern Peter, and the Jews: yet least he offend them, he applies
them to himself. This care, not to offend, was in Christ: who was rather
willing to depart please all men in that which is good.

Here again it is Paul's doctrine, that we make our selves offenders, when we
build that which we have lawfully destroyed. Thus Teachers are great offenders,
when good doctrine is

Further, we are here taught to be constant in that which is

19 For I through the law, am dead to the law, that I may live unto God.

In these words, Paul sets down a second reason, to prove Christ to be no
minister of sin, in abolishing the justice of the law. And the reason is
framed thus: We Jews, justified by Christ, are dead to the law, not to live as
we list, but to live to

Here three points are propounded: the first is, that the person justified, is
dead to the law: the second, that he is dead to the law by the law: the third,
that he is dead that he may live unto God.

For the better understanding of the first point, we must seach what is meant
by dying to the law. Here the law is compared to an hard and cruel master: and
we to slaves, or bondmen: who so long as they are alive, they are under the
dominion, and at the command of their masters: yet when they are to be dead to
the law, is to be free from the dominion of the law. And we are free, in four
respects. First, in respect of the accusing, and damnatorie he is dead to the
law. Lastly, in respect of the obligation of the conscience, to the observation
of Ceremonies. Col. 2. 20. Thus are all persons justified by the faith of
Christ free from the law.

Hence we learn, that the Papists err, and are deceived,

They err again, in that they teach, that persons justified

Thirdly, here we see how long the dominion of the law them, and cause them to
run headlong to utter desperation. And if they die being under the law, they
must look for nothing but death and destruction without mercy. For the law is
mer^ilesse. This consideration serves notably to awake them that are dead in
their sins. Again, all such as with true and honest hearts have begun to
repent and believe, let them be

The second point is, touching the means of our death to the law, and that is,
the Law. Here some by the law, understand the law of faith, that is, the
Gospel. Romans 3. 27. And they make this to be the meaning of the words, By the
law of Christ, that is, by the Gospel, I am dead to the Law of Moses. But this
sense, though it be a truth, yet will it not stand in this place. For it is the
question, whether by the gospel we be freed from the law? By the law of Moses,
I am dead to the law of Moses. It may be demanded, how this can be, considering
the law is the cause of no good thing in us? For it is the ministry of death
Legal, the other Evangelical. Legal is, when men have a sight of their
sins, and withal are grieved for the punishment thereof. This repentance is
wrought by the ministry of the law: it was in Judas: and it is no grace of
God; but of it self it is the Evangelical Repentance is, when being turned
by grace, we turn our selves to God. This repentance is a gift of grace, and
is not wrought by the law, but by the ministry of the Gospel. Again, there is
a Legal sorrow, which is a sorrow for sin, in respect of the punishment:
this is no grace, and it is wrought by the law. Evangelical sorrow, is sorrow
for sin, because it is sin. This indeed is a grace of God; but it is not
wrought by the law, but by the preaching of mercy and reconciliation: and it
follows in us upon the apprehension of Gods mercy by faith. The law then
being the cause of no good thing in us, it may be demanded (I say) how we
should be dead Ans. Though the law be not a cause of this death to the law, and
so to sin: yet it is an occasion thereof. For it accuses, and terrifieth,
and condemns us: and thereby it occasioneth, or urges us to fly unto Christ,
who is the

The third point is, touching the end of our death to the law: and that is,
that we may live to God. It may be demanded, what life this is, whereby we live
to God? Ans. There is a natural, and a spiritual life. Natural life is that,
which we receive the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. And this is the life to live to
God, that is, to the honor and glory of God. And we live to God by living
wisely, godly, justly. Tit. 3. 12. Wisely, in respect of our selves: godly, in
respect of God: justly, in respect of

That we may live wisely, we must observe two rules. The first: we must labor
with all diligence, and with all speed, that we may be worthy to stand before
the son of man at his coming. And therefore we must labor to be in Christ,
The second rule: we must in this world come as near heaven and the happiness of
life everlasting, as may be. Psalm. 3. 14. And for this cause we must join our
selves to the assemblies where the word is preached, prayer made, and
sacraments administered: for there is the gate of heaven. Consider the practice
of Moses, Heb. 11. 25, 26. and of David, Psalm. 84. 10. Again, being

That we may live godlily, seven rules must be remembered. The first: we must
bring our selves into the presence of the to walk with God, Abraham and Isaac
before God, Genesis 17. 1. and 48. 15. and David, Psalm. 116. 9. and 139. all. and
Cornelius, Act. 10. 33. and Paul, 2. Cor. 7. 17.

The second: we must take knowledge of the will of God in all things, whether
it be revealed in the word, or by

The third: we must bring our selves in subjection to the known will of God,
and captiuate all our senses unto it: and suffer God to set up his kingdom in
us. Romans 12. 1.

The fourth: when we have offended God, we must instantly humble our selves
before his majesty, confessing our offenses, and making instant deprecation
for mercy. Thus did Ezra, chap. 9. and Daniel, chap. 9. and David, Psalm. 32. 3.

The fifth: in all our miseries and adversities, we must be silent Examine your
selves, and be still. Psalm. 37. 7. be silent to Iehoua. Consider the example of
Aaron, Leuit. 10. 3. of David, Psalm. 39. 9. of the Jews, Act. 11. 18.

The sixth: in all things we do or suffer, we must depend to live by faith:
and, as Peter says, 1. Pet. 3. 17. to sanctify God in our hearts.

The last: in all things we must give praise and thanks to God: and that for
our miseries, and afflictions, Job 1. 22. for in them, God mingles his justice,
with mercy, whereas he might utterly condemn us.

That we may live justly in respect of men, two rules must be to be content in
any estate, Phil. 4. 11. because howsoever the world go, we have

Thus we see what it is to live to God. Now we are all to be exhorted, to order
our lives in this manner. For first of all, we are Gods: and therefore we must
glorify God both in our bodies and souls, 2. Cor. 6. 20. Secondly, the end of
our justification and redemption is, that we may live to God. And it is great
wickedness to pervert the order of God, by living to our selves and the iusts of
our hearts. Thirdly, there be three degrees of life: one is in this life, a
spiritual and a renewed life: the second

20 I am crucified with Christ: Thus I live, yet not I any more, but Christ
lives in me. And in that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
son of God, who has

Whereas Paul said before, I am dead to the law, here he declares the reason of
it, when he says, I am crucified with Christ. I am crucified with Christ. The
second, is Ab^egation, or Annihilation (as some call it) in these words, Not I
any more.

I am crucified with Christ.

For the better understanding of these words, we must observe, are buried into
his death. Romans 6. 4. Secondly, it must be observed, that Paul speaks this of
himself I am crucified with Christ? Ans. There be two reasons of this speech.
One is, that Christ upon the cross, stood not as a Paul says in the time
present, I am crucified with Christ; There are like phrases in Paul, We are
dead with Christ: we are risen with him: we sit with him in heavenly places.
Ephesians. 2. 6. Col. 3. 1. and they are in the same manner to be expounded.
Moreover, the benefits that arise of this communion with Christ in his
Justification from all our sins, Romans 6. 7. The second, is Mortification of
sin by the virtue of the death of Christ, after we are ingrafted into him.
Thus much of the meaning.

The use. Superstitious persons take occasion by the passion

The right use is this: we are in mind and meditation to consider Christ
crucified: and first, we are to believe, that he was crucified for us. This
being done, we must go yet further, and as it were spread our selves on the
cross of Christ, believing and withal beholding our selves crucified with
him. thou believe thy self to be crucified with Christ, thou shall see the
length, the breadth, the height, the depth of the love of god in Christ. For
thy sins are the swords, and the spears that crucified Christ: and yet thou
have all the benefit of his passion. Lastly, if thou can believe that thou
art crucified with Christ, thou shall further be assured, that he is partner
with

The duties hence to be learned, are these. First, if thou be crucified with
Christ, then must thou apply thy heart to crucify Not my will, but thy will
be done: even so in all thy sufferings, thou must resign thy self to God, and
quiet thy self in his will. Thirdly, Christ suffered in all humility,
humbling himself to the death of the cross: even so we, in, and upon our
afflictions, are to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, confessing
our are crucified with Christ.

Again, here we are to take notice of the false faith of many men. They can be
content to believe that Christ was crucified for them: but there they make a
pause: for they do not believe that they are crucified with Christ. Their
faith therefore is but half a faith: and their profession is according. For
they I am crucified with him. And this is to know Christ crucified.

Lastly, here we are to consider the abomination of the Church of Rome. For it
most abuses that, which is the greatest treasure in the world, namely, Christ
crucified. For they make a very Idol of him, in that they worship him in, at,
and before painted, and carved Crucifixes. For there is no such Latria, divine
honor, to devised and framed crucifixes: and thus they rob Christ of his
honor.

Thus much of our Communion with Christ in his passion: Abnegation. J live, yet
not I any more: that is, I live a spiritual life, yet not as I as a natural
man. For in that regard, I carry my self as a man crucified, or after the
manner of a dead man, suffering them under foot, making Gods will, our
wisdom, and will; and giving it lordship and dominion over us, our own wills
in the mean season lying dead in us. Thus are we to carry our selves as dead
men: and we are to be careful of it: that God may have pleasure in us we must
forget our own people, and our fathers house. Psalm. 45. 10. That we may buy
the pearl, we

The third point concerning spiritual life is, touching the Original and
wellspring thereof, in these words, That Christ may reign in me. For the
better conceiving whereof, three points are to be observed. The first, that
Christ is not only the He is the true vine, and we are the branches. Ioh. 15.
1. he is an appointed head to his Church. Ephesians. 1. 22. he is the prince of life.
Act. 3. 15. he is a quickening spirit. 1. Cor. 15. 45. to live in us, namely, as
a root in the branch, or as the head in the members. The second point is, that
there must be an Union with Christ, before we can receive life from him, and he
live in us. If ye abide in me, and I in you, ye shall bring forth much fruit.
Ioh. 15. 4. We must be grafted Christ lives in me. Of this conjunction, two
things must be noted. The first, that it is a eat the flesh of Christ, and
drink his blood, before we can have life abiding in us, Ioh. 6. 53. and our
bodies are members of Christ. 1. Cor. 6. 15. Again, this Union is spiritual,
because it is made by the bond By one spirit we are baptized into one body.
And no man is to marvel, that we on earth should be joined to Christ in
heaven. By civil contract man and wife are one flesh, though distant many
miles asunder: why then may not we be joined to Christ by virtue of the
covenant of grace? considering no distance of place can hinder the being of
the spirit of Christ in us. The third point is, that after this union with
Christ, he must further communicate himself unto us, before we can live by
him, and he in us. To this purpose S. John says, that God has given us life:
that this life is in the son: he which has the son has life. 1. Ioh. 5.
12. For the conceiving of this truth, two questions may be demanded. One, in
what order Christ gives himself unto us? Ans. Christ first of all, gives his
flesh and blood, that is, himself: and then secondly, his gifts, namely the
efficacy, and merit of his death. The to live in us? Ans. He is not in us in
respect of local presence, but by the supernatural, and special operation of
his the Justification of life. Romans 5.

Thus then the meaning of the words is evident: that Christ as a root, or
head, lives in them that are united to him, and that by the operation of his
spirit, causing them to die unto their Know ye not that Christ is in you,
except ye be reprobates?

The use. Hence it follows, that they which are true believers, (...). Ioh. 3.
9.
or infirmity.

Secondly, the true believer, cannot wholly fall away from grace: because the
life of Christ cannot be abolished. As Christ died but once, and for ever after
lives to God: so they that are in Christ, die once to sin, and live eternally
to God. Romans 6. 10. The virtue, and power of God, that was showed in raising
Christ to life, is likewise showed in quickening them that

Thirdly, they which are true believers, are a free and voluntary people
obeying God, as if there were no law to compel

It may here be demanded, how we may know that Christ lives in us? Ans. By the
spirit of God. 1. Ioh. 3. 24. And the spirit is known by the motions, and
operations thereof. The first whereof, is a Purpose to obey God, according to
all his commandments that concern us, with an inclination of our he was sold
under sin: and yet withal he adds, that he delighted in the law of God
according to the inward man. Romans 7. 23. He that loves God, and keeps his
commandments has the father and the son dwelling in him. Ioh. 14. 23. Let
this be observed. Pharaoh, himself, and to love them that love Christ, and
that because they love Christ. This is a true sign, that we have passed from
death to life. 1. Ioh. 3. 14. It may here be said, how can Christ be said to
live in us, considering we are laden with afflictions and miseries? Where
Christ lives, there is no misery. Ans. In the I bear in my body the
mortification of our Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus may be made manifest in
me. Gods power is made manifest in weakness. 2. Cor. 12. Again, it may be said,
if Ans. The life of Christ is conveyed unto us, by little and little. God
having wounded and slain us, first binds us up, then he revives us, and the
third day he raises us up. Hos. 6. 1. Again, nature feels not nature, nor
corruption feels corruption,

Furthermore, here we are to take notice of the common sin of our days. Men
will not suffer Christ to live in them, and to rule over them. It is reputed a
small matter; but it is a Let us break their bands and cast their cords from
us. Psalm. 2. 2. And it is was the sin of the Jews to say, We will not have
this man to reign over us, Luc. 19. 14. And therefore Christ says, bring them
hither, and slay them before me.

Lastly, here we learn our duty: and that is so to live, that we may be able
to say with good conscience, that Christ lives in us: we must seek his
kingdom above all things, and take his yoke on us. It will be said, what must
we do that Christ may live in us? Ans. We must use the means appointed,
meditation eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood. Ioh. 6. 57. And that
we may eat him, we must have a stomach in our souls like the stomach of our
bodies, and we must hunger and thirst after Christ: and therefore we must feel
our own Give me drink, I die for thirst. Judge. 4. 19. even so we being
pursued by the sentence of the law, by the terrors of hell, death, and
condemnation; must fly to the throne of grace, and cry out, saying, Give me
of the tree of life, give me of the water of life: I perish for thirst. Then
shall our wretched souls be quickened, and revived to everlasting life. Math.
5. 6. Rev. 21. 6.

In the fourth place, here is set down the Means of spiritual And in that I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God, who has loved
me, and given himself for me. And that the doctrine may the better appear, I
will stand a while to show the meaning of them. By flesh, is meant the mortal
body, or the frail condition of this temporal life. to live in the flesh, is
to live a natural life by eating, drinking, sleeping. Further, Paul says that
living in the flesh, he lived by faith: and for the better conceiving of this,
two questions may be demanded. The first is, Why a believer is said to live by
faith? Ans. There be two

The second question is, How men live by faith? Ans. The child of God lives a
double life in this world: a spiritual, and a temporal. The spiritual stands
specially in three things; Reconciliation

Again, in the renouation and change of our lives, we live by faith. For our
faith in Christ purifieth our hearts, Act. 15. 9. partly, by deriuing holiness
and purity from Christ unto us, who is our sanctification: and partly, by
moving and persuading of us to holiness and newnes of life. 1. Ioh. 3. 3.

Lastly, in the doing of every good work, we must live by our faith. For first
there must be a general faith that the work in his kind pleases God. Romans
14. 25. Secondly, justifying faith must give a beginning to the work. I
believed, therefore I spoke. Psalm. 116. 12. Thirdly, after the work is done,
faith must cover the defects thereof, that it may be acceptable to God. Heb.
11. 5.

Temporal life, stands in cares, or miseries: and miseries, are outward
afflictions, or inward temptations. And in all our

Likewise, in our afflictions we are to live by faith. For our faith is to
assure us, that God according to his promise will give a good issue. 1. Cor.
10. 12. And though all temporal things fail us, it makes us retain the hope
of mercy and of eternal life. Thirdly, it makes us wait Gods leisure for our
deliverance.

Lastly, in our Temptations we are not to live by feeling, but by faith: yea
against feeling, to rest on the bare promise of God; when we feel and
apprehend nothing but the wrath of God. And thus we see how the believer lives
by his faith in

It may be said, What is the faith we live by? Answer is here made: It is the
faith of the son of God. And saving faith is so called; because Christ is not
only the Author of it, and the object, or matter of it, but also the Reuealer
of it. For there was

Again, it may be said, What is this faith of the Son of Christ has loved
me, and given himself for me.

These words then thus explaned, are an answer to an objection, which may be
framed thus: Why should thou say, that thou live not, but that Christ
lives in thee; considering

The use. Here first of all they are to be blamed, that live by sense, like
beasts: believing no more then they see, and trusting God no further then they
see him. For, if a man whom we see and know, make a promise to us, we are
comforted: yet if God, who is invisible make in his word far better promises
(as he does,) we are not in like sort comforted. Again, we put too much
confidence in means. If we have good callings, house, land, living, we can
then trust in God: but when means

Again, they are to be blamed, that live only by the guidance of reason. For
many dispute thus: I deal truly and justly with all men, and live peaceably
with my neighbors: therefore God will have me excused. But there must be a
better

Thirdly, they deceive themselves, that think they may live as they list: and
call upon God when they are dying, and

Lastly, they are to be blamed, that spend their days in worldly cares, so as
no good thing can take place. This is the life of infidels. And where true
faith reigns, it cuts off the multitude of cares, and makes us cast them on
God.

Moreover, here we see what we are to do in perilous times, as in the time of
plague, famine, sword, when present death is before our eyes: we must then live
by faith. When Noeh heard of the flood, he prepared such means as faith would
affoard for the saving of himself, and his family. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
feared not the wrath of the king: because by faith he saw him that was
invisible, Hebr. 11. 27. David in the fear of present death, comforted
himself in the Lord his God, 1. Sam. 30. 6. When Iehosaphat knew not what were
stoned to death, and that by faith. Heb. 11. 36. We must therefore all of us,
learn to live by faith: and for this cause we must acquaint our selves with
the word, and promises of God; and mingle them with our faith: else shall the
life of a man in the world be worse, then the life of a beast.

Again, in these words [who has loved me, and given himself for me] the
nature and property of justifying faith is set down, which is to Apply the
love of God, and the merit of the passion of Christ, unto our selves. And
therefore the Papists are deceived, who say, that hope applies, and not faith.
It may be Ans. He speaks them in the name of all believers, Jews and
Gentiles. For (as we may see in the former verses) that which concerned Peter,
and the rest of Christian Jews, he applies to himself, least his speech
should seem odious.

Again, it may be objected, that all believers cannot say thus, Christ has
loved me, and given himself for me. Ans. If the mind be fixed on Christ: and
there be also a will and endeavor to believe and apprehend Christ; there is
faith indeed. For God accepts the true and earnest will to believe, for faith.

Again, in these words [who has loved me, and given himself for me] S. Paul
sets down the reason or argument, which faith uses in the mind regenerate,
to move men to live to God. And the reason is framed thus: Christ loves thee,
and has given

By this we are to take occasion, to consider and to bewail the hardness of our
hearts, who do not relent from our evil ways, and turn unto God upon the
consideration of his love in Christ. The waters of the Sanctuary have long
flowed unto us: but they have not sweetened us, and made us sauerie: therefore
it is to be feared least our habitations be at length turned to places of
nettles and saltpits. Eze. 7. 11.

21 I do not abrogate the grace

The meaning, Grace in Scriptures signifies two things: the I do not abrogate
the grace of God; his meaning is, I do not make void, or frustrate the grace
of God in respect of my self, or in respect of other believers, by teaching
the justification of a sinner by says alone. He adds, If righteousness be by
the law; that is, if a sinner be justified by his own obedience, in performing
the law, then Christ died without cause. The word (...), freely, translated
without cause, has a double signification. One is, when it signifies as much
as without price, or merit. Math. 10. 8. Ye have received freely, give freely.
rashly, without just, or sufficient cause: as Psalm. 69. 4. Mine enemies hate me
freely, (as the Seventy translate) that is, wrongfully, or without just cause.
Thus here is Christ said to die freely, that is, in vain, or without cause:
because if we be justified by obedience to the law, then Christ died

These words are an answer to an objection. The objection is this: If thou
teach that a sinner is justified only by his faith in Christ, then thou
abolishest the grace of God. The answer is negative. I do not by this doctrine
abrogate the grace of God. And there is a reason also of this answer: If we be
justified

The use. First, let us mark that Paul says, he does not abrogate the grace
of God: and why? because he will suffer nothing in the cause of our
justification to be joined with the obedience of the death of Christ. And hence
we learn, what is the nature of grace. It must stand wholly, and entirely in
it self. Gods grace cannot stand with man's merit. Grace is no grace, unless
it be freely given every way. Romans 4. 4. To him that works the wages is
given, not of grace, but of desert. Romans 11. 6. If election be of grace, then
not of works, else is grace no grace. Grace, and works of grace in the causing
of justification, can no more stand together, then fire and water. By this we
are admonished to be nothing in our selves, and to ascribe all that we are, or

Again, here we see our duty, and that is to be careful not to abrogate the
grace of God unto our selves. But how is that done? Ans. We must strippe and
empty our selves of all righteousness, and goodness of our own, even to the
death, and

Thirdly, Paul here sets down a notable ground of true religion; That the
death of Christ is made void, if any thing be joined with it in the work of
our justification, as a means to Christian Jews, who joined the law and the
Gospel: and looked to be justified both by Christ, and by the works of the law:
and not by works of the law, done by strength of nature, but by works of grace.

CHAP. III.
1 O foolish Galatians, who has and among you crucified.

THat we may see how this chapter depends

The first part of the minor, that Paul was called of God, was O foolish
Galatians. The other is, the deceit of false teachers, who has bewitched you?

Whereas Paul says, O foolish Galatians, that we mistake not his example;
three questions may be demanded. The first is, In what respect he gives this
hard judgment against them? Ans. Three things are subjected to Judgment, the
doctrines of men, the lives of men, and the persons of men. Doctrines are to be
judged by the word, and the lives of men: yet ordinarily, three things are not
subject to judgment: the Counsels of God, the Scriptures, and the persons of
men. And in this place Paul gives judgment, not against the Galatians
themselves, or against their persons, but against their new conceived doctrine,

The second question is, whether this judgment be righteous and true
judgment? Ans. It is: because it is upon good ground. For first of all, Paul
gives this censure, by virtue of his calling: because his office was to
reprove and correct fools. Thirdly, this judgment was given in love. For
Paul intended, and desired nothing in this speech, but their good and
amendment. Upon like grounds people of Sodom and Gomorrha, Isa. 1. Christ
calls the two disciples, foolish, and slow of heart to believe, Luke 24. 25.
Paul calls the Cretians liars and slow bellies, Tit. 1. 12. But Matthew. 5. 22.
may be objected, where he is said to be in danger of a Council, that says,
Thou fool. Ans. The place

The third question is, whether we may use like judgment against men? Ans.
Upon like grounds we may, if we have a

To come to the second cause, Paul says, Who has bewitched you? that is, who
has deceived you, as if ye were bewitched by some enchantments. Here Paul
takes it for a confessed truth, that there is witchcraft, and witches. And that
we may the better conceive his meaning, two questions are to be propounded. The
first is, what is the witchcraft here meant? Ans. It is a Satanicall operation,
whereby the senses of men are deluded. For the devil can by certain means,
delude and corrupt the fantasy, or the imagination; and cause men to think
that of Lycanthropia, in which, the brain being distempered, men think
themselves to be wolves, and carry themselves as wolves. And in this disease
the devil has a great stroke. Again, the devil can delude the outward
senses, as the hearing, and the sight.

The second question is, if this witchcraft be an operation of Satan, howmen
should be said to do it? for Paul says, who, or what man has bewitched you?
Ans. Men do it by league, and confederacy with the devil. The inchanter
charms by joining societies. Psalm. 58. 5. The devil seeks whom he may
devour:

That which Paul says to the Galatians, if he were now living among us, he
would likewise say to us, O foolish nation, who has bewitched you? We are wise
in matters of the world: but in religion. And we must take heed, least this
our foolishnes, and intoxication of our senses, lead us headlong to perdition.
And therefore we must learn the way of life in humility. Psalm. 25. 9. We must
obey it, and in obedience we shall learn it. Ioh. 7. 17. We must as heartily
love the word of God, as in mind we given up to strong illusions to believe
lies. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Lastly, we must pray to God to be taught and guided by
his word and spirit, in things pertaining to everlasting life.

To proceed further, the delusion or bewitching of the Galatians, that ye
should not obey the truth. Before I come to the consideration of these words, a
doubt must be resolved. For some man may say, that this Epistle is corrupted:
because these words are wanting in sundry translations, and editions of Ans.
In the Editions and translations of the bible, there are sundry differences,
and diversities of readings: and these differences are not the fault of the
Scripture, but of the men which used to write out the bible:

These words, that ye should not obey the truth, are meant of the The first
temptation wherewith our Savior Christ was assaulted, was against his faith,
as he was man: If thou be the son of God thou can cause these stones in thy
hunger to be made bread: but thou can not cause these stones to be made
bread: therefore thou art not the child of God. The devil desired to sift out
all the faith of the Apostles, and to leave in them nothing that the light of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ may not shine unto them. 2. Cor. 4. 4. This must
teach us, that we must not only hold and know the true religion for the time,
but also

The truth here mentioned, is the heavenly doctrine of the Gospel: so called
for two causes. First, because it is an absolute the Apostles and Prophets, in
writing and preaching, could not err. It may be said, they were men, as we
are: and therefore subject to err, and be deceived in judgment. Ans.
Judgment is twofold. One, conceived by the discourse of natural reason: the
truth, is, because it is a most worthy truth, namely, the truth which is
according to godliness, Tit. 1. It may be said, what is the truth? and how shall
we know it, considering there be so many dissentions? Ans. First, make thy
self fit v. 17. Obey, and ye shall know.

The second thing, whereby the delusion of the Galatians is expressed, is the
sign thereof, in these words, to whom Jesus Christ was described, etc. that
is, to whom I have preached the doctrine of salvation by Christ, in lively and
evident manner, even as if Christ had bin painted before your eyes, and had bin
crucified, in, or among you. And this is a manifest token that the Galatians
were deluded, because they could not acknowledge Christ was before described, I
refer it to the time before their revolt.

Here first, we are to observe, the properties of the Ministry It was a very
plain sermon. And I say again, the plainer, the better.

The second property of the Ministry of the word, is, that it must be
powerful and lively in operation, and as it were crucifying Christ within us,
and causing us to feel the virtue of The Lord is within you, 1. Cor. 14. 25.
The scepter of Christ whereby he smites the nations, is in his mouth, Isa. 11.
who is sufficient either for the speaking or doing of these things? yet
something may be showed. Know therefore that the effectual and powerful
preaching of the word, stands in three things. The first is, true and proper
interpretation of the Scripture, and that by it self: for Scripture, is both
the gloss, and the text. The second is, sauorie and wholesome do ctrine,
gathered out of the Scriptures truly expounded. The third is, the Application
of the said doctrine, either to the information of the judgment, or to the
reformation of the life. This is the preaching that is of power. Let all the
sons of the

Furthermore, two questions are here resolved. The first is, whether Images be
necessary in the congregations of the people of God? Ans. There are Christian
Images, and Pictures, laymens books: they are doctors of lies, Hab. 2. 18.
And where the lively preaching of the word is, there is no need of them. And
therefore Images were not established in Churches in these West parts, till
after 700. years. As long as the church Ans. The one, the Lord allows,

The second question is, Whether there be now in the church of God, any
sacrifice or oblation of Christ? Ans. There is after Accept these gifts, etc.
is become a Mediator, between Christ and God: and the body and blood of
Christ is offered in an unbloody manner; that is, blood is offered without
blood: and the Priest, when he has offered Christ, eats up all that he has
offered. Yet for this damnable oblation many stand: and the reason is; because
they are bewitched, and enchanted with pretended shows of Fathers, Counsels,
Antiquity, Succession, etc.

Lastly, here we learn, what is the duty of all believers; O daughters of
Sion, behold your king. But where must we behold him? Not in Roodes, and
Crucifixes, after the Popish manner; but we must look on him, as he propounds
himself unto us in the word, and sacraments. For thus is he the true object of
our faith. And

That this contemplation of Christ by faith, may take more place, and be the
better practiced, consider the use of it. First, heart takes to, it the
disposition, and mind that was in Christ crucified, by viewing, and beholding
of Christ. This sight makes us mourn and bleed in our hearts for our
offenses, when we consider, that Christ was crucified for them: and it makes us
love Christ, when we consider the love of God in Christ crucified.

Lastly, this thing must be a terror to all the ungodly. For they have no care
to behold Christ, but by their lewd lives they crucify him: and for this cause
in the day of judgment, they shall see with heavy hearts, Christ to be their
judge whom

2 This only would I learn of

3 Are ye so foolish, that after ye have begun in the spirit, ye would now be
made perfect by the flesh.

The sense of the words. When Paul says, this would I learn of you, he meets
with the conceit of the Galatians, who thought themselves wise: and the effect
of his speech is this: I have called you fools: but it may be, that you think
your selves wise, Received ye the Spirit, three things must be observed. The
first, that the Spirit sometimes signifies the essential spirit of the Father
and There is a diversity of gifts, but one spirit. Sometimes again, it
signifies the effects, operations, or gifts of the spirit, as namely when flesh
and spirit are opposed; as in this text. And further, when it signifies gifts,
yet then the presence of the spirit is not excluded, but included. The second
is, that here the Spirit signifies the spirit of adoption. Ephesians. 1. 13. Romans 8.
16. The third is, that to receive the spirit, is not barely to receive the
gifts of the spirit, (as we are said to have the sun in the house, when we
receive the beams of the body of the sun being in heaven:) but in this
receiving, there are Grieve not the spirit. Which is not meant of gifts, but of
the very person of the spirit. And it must be remembered, that the effects and
gifts of works of the Law, we are to understand, the doctrine of justification
by the works of the law. By the hearing of faith, is meant the doctrine of the
Gospel: hearing being put for the thing heard, namely, preaching: and faith,
for the doctrine of justification by faith faith signifies not only the gift
whereby we believe, but also that which is believed.

In the third verse, spirit signifies the operation of the spirit, whereby the
inward man is renewed, and made like to God; or again, the Exercises of the
inward man: and flesh signifies outward flesh, and the new creature are
opposed. And Paul says, Romans 9. 29. He is a Jew, that is a lew within, in the
spirit, having the circumcision of the heart. To begun in the spirit, is to
begin in godliness

The Resolution. In these words, is contained the first argu meant, whereby Paul
proves the truth of his doctrine. It is framed thus: If ye received the spirit
by my doctrine, my doctrine is true and ye foolish that add unto it,
justification by

The mayor or first proposition, is not expressed, but the proof thereof in
the third verse, thus: it is a point of extreme

The use. When Paul says, Let me learn one thing of you, he notes the fault
of the Galatians, and of sundry others, who when they have attained to a
certain measure of knowledge in Gods word, are presently puffed up with pride,
and often think themselves wiser then their teachers. This was the fault of
the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 8. 10. and of sundry in our days, who separate
wholly from all our congregations, presuming to know that which they never
learned of their teachers. That love edesies, and bare knowledge swells the
heart.

Again, here when it is said, Received ye the spirit? that is, ye did not
receive the spirit by the works of the law, but by the hearing of faith. Here,
I say, we see the difference between the law, and the Gospel. The law does not
minister the spirit unto us: for it only shows our disease, and gives us no
remedy.

Here also we learn, that the preaching of the Gospel, is necessary for all
men, because it is the Instrument of God to confer Whole Peter was yet
speaking, the spirit of God fell upon the Gentiles, Act. 10. 44. Paul says,
his ministry is the ministry of the spirit, 2. Cor. 4. 5. saving the
ministers and others. 1. Tim. 4. 16. And the most learned have need of this
ordinance of God. For suppose they have knowledge sufficient,

Further, let it be observed, what is the scope of all our hearing, and
teaching: namely, that we may receive the spirit of God: without which spirit,
we can do nothing.

Moreover, Paul here sets down an infallible argument, whereby we may be
assured that the Scripture is the word of God. For the scriptures in their
right use (which is in reading, hearing, meditation) have the divine and
supernatural operation of the spirit joined with them, to comfort in all
distresses,

Lastly, let us here observe the certain mark of true religion: and that is,
that the preaching thereof conferres the spirit of adoption. This does not the
pretended catholic Religion of the Papists: it does not confer unto men the
spirit to assure them that they are the children of God; because it teaches
that we are to be in suspense of our salvation. Again, by teaching

When Paul says, v. 3. Began ye in the spirit, etc. he teaches a divine
instruction, that true godliness and Religion stands in the spirit, that is, the
grace of the heart, or in the exercises of the inner man, whether we respect
the beginning, the middle, The kings daughter is all glorious within. Psalm. 45.
13. True worshippers worship God in the spirit. Ioh. 4. 25. Romans 1. 12. He is a
Jew, that is a Jew not without, but within in the spirit, in the circumcision
of the heart. Romans 2. 29. Gods service and kingdom, stands in justice, peace
of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost. Romans 14. 17. He that is in Christ
must not know him in any carnal respects, but be a new creature. 2. Cor. 5.
17. Gal. 6. 17. Baptism is not the washing of the spots of the flesh, but the
promise that a good conscience makes to God. By this doctrine we see the fault
of the world, which for by the spirit of prayer? then thou praiest indeed. If
thou can approve thy heart unto God for any act of religion, then is it done
indeed, else not. Remember this.

Furthermore, Paul here teaches that our after proceedings in religion, must
be answerable to our first beginnings in the spirit. And hence we may be
advertised of many things. First,

Young men must here be advertised as they grow in years

Lastly, aged persons that have begun in the spirit, must look that they
grow up in the graces of the spirit more then his love, service, and works,
were more at the last, then at the first, Reu. 2. 19. the same should be said
of all aged persons. They which are planted in the house of God, bring forth
fruit in their old age. Psalm. 91. 16. It is the commendation in the graces of
the spirit. We use to say of children, God make them good old men: and it is
well said. An old man is to be regarded: but specially, a Good old man, who is
more to be respected then twenty of younger years. Now aged persons when they
grow in age, and not in the spirit, they loose their age is a crown of glory
when it is found in the way of righteousness. Prove. 16. 31. Let them therefore
pray with David, Forsake me not, O Lord, in mine old age. Psalm. 71. 9.

4. Have ye suffered so many things

The interrogation, have ye? is as much as, ye have. Because the question in
this place counteruailes a speech affirmative. And the words carry this
sense: Ye have professed the Gospel,

The words [if they be in vaine] are a limitation or qualification of that
which was said before: and they carry this sense:

In this verse, Paul sets down a second reason, to prove the

The use. When Paul says, Have ye suffered, etc. he signifies Resist not
evil. And we are called to imitate the Ans. Yea. The better thy cause is, the
better are thy sufferings: they are blessed that suffer for righteousness. Paul
commends himself by the multitude of his sufferings. 2. Cor. 11. 13. Again,
it may be demanded, how long we must suffer? Ans. Even to the shedding of our
blood, if it be for the resisting of sin. Heb. 12. 4. Lastly, it may be
said, how shall we be able to do this? Ans. God is faithful, and will not
lay on us more then we shall be able to bear. 1. Cor. 10. 3. By this we are
admonished, not to make a reckoning in this world, of pleasure, and delight, as
though the Gospel were a Gospel of ease, and as we use to say, a gospel made of
velvet; but every one of us must take up his If thou will be my disciple, deny
thy self, take up thy cross: that is, the particular affliction, and misery,
which God lays on thee. Again, if in this world we must be sufferers by
condition, then in dissentions, and differences, we may neither give nor take
the challenge, but must be content to bear and put up wrongs, and abuses.
Lastly, in these days of we may be good bread to the Lord. And that we may be
able to suffer for the name of God, we must pray for this gift at Gods hand.
For power to suffer is the gift of God, Phil. 1. 29. and we must observe the
commandment of God, not to fear the terrors of men. Reu. 2. 10. 1. Pet. 3.
14. And for this cause, we must (as Peter sanctify God in our hearts: being
assured by our faith of the presence, protection, and providence of God.

When Paul says, Have ye suffered so many things? he shows that we must
endure manifold miseries in this life. Jacob said his days were few and evil.
Many are the afflictions of the righteous. Psalm. 34. 20. Christ says, Take up
thy cross every day, Luke 9. 23. and thereby he signifies, that every new day
that comes over our heads, we must look for a new cross. And for this cause,
it is not enough to be patient for a fit, but we must show all patience, and
long suffering, and that with

When Paul says, Have ye suffered so many things in vain? he signifies, that
our sufferings are of great use, unless our sins be the hindrance. It may
then be demanded, what is the use of our sufferings? The Papists answer, that
in our baptism or first conversion, Christ sufferings do all, and abolish the
whole fault and punishment: but if we sin after our conversion, then they
say, Christ's sufferings abolish the fault, and the eternal punishment, and our
own sufferings, abolish the temporal be in vain, that seek remission of
sins, or justification, in any thing, out of Christ.

Now we for our parts, make five other uses of our sufferings.

When Paul says, If they be in vain, we are to observe his yet forty days
and Niniuie shall be destroyed: but withal he adds, It may be the Lord will
repent, and turn from his fierce wrath. Ion. 3. 9. Peter says to Simon Magus,
Thou art in the gall of bitterness: but withal he adds, Pray God that the
thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. Act. 8. 21. See the like Joel 2. 14.
and Amos 5. 15. And thus are Ministers of the Gospel to delay and qualify
their

5 He therefore that ministers to you the spirit, and works miracles among
you, does he it by the works

These words are a repetition of the second verse, whence the exposition must
be fetched. The words [and works miracles among you] are added: and they
carry this meaning; That God gave to the Galatians, not only the spirit of
adoption, but also other extraordinary gifts of the spirit, as to speak with
strange tongues, to cure diseases, and such like.

Repetitions in Scripture are not idle, but of great use, and signify unto us
the necessity of the thing repeated, and the infallible

The Galatians are now revolted from Paul's doctrine, and they err in the
foundation: and yet Paul says in the time present, He that ministers the
spirit unto you. Hence it appears, that falls of infirmity in the child of
God, do not utterly extinguish

Again, Paul here teaches, that God is the only and proper author of
miracles. For he that ministers the spirit, works miracles, namely God. A
miracle is, a work above the Ans. God never gave to any man power to work and
effect a miracle, either mediately Ans. He can work a wonder, or things
extraordinary, in respect of the ordinary course of nature. Thus he caused
fire to fall from heaven: and he caused ulcers to arise in the body of Job,
and that true ulcers. And this he we see that they are deceived, who think
that the devil can make rain, thunder, and lightning. Indeed when the matter
of rain and thunder is prepared by God, he can hasten it, and make it more
terrible: but rain, and thunder he cannot make: for that is indeed as much as
any miracle. Again, it is a falsehood to think, that Alchimists are able to
turn baser metals,

Here again we see the use of miracles, that is, to confirm doctrine in the
Apostolic Churches. That their use is further to confirm doctrine even at
this day, it cannot be proved.

Lastly, here in the Galatians we see what an easy thing it is to fall from
God, from our faith, and allegiance to him. They

6 As Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness:

7 Knowye therefore, that they which are of faith, are the children

The words, Even as Abraham, etc. have reference to that which went before, on
this manner. Ye Galatians received the spirit by my doctrine: and my doctrine
was the preaching of justification of faith without works: which doctrine is
like and suitable to the example of Abraham, who believed God, and it was
imputed for justice.

Here Paul sets down the second argument, whereby he proves the truth of his
doctrine. And it is framed thus: As Abraham was justified, so are the children
of Abraham. Abraham

That which is said here of Abraham, is a maine ground concerning the
justification of a sinner, in the books of the old and new Testament:
therefore I will more carefully search the true interpretation of it.

Some expound the words thus: Abraham believed God, and the world reputed him
for a good, and virtuous man. But if this be the right sense, then Paul is
deceived, who brings this text to prove the justification of Abraham, not
only before

The second exposition is of the Papists, who by faith here understand, a
general faith, whereby the articles of faith are believed. And by imputation,
they understand reputation, where The end of teaching is love out of a pure
heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned. It is objected, that as the body
is dead without the soul, so is faith without works, Iam. 2. 26. and
therefore that works are the life Ans. S. James by faith, understands a
pretended faith, or the Profession of faith, as appears by the words, v. 14.
though a man say he has faith: and v. 18. show me thy faith. Now of this
profession of faith, works are the life.

Secondly, this exposition makes faith; or the act of believing, to be our
whole and entire justice before God: whereas indeed if it be justice, it is
but one part thereof. And in the act of believing, love cannot be included.

Thirdly, faith joined with charity, is not the justice whereby a sinner is
justified. For our faith and love are both imperfect: by, or through faith,
Phil. 3. 9. and therefore our justice, and our faith, are two

The third exposition is also from the Papists, that faith is reputed for
righteousness: because it is reputed to be a sufficient means to prepare men to
their justification: but this cannot be the sense of this place. For this was
spoken of Abraham

Let us now come to the true sense of the words. In them I consider two
things, Abraham's faith, in these words, Abraham believed God: and the fruit of
his faith, in these words, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Touching
his faith, I consider three things. The first is, the occasion, which was on
this manner. After the conquest of the heathen kings, Abraham was still in some
fear: in this regard the Lord comforts him, Genesis 15. 1. I am thy buckler, and
thy exceeding great reward. But to I want issue: and the Lord answers, I will
make thy seed, as the stars of heaven. Genesis 15. 5. Now then look as God
renewes and inlarges his promise to Abraham, so Abraham renewes his faith: and
hereupon Moses, and Paul, say, Abraham believed God. God does not now enlarge
his promises

The second thing is the object, or matter of his faith, and Ans. The promise
of the multiplication of his seed, was a dependant of a more principal
promise, I am thy God all-sufficient. Genesis 17. 1. and, I am thy exceeding great
reward. Genesis 15. 11. In this carnal seed, Abraham specially respected (by the
eye of faith,) the blessed seed of the woman. He therefore believed the
promise of a seed, as it was a pledge unto him of a thing more principal;
namely, the favor of God, and as it was a means to effect the incarnation of
the son of God. In his example we are taught

The third point is, the property of Abraham's faith, which was a faith against
hope. For he believed the promise of a

In the effect and fruit of Abraham's faith, three things must be considered.
The first is, what is meant by Imputation. To impute properly, is a speech
borrowed from merchants: and it signifies to reckon, or to keep a reckening of
expenses, and receipts. Thus Paul says, Philem. 18. If he have done thee any
wrong, impute it to me: that is, set it on my reckening. And this word is here
applied, to the Judgment of God. Because he is our sovereign Lord, and we are
his debtors: and he does adiudge unto men for their sins, either pardon, or
punishment.

Imputation in God, is twofold: one, Legal: the other, Evangelical. the wages
is imputed to him that works, and that of debt. Evangelical imputation is,
when God accepts the satisfaction of Christ, our surety, as a payment for our
sins. In this sense is

The second point is, what is imputed? And it was imputed, that is, faith.
Faith here must be considered two ways; first, as a quality in it self: and
thus it is imperfect, and consequently It was imputed to him, that is, the
thing which his faith believed was imputed to him by God: for the act of
believing is not our justice, as I have showed.

The third point is, what is meant by righteousness? Ans. That which is called
in Scripture, the Justice of God, which is sufficient to acquit a sinner at the
bar of Gods judgment. Thus

It is objected, that the obedience of Christ is to be imputed to none, but to
Christ, who was the doer of it. Ans. It is to be imputed, that is, ascribed to
him as to the author thereof: and withal because he did perform it in our
room, and stead, and that for us, it is to be imputed to us.

Secondly, it is objected, that works are also imputed, as well as faith. Psalm.
106. 31. Phinees exequuted judgment, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness. Ans. There is justice of the person, and justice of the act.
Justice of the person is that, which makes the person of man just. Justice of
the act, is that which makes

Thirdly, it is objected, that imputed justice was never known in the Church
till 1500 years after Christ. Ans. It is false. Bernard says expressly,
Death is put to flight by the death of Christ, Germ. ad mil. Temp. c. 11. Epist
190.
and the justice of Christ is imputed to us: and again, the satisfaction of
Christ is imputed to us. Again, sundry of the Fathers, as Augustine, Hierome,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Anselme, entreating upon the text of Paul, 2. Cor. 5.
21. avouch, that the justice whereby we are justified, is not in us, but in
Christ. And it is a received doctrine with them, that a sinner is justified by
faith alone:

The use. Hence it follows, that there is no merit of man's works, either in
the beginning, or in the accomplishment of our justification. For faith is
imputed for justice to him that believes and works not. Romans 4. 5.

Again, by this we see there is but one justification; and that the second, by
works, whereby a man, of a good man, is made better, is a mere fiction. For
just Abraham is not justified by his good works wherewith he abounded, but
after his first justification, faith still is imputed to him for righteousness.

Thirdly, here we see what is that very thing, whereby we are

Lastly, here we see our duty. God sits as a Judge over us: he takes a
reckening of us, for all our doings: the law is an handwriting

The declaration of the conclusion follows in the 9. verse, and it shows who
are the true children of Abraham. The meaning of the words must first be
considered. To be of faith, to be of Abraham's faith, is to believe, and apply
the promise of righteousness and life everlasting by Christ, as Abraham did: and
to rest in it for our justification and salvation. v. 10. they are said to be
of works,

And they which thus believe with Abraham, are said to be his children. It may
be demanded, how? Ans. Children of Abraham, them. Indeed properly the promise
and Election of God, makes them children: and Abraham by his faith believing
the foresaid promise, receives them of God as his children. In this regard
believers are called, children of the promise, Romans 9. 8. and the seed, that
is, of the faith of Abraham. Romans 4. 16. Now Ans. Great: for the children of
Abraham are children of the covenant, Act. 3. 25. and children of God. Romans 9.
8.

The use. In this verse Paul sets down one thing, namely, the true mark of
the child of Abraham, and that is, to be of the faith of Abraham. Here then
mark, first of all the Jews, though descending of Isaac, are no children of
Abraham, because they follow not the faith of Abraham. Secondly, the Turks are
no not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Math. 7. 22.

Therefore we must labor to be indeed and in truth of the faith of Abraham,
and to walk in the steps of his faith. And to this end, we must do three
things. First, we must have knowledge nature. Hebr. 11. 8. But this practice is
rare among us. For there are three things which prevail much among us, the
love of worldly honor, the love of pleasures, and the love of riches: and
where these bear a sway, there faith takes no place. It will be said, that
faith is much professed. Ans. Faith was never more professed, yet there was
never less true faith. For the

Moreover, that which Paul has said of the children of Abraham, he proves by
the testimony of the Galatians, in these words, Know ye therefore, or ye know:
that is, upon the saying of

8 For the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles



Against the argument in the two former verses, a doubt, or exception might be
moved, on this manner. We grant, that they which are of the faith of Abraham,
are justified as he was, so they be Jews, and not Gentiles. Now this doubt,
exception, or objection, Paul remooues in these verses, thus. When God said to
Abraham, In thee shall all the Gentiles be blessed; he signified, the
justification even of the Gentiles by faith: therefore all that are of faith,
even the Gentiles, are blessed of God, as Abraham

In the 8. verse, I consider three things; the occasion of the speech of God to
Abraham, namely, Gods foreknowledge: the manner of his speech, the preaching of
the Gospel to Abraham: and the testimony it self, In thee, etc.

Touching the occasion; first, it may be demanded, whether this foreknowledge
in God, be a bare foreknowledge, severed from the will of God, or no? Ans. No:
Gods foreknowledge, is in all things joined with his decree, or will. If God
should foresee things to come, and in no sort will or nill them, there Christ
was delivered by the will and foreknowledge of God, Act. 2. 23. and the Jews
for their parts did nothing in the crucifying of Christ, but that which the
hand, and counsel of God had determined to be done. Act. 4. 28. Neither is God
by this doctrine made the author of sin. For sin

Again, it may be demanded, In what order the foreknowledge of God stands to
his will. Ans. The foreknowledge of

In this text, two things are to be considered of Gods foreknowledge. The first
is, who, or what foresees? Answer is here The Scripture foresees: that is, God
foresees, and the Scripture records things foreseen by him. Hence it appears,
that the writings of Moses are the word of God. For they foretell things to
come 2000 years after, as the calling and benediction of the Gentiles in the
seed of Abraham. In the same regard the writings of Paul are the word of God.
For there he reueales and sets down in writing, more then 2000 years after,
what was the intention of God, when he said to Abraham, In thee shall all the
Gentiles be blessed.

The second point is, what is foreseen? Answer is made, that God justifies
the Gentiles, that is, God will as certe^ly justify God would have all men to
be saved, 1. Tim. 2. namely, all men, or all the Gentiles in the last age of
the world, and not all the Gentiles, of all ages, and times.

In the next place, the manner of the speech and testimony of God must be
considered, in that he is said to preach the Gospel to Abraham. Here mark the
Antiquity of the Gospel: and the marks of true religion, which for his
substance was known

The third point, is the speech, or testimony it self: In thee shall all the
Gentiles be blessed. In thee, that is, in thy seed, Christ, Genesis 22. 18. who
is in thy loins: into whom the Gentiles are All the Gentilis. but Genesis 17. 4.
Abraham is called the father, not of all, but of many nations. Ans: He is the
father of many, in respect of his fleshs and he is a father of all All: for
many Romans 5. 15. 18. And the benediction here mentioned, comprehends all the
spiritual graces of God, as vocation, justification, glorification, Ephesians. 1. v.
3.

The use. In that the Lord says, All the nations shall be blessed in Abraham,
hence I gather, that the nation of the Jews shall be called, and converted, to
the participation of this blessing: when, and how, God knows: but that it
shall be done before the end of the world, we know. For if all nations shall
be called,

Again, that which was foretold to Abraham, is verefied in our eyes. For this
our English nation, and many other nations are at this day blessed in this
seed of Abraham. Upon the consideration of this, we are admonished of many
things. First, In thy seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed, or,
bless themselves: because they shall use all good means, that they may be
filled with the blessings of God. Thirdly, we must bless all, do good to all,
and hurt we are heirs of blessings 1. Pet. 3. 8. Lastly, we must here mark
our comfort: if we truly turn to God, and believe in the holy seed of
Abraham, all things shall go well with us: God shall bless them that bless
us, and curse them that curse us. Genesis 12. 3.

The ninth verse, is the conclusion of Paul's answer: and it is in effect and
substance one and the same with v. 7. and it signifies that all men that be of
Abraham's faith, (though otherwise forrainers and Gentiles to Abraham,) shall be
partakers of the same blessing of God with him. It may be said: How shall we
Ans. god respects not the greatness of our faith so much, as the truth of it.
And if faith err not in his object: that is, if we make Christ crucified our
Redeemer, and join nothing to him: if there be further, a will to believe, and
to apprehend Christ,

10 For as many as be of the works of the law, are under the curse. For it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the
Law, to do them.

In these words, Paul sets down a second reason, whereby he proves that not
only the Jews, but also the Gentiles, are blessed as Abraham was, by faith.
And the reason is drawn from the contraries, thus. They that are of works,
that is, that

Whereas Paul says, that they are under the curse, that will be of works, we
see the whole world almost, walks in the way of perdition: it is a conclusion
of nature, that we must be saved, Good master, what must I do, to be saved?
The Jews would not be subject to the justice of God, but they est^blished
their own righteousness of the law, Romans 10. 3. Our common people, and they
that should be wise, say, they look to be saved by faith:

Hence again it follows, that the Papacy, or Popish reli gion, is the way to
perdition, in that it prescribes, and teaches, Steven Gardener a bloody
persecutor, being on his death bed told, of free justification by the blood of
Christ, You may tell this to me, but do not open this gappe to the people. One
of late in a public execution of justice, said, he would die a Catholic, and
withal he added, that he looked to be saved only by the passion of Christ.

In the proof of the reason, three things are to be considered: What the curse
is? who are cursed? and when?

The curse is eternal woe and misery: and it is either in this life, in the
end of this life, or in the life to come.

The curse in this life, is either within man, or without him.

The curse without us, is threefold. The first is, a spiritual

The second, is an Enmity of all the creatures with man, since the fall. And
this appears, because when God receives us to be

The third contains, all losses, calamities, miseries, in goods, friends, good
name. Read Deuteronomy. 28.

The curse in the end of this life, is death, which is the separation

The curse after this life, is the second death: which is separation of body
and soul from God, with a full apprehension of as there are drops in the sea,
and then have an end, it were some comfort: but when that time is expired, man
is as far from the end of his woe, as ever he was.

This in sum and substance is the curse here mentioned: and it were to be
wished, that men would more think and speak of it, then they do: then would
there be more conscience of

The next point is, who are cursed. Ans. They which do not all things written
in the law. Here, is an Item for them, that will keep some commandments, but
not all. Herod would do He that breaks one commandment, is guilty of all.
Iam. 2. And there is good reason, that he which obaies, should obey in all. For
where God renewes, he sanctifies throughout, and fills them with the seed of
all grace, that they may perform obedience,

Again, he is cursed, that does not all things which the law prescribes; or
if he do them, yet does not continue in all. So then he is cursed, that
breaks the law but once, and that only in one thought: for such an one does
not continue in all things.

The only way of help is this. Thou must fly from this sentence of the law,
to the throne of grace for mercy; instantly asking, seeking, knocking at the
gate of mercy, for pardon of thy sins. And that thou may be encouraged to
this duty. consider with me, that at thy first Purpose to amend, and to turn
unto God, thy sins are pardoned in heaven. David says, Psalm. 32. 5. I
thought I will confess my sins against my self, and thou forgauest me.
Mark the speech, I thought. The prodigal child, Luke 15. upon his purpose to
return to his father, I have sinned, Nathan in the name of God said, Thy sin
is forgiven thee. It may be, thou will say, the curse is absolute. Ans. The
threatenings of the law must be understood with an exception, which the Gospel
makes, on Except he repent. Jonas preached, yet forty days, and Niniuie
shall be destroyed: yet withal he adds an exception: It may be the Lord will
repent of his fierce wrath. Ion. 5. 9. Again, thou will say, my sins are
very grievous Ans. Forgiveness is promised without any limitation, to any number
or kinds of sin: (only the sin against the H. Ghost excepted.) Therefore
appeal with boldness in thy heart to the throne of grace, entreat for
forgiveness as for life and death, and thou shall escape

The third point is, when is a sinner accursed? Ans. In present, in the time of
this life. For the Lord says not, he shall be accursed: but, he is accursed.
There be among us whom no sermons or exhortations will amend: and such persons
think

Lastly, a memorable conclusion of Paul is here to be observed. not the law:
therefore he is accursed. I further prove it thus. If we could fulfill the
law, we might be justified by the law: but no man can be justified by the law,
or by works: therefore, no man can fulfill the law. Again, Paul says, Romans
7. 14. that the law was spiritual, requiring inward and spiritual obedience,
and that he was carnal, and therefore not conformable he was sold under sin:
that when he would do good, evil was present: that he carried about him the
body of death. And all this he says of himself, about twenty years after
his own conversion. Such as our knowledge is, such is our love, to God and
man. Now we know God only in part: All our righteousness is as a defiled cloth.
Prou. 20. 9. Who can say, my heart is clean? Job cannot answer God for one of
a thousand, Job. 9. The righteous man shall pray for the pardon of his sins
in a time when he may be heard, Psalm. 32. 6. If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves. 1. Ioh. 1. 9. The Papists say, that all these places are
meant of venial sins. Ans. There are no venial The stipend of every sin
is death. Romans 6. 23. If we were perfectly sanctified, and consequently
fulfillers of the law in this life, then Christ should not be a Savior, but an
Instrument of God, to make us our own Saviors.

The use. This point serves notably to condemn the folly of the world. The
Israelites say at Mount Sinai, that they will do all things which the Lord
shall command them. Exodus 19. 8. The young Prince said, that he had kept all
the commandments from his youth. Mark. 10. 20. Our common people say, that
they can love God with all their hearts, and their neighbors as themselves.

Secondly, this doctrine serves to confute sundry Errors of the Papists, who
blasphemously teach, that a man after justification, may fulfill the law in
this life: that a man may for a time be without all sin: that works of the
regenerate are perfect, and may be opposed to the judgment of God: that men
may supererrogate, and do more then the law requires. The ground

Object. I. God promifeth the Israelites, that he will circumcise their hearts,
that they may love him with all their hearts, with all their souls, and with
all their strength. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. And thus Joshua turned to God with all his
heart, with all his soul, and with all his strength according to all the law
of Moses. 2. king. 23. 25. Ans. The phrase [with all thy heart] is taken in a
double signification. Sometime it is opposed to a double heart, and then it not
to fight with a double heart, 1. Chron. 12. 33. but with a perfect heart, v.
38. Where, mark the opposition, of an whole or perfect heart, to a double
heart. In this sense are the places before named, to be understood. the law, is
spiritual; and by the prohibition of lust, gives the meaning of the whole law.

Object. II. Noah is said to be just and perfect, Genesis 6. and God commands
Abraham to walk before him, and to be perfect, Genesis 17. 1. Paul says, Let as
many as be perfect, be thus minded, Answ. There is a double perfection;
perfection of parts, and perfection of degrees. Perfection of parts is, when a
man has in him, after he is regenerate, the beginnings of all vertnes, and the
seeds of all graces: by which he endeauours, to obey God in all his laws and
commandments. Perfection of degrees, is, when the law is fulfilled both in
matter, and manner, according to the rigor of the law. Now the former places
speak only of the perfection of parts: and that is such a perfection in which
we are to acknowledge our imperfection, and it is no more but a true and
general endeavor to obey God. Isa. 38. 1.

Object. III. Sundry holy men are said to fulfill the law: David turned from
nothing that God commanded him all the days of his life, save in the matter of
Vriah. 1. king. 15. 5. Zachary and Elizabeth walked in all the commandments
of God, and that without reproof before God. Luke 1. 6. Ans. There are two
kinds of fulfilling the law: one Legal, the other Evangelical. Legal is,
when men do all things required in the law, and that by themselves and in
themselves. Thus none ever fulfilled the law, but Christ, and Adam before his
fall. The Evangelical manner of

Object. IIII. We pray that we may fulfill the law, when Let thy will be done
in earth, as it is in heaven. Ans. We pray not that we may fulfill the law in
this, but that we may strive as much as may be, to attain to the fulfilling of
the law. That is the scope of the petition. We desire not to be equal to the
Angels, and Saints; but only to imitate them more and

Object. V. Romans 7. 18. To will is present with me: therefore (say they) in
will the law may be kept, though the flesh relent. Ans. When Paul says, that
to will was present, he does not signify that he could perfectly will that
which is good. For his

Object. UI. Christ took out flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us. Romans 8. 4. Ans. The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in
us, not because we do all things required in the law, but because we have
faith in us, and by that faith we apprehend the obedience of Christ in
fulfilling of the law.

Object. VII. Romans 13. 8. Love is the fulfilling of the law: and Ans. If we
could love our neighbor as our selves, perfectly, we should then fulfill the
whole law. But our love is imperfect.

Object. UIII. He that is borne of God sins not: 1. Ioh. 3. he that sins
not, fulfills the law. Ans. He that is borne of God sins not, that is, he
does not commit sin, or make a practice of sin. He may fall of frailty,
yet then he recouers himself, and does not keep a course in sinning. This is
the meaning of S. John.

Object. IX. The commandments of God are not grievous. 1. Ans. They are not
grievous three ways; first, in respect of remission: because they that believe
in Christ, have the transgression of the law pardoned. Secondly, in respect of
imputation: because Christ's obedience in fulfilling the law, is imputed to
every believer. Thirdly, in respect of inchoation. For they

Object. X. The works of God are perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Good Ans. Works, that
are merely works of God, which he works by himself, and not by man, they
are all perfect: and thus must the text in Moses be understood. Now good works,
are works of God in us: and withal they are our works, having

Object. XI. If God have given us an impossible law, he is more cruel then any
tyrant. Ans. When God first gave the law, he also gave power to fulfill the
law. If the law be impossible, it is not Gods fault, but man's, who by his own
fault has lost this power of keeping the law.

The ground before named of the double fulfilling of the law, one for this
life, the other for the life to come, is false. For there is only one
general, and unchangeable sentence of the law, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things written in the law to do them.

I now come to other uses of the former conclusion. If the who is the end of
the law for righteousness, to them that believe. Hence it follows necessarily,
that our justification must be by the imputation, or application of Christ's
justice unto us.

Because we cannot fulfill the law, we must make it a glass to see our
impotencie, and what we cannot do: and it must be our schoolmaster to drive
us to Christ. And by our impotencie we must take occasion to make prayer to God
for his spirit to enable us to obey the laws of God. Thus come we to be

Again, it may be demanded, (considering we cannot fulfill the law,) how our
works can please God? Ans. In every good work, there is something that is
Gods, and something that is ours alone. The defect of the work is ours alone,
and that is

Lastly, after that we have begun to please God in obedience to his laws,
considering we fulfill them not, all boasting

11 And that no man is justified

12 And the law is not of faith:

The meaning. By the law] that is, the law not only ceremonial, but also
judicial and moral. Indeed the occasion of Paul's disputation in this place,
is taken from Circumcision, pertaining to the ceremonial law: but he inlarges
his disputation, from one part to the whole law. For they which thought
Ceremonies necessary to justification, would much more Cursedis every one,
etc. Again, the law may be considered, two ways, in the justification of a
sinner: first, as it justifies without Christ.

Before God] that is, in the judgment of God, before whose

The just shall live by faith.] The scope of these words is this. The Jews
were oppressed by the Babylonians, and it was further told them by the Prophet,
that they should be led into captivity, by the said Babylonians. Now in
this distress of justification of life. Romans 5. 17.

The law is not of faith] The meaning of these words must be gathered, by the
opposition in the latter part of the verse: but he that does these things shall
live in them. And the meaning is this. The law does not prescribe faith in the
Messiah: neither does it promise life to him that believes in the Messiah, but
to him that does the things contained in the law.

In these words, Paul adds a new argument to the former, the Prophet Habacuk.
The assumption is in the 12. verse.

The use. When Paul says, No man is justified by the law in the sight of God:
he makes a double justification: one, before God: the other, before me^.
Justification before God is, when God reputes a man just, and that only for
the merit, and obedience of Christ. Justification before men, is, when such as
profess faith in that a man is justified by faith without works, Romans 3. 28.
and James, who says, that Abraham was justified by faith, and works, Iam. 2.
24. are reconciled: for Paul speaks of justification before God, as he
himself expressly testifies, Romans 4. 2.

In the same sort, there is a double Election. One special, whereby God knows
who are his. The other, is more general, whereby we repute all men to be
Elect, that profess faith in

In the same manner, there is a double sanctification: one before God, in
truth, Ephesians. 4. 28. the other before men, in the judgment of charity. Thus men
are said, to tread under foot the blood of Christ wherewith they were
sanctified. Hebr. 10. 29. Thus all that are of right to be baptized, are holy
and regenerate: not in the judgment of certentie, which is Gods; but in

Again, when Paul says, in the sight of God, he gives us to understand, that
there is an universal judgment of God, before whom we must all appear, and
be judged. And when Paul God justifies (though not by works) he signifies,
that this judgment is already begun upon us, even in this life. This must
teach us, to walk in godly and holy conversation, in the fear of God: and to
watch and pray, that we may be found worthy, to stand before God. of us: and
therefore we must prepare our selves to make a good reckoning.

In the testimony of the Prophet our duty is set down, and that is, that we
must in this world live by faith. That we may live by faith, we must do two
things. One is, to choose the true God for our God: the second is, in our
hearts to cleave unto

Mark further, Paul says, the just man lives by faith: he therefore that is
justified continues to be justified by his faith: and therefore the second
justification, that is said to be by our works, is a mere fiction. And in that
none lives by faith, but he that is

When Paul says [the Law is not of faith] he sets down the his faith, or for
any work else, but for the merit of Christ. The law the^ requires doing to
salvation, and the Gospel believing, and nothing else.

Object. I. The Gospel requires repentance, and the practice of it. Ans.
Indeed the law does not teach true repentance; neither is it any cause of it,
but only an occasion. The Gospel

Object. II. The law requires and commands faith. Ans. The law requires faith
in God, which is to put our affiance in

Object. III. In the Gospel there are promises of life, upon condition of our
obedience. Romans 8. 13. Jf by the spirit ye mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye
shall live. 1. Ioh. 1. 9. If we confess our sins, God is faithful to
forgive them. Ans. The promises of the Gospel are not made to the work, but to
the worker: and to the worker not for his work: but for Christ's sake, according
to his work. As for example: promise of life is made not to the

Object. IV. Faith is a virtue, and to believe is a work: therefore one work
is commanded in the Gospel, and is also necessary to salvation. Ans. The
Gospel considers not faith as a virtue, or work, but as an instrument, or
hand, to apprehend

This distinction of the law and the Gospel, must be observed carefully. For by
it we see that the Church of Rome has oversight in mistaking the distinction
of the Law and the Gospel, is and has bin, the ruin of the gospel.

We must here further observe, that Cr^dere. Fac(...).
believing, and doing, are opposed, in the article of our justification. In our
good conversation they agree: faith goes before, and doing follows:

Lastly, it may be demanded, why the Lord says, He that does the things of
the law shall live; considering no man since the fall, can do the things of
the law? Ans. The Lord since man's fall, repeates the law in his old tenor, not
to mock men, but for other weighty causes. The first is, to teach us that the
law is of a constant, and unchangeable nature. The second is, to

13 Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made a curfe
for us: (for it is written,

14 That the blessing of Abraham the promise of the spirit by faith.

Paul having proved the truth of his doctrine by sundry arguments, in the
former part of this chapter, he here answers an objection, the occasion
whereof is from the 10. verse. It may be framed on this manner: If they be
accused that continue Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law. The
second is the form or manner of our Redemption, in these words, When he was
made a curse for us. And this form is further declared by the sign, in these
words: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on the tree. The
third argument is in the end, in these words, that the blessing of Abraham
might come on the Gentiles. The last is also an other end, that we might
receive the promise of the spirit.

Touching the Author, in these words, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the law, sundry things may be learned. First of all, comparing these words
with the 10. verse, or comparing the answer, and the objection together, we see
and are to observe, that the threatenings of the law, are to be understood with
an exception from the Gospel. All are cursed, says the law, that Except they
have pardon, and be redeemed by Christ, says the Gospel. And thus are all
curses of the law to be conceived, with a limitation or qualification, from the
Gospel.

Again, in that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of For we are bought
with a price. And for this cause, we must be admonished, not to fear any evil
overmuch, as the reuilings, and curses of evil tongues, withcraft,

Thirdly, our duty is, to glorify God and Christ, who has redeemed us, and
that both in body and soul. The redeemed must live according to the will of
their redeemer. 1. Cor. 6. 20. This is all the thankfulness that we can show to
our Redeemer for his mercy.

Lastly, here an objection made by some, may be answered. Ans. We were captives
properly to the justice of God in the law, to the order whereof we stand
subject: and by

I come now to the form of our Redemption, Who was made a curse for us. For
the better understanding of these words, four points are to be handled. The
first is, what is this curse? Ans. A double death: the first of the body, the
second of the

The second point is, How Christ was a curse, or accursed, who is the fountain
of blessedness? Ans. He is not so by nature: for he is the natural son of
God: nor by his own he was made a curse. And he was made a curse, first,
because he was set a part in the eternal counsel of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, to be our redeemer, and consequently to be a curse. In this regard,
the to have sealed him, Ioh. 6. 27. and he is said again to be prcordained
before all worlds, 1. Pet. 1. 20. and given according to the counsel and
foreknowledge of God. Act. 3. 22. Secondly, he was made a curse, in that he was
in time consecrated to be our Mediator and so a curse. And this consecration
was first in his baptism, in which he put upon him our guilt, as we put off
the same in ours; and secondly on the cross and passion, in which he took
unto him the punishment of our sin. And thus was he made a curse. It may be
objected, that he is the Son of God: and therefore no curse. Ans. Christ must
be considered as the Son of God, and again as our pledge and surety.

The third point is, In what nature was Christ accursed? Ans. Whole Christ
God-man, or Man-god, was accursed. For the Lord of life (says Paul) was
cr^cified, and consequently accursed. 1. Cor. 2. 8. Yet this limitation must be
added, that the curse was not upon the Godhead of Christ, but only in his
flesh, or manhood. For he suffered (says Peter) in the flesh. 1. Pet. 4. 1.
Moreover, the soul of Christ was the more principal seat of he made his soul
an offering for sin, Isa. 53. 10. and Christ said, My soul is heavy to the
death.

The fourth point is, How far forth Christ was accursed? Ans. In the first
death there are two degrees, separation of the putrefaction of the body
separated. And Christ entered only into the first, and not into the second. For
his body being dead endured no corruption. Again, in the second death there
are two degrees. The first is, a separation from God in sense and feeling: and
the second, is an absolute My God, my God. And this absolute separation could
not be without the dissolution of the personal union. Into the first degree of
the second death, he entered: namely, into the apprehension Ans. He endured it
willingly of his own accord: he did not only in mind see it before his eyes,
but also he felt it: it was laid and imposed on him, and he incountred with it:
but it had no dominion of lordship over him. Act. 2. 24. The second is, How
much he suffered of the wrath of God? Ans. The punishment he suffered was in
value and measure answerable to all the

Object. I. The Scripture ascribes all to the blood of Christ, and therefore to
the death of the body. Ans. By blood, is meant

Object. II. The suffering of the anger of God was not figured in Sacraments or
sacrifices. Ans. The beast, whereof

Object. III. Temporal death, or the curse for half a day Ans. Yes, in
Christ. For if man could suffer and overcome punishment in measure infinite, he
should not suffer eternally: but this no man nor angel can do: and therefore
man must suffer punishment for measure finite, for time infinite: because the
punishment must be it is more, then if all men had suffered eternal death.
Therefore the death of Christ in respect of the measure of the punishment, as
also in respect of the value, and dignity thereof, counteruailes death
everlasting.

Object. IV. It is hard to say, that Christ suffered the pains of hell. Ans.
The Latin translation (commonly received,) has he could not be holden of the
sorrows of hell, Act. 2. 24. And there is no offense to say, he suffered the
pains of hell, so far forth as this suffering may stand with the purity of
his manhood, and with the truth of the personal union.

The use. Friars teach, that if Christ had pricked his finger, and let fall but
one drop of blood, it had bin sufficient to redeem all the world. But they
dream. For Paul says, he was made the curse of the law, to redeem us. This
had bin a needles work, if a prick in the finger, or any punishment without

That Christ became a curse for us, it shows, the greatness and horriblenes of
our sins, it shows the grievous hardness of our hearts, that never almost
mourn for them: it shows the unspeakable love and mercy of God, for which we
are to be

In that the Son of God became a curse for our sins, we are put in mind,
to see, acknowledge, and consider them, and withal to bewail them, and to
humble our selves for them: and to detest them more and more, unto the very
death. For There is no Christ, there is no curse, that was endured by Christ.
Cleanse your hearts of this hidden Atheism, and look that inwardly in your
spirits, you die unto your sins, and live to God.

In that Christ was obedient to his Father in bearing the curse of the law, we
are taught in all things to subject our selves to the will of God. Our
obedience must not only be in doing this or that, but also in suffering the
miseries ^^d on us to the death: this is the best obedience of all, and the
truest mark of Gods child, to obey in our sufferings.

Moreover, that Christ was accursed, it is confirmed by the sentence and decree
of God: Cursed is every one that hangs on the tree. Deuteronomy. 21. 23. The ground
of this sentence is the sin of the malefactor: for whom God curses, he
curses for his offense. And here it may be demanded, why he that is stoned
Ans. He also is accursed: but there are special reasons why the man hanged on
the tree is cursed. First, among the Jews, they which were hanged, were most
grievous malefactors, as blasphemers, and idolatours: and there punishment was
accordingly, most grievous. Ans. As a thief, he was accursed; as

The use. If the malefactor hanged, be accursed, and defile the earth: how
vile and accursed is the living malefactor, the

Again, let us consider the scope of this law. Because he that hangs on the
tree, is accursed: therefore says the law of God, he must be taken down, and
buried. Mark the equity of this law: and that is, that things evil and
accursed, are to be removed from the eye and sense of man. This charge the
Lord gives of less matters, namely, of sights indecent, and unseemly. Deuteronomy.
23. 15. Again, we are commanded not so much as to name vile and wicked
fashions of the world, and the misdemeanour of men, which are things accursed,
and therefore to be buried, and not once to be spoken of. Again, all evil in
our example, whether in word, or in deed, must be buried, as much as may be:
for it defiles, and is accursed.

Here it may be demanded, how this law of God, (he is accursed: therefore let
him be taken down, and buried) stands with the order used in this and other
countries, in which men are hanged in chains for the terror of the world?
Ans. Judicial laws, if they have in them moral equity, and serve directly
to fense in the precepts of the Decalogue, are perpetual, and

The third point, whereby our redemption is described, is the end thereof,
that the blessing of Abraham, that is, righteousness and life everlasting, may
come upon the Gentiles. Here two things are to be considered. The first is,
whence comes the benediction of Abraham? Ans. From the cursed death of Christ.
He was made a curse for us, that the b^^ediction of Abraham might come on the
Gentiles. Mark here how God works one contrerie by the other. In the
creation, he made something, not of something, but of nothing: he called light
out of darkness: he kills, and then makes alive, Hos. 6. he sends men to heaven,
by the gates of hell: he gave sight by a

The second point is, where this benediction of Abraham is to be found. Ans.
The text say, It is extant in Christ Jesus, who is as it were the storehouse of
Gods blessing, and the dispenser of it to all nations. In him are hid all
treasures of wisdom, and can want nothing. Romans 8. 32. Matthew. 6. 33. Psalm. 34.
10. This is a most sure way to procure unto us all good things that he sees to
be necessary for us. For Christ is the storehouse of the benediction of
Abraham. Again, this must teach them that believe in Christ, to be content in
any estate, be it better or

The fourth point is, an other end of our Redemption, That we might receive the
promise of the spirit by faith. For the better understanding of this, four
questions may be demanded. The first is, what is meant by the promise? Ans. The
promise of God The vision of God (says the Prophet) is for an appointed time.
Hab. 2. 1. and so is the promise. This must teach us to be content, if after
much his eyes failed, and he was hoarse in praying. Psalm. 69. 4.

The second question is, what is meant by the giving, or sending Ans. Without
any alteration or change of place, it signifies two things. The first is, Order
between the persons, whereby the Father, and the Son work mediately by the
holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost immediately from them. The second is, that the
Spirit does manifest his presence by divine effects in us. In this respect he
is said to be sent, or given of the Father, and the Son.

The third point is, In what order is the spirit given? For it seems, that we
first of our selves believe, and then receive the spirit? Ans. Men are said to
receive the spirit, when they receive

The fourth point is, for what end we receive the spirit? Ans. For six. For
illumination of our minds, 1. Ioh. 2. 27. 1.

This receiving of the spirit, is one special end of our redemption: and
therefore it is most necessary for us, to have the spirit of God dwelling in
us. If we have not the spirit, we are not Christ's: and without it, we can do
nothing.

We must for this cause do such things, whereby we may obtain and receive a
plentiful measure of Gods spirit. Repent (says Peter) and ye shall receive
the holy Ghost.

Again, we must carefully retain and preserve the grace of the spirit in us;
by meditation in the word of God; by earnest

15 Brethren, I speak as men do: though it be but a man's covenant, when it is
confirmed, no man does

16 Now to Abraham and his

17 And this I say, that the law which was 430 years after, cannot

17 For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more by promise, but

In these words, Paul meets with a second Exception, or to the Gentiles,
because the law was added to it, and by the law it is abrogated: and therefore
the Gentiles are to be justified, and faued, by the observation of the law. To
this objection, Paul makes a double answer. One is, that the promise cannot be
abrogated: the second, that if it might be abrogated, yet the law cannot do
it. The first he confirms on this manner: The Testament of God confirmed,
cannot be abrogated:

The promises made to Abraham and his seed, which is Christ, are his Testament
confirmed:

Therefore they cannot be abrogated.



The proposition is expressed in the 17. verse, and is confirmed by comparison,
thus. The testament of man after it is confirmed, may not be abrogated: much
less the testament of God. minor is propounded in the 16. and 17. verses. Now
I come to speak of the words as they lie.

Brethreu] Paul had before called them fools; and that justly, because they
fell from the doctrine which he taught them, to an other Gospel. And yet here
he calls them brethren. And

Again, here we see it is lawful, to speak in Sermons as men do, so it be
done after the example of Paul, with these cautions. First, it must be done
sparingly, and soberly, without ostentation. Secondly, it must be done upon a
just cause, as the doctrine which is taught, and the word of man is to be
added, in respect of our infirmity to give light, or to convince.

That which Paul speaks after the manner of men, is a principle of law, or a
conclusion of the light of nature, namely, that a Covenant or testament
confirmed, may not be abrogated. Paul says, it is the property of them that
are of reprobate truce breakers. Romans 1. 30. Hence sundry questions may be
resolved. The first is, whether Legacies given to the maintenance of the Mass,
may be applied to the maintenance of the true worship of God? Ans. The testator
in the giving

The second question is, whether we are to keep covenant with heretics, and
enemies? Ans. Yea: for the principle, A covenant confirmed, may not be
abrogated, is the conclusion of nature,

The third question is, what if damages and losses follow upon the covenant
made and confirmed, must it then be observed? Ans. Of covenants some are
single, that is, bare promises, A good man swears, and changes not, though
he lose thereby. Psalm. 15. 4.

The fourth question is, whether a contract may not be dissolved, when one of
the parties has a disease contagious in deadly manner, and incurable? Ans. If
such a disease follow the contract, the marriage not consummate, we may presume
that God does dissolve the contract. And the covenant dissolved by God, we may
without danger hold to be abrogated.

The last question is, whether the Church of Rome has not dealt wickedly in
altering the last testament of Christ, when it ministers the Lords supper
under one kind? Ans. They sin against the light of nature, which teaches us
not to abrogate Ans. True indeed. But we must consider the end of the
sacraments is to signify and represent, perfect nourishment, in, and by
Christ: now perfect nourishment is not in bread alone, but in bread and wine:
and by them both joined together, is signified,

In the 16. verse Paul says, the promises were made to Abraham, [seede] is a
name collectiue, and signifies the whole posterity of Abraham. Ans. It does
sometime, but not always: for Eve says of Seth, God has given me an other
seed, Genesis 4. 25. that is, an other son.

Lastly, it is said, that this one particular seed of Abraham is Christ Jesus.
Here by the name Christ, first and principally the Mediator is meant, and then
secondly all Jews and Gentiles that the children of God, or, the children of
the promise, are the seed of Abraham: again, Gal. 3. 29. They which are of
Christ, are the seed of Abraham. And the name, Christ, signifies not only the
head or Mediator, God and man, but also the Church gathered partly of Jews,
and partly of Gentiles. The body (says Paul) is one, but the members are
many: even so is Christ, 1. Cor. 11. 12. that is, the Church of Christ. Again,
I bear in my body the remainders of the sufferings of Christ, Col. 1. 24. and
the Church is called the complement of Christ. Ephesians. 1. 23. It may be objected,
that by this means the seed of Abraham, is many, and not one: because Christ
and all believers are the seed. Ans. They are all one in respect of one and
the same blessing of God, which is first given to All are one in Christ, Gal.
3. 28. and he gathers things in heaven and earth into one head. Ephesians. 1. 10.

It is here to be observed, that the promises made to Abraham, are first made
to Christ, and then in Christ to all that believe

Secondly, by this we learn to acknowledge the communion that is between
Christ and us. Christ as Mediator, is first of all elected, and we in him:
Christ is first justified, that is, acquit

Thirdly, here we see the ground of the Certentie of perseverance, of all them
that are the true children of God. For the office of Christ to which he is set
a part, is to receive the promise of God for us, and to apply it unto us. And
this work

Lastly, here is comfort against the consideration of our unworthiness. Thou
say thou art unworthy of the mercy of God, and therefore have no hope. And
I say again: do thou truly exercise thy self in the spiritual exercises of
faith, invocation, repentance? be not discouraged: thou must not receive the
promise immediately of God, but Christ must do it for he will not quench the
flax that does but smoke, neither will he break the bruised reed. He
accepts the weak apprehension,

v. 17. This I say] In the former verses Paul has laid down two grounds: one
is, that testaments of men confirmed, may This I say, that is, the scope and
intent of all my speech is, to show, that the covenant confirmed cannot be
abrogated, he explanes himself in the end of the verse by saying, the promise
cannot be made of no effect.

It is here to be observed, that Paul says, the promise made to Abraham is a
covenant, or, testament. It is a Covenant or compact, because God for his part
promises remission of sins children of wrath by nature, as we all are.

Again, in that the promise is a testament, remission of sins, and life
everlasting, is a Legacy: and for the obtainment of the^, we must bring
nothing unto God, but hunger and thirst after them, and make suit unto God for
them, by asking, seeking,

Again, Paul says, that the promise made to Abraham is a covenant confirmed
of God. It may be demanded, by what means it was confirmed? Ans. By oath. Heb.
6. 17. Again, it may be demanded, to whom it was confirmed? Ans. To Abraham,
as being the father of all the faithful, and then to his seed, that

Here again we see Gods goodness. We are bound simply

Again, here we are admonished to rest by faith on the promise of God, as
Abraham did, when there is no hope. Some

And hence we are to gather sure hope of life everlasting.

Lastly, in that God thus confirms unto us the promise of life everlasting, it
must encourage us to all diligence in the use of all good means, whereby we
may attain to the condition of Abraham: and it must arm us to all patience in
bearing the miseries and calamites that fall out, in the strait way to eternal
life

Further, Paul says, that the promise is a covenant confirmed, and that in
respect of Christ: because he is the scope and foundation of all the promises
of God: partly by merit, and partly by efficacy. By merit; because he has
procured by his death and passion, remission of sins and life everlasting. By
his efficacy; because he seals up unto us in our consciences, remission of

The second answer of Paul to the former objection, is, that if the promise
made to Abraham might be disanulled, yet the law could not do it. And he gives
a double reason. The first is 430 years before the law was given: therefore
says Paul, the law was not given to disanull the promise.

Against this reason it may be objected, that Abraham's seed, was but 400 years
in a strange land. Genesis 15. 13. Ans. Moses speaks of the time that was from
the beginning of Abraham's seed, or from the birth of Isaac to the giving of
the law: and Paul here speaks of the time that was between the giving of the
promise to Abraham, and the giving of the law: and that

Again, it may be objected, that the Israelites were in Egypt 430 years.
Fxod. 12. 40. The dwelling of the children of Israel, while they dwelled in
Egypt, was 430 years. Therefore it seems Ans. The meaning of Moses in this
place, is thus much: that the dwelling of the children of Israel, while they
dwelt as pilgrims, was for the space of 430 years: and that in ^art of this
time they dwelt in Egypt as strangers. The words may thus be translated, The
dwelling or Peregrination of the children of Israel, in which they dwelt in
Egrpt, was 430 years. And this peregrination begins in the calling of
Abraham, and ends at the giving of the law.

In Paul's example, we see what it is to search the Scriptures, not only to
consider the scope of whole books, and the parts thereof; but to ponder and
weigh, every sentence, and every part of every sentence, and every circumstance
of time, place, person. This is the right form of the study of divinity to
be used of the sons of the Prophets.

The second reason used by Paul, is in the 18. v. it may be framed

The opposition between the law and the promise, shows that Paul in this
Epistle speaks not only of the ceremonial, but also of the moral. For the
greatest opposition is between the moral law, and the free promise of God.

Let us again mark here the difference between the law and the Gospel. The
law promises life but to the worker, for his works, or upon condition of
obedience. The Gospel called by Paul, the promise, offers and gives life freely
without the Ans. The Gospel has in it no moral condition of any thing to be
done of us. Indeed faith is mentioned after the form and manner of a
condition; but in truth it is the free gift of God, as well as Justification.

Thirdly, we must here observe, the opposition between the Law and the free
promise of God, in justification of a sinner. For if life come by the law, it
comes not by the promise, says Paul. And Romans 4. 14. If they which are of the
law are heirs, the promise is of none effect. By this we see the Church of
Rome ouerturnes and abrogates, the free promise of God. For they of that Church
teach, that the first justification is by mere mercy: and that the second, is
by the works of the law. But the law and the promise cannot be mixed together,
more then fire and water: the law joined with the free promise, disanulls the
said promise.

Lastly, in that Paul says, God gave and freely bestowed the inheritance by
the promise, it must be considered, that this Giving they shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven: and after

19 Wherefore then serves the law? it was added because of transgressions,

20 Now a Mediator is not of one: but God is one.

Paul has proved before, that the law does not abolish the promise: his last
reason was; because then the inheritance should be by the law: which cannot be.
Against this reason in the 19 and 20 verses, there is an objection made, and
answered. The objection is this. If life and justice come not by the law, the
law then is in vain. And this objection is expressed by way of interrogation,
Wherefore then serves the law? The answer is, in the next words, It is added
for transgressions, that is, for till the seed came to which the promise was
made: that is, till Christ come and accomplish the work it is added for
transgressions, till Christ. Ans. The law serves to reveal sin, even to the
end of the world: yet in respect of the legal or Mosaicall manner of but till
Christ. For the law before Christ did convince men of sin, not only by
precepts and threatenings, but also by Rites and Ceremonies. For Jewish
washings, and sacrifices, were real confessions of sin. And they were an
handwriting against us, as Paul says. And this manner till Christ.

The second question is, whether the seed of Abraham Ans. All that followed
the steps of Abraham's faith before Christ, were his seed. Yet were they not,
that seed, that is, the principal seed, who is Christ, who is the seed
blessed in himself, and giving blessedness to all other. And the believers that
were before Christ or after him,

When Paul says, ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, he makes a
declaration of that which he had said before by an Evident sign, on this
manner. That the law serves to discover transgressions, it appears by this,
that the Jews could not abide to receive the law immediately from God, but it
was delivered by Angels, and received by the hand of a Mediator: and this
argues man's guiltines, and his disagreement with God; because a Mediator is of
two, at the least, and of

The law is said to be ordained or disposed by Angels: because they were
attendants on God in the Mount, when the law was delivered. Secondly, they were
witnesses and approouers of the delivery. Thirdly, it may be, the voice of God
the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, Hebr. 2. 2. that is, the law. It may be
said, all this proves not, that Angels ordained the law. Ans. Often in
Scripture, the to judge the world, 1. Cor. 6. whereas indeed they are no more
but witnesses and approouers of this judgment. In the same manner Timothy is
said to save himself and others, 1. Tim. 4. 16. The last trumpet

Moreover Paul says, the law was delivered by the hand of a Mediator, that
is, of Christ, (as some think:) but that cannot be: for the hand of a
Mediator, signifies the ministry and one Mediator Christ, 1. Tim. 2. 8.
Ans. Mediator of reconciliation is only one, and that is Christ: and Moses is
a Mediator only in the relating and reporting the law from God to the
Israelites.

Paul adds, that a Mediator is not of one, that is, that every God is one:
that is, always the same and like himself without change. And the reason of
the speech is this. Paul has taught that the law was given by a Mediator, and
that this declared a difference between God and man. Now it might be said,
where is the fault in this difference, and who is the cause of it? Paul says,
not God, but man: because God is always one and the same.

The use. In that the law is for transgressions, we are taught to examine and
search our hearts, and lives by the law of God. Fan you, O nation, not
worthy to be loved. Lam. 3. 40. Let us search our hearts, and turn again to
the Lord. That we may the better examine our selves, four rules must be
observed.

The first, when any one sin is forbidden in any commandment

The second, a commandment negative includes the affirmative, and binds us not
only to abstain from evil, but also to do the contrary good.

The third is, that every commandment must be understood with a curse annexed
to it, though the curse be not expressed.

The fourth is, that we must especially examine our selves by the first and
last commandments. For the first forbids the Thou shall not lust, was it that
especially humbled him. Romans 7.

According to these and other rules, (which now I omit) we must with special
care examine our selves. The want of this duty, causes men to rot away in
their sins, without remorse or true repentance: and it is the cause that so
many men profit so little in hearing the word preached; because they know not

Moreover, after we have begun to practice this duty; we must often (as
occasion shall be given) renew it to the end. Consider David's example. Psalm.
119. 59.

Where Paul says, that the law is added till Christ, we see that the Legal
ministry of death is abolished now; and that we are under the Ministry of
the spirit and life. And for this cause we in these last days, that are
Ministers of the word, must preach the doctrine of salvation plainly, to the
very consciences of men. 2. Cor. 4. 1. Again, the people of these days ought
to abound in knowledge, and their obedience should be answerable to the measure
of their knowledge. And, if after much preaching in these days of light, the
Gospel be hid, (as it is to very many, who remain still in ignorance, and
disobedience) it is a fearful sign unto them of their condemnation. 2.

In that the law of God was ordained or delivered by Angels, we are put in
mind to reverence it, and to esteem it as a treasure. Secondly, we are to
fear to break the least commandment

Because Moses was a mediator to the Jews, Papists gather that therefore,
Angels, and Saints, may be mediators. Ans. It sollowes not. Moses was ordained
a mediator, so are not they. Moses was present with the Jews, and had
fellowship with them whose mediator he was, Saints are absent in

Whereas Paul says, that a Mediator is not of one, but a third, between two
at the least: it may be demanded, how Christ can be mediator between man and
God, considering he is God? Ans. Though Father, Son, and holy Spirit, be
Ghost, the holy Ghost, and not the father, or the son. The son then, and
the father, being persons really distinct, the son may be, and is Mediator,
first of all, in respect of order to the father, and in him, to the son, and
the holy Ghost. For the three persons being of one nature and will, when the
father If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father. It may be said,
that Christ cannot be Mediator to himself. Ans. In Christ consider his
nature, and his Office. By nature, he is the son of God: by office, he is
Mediator, God-man, or Man-god: and as Mediator by voluntary dispensation, he
is inferior to himself as he is the essential son of God. And in the same
manner, Christ as God-man is Mediator to himself as he is the son of God.
For as he is the son of God, he is the party offended; as he is Mediator

Lastly, the property of God must be observed, that he is unchangeable. Iam.
1. 17. Mal. 3. 16. It may be objected, that God is said in Scripture to
repent. Ans. God is said to repent, not because he changes either nature or
will: but because he Ans. This God did by an unchangeable decree, before all
worlds: and so the change is in the law, and not in God. For God can decree to

The use. Gods unchangeableness is the foundation of our comfort. Saint Paul
says, If we love God; we are known of him. 1. Cor. 8. 3. Now the first we may
certainly find in our selves, namely, the love of God, and Christ: and for the
second, God

Again, we are put in mind to be unchangeable in good things, as in faith,
hope, love, good counsels, honest promises, Semper eadem. Always one and the
same; no doubt in good things, specially in the religion established among us.
The same must be the mind of all good subjects and all good people. 1. Cor.
15. 58.

21 Is the law then against the promise of God? God forbid: for if there had
been a law given, which

22 But the Scripture has included all under sin, that the promise by the
faith of Jesus Christ, should

In these words, Paul propounds and answers an other objection, in number the
fourth. The occasion of the objection, the law is for transgressions. It may be
framed on this manner. If the law serve to convince and condemn us of sin,
it serves not to give life but to kill, and so it is contrary to the promise
which giuethlife. The answer is made negatiuely, God forbid. And a

The use. In that Paul reiects the blasphemous objection with, God forbid: we
are taught to avoid things said or done to the dishonor of God, with loathing
and detestation. When it was related to Ahab and Iezabel, that Naboth had
blasphemed God, they being idolaters, solemnise a fast pretending danger by
the sin. 1. King. 21. 12. Caiphas supposing that Christ had blasphemed, rent
his garments. Math. 26. When Job did but suspect his children of blaspheming
God, he called

In the first reason, Paul delivers a notable conclusion, namely, that the
thing which is the means to procure life unto us, is also the means of our
justice or justification before God. And good reason. For justice causes life:
and that which gives

The 22. verse follows, containing the second reason. And The Scripture] the
words are in the Original thus, That scripture, namely, the Scripture before
named, the written law in the books of the old Testament. And further, by the
law, we must understand, God in the law, Romans 11. 32. God has concluded all
under unbelief.

Concluded] The law is compared to a Judge, or sergeant: sin to a prison. And
the law is said to conclude, or enclose men under sin: because it does to the
full accuse and convince us of sin, so as our mouths are stopped, and we have
no way to escape.

All] All men that came of Adam by generation, with all that comes from them,
their thoughts, desires, words, and deeds.

The promise] The thing promised, which is Remission of sin, and life
everlasting.

By the faith of Christ] That is, the faith whereof Christ is both the author,
and matter. This is added, to signify unto us, who are true believers, namely,
they which are believers by the faith of Christ.

Against this text of Paul, blind reason moves many questions, He may do
with his own what he will. Math. 20. 15. The second is, that the ways and
judgments of God are a gulf, into which unsearchable. Romans 11. 33.

Mark the phrase of Paul [the Scripture concludes all under smne] if it
conclude or shut up, then it determines what is sin, what not. And if this be
so: then it may also determine what is themselves by it: even so the Scripture
speaks sufficiently for the determination of truth and falsehood, in matters of
salvation, when it is searched, with care and humility.

When Paul says, We are all shut up under sin; he puts us in mind of our
most miserable condition, that we are captives We are sold under sin, and
that we know there is no goodness dwelling in our flesh. Romans 7. 14. 18. This is
one of the first lessons that we must take out in the school of Christ.
Again, if we seriously bethink our selves that we are captives of sin and
worthy of death, it will make us with contentation of

Whereas Paul says, that all men with all that proceeds from The wisdom of
the flesh, that is, the wisest cogitations, counsels, inclinations of the
flesh, are enmity unto God. Romans 8. 5. To the unclean all things are
unclean. Tit. 1. 15. An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Mat. 7. It
may be objected, Ans. Sins be of two sorts. One is, when any thing is done
slat against the commandment of God. The second is, when the act or work is
done which the law prescribes, yet not in the same manner which the

Whereas Paul says, that the promise is given to believers, it is manifest
that the promise is not universal in respect of all mankind, but only
indefinite, and universal in respect of believers. Wherefore their doctrine is
not sound, that teach the Redemption wrought by Christ, to be as general as
the sin of Adam. Indeed, if we regard the value and sufficiency of the
death of Christ, it is so: but if we respect the Communication and donation of
this benefit, it is not. For though all be shut under sin, yet the promise is
only given to them that believe. It is objected, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself. 2. Cor. 5. 19. Ans. The text in hand shows
that by the world, we are to understand all believers, through the whole world.
And whereas Paul says, God shut up all under unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all, Romans 11. 32. his meaning is here set down, that he shut both
Jews and Gentiles under

Mark further, the end of the law is conviction: and the end of our
conviction is, that the promise of mercy may be given to them that believe.
Here is notable comfort, with encouragement but the lost sheep, and he calls
not just men, but sinners to repentance. Let us therefore with all our hearts
come

Lastly, Paul says, the promise is made not to every one that believes
according to any faith of his own, but to them that are true believers by the
faith of Christ. Therefore every man shall not be saved in his own faith and
religion, but only they that are of the faith of Christ.

23 For before faith came, we were kept under the law, and shut up unto

24 Wherefore the law was our schoolmasters to Christ, that we might be made
righteous by faith.

23 But after that faith is come, we are no more under the schoolmasters.

Paul in the 19. v. had said, that the law was for transgressions, till the
seed come, to which the promise was made. And here he makes a more large
declaration of his own meaning. The sum of all that he faith may be reduced
to a comparison of

Faith] That is, the Gospel, or, the doctrine of remission of sins and life
everlasting by Christ exhibited in the flesh.

We] We Jews: I Paul a Jew, and the rest of that nation.

Law] That is, the whole Oeconomie, policy, and Regiment

Kept] Compassed or guarded. Because the law before Christ was to the Jews as
a guard of armed men, to enclose and keep them, that they should not depart
from God, and from their allegiance to him, unto the sins, idolatries, and
superstitions of the Gentiles.

Unto the faith] That is, till the faith come.

Afterward reuealed] From the creation, to the law, the Church of God was in
one family; and the rest of the world beside was no people of God. From the
law, till Christ, the Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into the
cities of the Samaritans enter ye not. After

Thus we see that the law served for transgressions: because it

The use. This shows the greatness of our corruption, and that the very frame
of our heart is evil continually, that the Lord must be feign to set his laws
about us as a Guard of armed

Again, here we see the use of Gods laws, which serve to prevent, restrain,
and cut off sin, into which otherwise men would fall, unless they were
compassed and guarded by laws. Some object for freedom of will, on this
manner: If the laws Ans. The mayor, or first part of the reason, is not true.
For there are other uses of the law of God, then the keeping of them: for they
serve to restrain, and prevent open offenses: and to keep men in order, at
the least

An other use of the law of God, was to conclude and shut up the Jews into the
unity of one faith and religion. For this cause the Jews had but one temple,
one Mercie-seat, one high Priest, etc. Hence it follows, that in a godly and
Christian people into the unity of one faith.

The Church of the Jews, is called a fountain sealed, a garden enclosed,
Cant. 4. 12. a vineyard hedged in. Isa. 5. 5. Psalm. 80. 13. And here we see
what is the hedge or wall of this garden, or vineyard: namely, the regiment or
policy of Moses by a threefold

Where Paul says, till the faith be revealed. Note, that the Ans. It was not
revealed to all, either darkly or clearly, before the coming of Christ. Act.
14. 16. God suffered the Gentiles to walk in their own ways. Ephesians. 2. 12.
they were without God, and without Christ. Romans 15. 20. Paul preached where
Christ was not so much as named. Hence it follows, that the Vocation of men to
life everlasting, is not Universal: because Christ was never Universally
revealed. Neither is man's Redemption universal

Seeing faith is now come, it may be demanded, what is the Ans. The precepts of
the moral law. The sayings of the wise are as nails or stakes fastened to
range men in the compass of their own duties. Eccles. 12. 11. Again, the
peace of God, or the assurance of our reconciliation with God, is a Guard, to
keep our hearts and senses precepts, and counsels of God. Considering we lie
open to so many enemies, we should continually be armed and fensed from the
head to the foot, Ephesians. 6. 13. otherwise we shall upon every occasion be
ouerturned.

To come to the 24. v. the Jews might happily say, seeing we are thus kept and
shut up by the law, what means have we the law is further our schoolmaster.
Here by schoolmaster, understand one, that teaches little children or Petits,
the first rudiments or elements, A. B. C. And the law is a schoolmaster to
Christ, for two

In this verse, Paul sets down the manner and way of our salvation, which is
on this manner; first, the law prepares us by humbling us: then comes the
Gospel, and it stirs up faith. And faith wrought in the heart, apprehends
Christ for justification, sanctification, and glorification. Paul sets this
forth by become children and servants of God.

By this then it is manifest, that there are two sorts of badde scholars in
the school of Christ, among us. One sort are they, which come to the Lords
table, and yet learn nothing, either from the law, or from the Gospel: but
content themselves with

In a word, he is a good scholar in the school of Christ, that first learnes
by the law to humble himself, and to go out of himself: and being humbled
subjects his heart to the voice

In the second part of the comparison 25. v. Paul sets down one point, that at
the coming of the faith the Jews were freeed from the dominion of the law of
Moses, and consequently Shilo, Genesis 49. 10. The law of commandments standing
in ordinances, was abrogated by the flesh of Christ. Ephesians. 2. 15. And the change
of the priesthood, brought the change of the law.

For the better clearing of this point, three questions are to be demanded. The
first is, when was the policy, regiment, or law of Moses abrogated? Ans. At
the coming of the faith, or when the Gospel first began to be published to
the world:

The second question is, How far forth the law is abrogated? Ans. The law is
threefold: Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial. Moral is the law of God, concerning
manners, or duties to God and man. Now the moral law is abrogated, in respect
of the Church, and them that believe, three ways. First, in respect of
justification: and this Paul proves at large in this epistle. Secondly, in
respect of the malediction, or curse. There is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ. Romans 8. 1. Thirdly, in respect of rigor. For in them that are in
Christ, God accepts the

The Ceremonial law, is that which prescribed rites and gestures

Judicial laws are such as concern inheritances, lands, bargains,
controversies, causes criminal; and they pertain to the of Canaan, the times
before Christ, the things of the old Testament, are abrogated. Of this kind is
the law that commands the brother to raise up seed to his brother. Deuteronomy. 25.
5. The law of Tenths is partly ceremonial, and partly judicial, and specially
concerns the land of Canaan. For as countries are richer or

Now Judicial laws that are in foundation and substance moral, are not
abrogated, but are perpetual. For the better discerning of them, I give two
notes. The first is this: If a Judicial thing or person ouerturneth or
abolisheth this end, it must be cut off from the society of men. Here note by
the way, that they which have bin borne, baptized, and brought up among us, and
yet afterward become Mass Priests, and seek maliciously and obstinately,
without ceasing to seduce our people, deserve in this respect, to be put to
death.

Example 2. Thou shall not suffer a witch to live, Exodus 22. 18. This law
again, is a fense to the first commandment. For Witches renounce God, and
humane society: and therefore are worthily cut off: though they do no hurt:
even because they make a league with the devil.

Example 3. He that blasphemeth the name of God, shall be put to death, Leuit.
24. 16. Understand this law of manifest and notorious blasphemies, that pearce
through God, as the words import: and then it is a maine fense to the third
commandment. For Gods name may in no wise be abused, and troad

Example 4. He that curses father or mother shall die the death, Leuit. 4. 9.
This law is a necessary fense to the fifth commandment, and vpholds the
honor that is due to parents.

Examples 5. He that smites a man that he die, shall die the death. Exodus 21.
12. To this law there is no exception made, but one, and that is, when a man is
killed at unawares. And it is for his equity perpetual. For it is a maine and
direct fense to the sixth The whole land (says the Lord) shall be defiled with
blood, till his blood be shed that kills a man.

Example 6. The adulterer and the adulteress shall both be put to death. Leuit.
20. This Judicial serves to uphold and maintain chastity, which is the end
of the seventh commandment. Least the land spne you out: and, for these
things, that is, for suffering this and other sins unpunished, the Gentiles
were cast out. It may be said, that Christ did not condemn the woman to death,
which was taken in adultery. Ans. He came to be a Mediator, and not a Judge,
or Magistrate. It is alleged, that David was not put to death for adultery.
Ans. He was the highest in the kingdom: there was none to judge him. Again,
it may be said, that if adultery be death, then innumerable persons must die.
Ans. We must do that which we find to be the will of God;

The second note, whereby we may discern a judicial law to be moral for his
equity, is this; If it follow necessarily and immediately from the light,
principles, and conclusions of nature. The man shall not put on the things that
appertain to the woman, nor the woman the things that appertain to the man.
This law is more then Judicial: for it is a Rule of common honesty: practiced
in those countries, by the light of nature, where the written law was never
known. And Does not nature teach this? 1. Cor. 11. 14.

This I speak, not to censure and condemn the laws of this or any other
commonwealth: but only to show how far

The third question is, what is our guide now in the time of the new Testament,
seeing the Regiment and law of Moses is abrogated? Ans. The outward guide is
the Doctrine of the moral law, and of the Gospel. It is therefore called the
rod and the staff of God, Psalm. 23. and the rod of his mouth, Isa. 11. 4.
The inward guide, is the spirit of God, writing the laws of God in our hearts,
and by them guiding us, and being a law unto us. Romans 8. 3. 14. Thirdly, God
by manifold afflictions nurtures and schools us partly to prevent sins to
come, and

The use. Seeing the law is abrogated (as I have said) we must be a free and
voluntary people, serving God not of constraint but willingly, as if there
were no law to compel us. All nations shall flow as waters to the mountain of
the Lord. Isa. 2. 2. Thy people shall come willingly in the day of assembly.
Psalm. 110. 3. In the days of John Baptist, the kingdom of heaven suffered
violence. Jeremy says, they shall teach every man his neighbor and his
brother, Ierem. 31. 31. because men shall learn freely without compulsion, or
calling upon. Here is the fault of our times. Many say in heart to Christ,
Depart from us, we will none of thy ways; and many again are zealous for the
things of this life, but for duties pertaining to Gods worship, and the
salvation of their souls, they are neither hot nor could. This negligence
cursed is he that does the work of God negligently: and the Lord will spue out
such persons.

26 For ye are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus.





Paul had said before, v. 25. that the believing Jews after the publishing of
the Gospel, were no more under the law as under a schoolmaster: In this 26. v.
he renders a reason hereof:

In these words, I consider two things. The first is, the benefit or gift
bestowed on the Galatians, which is sonne-ship, Adoption, or the condition of
Gods children. The second is, the description of this benefit by four
arguments. The first is, by the circumstance of the persons, ye all are
children of God. The faith in Christ Jesus. The third is, the outward means,
or the pledge of adoption, ye are all baptized into Christ. The last is, the
foundation of adoption, and that is, to put on Christ, or, to be one with him.

For the better conceiving of the benefit, three questions Ans. The sons of
God. It may be said, how the sons of God? I answer again, God is called a
father, in two respects: first, he is a father in respect of Christ, the
essential word: and then God signifies the first person. Again, God is called
a father God is put indefinitly: and it comprehends not only the first person,
but also the son, and holy Ghost. For all three do equally regenerate them
that are adopted. And Paul says of the Godhead indefinitly: there is one God
and father of all. Ephesians. 4. 6. And Our father, etc. we invoke not only the
first person, but also the Son, and holy Ghost. And the son of God, is
expressly called the Father of eternity, in respect of us, Isa. 9. 6. and he
is said to have his seed. Isa. 53. 11.

The second question is, in what respect are the Galatians Ans. A child of God
is two ways: by nature; by grace. The child of God by nature, is Christ as he
is the eternal son of God. A child by grace, is three ways. By creation:
thus Adam before his fall, and the good angels are the children of God.
Secondly, by the personal union: thus Christ by the grace of adoption: thus
are all true believers, and in this text, the Galatians are said to be the
children of God. In this grace of adoption, there be two acts of God: one is
Acceptance, whereby God accepts men for his children. The other is
Regeneration, whereby men

The third question is, what is the excellency of this benefit? Ans. Great
every way. Ioh. 1. 12. he which is the child of God is heir and fellowheire
with Christ, Romans 8. 17. and that of the kingdom of heaven; and of all things
in heaven and earth. 1. Cor. 3. 22. he has title in this life, and shall have
possession in the life to come. Again, he that is Gods child has the angels
of God to tend on him, and to minister unto him for his good and salvation.
Heb. 1. 14.

The first argument whereby the adoption of Gods children All ye are the
children of God. So Paul says, all the Ephesians are Elect. Ephesians. 1. 3. And
Peter calls all them to whom he writes, 1. Pet. 1. 1. Elect; and John 1.
epist. 3. the children of God. And herein they follow the judgment they were
the children of God, and not some, but all of them. This truth may be seen by
experience. The child of God before his fall, has a purpose not to sin: in
the time of temptation when he is in falling, he has a strife: after he is
fallen, he lies not in his fall, as wicked men do, but he recouereth himself
he that is borne of God sins not, his meaning is this; he that is borne of
God, if he fall into any offense of frailty, yet does he not make a practice
of sin,

It may be said, the Galatians, and all the Galatians, are the children of
God: but what is that to us? Ans. They among us that profess true says in
Christ, with care to keep good conscience, are likewise to hold themselves to
be children of God. Our father, we are bidden to believe our selves to be
children of God, and so to come unto him. Therefore with Paul I say, that all
we that truly believe in Christ, and have care to lead a good life, all I say,
are indeed the children of God.

The use. Comforts arising by this benefit, are many. First, if thou be Gods
child, surely he will provide all things necessary for thy soul and body.
Math. 6. 26. Our care must be to do the office and duty that belongs unto us:
when this is done, our care is ended. As for the good success of our labors,

Secondly, in that we are children, we have liberty to come into the presence
of God, and to pray unto him. Ephesians. 3. 12.

Thirdly, nothing shall hurt them that are the children of God. The plague
shall not come near their tabernacle: they shall walk upon the lion and the
aspe, and tread them under foot. All things shall turn to their good. Romans 8.
28. And the rather; because the Angels of God pitch their tents about them.

Lastly, God will bear with the infirmities and frailties of them, that are
his children, if there be in them a care to please

The duties. First, if ye be Gods children, then walk worthy your profession
and calling. Be not vassalls of sin and Satan:

Secondly, we must use every day to bring our selves into the presence of God,
and we must do all things as in his sight, and presence, presenting our selves
unto him, as instruments of his glory in doing of his will. This is the honor
that the child of God owes unto him Mal. 1. 6.

Thirdly, our care must be (according to the measure of grace) to resemble
Christ in all good virtues, and holy conversation. For he is our eldest brother
the first borne of many brethren: and therefore we should be like unto him. 1.
Ioh. 3. 2, 3.

Fourthly, we must have a desire and love to the word of

Lastly, we must put this in our accounts, that we must have many afflictions,
if we be Gods children: for he corrects all his children. And when we are under
the rod of correction, we

The internal means of Adoption, is Faith in Christ. And for the better
conceiving of it, three questions are to be propounded. Ans. A particular or
special faith: and it has three acts, or effects. The first is, to believe
Christ to be Jesus, that is, a Savior: the second is, to believe that Christ
is my or thy Savior: the third My Lord, and my God: and thereupon Christ said,
Because thou have seen thou beleeuest. Ioh. 20. 29. Here mark, that to
believe Christ to be my Christ, is faith. Against this special faith, the
Papists object three arguments. Ans. We have that which in force and value is
equivalent to a special word: namely, a general promise, will is to save them
by Christ: the other, that his will is that men should believe in Christ. And
the word thus applied in the public Ministry in the name of God, is as much
as if an Angel should particularly speak unto us from heaven.

The second Argument. Special faith (say they) is absurd; Ans. The giving and
the receiving of pardon and faith, are both at one moment of time: for when God
gives the pardon of sin: at the same instant he causes men to receive the

The third Argument. The full certentie and persuasion of Gods mercy in
Christ, follows good conscience and good works: and therefore faith follows
after Justification. Ans. There be two degrees of faith. A weak faith, and a
strong faith. A weak faith is that, against which doubting much preuailes,

The second question is, when faith begins first to breed Ans. When a man
begins to be touched in his conscience for his sins, and upon feeling of
his own spiritual poverty, earnestly hungers and thirsts after Christ and
his righteousness above all things in the world. Christ says, I will give to
him that thirsts of the well of the water of life freely, Revel. that
professors of the Gospel, yea teachers of the same, that want this sense of
their unworthiness, and this thirsting, are far wide, what gifts soever they
have. For they are not yet come to the first step of true faith.

The third question is, how faith in Christ is revealed in the heart? Ans. It
is not faith to conceive in mind a bare persuasion,

The third point to be considered, is the sign, or the outward means of
Adoption, and that is Baptism. It may be demanded, how Baptism can be a mark
or sign of the child of God considering all sorts of men are partakers of it?
Ans. Baptism All ye Galatians that believe, are baptized into Christ. For Paul
had said immediately before, Ye are the sounes of God by faith. Again, the
Scripture speaking of baptism, comprehends both the outward and

It may further be demanded, what are the marks of the inward baptism? Ans.
The new birth, whereby a man is washed and cleansed by the spirit of God, has
three special marks. The first is, the spirit of grace and supplications,
Zach. 12. 10. that is, the spirit of regeneration, causing men to turn to God,
and withal to make instant prayer and supplication for mercy and forgiveness
of sins past. The second, is to hear and obey the He that is borne of God,
does not commit sin. He may fail in this or that speech, and do amiss in
this or that action; but after his calling and conversion, the

Some alleged, that having long ago been baptized with water, yet they
feel not the inward baptism: and therefore Ans. If there be in thee a sorrow
for thy corruptions and sins past: if thou have a purpose to sin no more:
if thou auoidest the occasions of sin, and fear to offend: if having
sinned, thou lie not in thy sin, but recouerest thy self by new
repentance:

Others allege, that although they have bin baptized, yet they fear they
have no faith: and therefore they think they are not the children of God. Ans.
If there be in thee a sorrow

Others again allege, that they have long made prayer Ans. If thou can
pray, though thy prayer be not heard according to thy desire, content thy
self. For the prayer of the heart is the mark of the spirit of adoption. Romans

Thus then we see what is the infallible mark of the child of God; namely,
baptism joined with true faith in Christ, or the outward baptism joined with
the inward baptism of the spirit. The use. Many avouch the present Church of
Rome to be the true Church of God: and that because they say, in it there is
true baptism, which is a mark of the church of God. But they are deceived:
for baptism in the church of Rome is severed from true faith, or from the
Apostolic doctrine: and the outward baptism is severed from the inward
baptism. For they

Again, we must be warned to take heed that we deceive not our selves,
thinking it a sufficient matter that we have bin baptized. For except Christ
inwardly wash us by his spirit, we have no part in him. Ioh. 13. 8.
Circumcision (says Paul) avails not, unless thou be a doer of the law. To. 2.
25. Baptism indeed saves, 1. Pet. 3. 21. but that is not the baptism of
water, but the stipulation of a good conscience, by the resurrection of Christ.
The outward baptism without the inward, is not the mark of

Moreover, baptism is not only a sign of our adoption, but also a seal
thereof, and a means to conuaie it unto us: and for the better understanding
of this point, and for a further

Touching the name; Baptism is taken six ways. First, it signifies the
superstitious washings of the Pharisees, who bound themselves to the baptismes
or washings of cups and potts. Mar. 7. 4. Second(...), it signifies the
washings appointed by God in the Ceremonial law. Hebr. 9. 10. Thirdly, it
signifies that washing by water which serves to seal the covenant of the new
Testament. Math. 28. 19. Fourthly, it signifies by a metaphor, any grievous
cross or calamity. Thus the passion of Christ, is called his baptism. Luke
12. 50. Fifthly, it signifies the knowing nothing but the baptism (that is, the
doctrine) of John. Act. 18. 25. In the Ye are all baptized into Christ.

The phrases used in Scripture of baptism are strange in reason: and therefore
they are to be explaned. Here it is said, Ye that are baptized into Christ, put
on Christ. The reason of this to put on Christ. The second reason is, because
the washing by water to put on Christ. In the same manner must other phrases be
baptism saves, 1. Pet. 3. 21. that men must be baptized for the remission of
sins, Act. 22. 6. that we are buried by baptism into the death of Christ.
Romans 6. 3.

The second point, concerns the Matter of baptism. Here I consider three
things, the sign, the thing signified, the Analogy

Here a question may be made, Whether washing of the body in baptism, must be
by dipping, or by sprinkling? Ans. In hot countries, and in the baptism of men
of years, dipping was used, and that by the Apostl(...) and to this Paul
alludes, Romans 6. 3. and dipping does more fully represent our spiritual
washing, then sprinkling. Nevertheless in cold countries, Necessity and
charity, dispense with the Ceremonial law. Upon this ground, David did eat
the shewbread: circumcision was not always the eight day, as appears by the
Israe

The thing signified, or the substance of baptism, is Christ himself our
Mediator, as he gave himself to wash and cleanse us. Thus Paul says, that he
cleanse^th his Church by the washing of water. Ephesians. 5. 6.

The Analogy, or proportion of both, is on this manner. The blood of Christ
cleanses us from all our sins, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. that is, the merit and
efficacy of Christ crucified, freeth us from our sins, and from the guilt
and punishment thereof. External washing of the body, resembles inward
washing by

The third point concerns the Form of baptism. Math. 28. 19. Go teach all
nations, baptizing them into the Name of the Father, etc. I explain the words
thus: Mark, first it is faide, Teach them, that is, make them my disciples, by
calling them to then in the second place God makes his promise of mercy and
forgiveness: and thirdly, he seals his promise by baptism. This divine Order
Christ signifies when he says, make them disciples: and (...)as always
observed of God. Before he made any covenant with Abraham, and before he sealed
it by Circumcision, he says to him, Walk before me, and be upright, do
righteousness and judgment, and then he will bring upon them all that he has
spoken, Genesis 18. 19. to the Israelites he says, that they must turn and obey,
and then he will make all his promises and covenants good. Deuteronomy. 30. 1. 6. and
Isa. 1. 16, 17, 19. To the Jews Peter Repent first, and then they shall be
baptized for the remission of sins. Act. 2. 38. 42. And Philip said to the
Eunuch, If thou beleeuest with all thy heart, thou may be baptized. Act. 8.
37.

The use. By this order we see, that the commandment to

Again, by this order it appears, that Repentance belongs to baptism: and it
is one of the first things that are required: and therefore it is folly to
make Repentance a distinct means of salvation, and a distinct sacrament from
baptism.

Thirdly, if it be demanded, why so many persons that have Ans. They do not
know and consider the Order which God used in couenanting

Again, there be many persons that have bin baptized, who nevertheless cannot
abide to hear and read the word of God: and the reason is, because they
observe not the order of their baptism, first of all to become disciples, and
then to lay hold of the promises of God.

They likewise are to be blamed, that bring up their youth in ignorance. For
they are baptized upon condition that they shall become disciples of Christ,
when they come to years of discretion. And they are by this means barred from
all the mercies of God: for we must as good disciples obey the commandment
that biddes us turn and believe, before we can

Lastly, we are here taught in the working of our salvation to keep the Order
of God which he has set down unto us in baptism, which is first of all to
turn unto God, according to

It follows, Baptizing them into the name, or in the name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. These words signify: first, to bap tize by the
commandment and authority of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: secondly, to
baptize by and with the invocation of the name of the true God. Whatsoever ye
do in ward or deed, do it in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, by
the in vocation of the name of Christ. Col. 3. 17. Thirdly, to baptize in the
name, etc. signifies to wash with water in token that the party baptized has
the name of God named upon him, and that he is received into the household or
family of God, as a Let them be mine, and let my name be called upon them.
Genesis 48. 5. 16. And Paul says, that the Corinthians might not be named and
distinguished by Paul, Cephas, Apollos, because

Here we see what is done in baptism; the Covenant of grace is solemnised
between God and the party baptized. And in this covenant some actions belong
to God, and some to the parties baptized. Gods actions are two. The first is,
the making of promise of reconciliation, that is, of remission of sins, and
life everlasting to them that are baptized, and believe. The second is, the
obsignation or sealing of this promise: and that is twofold, outward, or
inward* The outward baptize them, etc. and therefore Paul says, cleansing the
Church by the washing of water in the word. Ephesians. 5. 26. The inward sealing

It is not said in the name of God, but in the name of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, to teach us the right way to know and to acknowledge the true God.
This Knowledge stands in into the name of the Lord. Act. 10. 48. The second is,
that this seek to grow in the knowledge and experience of this.

It may be demanded, whether baptism may not be administered in the name of
Christ alone, or in the name of God, without mention of the persons in the
Godhead: Ans. No. For the true form of baptism is here prescribed. If it be
said, that Peter biddes them of Jerusalem, repent and be baptized into the name
of Christ. Act. 2. 38. I answer, that Peter's intent in that place is, to set
down not the form of baptism, but the end and scope thereof, which is, that
we may attain to true fellowship with Christ.

The fourth point is, concerning the ends of baptism, which the stipulation
or interrogation of a good conscience. 1. Pet. 3. 21. Thirdly, it serves to be
a means of our first entrance or admission into the visible Church. Lastly, it
is a means of unity. Read Ephesians. 4. 5. 1. Cor. 12. 13.

The fifth point concerns the Efficacy of baptism. Of which there be four
necessary questions. The first is, whether the Efficacy of baptism extend it
self to all sins, and to the whole life of man? For answer, I will set down
what we teach, and what the Papists. We teach, that the use of baptism
inlargeth it self to the whole life of man, and that it takes away all
baptism saves, 1. Pet. 3. 21. and, ye are buried by baptism, into the death
of Christ. Romans 6. 4. And in the future tense it is said, he that believes,
and is baptized, shall be saved. And Paul says, that the Church is cleansed
with the washing of water, that it may be presented glorious and without spot
unto God. Ephesians. 5. 26. And all this shows that baptism has the same efficacy
after, which it had before the administration thereof. Secondly, the covenant
of grace is everlasting, Isa. 54. 10. Hos. 2. 19. and the covenant is the
foundation or substance of baptism: therefore baptism is not to be tied to
any time: but it must have his force, so long as the covenant is of force. And
this appears by the example of the Galatians, who are now fallen away to an
other gospel after their baptism, and yet are Aug. de ^^pt. and concup. l. 1.
c 33. ad Bon. l. (...). c. ^3.
by baptism even sins to come.

The doctrine of the Papists is, that baptism takes away all sins that go
before the administration thereof: and that

Argum. first. Circumcision had no use after the administration thereof, for
the abolishing of sin. Therefore neither Ans. Circumcision had. And this
appears; because the Prophets put the Jews in mind of their circumcision
when they fell away from God, bidding them to circumcise the foreskin of their
hearts. Ier. 4. 4.

Arg. 2. The Apostles used to call them that sinned after Ans. This makes for
us: for in so doing they bring men to their baptism, and to the order set
down there, which is, that the party baptized, must first of all turn to
God, and believe in Christ: and there is no new order

Arg. 3. If a man be enlightened, that is, baptized; and then fall again, he
cannot be renewed by repentance, which is in baptism. Hebr. 6. 6. Ans. The
text speaks not of them that fall after baptism, but of them (...).
that fall away by an universal Apostasy, that they crucify Christ again,
that is, crucify Christ crucified, and so make a mock of him, and tread under
foot the blood of Christ. Hebr. 10. 29. Again, the text speaks not
particularly of repentance in baptism, but of all repentance whatsoever; yea
of repentance after baptism. For there is no place for repentance where Christ
is renounced.

Arg. 4. Penance (as Hierome says) is a second table after a shipwreck. Ans.
Repentance indeed is a second table or board, whereby a sinner fallen from his
baptism returns again to it, and so comes to the haven of everlasting
happiness. Thus then

The use. If baptism serve for the whole life of man: then if thou be in any
misery or distress, have recourse to thy baptism, and there shall thou find
thy comfort, namely, that God

The second question is, whether baptism abolish Original imputation; because
God does not impute dominion; because Original sin reigns not in them that
are regenerate. Nevertheless, after baptism, it remains in the^ that are
baptized, and is still, and that properly, sin. Paul says, Romans 7. 20. If I
do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me does it. Here mark, Paul calls concupiscence in himself after
regeneration, sin; and that properly: because he says it is the same that
makes men to sin. And Col. 3. 5. he says, Mortify your earthly members:
and among the rest he names, evil concupiscence. And to the Ephesians 4. 22.
Be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds. Therefore If we say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves. Answer is made, that this is spoken of venial,
or small sins: but how can they be small sins that are to be washed away
with the blood of Christ, as he says, v. 7. And if these words be spoken of
infants (as they are) then must Concupiscence be a sin in them: for they have
no actual sins. Lastly, Christ says, Ioh. 13. 10. He that is all washed,
must have his feet, that is, his carnal affections, washed. Here

The grounds of Popish doctrine in this point, are two. The Ans. The doctrine
is false: for it is an evident truth that Concupiscence with the first motions
thereof to evil, is condemned in the Moral law. It is a Principle in
expounding the law: where any actual sin is forbidden, there all causes,
occasions, Thou shall not lust. Romans 7. 7. Now he was a Doctor of the law, and
knew that lust with consent was a sin: for thus much the light of nature
teaches: therefore the law speaks of an higher degree of lust, namely, of lust
going before consent.

The second ground is this. When sin is remitted, it does not make men
guilty, but cease to be a fault: Original sin therefore cease to be
sin after baptism. Ans. Though actual guilt be taken away, yet potentiall
guilt remains, namely, an aptnes in Original sin, to make men guilty: and
though it be not the fault of this or that person, yet it is a fault in nature,
or as it is considered in it self.

The use. If Original sin remain after baptism to the death, then we must
humble our selves, and use to the very death, the plea of mercy and pardon,
denying our selves, and resting on Christ.

Again, if persons baptized be sinners to the death, it may be demanded, what
difference there is between the godly and ungodly? Ans. In them that are
regenerate, there is a sorrow for their inward corruptions, and for their
sins past, with a detestation

The third point is, how baptism conferres grace? Ans. It conferres grace:
because it is a means to give and exhibit to the believing mind Christ with
his benefits; and this it does by his signification. For it serves as a
particular and infallible thousand pounds, or, this will bring me a thousand
pounds, because it is unto him as a pledge upon the kings word of the reward of
a thousand pounds. And so is the washing in baptism an infallible pledge to
him that believes, of the pardon of his sins. Thus do the sacraments
confer grace, and no otherwise. One reason for many may be this. The word of
God

The doctrine of the Papist is, that the sacrament conferres grace by the work
done: that is, that the outward action of the Minister conferres grace by his
own force, when the sacrament is administered. And that it may confer grace,
some say, that the said action has virtue in it for this purpose, which Thom.
Sum. p. (...) q 62. art. 4. Bellar. de Sact. l. 2. c. 11.
virtue in it, but that Gods using of the action eleuates it, and makes it able
to confer grace. But this doctrine is a fiction of the brain of man. John
the Baptist, Math. 3. 11. makes two baptizers, himself, and Christ; and he
distinguishes their actions: Christ sanctifies his Church by the washing of
water, through the word. Ephesians. 5. 26. Baptism fellowworkers with God, 1. Cor.
3. 9. and yet in the work of regeneration, and in giving of life, they are not
any thing. v. 7. Peter says directly, that the washing away of the filth of
the flesh does not save, but the stipulation that a good conscience makes to
God. 1. Pet. 3. 21. The work of creation is from God immediately, and only:
now regeneration is a work of creation: and therefore it is of God immediately,
and not immediately from the sacrament and mediatly from God. The flesh of
Christ is elevated

Again, their doctrine is erroneous, in that they teach, that the outward act
in the Sacrament performed by the Minister, As many as received him he gave
this power to be the sons of God. Indeed they say there must be faith and
repentance to dispose the party: but this disposition serves only to take
away impediments,

The use. We must not think it sufficient that we come to the Church, hear
Gods word, and pray, contenting our selves in the work done. For thus shall we
deceive our selves: but in doing these acts of religion, we must in our hearts
turn unto

Again, if the using of the element in the sacrament do not conferregrace,
then be assured that charms, and spells, be the words never so good, have no
virtue in them to do us good but by diabolical operation.

The last question is, whether baptism imprint a Character or mark in the
soul, which is never blotted out? Ans. In scripture there is a twofold mark
of distinction, one visible, the other invisible. Of the first kind, was the
blood of the paschall lamb, in the first passover: for by it the first borne
of the Israelites were marked, when the first borne of the Egyptians were
slain. Of this kind is baptism: for by it Christian people are distinguished
from Jews, Turks, and infidels. The invisible mark, is twofold. The first,
is the eternal Election of God. 2. Tim. 2. 19. The foundation of God stands
sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his. By virtue of this,
Christ says, I know my sheep, Ioh. 10. And by this the Elect of all nations
are marked. Apoc. 7. and 9. The second is the gift of regeneration, which is
nothing else but the imprinting of the image sealed. Ephesians. 1. 13. 2. Cor. 1. 22.
And baptism is a means to see this mark in us; because it is the lauer of
regeneration.

The Papists have devised another work, which they call the Indeleble
character: and they make it to be a distinct thing

The sixth point to be handled concerns the Necessity of baptism. Here we
must put difference between the Covenant of grace, and baptism, which is the
confimation or seal of the covenant. To make covenant with God, and to be in
the

Baptism it self is necessary in part: first, in respect of the commendement
of God, who has enjoined us to use it: secondly,

It is objected, that the male child, which is not circumcised must (by God
commandment) be cut off from the people of God, Genesis 17. 14. and therefore he
that is not baptized must also be cut off. Ans. The text is spoken and meant
not of infants, but of men of years, who being till then uncircumcised,
despise the ordinance of God, and refuse to be circumcised. for he has made my
covenant void: now infants do not this, but their parents, or men of years.

Secondly, the speech of Christ is objected, Ioh. 3. 5. Except a man be borne
of water and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Ans.
Christ alludes to the washings of the old testament, Ezech. 36. 25. and withal
gives an exposition of them, on this manner. Thou art a Pharisie, and love
much washing: but if thou would enter into the kingdom of

The seventh point, is touching the Circumstances of baptism, which are five.
The first, concerns the persons which are to administer baptism, of whom I
propound four questions.

The first is, whether not only Ministers of the word, but Ans. Ministers of
the word only. For to baptize is a part of the public Ministry, Matthew. 28.
18. Go teach all nations baptizing them. And mark how preaching, and
baptising are joined together: and things which God without faith. For there is
neither precept, nor fit example for it in the word of God.

The example of Zippora is alleged, Exodus 4. 28. who circumcised her child.
Ans. The example is many ways discommendable. For she did it in the presence
of her husband, when there was no need: she did it in have, that she might
have a man of blood by reason of the circumcision of the child. v. 26. and in
this respect it seems,

Again, it is objected, that private persons may teach: and therefore baptize.
Ans. Private teaching, and Ministerial teaching are distinct in kind, as the
authority of a master of a family,

The second question is, whether baptism administered by a wicked man, or an
here^^ke, be indeed true baptism? Ans. If the said party be admitted to
stand in the room of a true pastor or minister, and keep the right form in
baptising, according hear them, Math. 23. 1. And to this effect was the
conclusion of the Churches in Africa, against Cyprian.

Upon the same ground the same answer is to be made, if it be demanded, whether
baptism administered by him that cannot preach, be of force or no? It were
indeed to be wished that all Ministers of holy things, were preachers of the
word: nevertheless, if such as preach not, stand in the room of lawful
pastors, and keep the form of baptism, it is baptism

The third question is, whether an Intention to baptize, be necessary in him
that baptiseth? Ans. If the word of Institution come to the Element, it is a
sacrament whatsoever the minister intend. Paul rejoiced that Christ was
preached, though

The last question is, what is the duty of the Minister in baptising? Ans. He
stands in the room of God: and what he does according to the Institution, it
is as much as if God himself had done it with his own hand from heaven. And
therefore, when the Minister applies water, (which is the sign and pledge of
grace,) to the body, he does withal apply the Promise of remission mercies
with his own hand and seal, we must needs be much moved and affected
therewith.

The second circumstance is concerning the persons to be baptized: and they are
all such as be in the Covenant, in likelihood, or in the judgment of charity.
For the seal may not be

Men of years that join themselves to the true Church, are to be baptized:
yet before their baptism, they are to make confession of their faith, and to
promise amendment of life. Act. 2.

Infants of believing parents are likewise to be baptized. The grounds of their
baptism are these. First, the commandment Baptize all nations, etc. in which
words the baptism of infants is prescribed. For the Apostles by virtue of
this commission baptized whole families. Act. 16. 31. and 38. Again,
circumcision of Infants was commanded by God, Genesis 17. 14. and Baptism in the
new Testament, succeedes in I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, Genesis
17. 7. It may be said, that this promise was made Ans. It pertaines to all
believing parents. Exodus 20. God promises to show mercy to thousands of them
that love him. Act. 2. 39. Peter says to the Jews that heard him preach, The
promises belong to you, and to your children. Paul If the parents believe, the
children are holy. 1. Cor. 7. 14. If holy, then are they in the Covenant: now
they are holy: because we are in the judgment of Christian charity to esteem
them all as regenerate and sanctified, secret judgments (in the mean season)
left to God. Now then because infants

It may be objected, that we cannot tell, whether infants be indeed the
children of God, or no: and if they be not children of God, we may not baptize
them. Answer. The same may be said of men of years: for we know not whether
they be indeed the children of. And therefore we may by the like reason
exclude them from all sacraments. Again, we are to presume

Secondly, it is objected, that infants have no faith; and consequently, Ans.
Some think, they have faith, as they have regeneration, that is, the
inclination or seed of faith. Others say, that the faith of the parents is
also the faith of their children: because the parents by their faith, receive
the promise of God, both for themselves and

Thirdly, it is alleged, that infants know not what is done, Ans. For all
this, baptism has his use in them: for it is a seal of the covenant, and a
means to admit them into the fellowship of the visible Church, whereof for
right they are members. A father makes a Purchasse for himself and his
children: at the time of the sealing, the children

It may be demanded, whether the children of Turks and Jews are to be
baptized? Answ. No: because the parents are forth of the covenant.

Secondly, it is demanded, whether the children of professed Papists, are to be
baptized? Answ. The parents are persons baptized in the name of the father,
son, and holy Ghost. And though the Papacy be not the church of God, yet is
the church of God hidden in the papacy, and to be gathered out of it: and
which promise the education of the child in the true faith.

Thirdly, it may be demanded, whether the children of wicked Christians, that
is, of such as hold in judgment true religion, and deny it in their lives,
may be baptized? Ans. They may; for all without exception, that were borne of
circumcized lews, If the root be holy, the branches are holy, Romans 11. Upon
this ground, children borne in fornication, may be baptized, so be it, there be
some to answer for them, beside the

Lastly, it may be demanded, whether the children of parents excommunicate, may
be baptized? Answ. Yea, if there be

The third Circumstance concerns the time. Here one question may be moved:
How often baptism is to be administered? Answ. but once for the efficacy of
baptism extends it self to the whole life of man: and we are but once borne
again, and once ingrafted into Christ. Here let it be observed, that the gift
of regeneration is never utterly extinguished: for if a man be the second time
borne again, he must be baptized again and The spiritual temple is made of
living stones, 1. Pet. 2. 5. And all the body of Christ increases with the
increasing of God. Col. 2. 19. and Ephesians. 2. 21. Believers are of the bone and
flesh of Christ: now there is no part of the bone and flesh of Christ that
dies.

The last Circumstance is touching the place: and that is, the public
assembly or congregation of the people of God. Because baptism is a part of
the public Ministry, and a dependence upon the preaching of the word of God.
Secondly, the whole congregation is to make profit by the enarration of the
institution of baptism: and lastly, the said congregation is by prayer to
present the infant baptized unto God, and to entreat

The eight and last point follows, concerning the use of baptism. And first
of all, our baptism must put us in mind, that we are admitted and received
into the family of God: and Examination, whereby we must call our selves to an
account Confession, whereby we must with sorrowful hearts bewail and
acknowledge the same sins, in the prefence of God, accusing and condemning
our selves for them. The third is Deprecation,

And for the life to come, there must be two things in us the

Again, our baptism into the name of the father, etc. must teach us, that we
must learn to know and acknowledge God aright; that is, to acknowledge him to
be our God, and father in Christ: to acknowledge his presence, and therefore to
walk before him; to acknowledge his providence, and therefore to cast our care
on him; to acknowledge his goodness and mercy, in the pardon and free
forgiveness of our sins.

Thirdly, Our baptism must be unto us a storehouse of all comfort in the time
of our need. If thou be tempted by the

Lastly, if a man would be a student in divinity, let him learn and practice
his baptism. Commentaries are needful to

The 4. point whereby the gift of adoption is described is the ground thereof,
in these words, ye have put on Christ: and all are one in Christ. The phrase
which Paul uses, is borrowed from the custom of them that were baptized in
the Apostes

The union with Christ, is a work of God whereby all believers are made one
with Christ. Here two questions are to be demanded. The first in what respect,
or for what cause are they said to be one with Christ? Ans. They are not one
with him in conceit or imagination: for this conjunction is in truth a real
conjunction. John 17. 22. Christ proves that all believers may be one with him
as he is one with the father. Secondly, they are not one barely by consent of
heart and affection: for of one heart and mind. Act. 4. 32. Thirdly, they are
not one in substance for so many believers as there are, so many distinct
persons are there: and every one of them distinct he that cleaves to the Lord,
is one spirit. Paul says in this sense, Ephesians. 2. 14. that Christ makes the two
one new man. S. John says, that Christ dwells in us and we in him by the
spirit. 1. John 3. 23. For the better conceiving of this, suppose a man whose
head lies in Italy, his arms in Germany, and Spain, his feet in England:
suppose further that one and the same soul extends

The second question is, how are all believers made one with Christ? Ans. By a
donation on Gods part whereby Christ is given unto us, and by a receiving on
our part. The donation is whereby Christ is made ours for right, so as a man
may incommunicable, but only in respect of operation. But the very flesh or
manhood of Christ is really given to the believing heart. Ioh. 6. 54, 56. By it
we receive eternal life from the godhead, and by it God is joined to man, and
man to God. The second is, that Christ gives his merit and satisfaction to them
that believe. And this satisfaction imputed, is the cover whereby he makes us
put off the old man, and put on the new man, created after God in righteousness
and holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. The fourth is, that the word preached and the
sacraments, are (as it were) the hand of God whereby he exhibits and gives
Christ unto us with all his benefits.

Of our receiving of Christ given by God, two things must be observed: one is,
that we must there receive Christ, where

Communion with Christ is, when we have, possess, and enjoy Christ and his
benefits: and that is partly in this life, and fully in the life to come. Of
this communion speaks Solomon

The use. In that we are to put on Christ, we are put in mind to consider our
fearful nakedness. What is that? Ans. There is a nakedness of creation, and a
nakedness following the fall. The nakedness of creation is, when the body
without all covering, in the eye of God.

Secondly, we are here put in mind to have a special care of the trimming and
garnishing of our soul. And for this cause we must put on the Lord Jesus, Romans
13. 14. And that is done two ways. First, by uncovering our nakedness before
God, and by praying him to cover it. To uncover our shame, is the way

Thirdly, there is a great temptation arising upon the consideration of our
own indignity. For when our sins come to our remembrance, they drive us
from the presence of God, and make us that we dare not pray. Now the remedy is
this.

Fourthly, it may be demanded, what we must do for our selves in the time of
plague, famine, sword? We must put on Christ, then shall we walk in safety in
all dangers. This garment serves not only for a covering of our shame, but
also for protection. Isa. 4. 6. And if we be taken away in any common
judgment, being clothed with Christ, there is no more hurt done to us then to
him: and he carries us in his breast, as if we were part of his bowels.

Lastly, though we be clothed with Christ in baptism, yet we must further
desire to be clothed upon. 2. Cor. 5. 4. In this

V. 28. There is neither Jew nor Grecian, etc. These words (as I have said)
contain an answer to an objection, which is this: If

By occasion of this text, two questions are moved, the answer Ans. Yea: Kings
and Queens shall be nourcing fathers and nourcing mothers to the Church of God,
says the prophet, Isai 49. 23. Paul bids us pray for Kings, and all in
authority, that we may line in peace and godliness, 1. Tim. 2. 1. The fifth
commandment, Honor thy father, etc. requires subjection to authority: and
this commandment is eternal.

Object. I. All believers are one in Christ: therefore there is no subjection
among them. Ans. Believers are under a twofold estate justice, peace of
conscience, joy in the holy Ghost. In the first estate, there are sundry
differences of persons that believe: some fathers and mothers, some children,
some

Object. II. Believers are governed by Gods spirit, and therefore outward
government by magistrates is needless Answ. In the visible Church, hypocrites
are mingled with true believers, and they are not governed by Gods spirit, but
by the spirit of the devil: and therefore in respect of them, civil
authority is requisite. Again, true believers are but in part governed by the
spirit, for the time of this life. And for this cause,

Object. III. They that are in Christ, are freed from sin, and consequently,
from subjection which follows upon sin. Answ. Subjection is either
politic, or servile. Politic is, when men are subject for their own good:
and this was before the fall, yielded by Eve to Adam. Servile subjection, when
they are subject for the good of their masters: and this only comes of sin.
Again, subjection with joy was before the fall: subjection joined with pain
and misery, follows upon sin:

The second question is, whether bondage, in which some are Lords, others
bondmen, or slaves, may stand with Christian religion? Answ. It may, in the
countries where it is established If any man be calied being a servant or
bondsman, let him not care for it, 1. Cor. 7. 21.

Object. I. Be not servants of men, 1. Cor. 7. 23. Ans. That is, in respect of
conscience, the subjection whereof must be reserved to God.

Object. II. Christians have liberty by Christ: and where liberty is, there
may be no bondage. Answ. Christians obtain

Object. III. Bondage is against the law of nature. Answ. Against the law of
pure nature, created in innocence, not against the law of corrupt nature, the
fruit whereof is bondage.

Object. IU. All are one in Christ: therefore the difference of bond men and
freemen must cease. Ans. All are one in respect of the inward man; or in
respect of faith and fellowship with Christ: but all are not one in respect of
the outward man, and in regard of civil order.

The sense then of the text is this. There are distinctions of men in respect
of nation, some Jews, some Gentiles: in respect of condition, some bond, some
free, some rich, some poor, some in authority, some in subjection, etc. in
respect of sex, some men, some women: yet in Christ Jesus, all are even as one

The use. By this text we may expound another, 1. Tim. 2. God would have all
men to be saved: that is, not all particular persons upon earth, but all kinds.
For here Paul says, all are one in Christ: that is, men of all nations, of all
conditions, and of all

Again, the name (Jewe) apposed to Gentiles, signifies not only men of the
tribe of Judah, but all circumcized persons of all tribes, Romans 2. 28. and thus
it is all one with an Israelite. And thus we see how to expound the place of
scripture, 2. king of Israel. The words Judah, and Israel, are sometime opposed,
Judah signifying the kingdom of the two tribes, Judah and Benjamin: and Israel
signifying the 10. tribes. Sometimes again, Synonima and are put one for
another, as Psalm. 114. 1, 2. and in this text. And Judah at this time was
indeed the true Israel of God, and Iehosaphat without any fault in the text (as
some suppose) is truly called king of Israel.

Thirdly, they which are of great birth and of heigh condition, The king must
not lift up his heart against his brethren. Deuteronomy. 17. 20. rich men (says Paul)
must not be high minded. 1. Tim. 6. 17. Job would not despise the cause of his
handmaid. Job. 31. 13. Naaman a great man, respected the counsel of his
servants. 2. King. 5. 13.

Fourthly, all believers must be on heart and mind. 1. Cor. and that we are but
in part (as yet) united to Christ.

Lastly, hence we learn not to hate any man, but always to carry in mind a
purpose to do good to all by thought, word, and deed, and to do good to men
in respect of their names, their goods, their lives. And this wholly mind and
purpose, must always bear sway in us. there is no hurt in the mount of the
Lord. Isai 1^. 9. Men turn their swords and spears into mattocks and sithes,
that are of the kingdom of Christ. Isai, 2. 4. because they are one with Christ
by the bond of on spirit.

v. 29. And if ye be Christ's, then

Before, Paul had taught v. 7. 8. 9. that all believing gentiles

The intent of Paul in these words, is to establish and confirm an argument
which before he had urged in this chapter against patrons of works in the case
of our justification: it

In this verse, Paul sets down the fruit and banefit, that comes by the gift of
adoption, to them that believe. And that is, to be children of Abraham, and
heirs of all the blessings of God. And therefore learn here one golden
lesson; namely, that the basest person that is, if he believe in Christ, is in
the place of Answ. Thou may know it certainly, if thou will do as Abraham
did; namely, follow the calling of God, and obey the Gospel; that is, subject
thy heart to the commandments of God, which bid thee repent, and believe in
Christ: for then all the good things revealed in the Gospel, shall be thine.

The use. Believers in this world must be content with any

Secondly, they that believe in Christ, must moderate their worldly cares, and
not live as drudges of the world. For they are heirs of God, and have a title
or right to all good things promised in the covenant. Therefore they shall
never want any good thing that is needful for them. He that has made them

Lastly, our special care must be for heaven. For the things of this world are
but trifles in respect. The city of God in heaven is thy portion, or child's
part. Seek for the assurance of that above all things. Thus did Abraham, Heb.
11. 15, 16.

CHAP. IIII.
1 And I say that the heir, as long



3 Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the rudiments of
the world.

4 But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son





7 Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son: and if thou be a

THese words depend on the former chapter, were under the law as under a
schoolmaster, c. 3. v. 24. and that we are free from the same schoolmaster,
v. 25. being children of God, and heirs by Christ, v. 29 but we for our parts
think our selves servants under the law, as well as the ancient Jews, and
that they are as well children of God, as we. To this objection, Paul makes
answer in these 7. verses, as the very first words import; And I say: that is,
whatsoever you suppose, I say thus. And then he propounds the reason of his
answer, which may be framed thus. If the time of our bondage be ended, and the
full time of our liberty come, then are we sons and not servants: but the
time of our bondage is ended, and the full time of our liberty is

The mayor is omitted, because it is manifest. The minor is in the six first
verses: the conclusion is expressed in the 7. verse.

Again, the minor, [the time of our bondage is ended, and the time of our
liberty is come] is first of all declared by a similitude, and then confirmed.
The similitude is borrowed from the Civil law; and it may be framed thus.
Heirs in their minority, live in subjection to Tutors and governors: but
when they are of riper years at the appointment of their parents, they are

Again, the minor is confirmed by two reasons. The first is this: Your
liberty is procured by Christ: therefore the time of your liberty is come.
This reason is in the 4. and 5. verses. The second reason is taken from the
sign, You have received the spirit of adoption: therefore the time of your
liberty is come, v. 6. Of these points in order.

First, where he signifies, that the father has authority to dispose of his
child. This is the law of nature, and the law of nations. Paul says, Col. 3.
20. that children must obey their parents in all things. When the devil had
obtained liberty to afflict Job in all things that belonged to him, save his
person; he destroyed his children. Job 1. 12. 18. And this shows, that the
children in respect of their bodies, are the goods of their parents. In this
respect, the Jews were permitted to sell their children. Exodus 21.

This authority shows it self, specially in two things: in the marriage, and
in the calling of the child. In the marriage of the child, the parent is the
principal agent, and the disposer thereof. Deuter. 7. 3. Exodus 34. 16. 1. Cor.
7. 38. Where observe, that the commandment touching the marriage of the child,
is given not to the child, but to the parent: and the parent has authority by
the said commandment to give and bestow his child, and to take wives to his
sons. Thus Abraham took a

The first is, whether the father may command his child to marry? Ans.
Presuppose two things; one, that the commandment

The second question is, whether parents may make void the contract secretly
made by their children, without or against their consent? Ans. The scripture
gives them authority either

The third question is, whether a marriage made without and against the consent
of parents, be a marriage or no? Ans. It may be called a politic, or civil
marriage, because it is ratified in the courts of men, according to humane
laws: and

Touching the callings of children, they are to be ordered

Here take notice of the impiety of the Roman religion. There are three
especial estates whereby man lives in society with man: the Church, the
Commonwealth, the family. In the Church, that religion sets up another head,
beside Christ: in the Commonwealth, it sets up an authority that serves to
curb, and restrain the Supremacy of Princes in causes Ecclesiastical.

Again, parents must be put in mind to know their authority,

Again, here is set down the office of parents, and that is, to provide meet
overseers and Tutors for their children after their departure. When Christ upon
the cross had the pangs of death upon him, he commends his mother to the
tuition of John. Ioh. 19. 26. When widows and Orphans are wronged,

Thirdly, here the duty of children is set down, and that is, that they must
be subject to their Tutors and governors, as to Ruth loved Naomi, and claue
unto her as to her own mother. Ruth. 1. 16. Christ was subject to Joseph who
was but a reputed father. Luke 2. last. The sons of the Prophets obey their
masters as their own fathers, 2. king. 2. 12. and so do the servants to their
master. 2. king. 5. 13.

Now I come to the second part of the similitude, v. 3. Even so we] that is,
the Jews, and all the people of God in the old testament. Were children] were
as children in respect of the Christian Church, in the new Testament.

Were in bondage] The Jews are said to be in bondage in respect

Rudiments of the world] that is, the law or Ministry of Moses, and it is so
called, in respect of a more full and plentiful doctrine, in the ministry of
the new Testament. And it is called the Rudiments of the world, because Iewrie
was as it were, a little school set up in a corner of the world, the law of
Moses was as it were, an a, b, c, or Primar, in which Christ was revealed

The use. Here we see, that the people of the old Testament, were for right,
heirs as well as we, and therefore they had right to all the blessings of God.
The difference between us and

Again, the fathers of the old Testament before Christ, were but as children
in respect of us now. Thus much says Paul in express words. And they were so,
two ways. First, in Answ. It is so. If we compare person and person: but it is
otherwise, if we compare body with body, and compare the Christian church,
with the Church of the Jews before Christ: then we exceed them and they are
but children to us. This must teach us all, to be careful were in bondage
under the law, after the manner of to the Church, for the time of her infancy
or minority. Let this be remembered against the Romish religion: for it is like
to that of the Jews, in the old Testament; standing for the greatest part, in
bodily rites, in differences of meats, and drinks, in differences of times,
places, garments; in exercises, and afflictions of the body, in local
succession, in the collation mass, which indeed is nothing but a mass of
ceremonies. Therefore the Roman religion is a childish and babish religion:
and if it were of God, yet is it not fit for the church of the new Testament,
that is come forth of the true worshippers of God in the new Testament, worship
him in spirit and truth, Ioh. 4. v. 24

The fullness of time, or the full time, is that time in which the a full time,
because it was designed and appointed, by the will and providence of the
heavenly father. For he is Lord of time, and this is the day of grace, and
therefore the only fit time. Heb. 3. 7. Psalm. 32. 6.

Thus much of the similitude: now I come to the first reason, whereby Paul
confirms his maine argument. Christ has to the law; the fourth, our
redemption from the laws, the fifth, the fruition of our adoption, v. 4. 5.

The first, the sending of the son is in these words, In the fullness of
time, God sent forth his son. That we may attain to the sense of this great
Mystery, six questions are to be propounded.

The first is, what is meant by God? Answ. The father, the first person. Ephesians.
1. 3. Blessed he God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 1. 3. and
Ioh. 20. 17. And he is called God, not because he partakes more of the godhead
then the son, or the God more commonly then the son, or the holy Ghost.

The second question is, How the father sends the son? Answ. By his counsel
and eternal decree, whereby the son was designed to the office of a
Mediator, and consequently to become man. Act. 2. 23. And thus is he said to
be sealed of the father, Ioh. 6. 27. and to be sanctified, and sent into the
world, Ioh. 10. 36. And therefore this sending implies no alteration or change
of place.

The third question is, whether the son was sent with his own consent or no?
Ans. Yea, the decree of the father is the decree

The fourth question is, how the father can send the son, considering they
are both one? Ans. In the doctrine touching Nature, and person must be
distinguished. Nature, is a substance common to many, as the Godhead. A person
is that which subsisteth of it self, and has a proper manner of subsisting,
as the father begetting, the son begotten, the H.

The fifth question is, why the son is so called? Ans. Because he was begotten
of the father, by a perfect and eternal generation, not to be uttered of man,
or conceived. And we must be warned, not to conceive it in any carnal or
humane manner. For an earthly father is in time before his son, and the son
after: but God the father and the son are coeternall, and not one before or
after the other for time. An earthly father is

The last question is, whether the Son be God? For it is here said, God sent
his Son. Ans. He is God. For he that is sent forth from God, was before he
was sent forth. And the son he was with God the father before all worlds,
Ioh. 1. 1. and because he came from the bosom of his father, v. 18.

Object. I. The son is sent of the father: and he that is sent is inferior
to the father: and he that is inferior to God, is not Ans. Two equals by
common consent may send each other: and therefore sending always implies not
inequality. Again inferioritie is of two sorts, inferioritie of nature, and
inferioritie of condition. The first does not befall Christ: because

Object. II. God has his beginning of none: the son Ans. The son in
respect of his person is of the father: but in respect of his godhead, he is of
none. The son of God considered as he is a son, is of the father, God of
very God. But considered as he is God, he is God of himself, because the
godhead

Object. III. The son was made Lord in time, Act. 2. 36. therefore no God.
Ans. Christ as he is the son of God, was not made Lord in time, but is by
nature an eternal Lord, as the father. And he is said to be made Lord in
respect of his condition as he is God-man, and that in time, in respect of both
his natures. In respect of his manhood, because it is received into the unity
of the second person, and exalted to the right hand of God in heaven. In
respect of his Godhead, the majesty and Lordship whereof, he declared and made
manifest in the flesh

Thus we see how God sent forth his son: the use follows. This act of God in
sending, declares his infinite love: for this

The son of God takes not to himself the office of a Mediator, but he is
called and sent forth of the father: whereby two things are signified; one,
that the office of a Mediator was appointed of the father: the other, that the
Son was designed to this office in the eternal counsel of the blessed
Trinity.

The son is sent forth, that is, he comes from his father, lays aside his
majesty, and takes on him the condition of a servant. The same mind must be
in us to humble and abase our selves before God, to think better of others
then of our selves, to be

That the son of God himself must be sent forth from the bosom of his
father, this shows the greatness of our sin and

The second point, namely, the Incarnation of the son, is expressed in these
words, Made of a woman: that is, made man, or made flesh of a woman. The Word
was made flesh. Ioh. 1. 14. Here three questions are to be handled. The first
is, why the Son was made flesh? Ans. There be two special causes hereof.

The second question is, how far forth the son of God, was made flesh? I
answer three things. The first, that he took Let this cup pass, Matthew. 26.
some say, that their was oblivion in Christ: but this may not be said. For
oblivion is a sin, namely, a forgetting of that which a man ought to
remember: and there may be in Christ or other men, a suspending of the Memory,
by some external and violent appurtenances thereof, except sin.

The third question is, How was he made flesh? Ans. The flesh or manhood of
Christ, was first framed, then sanctified, and then vn^ted to the godhead of
the son. And thus was he made man. Remember here that the forming of the
flesh of Christ, the sanctifying of it, and the personal Union are all
together

In the framing of the manhood, I consider the matter, and the manner. The
matter was the substance of the Virgin, signified Made of a woman. By this
Christ is distinguished from all men in the world: from Adam, because he was
neither of man nor woman, but of ^edde clay. From Eve, because she was made of
man, and not of woman. From all that come of Adam and Eve, for they are both of
man and woman; whereas Christ is of woman, and not of man. Again, [made of a
woman] to note the accomplishment of the promise, the seed of the woman shall
bruise the serpents head. Genesis 3. 15.

The manner of framing is expressed, when Paul says, made, Ans. The order set
down by

The sanctifying of the manhood of Christ, is a work of divine power, whereby
at the time of the framing thereof, it was Again, observe that Christ in his
manhood increased in grace, as in age, and stature. Luke 2. And this increase
was without all imperfection: for in his infancy, Christ received a full
measure of grace fit for that age: when he was twelve years old, he received a
further measure, fit for that age: and so when he Schools for 400. years have
taught the contrary Lumbard.

The third thing is, the Uniting of flesh to the Godhead of the Son: and that
is done, when the son of God makes the flesh, or nature of man, a part of
himself, and communicates unto it his own subsistence. The like example to
this is Misselto, which has no root of his own, but grows in a tree of an
other kind, and thence receives his sap. And so the manhood of the son
has no personalitie or personal subsistence, but is received

It may be objected, that all believers are joined to the son of God, as well
as the flesh of Christ: I answer, they are so, but

Thus we see how the son was made flesh: the use follows. Hence we learn to
use all means, that we may become new creatures, and be borne of God. God
becomes man, that we of God.

To be made flesh, is the abasement of the son: in this abasement he goes on,
till he become even as a worm of the earth, Psalm. 22. 7. so must we abase our
selves, till we be anihillated and brought to nothing: then shall we be like to
Christ, and filled with the good things of God.

Our sins are a wall of partition between God and us: so as we are far
from God, and God from us, Isa, 59. 2. and this partition is of our own making:
and by this means we have no access to God of our selves, though we pray unto
him, and fill Immanuel, that is, God with us, Isai, 7. 14. and his incarnation
is a means whereby we have access to god, and he is nere unto us when we pray
unto him in truth, 2. Chron. 15. 2. This must teach us to draw nere to God in
the hearing and obeying

The incarnation of Christ, is the foundation of all our comfort, and all good
things which we enjoy. By it God comforts, The seed of the woman shall brnise
the serpents head. Jacob is comforted by the vision of a ladder, reaching from
heaven to earth: and this ladder is the son of God made man, Ioh. 1. 51. Job
comforts himself in this, that his Redeemer of his own flesh (as the word
signifies) lives, Job. 19. 25. In the old testament,

The third point or degree, is the subjection of the son of God to the law
expressed in these words, made under the law.

Here two questions are to be answered. The first is, who is made subject to
the law? I answer, the son of God. And this may not seem strange, that he
which is Lord of the law, should be subject to the law: for he must be
considered, as he is our pledge and surety, Heb. 7. 22. and as one that
stands in our place, room, and stead; and before God represents the person of
all the elect: and in this respect is he subject to the law, not by nature,
but by voluntary abasement and condition of will.

The second question is, how the son of God was subject to the law? Answ. By
a twofold obedience: namely, by the obedience the son of God was made sin
for us, 2. Cor. 5. 21 that is, all the sins of all the Elect were imputed to
him, and he in our room and place was recounted a sinner. The passion it
self, is the curse of the law, laid on the son of God, namely, the first
death, and the pains of the second death,

By the second Obedience in fulfilling the law, the son of God performed for
us, all things contained therein, that we might have right to life everlasting,
and that according to the Do all these things and live. Of this obedience 2.
questions are demanded. The first is, whether it be necessary for the
justification of a sinner? Answ. It is: The sum of the law is, Love God with
all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self: Now every jot and title of the
law must necessarily He that does not all things contained in the law, is
cursed. Gal. 3. 13. He therefore that would eschew the curse of the law, and
come to life everlasting, must by himself accomplish all things contained in
the law: and if this cannot be done, the law and all the contents thereof, must
needs be accomplished in the person of the Mediator: of the law. And the law
is the bond that binds us to the payment of this double debt. And till the
justice of God in the law be answered to the full, this bond cannot be
cancelled. Therefore the son of God the Mediator, must not only die for us,
but also perform homage for us to God, according to the tenor of the law.
Therefore he says, that he must perform all righteousness, Math. 3. 15. And
Paul, that Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, Romans 10. 4.

It is alleged, that Christ as man fulfilled the law for himself: and
therefore not for us. Ans. The flesh or manhood of the son of man be Lord of
the Sabbath, then also is he Lord of the whole law. And Paul here says, that
the son of God, is not borne but made under the law.

Again, it is alleged, that the blood of Christ takes away all sin, 1.
Ioh. 1. 7. and when all sin is taken away, the law is fulfilled, Ans. When S.
John says, the blood of Christ purges us from all sin, he excludes the blood
of beasts, and all meritorious means of salvation in man, out of Christ, and he
excludes not the obedience which the Mediator yielded to the father in all his
sufferings. Again, it is not true that a sinner

The second question is, how the son of God performed this obedience? Ans. He
was obedient to his father to the death, selves, and not more then our selves.
This obedience therefore is truly to be termed a work of supererogation: and
there is none in the world beside.

The use. That the son of God was conformable to the law, it argues the
goodness, perfection, and excellency thereof. Here again mark the
difference, between the man Christ, the Gentiles do by nature the things of
the law. The remainders of

The fourth point or degree is, the Redemption of man from under the law in
these words [that he might redeem them which were under the law.] Here five
things are to be considered. The Ans. The law must be considered two ways:
first, as the Rule of life. Thus angels are under the law, and Adam before his
fall, and the saints now in heaven. And none yield more subjection to the law
then they: and this subjection is their liberty. Again, the law when it was
abolished, then men of sundry nations embraced it as needful to salvation.
To be under the law then, is to be in subjection to it, as it is a burden and
yoke in the three former respects, specially to be subject to the curse of the
law.

The second point is, who are under the law? Ans. The Jews before the coming
of Christ were under the law in respect

The third point is, what is the price whereby men are bought or redeemed from
under the law? Ans. The obedience of the is of infinite merit, and efficacy.
Again, we must consider him not as a private, but as a public person,
representing all the Elect in his obedience to his father. And by this means
his Obedience ferues for all that believe in him. Again, it may be alleged,
that the law says, Thou shall love, thou shall not lust, etc. And, the soul
that sins, that soul shall die. Ezech. 18. 20. And, a man shall not redeem
the life of his brother. Psalm. 49. 7. Ans. The law requires that every man
perform obedience and make satisfaction in his own person, and the law knows
no other obedience. But this must be considered, that the law is but one

The fourth point is, who are partakers of this Redemption? Ans. They which
see, and feel, and bewail their condition that they are under the law, and
fly from the sentence thereof to the throne of grace for mercy. Christ came
to save sinners, Matthew. 9. that is, such as are convicted by the law, and know
to them that travel and are heavy laden, Matthew. 11. 28. He preaches
deliverance to captives, Luke 4. 18. Here we are to bewail the misery of our
people, that know not themselves to be under the law: nay they love and delight
to be under it. For they allege for

The last point is, what benefits arise of this deliverance from Ans. They
which turn to God, and believe in Christ, reap four benefits hereby. The
first is, that no sin shall have dominion over them, Romans 6. 14. Here mark
by the way, that they which are in Christ, cannot wholly fall from grace. For
they which wholly fall away, are under the dominion

The second is, that God will accept the endeavor to obey, for obedience,
because they are freed from the rigor of the law. Read Malac. 3. 17.

The third is, that they have liberty to live and serve God without fear of
damnation, or any other evil. Luke 1. 74.

The last is, that afflictions cease to be curses, and are turned to blessings:
and for this cause they are delaied and qualified for the good of them which
are afflicted. Psalm. 89. 32. J will correct them that offend with a rod, but
I will not take my mercy from them. Prou. 3. 11. Grieve not for the correction
of the Lord: for he loves, whom he corrects. Ierem. 10. 24. Correct us in
judgment: and power forth thy wrath upon the nations, that have not known
thee. This must teach men that profess, or teach Christ, not to be discouraged
when they are abused, railed on, slaundered, or cursed. For if they be from
under the law, and

To end this point, it may be said, if we that believe be not under the law,
then we may live and die as we list. Ans. We are free from the law, as a yoke,
but not free from it, as it is the rule of obedience, and good life. And
because we are freed from the bondage of the law, therefore we must be a law to
our voluntaries, Psalm. 110. 4. without constraint, freely yielding subjection
to the will of God, and not for fear of hell, and the last judgment.

The third and last degree, is the Fruition of adoption, in these words [that
we might receive the adoption of sons.] Here Ans. In scripture a thing is
often said to be done, when it is done more fully, and plentifully. Christ
tells Nathanael that he shall see heaven open, the holy Ghost was not yet, Ioh.
7. 39. that is, in the full measure. And, the way into the Holiest, was not
open while the Tabernacle was standing, Hebr. 9. 8. that is, plainly made
manifest. And in this place, Believers of the new Testament receive the
Adoption: because they receive it in a more and daughters of God, in reverence,
obedience, and thankefulnes. Butalas, among the multitude, it is far
otherwise. For the most live even as Atheists in ignorance, according to the
lusts of their own hearts. The faith and repentance, which they profess, is
but Ceremonial faith, and Repentance.

The second question is, whence springs our adoption? The Ans. The Obedience of
the son of God made man,

Therefore our common people err, that look to be saved by their good deeds,
that is, by their good meaning, and dealing. They thus tread the blood of
Christ under their own feet, and become Iesuses or Saviors to themselves.

Secondly they err, that teach justification by the essential justice of the
Godhead of the son: for that it is incommunicable: and they which are
justified by it, are also deified.

Thirdly, the Papist erreth, which teaches justification partly by remission
of sins, and partly by that which we call

It may be said, what must we do that we may be justified and saved by this
Obedience of the Mediator? Answ. In the us, laying our hands on the head of
it: that is, confessing ourguiltinesse, and that we have justly deserved death
and perdition from the presence of God. In the last place, we must entreat the
Lord to accept the blood of the lamb for us, and the whole obedience of the
Mediator. Thus shall we be justified and saved. Thou will say, I will
therefore do this, when I am dying.

Uers. 6.

Sonnes] that is, such as enjoy the liberty of sons. Sent forth] a speech
borrowed from Ambassadors, which are sent forth with instructions, what they
shall say or do: and it signifies, that the spirit reueales nothing but that
which is the will of the father and son, Ioh. 16. 14. Crying] making us to
cry, Romans 8. 26. For if Abba] the next word is the exposition, Father.

The sense. The father has sent forth the spirit of his son unto you; this
spirit sent forth, dwells in your hearts: dwelling in

The scope. The question is, whether believers of the new Testament be
servants to the law, or children? Paul answers, no: and he gives two reasons.
The first, was in the former verses:

In the words, I consider five things: the person sent forth, the spirit of the
son: the person sending, God: the manner of sending: the place, whither the
spirit is sent, your hearts: the office Crying, Abba.

Of the first: the spirit of the son it is, who is sent forth. He is so
called: first, because he proceeds by communication of substance, or godhead,
not only from the father, but also from the son. Secondly, because in his
manhood he is anointed and filled with the Holy Ghost, above measure: thirdly,
because by his death; he has merited the giving and sending of the Holy Ghost
unto us.

Moreover, the spirit of the son is here described. First, he is a

The use. By this we learn, that the Intercession of Christ, is of force with
God. For he prayed for the sending of the spirit, and it is accomplished. Read
Ioh. 14. 16.

And it is a superfluous doctrine, to teach the Real presence of the flesh of
Christ in the Sacrament. For Christ is departed

Thirdly, that which the spirit inwardly teaches, is the same with that which
the son has revealed by the Ministry of the Prophets, and Apostles;
because the spirit is the spirit of the

The person sending is God, that is, the father, in these words, God sent forth
the spirit of his son. Where mark the distinction of the persons in
Trinity. There is the father, the son, and the spirit of the son. And here
remember, that this action of sending forth, argues not superiority in the
person sending, nor inferioritie in the person sent: (for equals may send each
other

The manner of this sending forth, was on this sort. We may motion are the
gifts of the spirit, and so are civil virtues: but the sending of the spirit
is only in respect of such gifts as are bestowed in the Church, in the
receiving of which, the spirit is acknowledged.

The place, or mansion of the spirit is the heart, that is, the mind, will,
and affection. The heart is the very sink of sin;

1. That the beginning of our new birth is in the heart, when a new light is
put into the mind, a new and heavenly disposition into the will, and
affection.

2. The most principal part of our change or renouation, is in the heart,
where the spirit abides. The end of all teaching is love out of a pure heart,
good conscience, and faith unfeigned, 1. Tim. 1. 5.

3. The beginning and principal part of Gods worship is

4. In our hearts no wicked or carnal thought, will, desire, or lust must
reign, but only Gods word and spirit. For thy

5. Above all things keep watch and ward about thy heart: and fill it with
all good cogitations and desires, that it may be a fit place of intertainment
for the spirit, who is (as it were)

The last thing is, the office of the spirit, which is to make believers Cry
Abba. Here I consider 4. things: 1. The means whereby this Cry is caused. 2.
The nature of it. 3. To whom it is directed. 4. The manner of direction.

For the first, in the effecting or causing of this Cry, there are 4. works
of the spirit. The first is Conviction, when a man in his judgment and
conscience is convicted, that the scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, are
indeed the word of God. To this purpose there are many arguments which now

The second work is Subjection, whereby a man convicted that the scripture,
and every part of it, is the word of God, subjects himself in his heart to the
commandment of God, which bids him turn to God and believe in Christ. And
this second, is a work of the spirit of grace proper to the elect.

The third is, the Certificate or testimony of the spirit, which is a divine
manner of reasoning framed in the minds of them He that believes and repents
is Gods child. Thus says the Gospel:

But I believe in Christ and repent: at the least I subject my will

Therefore I am the child of God.



This is the practical syllogism of the H. Ghost. It is the testimony of the
spirit, that we are the sons of God: it is the

The fourth thing that follows upon this Testimony, is

The use. By this we see a manifest error in the Popish religion, which
teaches that we can have no other certenty of our salvation in this life, but
that which is probable or coniecturall, that is, a certentie joined with fear,
suspicion, and some doubting. Certentie in respect of God, that promises:
fear and

Again, by this doctrine we see it is ordinary, and possible, for all that
believe and repent, to be certainly assured that they are the children of God.
For if they have the spirit of God crying in them (as all Gods children have)
they cannot but perceive this cry, and withal they have the testimony of the
spirit in them, which is the ground of this cry. Romans 8. 16. And seeing this
is so, we must be admonished to use all means that we may be assured that we
are the children of God. 2. Pet. 1. Give all diligence to make your Election
sure. Paul bids rich men lay up a good foundation against the time to come. 1.
Tim. 6. 18. Ans. Thou must examine thy self of two things. The first is,
whether thou art convicted in thy judgment

Touching the nature of this cry, it stands in the desires and groans of the
heart, directed unto God. And these desires may be distinguished from all
carnal desires, by three properties. First of all, they are in the hearts of
them that are turned to God, or at the least begin to turn unto him. For God
hears

Desires thus qualified, have the force of a loud cry in the ears of God.
Psalm. 10. 17. God hears the desire of the poor. Psalm. 38. 9. All my desires
are before thee. Psalm. 145. 19. He fulfilleth the desire of them that fear of
him. Isa. 64. 24. Before they cry I will answer: that is, so soon as a desire
of my help is conceived, and before it be uttered, I will answer.

That the desires of our hearts are cries, it is by means of the vocal, but a
vertuall prayer, in that the Son of God presents his manhood and his merits
before the father in heaven, willing as God, and desiring as man, that the
father should accept the said merits for

Of these desires there be two special examples in the scriptures. The first
is, when we are touched in our hearts for our I said I will confess my
wickedness against my self unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of
my sin. When the prodigal son conceived a desire to be reconciled to his
father, with a purpose to confess his offense, before he had uttered his
desire, he is received to mercy. Luke 15. 21.

The second example is a desire of Gods presence and protection Why criest thou
to me? Exodus 14. 15. When Iehosaphat O Lord, we know not what to do, but our
eyes are toward thee. 2. Chron. 20. 12. and hereupon he obtained deliverance.

The use. By this we learn to lay aside formal praying and

Again, many are cast down in themselves, because they see their minds full
of ignorance, their wills full of rebellion, and subject to many temptations;
and they find little goodness in themselves, but they must be comforted by this:
if they can but groan and sigh unto God in their hearts for mercy and
forgiveness, they have the spirit of God crying in them Abba;

Others are grieved, because they have prayed long, and they

It falls out often, that men in extremity of danger confounded in themselves,
know not what in the world to say, or do. Ezechias in his sickness could not
say any thing, but chatter in his throat, and mourn like a dove. Isa. 38. 14.
Some lie under the sword of the enemy, others in a tempest are cast over

The third point is, That the cry of the spirit is directed to God; because it
makes us cry, Abba, father. Here first observe that Prayer to Saints and
Angels, is carnal prayer. For the prayer which is caused by the spirit, is
direct to the father. And God alone searches the heart. 1. king. 8. 39. None
knows what is in Thou art our father, and Abraham knows us not. Isa. 64. 16.
And for this cause, Invocation of Saints, whether it be called Latria, or
Dulia, is flat idolatry.

Again, Prayer is to be made to God as he has revealed himself in the word;
that is, to God, who is the father of Christ, and in him our father, who also
sends his spirit into our hearts, crying Abba. It is an heathenish practice
(which is also the practice of many among us) to pray to an absolute God, that
is, to God out of the Father, Son, and holy spirit.

Thirdly, here we see that true and spiritual Invocation of God, is a mark of
the Church of God: because it is a fruit of the spirit of God in them that are
the children of God. And by this the people of God are noted. Act. 9. 14. 1.
Cor. 1. 2. and on the contrary, it is the mark of an Atheist not to pray.
Psalm.

The last point is, the manner of directing our cries to God. First of all,
they are to be directed to him with reverence, as being present with us: for
to cry Abba, is not to speak words into the air, but to direct our hearts to
one that is present Abba, Father: that is, My father, and thy father. God
requires this importunity of us. Luke 18. 1. It is practiced by David, Psalm.
69. 4. by the woman

Verse 7.

These words, are the conclusion of the former doctrine of Paul. The time of
our liberty is come, in that your liberty is procured and purchased by
Christ, and ye have received the spirit of sons crying Abba: therefore ye are
not servants to the law, but sons of God. And from this conclusion Paul
deriues a second, which is the sum and substance of the whole disputation,
from the beginning of the third chapter, to this place; namely, that they which
are sons, are also heirs,

This verse is a repetition of the 26. and 29. verses, of the third chapter:
therefore I will not stand any longer in the ha^dling of it.

One thing is to be observed, namely the change of the number. Paul said
before, ye are sons: here he says, thou art a son. these things we write
unto you that believe, that ye may know that ye have life ever lasting 1. Ioh.
5. 13. Thus must every believer apply the Gospel, and the benefits thereof to
himself.

The meditation of this point serves greatly to sweeten all For all things are
thine, thou Christ's, and Christ Gods, 1. Cor. 3. 22. Lastly, this meditation
must stir up in us, a care to lead a heavenly and spiritual life, 1. Ioh. 3.
3. that we may be like our eldest brother Christ Jesus.

v. 8. But even then when ye how turn ye again unto impotent and beggarly
rudiments, whereunto as from the beginning, ye will be in bondage again,

Here Paul returns again to the principal conclusion of the whole Epistle,
which is on this manner. If I Paul be called to teach, and my doctrine be true:
ye have done evil to revolt from it to another Gospel: but I am called to
teach, and my doctrine is true: this Paul proved in the first, second, and ye
return to impotent rudiments: ye observe days and times. Secondly, he sets
down the greatness of their revolt: first, by comparison thus: Once ye served
false gods: but there is some excuse of that offense: because ye did not know
God: but that ye have returned to the Rudiments of the world, there is no
excuse of it: for ye then

Here Paul sets down a threefold estate of the Galatians:

Their estate in Gentilisme stands in two things: Ignorance of God [then ye
knew not God.] Idolatry or superstition, ye served them which are not Gods by
nature.

Touching their ignorance of God, it may be demanded, how they can be said not
to know God, whereas Paul says, that which may be known of God, is made
manifest unto the Gentiles? Romans 1. 20. and that God did not leave himself
without witness? Act. 14. 17. Answ. Knowledge of God is twofold, Natural, or
revealed knowledge. Natural is, that which all men have Revealed knowledge is,
that which is set down in the written word, whereby we may know what God is
in himself, and what he is to us: namely, a father in Christ, giving pardon of
sin, and life everlasting. This knowledge the Gentiles altogether want:

Again, it may be demanded, whether this ignorance be a Answ. Yea. For all
men are bound to know God by the first commandment. And this ignorance is a
want of the image of God in the mind, Col. 3. 10. And every defect of the
image of God, is a branch of originali sin. And vengeance is the punishment
of this sin, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.

It may be objected, that Paul here excuses the Galatians by their ignorance.
Answ. It excuses a tanto, non a toto, that is, the degree and measure of the
sin, and not the sin it self, Luke 12. 48.

Again, it may be said, that this their ignorance is invincible, Ans. That
they cannot know him, it is not Gods fault, but the fault of their first
parents, and consequently their fault: and this ignorance spreads it self over
all mankind, as a punishment of the first offense.

The third point is, that this ignorance is a great and grievous sin: for
here Paul makes it the mother of superstition and Idolatry. This must teach us
all to detest this ignorance of God, and his will, and to seek by all means
to know God. God has a controversy with men, because they know him not,
Hose, 4. 1. 6.

Again, this serves to warn all Ministers of the word, to be careful to
root out ignorance out of the minds of the people, and to plant the knowledge
of God. And by this we see, it is false which the Papist teaches, that
Ignorance is the mother of devotion.

The second sin of the Galatians is, that they served them, which are not
gods by nature, that is, false gods, not gods indeed, but gods in opinion.

It may be objected, that the wisest of the Gentiles, worshipped Answ. False
gods are set up two ways. The first is, when that which is not God is placed
and worshipped in the room of the true God; as when the son, moon, and
stars are worshipped, etc. and this is the grossest kind of idolatry. The
second is, when men without God, Ephesians. 3. 12. and the Samaritanes to worship
they knew not what, Ioh. 4. 22. For they conceived the true God in a false
manner, because

This Idolatry is a common sin, and bred (as it were) in he which has not
the son, has not the father, 1. Ioh. 2. Likewise the religion of the Papist
teaches and maintains the worship of false gods. For it gives to Angels and
Saints a faculty or power to know the desires of our hearts, to hear and
help us in all places, at all times: and hereupon prayer is made to them: but
all this is indeed the prerogative and privilege of the true God: and in as
much as it is given to Angels and

Again, that religion teaches men to worship God, in, at, and before images.
And this worship presupposes an Opinion or imagination that there is a God
that will be present to

Thirdly, they of the Popish religion worship a fained Christ of their own
devising: namely, a Christ that sits at the right hand of the father in heaven,
and is withal in the hands of every

Though our religion teach no Idolatry, yet certain it is, that many among us
practice a spiritual idolatry in their hearts. For look what a man loves
most, and cares most for, and delites most in, that is his God; some therefore
have their riches for their God, some their pleasures, some their beastly
lusts. For

That this sin of Idolatry may be rooted out of the minds of men, there must
be first an Illumination of the mind, with the knowledge of the true God and
his will: and there must also be a renouation of the heart and affections, that
they set not up something else in the room of God.

The estate of the Galatians after their conversion is in these words, Ye know
God, or rather are known of God.

The knowledge whereby men know God, is either litterall knowledge, or
spiritual knowledge: Litterall is when the doctrine Spiritual knowledge is
when the mind is enlightened by the spirit of God, with the knowledge of God,
by the word, and according to the word; so as thereupon men are transformed
into the image of God. 2. Cor. 3. 18. And this kind of Ye know God.

The foundation of this knowledgae is, that God is to be known in Christ, for
in him God has manifested his infinite wisdom, justice, mercy. Therefore is
he called the ingranen image of the person of the father, Heb. 1. 2. and Paul
we have the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. 2.
Cor. 3. 6.

The properties of this knowledge are three. The first is, that it must be a
Special knowledge, whereby we must acknowledge God to be our God in Christ.
The first commandment Believe the Gospel. Now the stipulation of the covenant
of grace (which also is the substance of the gospel) is this, I am thy God,
Ier. 31 33. this therefore must we believe. And to this knowledge, is the
promise of life ever

The second property is, that this knowledge must not be confused, but
distinct. First, we must acknowledge the true God in respect of his presence
with us in all places. Thus Moses is said to know the invisible, Hebr. 11. 27.
Secondly, we must he numbered his flittings, and put his tears into his bottle.
Psalm. 56. 8. Thirdly, we must know God in respect of his will, in all things to
be done, and to be suffered: and this is the right All thy laws are before me.
2. Sam. 22. 23. And when Shemei reviled, he spoke thus, He raileth because God
biddes him rail. 2. Sam. 6. 10. Lastly, we must know and acknowledge God in
the power which he showed in the death and resurrection of Christ. Read and
consider Ephesians. 1. 17. where Paul places the knowledge of God in two things, in
the knowledge of the riches of eternal life, and in an experimental knowledge
of the virtue of the resurrection of Christ in our selves.

The third property is, that this knowledge must be an effectual He that
says he knows God, and keeps not his commandments, makes him a liar. 1.
Ioh. 2. 4. and 3. 6. Tit. 2. last.

The use. Seeing the conversion of a sinner stands in this spiritual

Again, if we must know God, we must remember God and Christ: and as we must
know God, so must we remember him. Now we must not know Christ according to
the flesh, 2. Cor. 5. 17. and therefore we may not remember Christ according to
the flesh, that is, in any worldly and carnal manner. This therefore is not to
keep a Memory of Christ, to spend twelve days in revel and riot, in masking
and mumming, in carding and dicing (as many do:) this is rather to bury the
memory of Christ, and to do homage to the god of pleasure. Of them that
said, Let us eat, drink, and sleep, Paul Awake and do righteously: for
some of you do not know God. 1. Cor. 15. 34.

Paul says further, But rather ye are known of God. The knowledge whereby God
knows men, stands in two things; his Election of them to his special love, 2.
Tim. 1. 19. and the

Hence observe: first, that Gods Election is the root of all the gifts of God
in us. We know God, because he first knows we were elected that we might be
holy. Ephesians. 1. 4. Therefore we are not elected (as some teach) either for our
faith, or according to our faith, but to our faith, that is, Elected that we
might believe.

Secondly, hence we learn, that we can neither think, will

Thirdly, by this we see, that the works of grace in God imprint their image
in the hearts of them that belong to God. And this is worth the marking. There
is a knowledge in God whereby he knows who are his: and this knowledge brings
us: and this apprehension of his, works in us the apprehension of faith,
whereby we lay hold upon him. Phil. 3. 12. When Christ makes intercession for us
in heaven, there is another intercession wrought in our hearts by the spirit,
whereby we cry Abbafather, Romans 8. 26. The death of Christ has a virtue in
it, to work in us the death of sin. Thus does

Lastly, here is the foundation of true comfort. Our faith

This knowledge of God whereby he knows us, has two properties. First; it is
special, whereby he knows all the elect even by name. Exodus 33. 17. Again,
it is a perpetual and unchangeable knowledge. For whom God once knows, he
never

The third estate of the Galatians is their estate in their revolt or
Apostasy, in these words, How turn ye again to impotent and beggarly
rudiments, whereunto as from the beginning ye will be in bondage again? or
thus, to which ye will do service again as from the beginning?

The words carry this sense: How turn ye again? that is, it is an
intolerable offense in you, having known God, to return again to the
rudiments of the law. By rudiments we are to understand Circumcision, the
Jewish sacrifices, and all the ceremonies types and figures of Christ to come,
and as signs of grace by divine institution for the time of the old Testament.
Without Christ, when they are used only for custom, whether before or after
the death of Christ. Against Christ, when they are esteemed as meritorious
causes of salvation, and the justification

And Paul having said, that the Galatians returned again to the rudiments of
the law, in the next words he shows how serving them again. They served or
yielded service to them three ways: In opinion, because they judged them to be
necessary parts of Gods worship, and means of their salvation. In
Conscience: because they subjected their consciences to them. In affection,
because they placed

It may be demanded, how the Galatians can be said to return again to the
rudiments of the law, and serve them again, that were never used to them
before? Answ. In the speech of Catachresis, that is, a kind of speaking
somewhat improper in respect of finenesse and Elegancie. The like we have,
Ruth. 1. 22. when Ruth is said to return to Judah with Naomi; and yet she was
never there before. Nevertheless, the speech in sense is most significant and
proper.

Here then we have a description of the Apostasy of the Galatians. It is a
voluntary sin (for Paul says, ye will serve) after the knowledge of the
truth, in which they return again to the rudiments of the law, by yielding
subjection, and service to them: which act of theirs is indeed as much as if
they had served Ans. The sin against the holy Ghost, is indeed a voluntary
sin: but that is by reason of the obstinacy and malice of the will: and this
offense in the Galatians was voluntate only by infirmity. Again, the sin
against the holy Ghost is an universal Apostasy, in respect of all the
Articles of religion: for that sin makes men crucify Christ crucified, Heb.
6. 5. and to tread under foot the son of God: the Apostasy of the Galatians
was particular only in the article of justification.

The use. In that the Ceremonies of the law set up against There is no other
name whereby we can be saved beside the name of Christ. Act. 4. 12. Christ
saues them perfectly that come unto him, Heb. 7. 25. In him we are complete, He
alone treads the winepresse of Gods wrath, and none with him, Isai, 63. 3. If
Christ be a Savior, he must be a perfect Savior, considering he is God and
man: and being a perfect Savior in himself, he needs no partner, and because
he is every where (...) all times, therefore he needs no deputy in
theandricke, that is, humane-diuine. For this cause no action pertaining to
redemption, can be performed by a mere creature, whether man or angel.

Objection. I. Ioh. 20. 23. The Apostles have the power to remit and retain
sins: therefore it is not proper to Christ. Answ. To remit by meriting and by
efficacy in the conferring of pardon, is proper to the mediator. The Apostles
and other Ministers remit by preaching and by declaring remision. The

Object. II. 1. Pet. 3. 18. Baptism saves: therefore not Christ alone. Ans.
Baptism saves by signifying and by sealing unto us the grace and mercy of
God: and the effecting of our salvation, is in the same place ascribed to
Christ and his resurrection.

The conclusion then of Paul is to be remembered: for it serves as in engyne to
ouerturne the maine grounds of popery. The

This again must teach us, to content our selves with Christ alone, and not to
set up any thing with him, or against him.

The second conclusion of Paul is, that to set up any thing out of Christ, as a
meritorious cause of salvation, and to place

The doctrine then of Justification by works, is a doctrine that maintains
idolatry: for if they justify, we may put our trust in them: and if we put
our confidence in them, we make idols of them. That works may merit at Gods
hand, they must not only be sanctified, but also deified.

The distinction used of the Papists, of Latria, and Dulia, that worship, and
service, falls to the ground. They say they give worship to God, and service to
Angels and Saints. It is a toie. For here Paul condemns the very service to
heathen gods: and the service of the rudiments of the law, is the Apostasy of
the Galatians.

The third conclusion of Paul is, that they which have given their names to
God, and Christ, must not return to any thing, that they have forsaken, or
ought to forsake. He that puts his hand to the plough, must not look back: he
that goes to the

Verse. 10.

In the former verse, Paul sets down the Apostasy of the Galatians in
general terms, saying, How turn ye again to the Elements of the world? In
the 10. verse, he shows, what these Elements be, Ye observed days, and
months, and times, and years. days, are meant Jewish Sabbaths: by months,
the feasts observed every month in the day of the new moon. By times, some
understand the feast of the Passover, the feast of Pentecost, and the feast of
Tabernacies. But the word ((...)) signifies, seasons, or fit times for the
doing of this or that business. So It is not for you to know the times and
seasons. It was the manner of the Gentiles to make difference of times in
respect of good or bad success, and that according to the signs of heaven.
And it is very likely, that the Galatians observed days not only in the
Jewish, but also in the heathenish manner. By years, are meant every seventh
year, and the Iubelie years, which the Galatians observed after the fashion
of the Jews.

Again, there is a fourefold kind of observation of days; one natural, the
other civil, the third Ecclesiastical, the fourth superstitious. Natural is,
when days are observed according to Civil observation is, when set times are
observed for husbandry, in planting, setting, Ecclesiastical observation of
times is, when set days are observed for orders sake, Purim, for a memory of
their deliverance. In like manner they appointed and observed the Dedication:
and it seems that Christ was present at Jerusalem, as an obseruer of this
feast. Ioh. 10. 22. And thus for orders sake, to observe certain days of
solemnity, is not forbidden. Superstitious observation of days, is twofold,
Jewish, or heathenish. Jewish, when set days are observed with an opinion,
Heathenish, when days are observed in respect of good or bad success. Now
then, to come to the point, the intent of Paul is only to condemn the Jewish
manner of observing of days, Ye observe days, months, years: and the
heathenish manner, in these words, ye observe seasons.

Against this interpretation, the place of Paul may be objected, Romans 14. 6. He
that observes the day, observes it to the Lord. Ans. Indeed Paul in these
words excuses the Romans that they were weak in faith. Now the case was
otherwise with the Galatians: because they observed days after they had bin
informed touching their liberty in Christ: and withal they placed their
salvation, in part, in the observation of days: and thus they mixed the Gospel
with the law. And therefore they were justly to be blamed.

Again, it may be objected, that now in the time of the new Testament, we in
religious manner observe the Lords day. Ans. Some men both godly and learned
are of opinion, that the Lords day was appointed by the Apostles for orders
sake: and that it is in the liberty of the Church to appoint the Sabbath

It seems to be a truth more probable, that every seventh day in the week,
must be set a part in holy rest unto God: for this is the substance of the
fourth commandment. And it is also very probable, that the Sabbath of the new
Testament is limited the Lords day. For Paul and the rest of the Apostles
observed the first day of the week for a Sabbath day, Act. 20. 7. and he
says, Whatsoever ye have heard, and what ye have seen in me, that do. Phil.
4. 9. Again it was the decree or constitution of Paul, that the collection the
first day of the week at Corinth: now this collection in the Primitive Church,
followed preaching, prayer, sacraments, and it was the conclusion of all other
exercises in the assembly. 1. Cor. 16. 2. And this first day of the week is
called the Lords day, Apoc. 1. 11. and it is so called, Remember the Sabbath
day to sanctify it, and the words, In it thou shall do no manner of work,
etc. are spoken of the Jews Sabbath: but the words, Six days shall thou
labor, and the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, are moral, and
contain a perpetual truth. Therefore the words of Paul must be conceived with
an exception of the Sabbath day, which is the seventh day in every week; which
day Christ has limited by his Apostles, to the Lords day.

The use. This text of Paul discouers unto us a great part of the Lords day,
they appoint many other sabbaths: whereas it is the privilege of God to
appoint an ordinary day of rest, and to sanctify it to his own honor.
Secondly, Ans. Some Churches do not: because the Church in the Apostles days,
had no holy day, beside the Lords day: and the 4. commandment the Lords day is
not accordingly respected: and men will not be dissuaded from following of
faires on that day.

Again, to observe days of good and bad success, according to the
constellations of the heavens, is an heathenish fashion to be avoided. For it
is here condemned in the Galatians. Here therefore, we must be put in mind,
not to observe the planetarie hours: for men suppose that the hours of the
day are ruled Horoscope or the time of our birth, and the constellation of the
heavens the^, Climactericall years are not to be observed as dangerous and
dismal. The observation of the signs, is of the same nature. For the 12.
signs are nothing Fear not the signs of heaven. Ierem. 10. 2. And good
reason. For no man can by learning know the operation of the stars: because
their lights and operations are all mixed together in all places upon earth:
and therefore the creatures of God, and their light serves for the good of man.
In a word, we are not to make difference of days, neither in respect of
holiness, nor in respect of good or badde success.

V. 11. I am afraid, etc.

In these words, the Apostle sets forth the greatness of the

First the occasion of the words must be considered, and that is expressed in
the former words. ye observe days and months. J am in fear of you. And thus
Paul teaches, that works set up as causes of salvation with Christ, make void
the Ministry and grace of God. It may be said, this is meant of ceremonial
works, and so it is true. I answer, it is indeed spoken of ceremonial works,
but it must be enlarged If ye be circumcised, ye are bound to fulfill the whole
law. Hence then it follows, that the doctrine of justification by works, is
an error in the foundation, and being distinctly, and obstinately

Again, here we see the fidelity of the Apostle Paul, and it stands in two
things: the first is, his painful and wearisome labor, to gain the
Galatians to God. The second is, his care that the foresaid labor be not in
vain. And in this example had not so much as a place where to lay his head,
Math. 8. 20. and to preach for by-respects, is to make a merchandise of the
word of God, 2. Cor. 2. 17. The second is, that ministers after the example of
Paul, must be laborers indeed, 1. Cor. 3. 9. and workmen, 2. Tim. 2. 15. And
they must and keep them in Christ, which are already called.

Thirdly, here we see the condition of the Church of Galatia, and of all other
visible Churches upon earth, that they are subject to Apostasy. It may be
said, how can this be, considering true believers cannot fall away? Ans. In the
visible church

The use. This must teach us that are members of the visible Church, to fear
and to suspect our selves: and not to content our selves, because we have some
good things in us: but we to be sealed up to the day of our redemption, and to
lay up a good foundation against the time to come, 1. Tim. 6. 18. By seeking to
have in us such good things, as are proper to the Elect, as unfeigned faith in
Christ, and conversion to God from all our sins.

It may be demanded, how Paul's labor should be in vain? Ans. It was in vain
in respect of his own desire and affection to save all the Galatians:
secondly, it was in vain, in respect of the whole body of that Church, whereof
many were hypocrites. It was not in vain in respect of the elect, nor in
respect of the

Again, it may be demanded, what must be done when the labors of our callings
are in vain? Ans. We must follow the calling and commandment of God; whether
we have good success or no, and whatsoever come of it. Paul fears least his
In thy word will I cast out my net, Luke 5. And thus to do, (whatsoever
follows) is true wisdom, and the fear of God. For it must suffice us, that
the work we take in hand is pleasing unto God. And though it be in vain, in
respect of men, it is not so before God. Isa, 49. 4. and 2. Cor. 2. 18. This
must every man remember in his place and calling, for the establishing of his
mind against all events.

V. 12. Be you as I, for I am even

The words in this verse, to the 16. verse, are an answer to an be as I, I am
as you: the speech is very effectual and significant, and it is Amicus, alter
ego, alter idem, that is, a man's friend is all one with himself. The sense of
the words is, Be as I, look that your minds be not estranged from me, but
tender me even as your own selves: for I Paul am the same that ever I was, I
respect and tender you even as mine own self. be ye as I? therefore he adds,
I beseech you brethren, I command you not. In the next words he adds a reason
of his answer, thus, Hatred presupposes a hurt or wrong to be done: ye have
done me no hurt or wrong: therefore ye

When Paul says, be as I: I am as you: we learn, that there must be a
special and mutual love between the teachers and the people. Paul says,
that he did enlarge his heart for the Corinthians, and he requires the like of
them, 2. Cor. 6. 11. 13. themselves, Romans 15. 30. secondly, by having in
singular price the work of the Ministry, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. and that is, by
wholesome doctrine to repair the image of God, and to erect the kingdom of God
in the hearts of men. When this thing is loved and desired, then are Ministers
loved. This mutual love is of great use, it incourageth people to obey, and
the Preachers

When Paul says, I beseech you brethren, he shows what moderation is to be
used in all reproves. He tells the Galatians his mind plainly to the full:
and withal he endeavors to show his own love to them, and to keep theirs.

It may be asked, how Paul can say, Ye have done me no hurt at all. For when a
believer in Corinth committed incest, Paul took it for a wrong to himself? 2.
Cor. 2. 10. And no doubt, to call the doctrine of the Apostle into question,
was a great wrong unto him? I answer, the wrong was no wrong in his estimation

Again, mark the mind of the Apostle, that he may win souls to God; he is
content to suffer any wrong. The Priests and Jesuits among us in England, are
content to venture life and limme that they may win Proselytes to the Church of
Rome: much more then must the true Ministers of the Gospel be

13 And ye know how through the infirmity of the flesh, I preached

14 And the trial of me which was in my flesh ye despised not, neither
abhorred: but received me as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus.





The answer to the Objection in the former verse was this; Be as J: I am as
you. And the reason was this: hatred presupposes an offense: ye have done me
no offense or hurt: therefore ye may not think that I hate you. The minor is
in the 12. v. the conclusion in the 16. v.

Again, the minor [ye have done me no hurt] is confirmed in the 13, 14, 15.
verses. The sum of the Argument is this: in weakness of the flesh: that he
the first: that he preached having the trial of himself in his own flesh.
Secondly, the love and reverence of the Galatians is set out by three signs,
or effects: they despised him not; they received him as an Angel, or as Christ
himself: they would have plucked out their eyes to have done him good.

The first thing in Paul's condition is, that he published the Gospel in the
infirmity of his flesh, that is, in a mean and base estate, without the show
of humane wisdom, and authority, and subject to many miseries. In this sense
Paul opposes infirmity to the excellency of humane wisdom, 1. Cor. 2. 1. 3.
and under it he comprehends all the calamities and troubles that befell him. 2.
Cor. 12. 10.

This was the condition of the rest of the Apostles. For they were but fishers,
and preached the word in their fisherlike simplicity. Nay, this was the
condition of Christ himself. For he that they were men subject to the same
passions with themselves, Act. 14. 15. The second cause, that we

And as the word is preached in weakness, so it is believed of men; and the
grace of God is conferred to us, and continued in us, in the weakness of the
flesh. Gods love is shed abroad Paul bears about him the mortification of
our Lord Jesus, not for his damnation, but that the life of God might be
manifest in his mortal flesh. 2. Cor. 4. 10. And he says plainly, that the
grace of God is made perfect through weakness. 2. Cor. 12. 9. By this we are
taught a high point in religion, and that is, not only to be content with the
miseries and troubles of this life, but to rejoice therein: because when we are
weakest, we are strongest: and when we think our selves forsaken of God in the
time of distress, we

The second thing is, that Paul preached the Gospel to the Galatians at the
first, as it were breaking the ise, where none had preached before. In this he
claims his privilege, that he was to be esteemed as a master builder, that
laid the foundation of the Church of Galatia: and withal he gives a close item
to the false Apostles, who did not plant Churches, but only corrupt them after
they were planted. Again, Paul here notes the condition

The third thing is, that Paul preached bearing about him the trial of God.
This trial is a work of God whereby he discouers unto us, and to the world,
either the grace or the corruption of our hearts. Thus God tried Abraham, Hebr.
11. 17. the

The use. We must not think it strange, when we are afflicted any way. Nay, we
must look for trialls, and be content when they come. 1. Pet. 4. 12. Iam. 1.
2. We are either gold in

Again, we must take heed least there be any hidden corruptions reigning in
our hearts: and we must labor to be indeed that which we appear to be. For
we must be tried by God: and then that which now lies hid, shall be
discovered

Lastly, we must look to it, that there be soundnes of grace in us, that we
may be able to bear the trialls of God, and show forth some measure of faith,
potience, obedience.

The first sign of Reverence in the Galatians is, that they did not despise
Paul in his base condition. This is a matter of commendation in them, and it is
to be followed of us. And he is a blessed man that is not offended at Christ,
Math. 11. 6.

The second sign of reverence is, that they received Paul as an angel of God,
or as Christ Jesus. Here first we must distinguish between Paul's person, and
his doctrine or ministry. And he is said to be received as an angel, or as
Christ: because his doctrine was received even as if an angel, or Christ had
delivered it. Secondly, we must put a difference between an Apostle, and all
ordinary pastors and teachers. And to be received as an angel, or as Christ,
properly and simply concerns Paul, and the it is not you that speak, but the
spirit of the father in you, Math. 10. 20. Again, he that hears you hears
me, he that despises you despises me, Luke 10. 16. The Apostles were called
of God immediately,

As for other ordinary teachers, they are in part and in the the angels of the
covenant, Math. 2. 7. And Ambassadors in the stead of Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 21.

Here Paul notably expresses the Authority and honor

Secondly, they are to be blamed that call the Pope the De consid. ad Eugen.
spouse of the Church, and Christ by annointment (as Bernard did) for thus is
he more then an Apostle.

Thirdly, here we see the goodness of God, that does not speak to us in his
majesty, but appoints men in his stead, who are his ambassadors to beseech us
to be reconciled to him.

Fourthly, there must be fidelity in teachers, because they stand in teaching,
in the stead of Christ: and therefore must only deliver that which they know
to be the will of Christ.

Fifthly, They must have a special care of holiness of life, because they
speak in the name and room of God. Read Leuit. 10. 2.

Sixthly, the people are to hear their teachers with all reverence, even as if
they would hear the very angels of God, or

Seauenthly, the comfort of the Ministry is as sure and certain, as if an
angel came down from heaven, or Christ himself to comfort us: so be it we do
indeed truly turn to God and repent.

Verse. 15.

What was your felicity?] that is, you esteemed it to be your felicity, that
you received me and my doctrine. Ye would have plucked out your eyes and have
given them to me] a prouerbiall If it had bin possible] this he says, because
no man can pluck out his eye to do another man good: or thus, no man can
possibly give his eye and the sight thereof to another.

In these words Paul sets down the third sign of the love and reverence which
the Galatians showed to him: and that is, that they thought themselves happy
by reason of Paul's Ministry, and would have parted with their own eyes for
his good.

Hence we learn, that there is a felicity after the time of this life, and
that is, to receive and embrace the doctrine of the Gospel So says Christ
else where. Luke 8. 21. and 11. 18. Math. 7. 26. True happiness stands in our
reconciliation with God in Christ. And this reconciliation is offered and given
us on gods

The Philosophers therefore have erred, that place our happiness in honors,
riches, pleasures, or in civil virtue.

Secondly, our common people are deceived, who think because they deal
truly, and justly before men, that they are in as good a case, as they that
hear all the sermons in the world: as though true happiness stood in civil
conversation.

Thirdly, this doctrine serves to beat down a point of natural Atheism in
the heart of man, which makes many think

Fourthly, the only way to establish a kingdom or common wealth, is to plant
the Gospel there: for this makes an happy people: And this is the maine cause
of our happiness

5. On the contrary, they are wretched and miserable that live without the
Gospel, Prou. 29. 18. 2. Cor. 4. 3. 2. Tim.

6. To receive the doctrine of the Apostles, is an infallible mark of the
Church of God. For this is it that makes a people blessed and happy.

7. We may not despise the preaching of the word, 1. These. Answ. Mark the
addition of Paul, Prove all things, hold that which is good, 2 Thessalonians. 5.

Touching the special love of the Galatians to Paul, First it may be demanded,
what was the cause of it? Answ. The very these are the means whereby this
special love was procured.

Secondly, it may be demanded, whether the Galatians did not more then keep
the law, when they would have plucked out their own eyes, and have given them
to Paul? for thus they love him more then their own selves. Ans. The
commandment [Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy selfe] does not prescribe

The measure of love is expressed when Christ says we must love on another, as
Christ loved us. Ioh. 13. 34.

There is a certain case in which we must consider our neighbor not only as a
neighbor, but also as a special instrument of God: and thus are we in some
respects to love, and to prefer him before our selves. Thus a subject is
more to love the

In their example we are taught to be willing to forsake the dearest things in
the world for the Gospel of Christ, even our eyes, hands, feet, yea and our
life.

Verse. 16.

Because I tell you the truth.] We must after Paul's example Am I therefore
your enemie] the conclusion of the Apostles argument. Here we see a corruption
of nature, which makes us that we cannot abide to hear the truth in things
that are against us. We hate them that

1. To search thy heart and life, that thou may know the very worst by thy
self: If thou will not know it now, thou shall know it to thy shame in the day
of judgment.

2. Be vile and base in thine own opinion, Job. 34. last.

17. They are jealous over you amiss: yea they would exclude you, that ye
should altogether love them.

18 But it is good to love earnestly always in a good cause; and not only
when I am present with you.

The word zeal, has many significations; here it is fittely translated
jealousy. Ye are ielous] hereby much is signified; that there is a spiritual
marriage between Christ and his Church: pretended jealousy, and true jealousy.
Pretended jealousy is, when men falsely pretend the love of the Church for
Christ's sake. Thus Paul says, They are ielous, that is, they pretend a love
unto you for Christ's sake, but indeed they do it amiss. And the reason They
would exclude you, namely, from loving of me. Others read the words thus; they
would exclude (...), us: the difference in the Original is only in one letter:
and the sense is the same, that the false Apostles would exclude Paul from the
love of the Galatians, that they only might be honored and

It is good] These words may be understood either of the Galatians, or of Paul.
I rather choose to apply them to Paul, that for jealousy he may make an
opposition between himself, and the false teachers. The sense is this: that
jealousy is a good

The scope. In these words, Paul meets with a conceit of the Galatians: for
they might happily say, that their new Teachers loved them exceedingly, and
were zealous for their salvation. Paul therefore answers by a comparison, thus:
they are ielous over you, but it is amiss: nay, jealousy for you is good. The
first part of the comparison is in the 17. verse, the second in the 18.

The use. When Paul says, that the false Apostles were ielous over the
Galatians amiss, he sets out the fashion of men in the world, which is to do
things which are good in their

In that the false Apostles are said to be ielous, or zealous, we see how
nature can counterfeit (...) grace of God: and that which the child of God does
by (...) that the natural man can do by nature. Thus Pharao fa(...)
repentance, Exodus 9. sold himself to work wickedness, 1. king. 21. 27. and
Judas in the midst of his despair is said to repent. Matt. 27. 1. Daily
experience shows the like in such persons, who in their extremity, with
tears use to bewail their lives past, and good things. Therefore it stands us
in hand to pray, and examine our hearts, least we be deceived in our selves.
For there may lie a depth of deceit and falsehood lurking in the heart. And that
we be not deceived, two things must be observed. One is, that we must cherish
in our hearts an universal hatred of all and every sin; first in our selves,
and then in others.

Thirdly, here we see the property of envy, and Ambition, in these false
teachers. Paul must be excluded from the love of the Galatians, that they alone
may be loved. Thus Joshua would I would to God all the people could prophecy.
Number. 11. 29. John's disciples would have excluded Christ baptising: but John
says, He must increase, and I must decrease. Ioh. 3. 30. The disciples

Lastly, we here see the property of deceivers is to make a

Beside the former pretended jealousy, there is a good jealousy, which the
Apostle takes to himself, and else where he calls it the jealousy of God. 2.
Cor. 11. 2.

This jealousy presupposes the office of the Apostles, and of the lamb. These
duties are all noted by Paul, when he says, that he prepared the Corinthians
that he might present them as a pure virgin unto Christ. 2. Cor. 11. 2. And
because this charge and office is laid upon the Apostles and Ministers:
therefore they are said to be ielous.

This Jealousy stands in three things. The first is, to love the Church,
indeed and truth, for Christ's sake. The second is, to fear least by reason of
weakness, and by means of the temptations of the devil, the Church and they
that believe, should fall away from Christ. The third is, after the fall of the
church,

If the Apostle be thus ielous, how much more then is Christ

This Jealousy in the Ministers must teach all faithful servants of God, that
they keep themselves as pure virgins for to go a whoring from him, and
therefore they are accursed. Psalm. 73. 27. Thus many Protestants do in their
practice, whatsoever they profess. Thus does the Church of Rome both in word
and deed. For beside Christ she has many other lovers: and she goes a
whoring

Again, by this we are put in mind to yield an universal subjection to
Christ: for this is the duty of the espoused wife to her husband.

Lastly, that good things may be well done, good ends must be propounded: and
we must be constant in the good which we do. And thus Paul says, it is a good
thing to be jealous.

19. My little children of whom I travel in birth again, till Christ

20. I would I were now with you, that I might change my voice:

Paul has said before, that his jealousy over the Galatians was good: because
it was in a good cause, and it was constant, not only

The word, (...), translated, I travel in birth, signifies not only, the travel
of the woman at the birth of the child, but also the

In these words (my little children) Paul takes to him the condition of a
mother, and he signifies his most tender and motherly his children. If the
child be sick, and froward, the mother does not cast it forth of the doors,
but she tenders it, and carefully looks unto it: much more then will the Lord
have pity and compassion. Here then a maine comfort is to be remembered: if we
be of the number of them that believe in Christ, haung vice, and having a care
to please God, our weaknesses and falls as a father has compassion on his
children, so has the Lord compassion on them that fear him: and mark the
reason: for he knows our frame, and that we are but dust. Psalm. 103. 14.

When Paul says, I travel, he signifies the measure of his Ministerial
pains, that they were as the travel of a woman with child: and this he shows
plainly in the particulars, 2. Cor. 11. 23. Elias, that was sent in his time
to restore religion, My leannes, my leannes; and Jeremy cries, my belly my
belly: signifying that his griefs and his pains in the Ministry, were as
the pain of the Colicke. By

Again, when he says, I travel, he signifies the dignity of

When he says, I travel again, he teaches, that if men fall after their
first initiall repentance, there is still a possibility of mercy, and place
for a second repentance. We must forgive till seaventie seven times, Mat. 18.
22. Much more will god do it.

An objection: Paul's second travel presupposes a second regeneration in the
Galatians: and if they are borne again the second time, then in their
Apostasy they fell wholly from god. Answ. When Paul says, J travel again,
he does not presuppose any second spiritual generation: for the child of God
is but once begotten to the Lord, and Paul here calls the Galatians; little
children, because even in the time of their fall, the seed of I travel again
of you.

The end of Paul's ministry is expressed in the words, till Christ be formed
in you: that is, till (as it were) the counterfeit or conformity in quality,
and conformity in practice.

Conformity in quality is again twofold. The first is a Conformity to the
death of Christ, when the virtue thereof works in a conformity to the
resurrection or life of Christ, and that is, when we live not only a natural,
but also a

Conformity in practice is, when we carry ourselves as Prophets in the
confession of the name of Christ, in teaching, exhorting, and admonishing one
another: as Priests to offer our

The use. Here we see, the end of all preaching, is to make sinful men to
become new creatures, like unto Christ: this is

Again, here we see, that in the new Testament, there is but one rule and
order for all men, and that is the rule of Christ, Take up thy cross and
follow me: and for this cause the Ministry serves to frame Christ in the
hearts of all believers: Therefore the several rules and orders of Monks and
Friars in the Church of Rome, are mere superstitions.

Furthermore, Paul here makes two degrees of Gods children; one is, when they
are begotten of God, and Christ is formed in them. The second is, when they are
begotten of God,

When Paul says, until Christ be formed, he shows that the conversion of a
sinner is not wrought in one moment, but by

Lastly, we are all here put in mind to study, and to use all good means,
that we may be like to Christ, specially in the disposition of the inward man.
There is a spiritual madness in the minds of many men: they think of
nothing but of the fashion of their apparel, and of the trimming of their
bodies: but let us think how to imprint the gracious image of Christ in our
hearts: thus shall we be lovely, and have favor in the eyes of God.

Thus much of Paul's love: now follows his desire in the 20. verse. In which I
consider three things: the desire it self, I would J were with you now: the
end of his desire, that I might change my voice: the occasion thereof, for I
am in doubt of you.

When Paul says, I would I were with you now, he shows, that the presence of
Pastors with their people, is a thing most necessary. And there are two
reasons thereof. One is, to prevent the devil seeks continually whom he may
devour: and we fight against principalities and powers in heavenly things. In
this respect Pastors are called watchmen, and overseers. Secondly, the
presence of Pastors with their people, serves to redress things I would I
were with you n(...).

In the words, [that I might change my voice] Paul continues

If sorrow for other men's offenses make Paul change his Luke 7. 38. The like
ought we to do for our offenses and sins. The earthquake this winter past,
must stir us up to this duty. For it is a matter full of terror, 1. Sam.
14. 15. and the sickness which has taken hold of thousands as a gentle
warning must be respected. And it must be considered, that the changes of the
great world bring with them like changes

Again, to change the voice, is to confer with the Galatians, and upon
conference to temper his voice to their manners and condition, as nources
stammer and lispe with children. For

That the Conference of Pastors and people, is a thing very necessary. Paul
here ascribes more to it then to his Epistle. It is the life of preaching. For
by it the teachers know better what

Again, here is set down the way to attain all good learning: and that is,
that learners be present with their teachers: and the teachers again temper
their voices to the capacity of

Thirdly, Paul here sets down the way to make a pacification for religion in
these last days: and the way is, that the Pastors when two or three come
together in his name, he will be with them. Matthew. 18.

Lastly, the Ministers (as here we see) are to temper their gifts and speech to
the condition of their hearers. The Corinthians were babes in Christ, and Paul
feeds them with milk. 1. Cor. 3. 3. to the Jew he became a Jew, to the
Gentile a Gentile, that he might win some. 1. Cor. 9. 18. For this cause it
were to be wished, that Catechizing were more used then it is of our Ministers.
For our people are for the most part rude and vncatechised: and therefore they
profit little or nothing by sermons. A sermon to such persons is like a great
loaf set before a child. And it is no disgrace for learned Ministers, in

The occasion of Paul's desire is in these words, I doubt of you, or thus, I am
in perplexity for you: and this Paul speaks as a mother in some dangerous
extremity, in the time of her travel; as Rachel was in the birth of Benjamin,
Genesis 35. And the

Here we learn, how dangerous a thing it is to fall from grace, though it be
but in part. For a man cannot recover himself when he will. We do not the
good we can, unless God make us do it. Ezech. 36. 27. Cant. 1. 4. Ier. 31.
29. Therefore

And though Paul doubt of the recovery of the Galatians, yet he spares not to
send his Epistle to them, and to use means. And thus in desperate cases, we
must use the best means and leave the success to God. Thus the Israelites
when there was no other help, went into the sea, as into their death bed, or
grave, by faith staying themselves on the promise of god. Heb.

That which Paul here says, may be said of many among us in whom Christ is
not yet framed, whether we respect knowledge, or good life: for they give just
occasion of doubting whether they will ever turn to God or no.

21 Tell me ye that will be under the law, do ye not hear the law?

22 For it is written, that Abraham

23 But he which was of the servant,

From the 8. verse of this chapter to the 20. verse, Paul has handled the
conclusion of the principal argument of this Epistle touching the Apostasy of
the Galatians: and here he returns again to his former doctrine touching the
justification

The argument is at large propounded, and it has four parts: a preface in the
21. verse: an history of Abraham and his family, verse. 22. 23. the
Application of the history from the 24. verse to the 30. the conclusion, v.
31.

And first of the Preface. Law] the word (law) in the first place, is taken
properly for the moral and Ceremonial law of Moses: and in the second place,
for the books of Moses, and namely, for the book of Genesis. And in this
sense the word is taken, when Christ is said to expound the law and the
Prophets,

Under the law] to be under the law, is to hold our selves bound to the
fulfilling of the law: and to look for life eternal thereby.

Do ye not hear the law?] that is, ye read and hear indeed, but ye
understand not the scope and drift of that which you read.

In this preface, first Paul meets with the pride of man's nature, whereby the
Galatians went about to establish their own righteousness by the law, when
he says, ye that will be under the law, etc. with this pride were the Jews
tainted, Romans 10. 3. and the young Prince that came to Christ and said, Good
master what must I do to be saved? And the Papists of our time, who will not
be subject to the justice of God, but set up their own justice in the keeping
of the law. The like do the ignorant

Again, Paul here notes the servile disposition of men that

When Paul says, do ye not hear the law? he notes the cause of our
spiritual pride, and of the servile disposition before named, namely,
ignorance in mistaking and misconceiuing the

In the history of Abraham I consider three things, the fact

Touching the fact of Abraham, it may be demanded, what is to be judged
thereof? The ground to the answer shall be this: that marriage is the
indivisible conjunction of one man and one woman only. This Christ of purpose
teaches. Math. 16. where he says that God created them at the first man and
woman, and not women, v. 4. that a man must for sake father and mother and
cleave to his wife, not to his wives, v. 5. that they twain shall be one
flesh, v. 6. And in all this Christ makes no new law, but only reuiues the
first institution of marriage made in Paradise. And

Now then, the answer to the question is twofold. Some say, that Abraham and
the rest of the Patriarks had a dispensation from God to marry many wives, and
therefore that it was no

The second answer is, that God did not approve the polygamie of the fathers,
or commend it, but did only tolerate it, the king must not multiply his wives,
Deuteronomy. 17. 17. and that the child of the hated wife, (though she be the second
wife,) if it be first borne, shall be the heir. Deuteronomy. 21. 15. The occasions of
this tolleration were

It may be objected, if the having of many wives were an offense, that Abraham
and the rest of the holy Patriarchs lived and died in a sin without
repentance: because we find nothing Answer. Known sins require particular
repentance: but if sins be unknown, or unconsidered, by reason that men are
carried away with the sway of the times (as the Patriarchs were) a general
repentance suffices, Psalm. 19. 12.

Again, it may be alleged, that Abraham took Agar by the consent of Sara.
Ans. that suffices not to make a full excuse for Abraham. For if marriage were
a mere civil contract, as it is made by the consent of men and women, so it
might be dissolved by like consent: But it is more then a civil contract:
because in the making of it, beside the consent of the parties, the authority
of God is interposed: and therefore Saraes consent (in giving Agar to Abraham)
is nothing, without the allowance of God: and we may not think that God will
allow of that which is directly against his own ordinance.

Thirdly, it may be alleged, that if the having of may wives be a fault, then
Abraham and the rest were adulterers. Ans. Not so, the polygamie of the fathers
is to be placed in the middle, between adultery, and holy wedlock. They
took not wives of a leude mind, for the satisfying of their lust, but of a
conscience

The event upon the fact of Abraham was, that his two wives, bare him two
sons. He had indeed more sons by Ketura, Genesis 25. 2. but these two, Ismael
and Isaac are only here mentioned: because by the special appointment of God,

The condition of the children is set forth, by a double difference. The first
is, that one was borne of a bond woman, and therefore the other of a free
woman, and therefore a free man, and the heir. Here it may be demanded, how
the same person can be both a wife and a bond woman? Answ. Among the heathen
(as also among the Jews) there were two sorts of wives. Of the first kind
were they, that were joint governors Vxor materfamilias.
of the family with the husband, and they were called mistresses Vxor Vsuaria.
Of the first kind, was Sara, and of the second, Hagar and Ketura.

The second difference of the children was this. One, that is, Ismael was borne
after the flesh, that is, by the strength of nature, and according to the
fleshly counsel of Sara, who did substitute Hagar into her own room. The
other, namely Isaac, was borne by the promise, that is, according to the order
of nature, yet not by the strength of nature, but by the virtue of the promise
of

In the birth of Ismael Saras desire was good, that the promise of God might be
accomplished: but the means was carnal, the substitution of her handmaid,
This is the condition of the godly: they inte^d and desire the best things, but
they fail in the manner of doing. The spirit stirs up good motions, and the
flesh corrupts them. Paul says, that to will was present with him, but he
could not do that which was good as he ought. This must cause us always to
humble our selves for our best works.

Again, we are here taught not to make haste to accomplish

In the birth of Isaac we see the virtue of the promise of God, when it is
mixed with our faith: for then it makes things possible, that are otherwise
impossible, Math. 17. 20. If then we desire any good things at the hands of
God, our duty is in silence and patience to rest on the promises of God, and
then

24 By the which things another thing is meant. For these mothers are



The application of the former here begins: and the sense of the words is.
An other thing meant] the words are thus. These things are spoken by
allegory: that is, one thing is said, and Two mothers] Agar and Sara. Are two]
they represent or signify the two Testaments. Est is put for significat. Of
the two Testaments I will speak afterward.

The one] the one Testament, which is the covenant of works [which is Agar]
which Testament is figured by Agar [is of mount Sina] came from mount Sina,
where the law was delivered to the Israelites. And gendreth to bondage] that
is, it makes all them bondmen that look to be justified and saved by the works
of the law.

For Agar or Sina] here the translatours are deceived, supposing Agar and Sina:
but this opinion of theirs has no ground, and the words are thus to be read,
Agar is Sina. Here Agar signifies not so much the person of Abraham's handmaid,
as that which is said in the former history of Agar. For the words are, (...).
And Sina must be Agar is Sina, that is, Agar figures Sina, two ways. First, in
condition: for as Agar was a bondwoman, so Sina in respect of the law, was a
place of bondage: and in this respect also it is called Sina of Arabia. And it
answereth] Sina answers to Jerusalem, that is, as Agar figures Sina; so Agar
figures Jerusalem: and by this means, Sina and Jerusalem are and she is in
bondage with her children.

The use. These things are said by allegorie] Here the Papists make a double
sense of scripture, one literal, the other spiritual. Literal is twofold.
Proper, when the words are taken in their proper signification. Figurative,
when the holy Ghost signifies his meaning in borrowed terms.

Spiritual senses they make three. One allegorical, when things in the old
testament are applied to signify things in the Tropologicall; when scripture
signifies something touching manners. The third, is Anagogicall, when things
are in scripture applied to signify the estate of everlasting life. Thus
Jerusalem properly is a city: by allegory, the Church of the new Testament:
in a tropologicall sense, a state well ordered: in an anagogicall sense, the
estate of eternal life. These senses they use to apply to most places of the
Scripture, specially to the history. But I say to the contrary, that there is
but one full and entire sense of every place of

Again, here we see the scripture is not only penned in proper terms, but
also in sundry divine figures and allegories. The song of Solomon is an
Allegory borrowed from the fellowshippe of man and wife, to signify the
communion between Christ and his Church: and so is the 45. psalm. The book
Ride on upon the word of truth, meeknes, and justice, he describes a Princes
chariot by allegory. The Guide is the word, the horses that draw it, are

It may be demanded, when does the scripture speak properly, Ans. If the
proper signification of the words be against common reason, or against the
analogy of faith, or against good manners, they are not then to be taken
properly, but by figure. The words of Christ, Ioh. 15. 1. I am the true vine,
and my father is an husband man. If they be taken I am as the true vine, and my
father as an husbandman. The words of Christ, Take, eat, this is my body, 1. Corinthians. 11. verse. 24. taken properly, are against the articles of faith, He
ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God. And they are against
the sixth commandment, Thou shall not kill. And therefore they must be
expounded by figure, thus, This bread is a sign of my body. The like is to be
said of other places: they must be taken properly, if it be possible: if not,
by figure.

Here then they are to be blamed, that make the use of Rhetoric in the Bible,
to be a mere fopperie. For to this purpose

They are two Testaments] they are, that is, they signify: and so Agar is Sina
a mountain in Arabia, that is, signifies Sina. Thus the Rock in the wilderness
is Christ, 1. Cor. 10. 4. that is, figures Christ. Like to this is the
Sacramental phrase, This is my body, that is to say, this bread signifies my
body. Great is the madness of men that hence gather Transsubstantiation, or the
real conversion

The two Testaments are the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of grace, one
promising life eternal to him that does all things contained in the law: the
other to him that they are two, that is, two in substance, or kind. And they
are two, sundry ways. The law, or covenant of works, propounds the bare
justice of God, without mercy: the covenant of grace, or the Gospel, reueales
both the justice and mercy

Here then falls to the ground a maine pillar in Popish religion, which is,
that the law of Moses, and the Gospel, are all one law for substance: and that
the difference lies in this, that the law of Moses is dark and imperfect, and
the Gospel or the law of Christ more perfect: because he has (as they say)
added Counsels to precepts. Again, the law (they say) without

And whereas the Papists make two iustifications, the first merely by grace,
the second by works: besides the two Testaments, they must establish a third
Testament compounded of both, and it must be partly legal, and partly
Evangelical; otherwise the twofold justification cannot stand. For the law

God did not approve the polygamie of Abraham, yet does he use it to signify
the greatest mystery of our religion.

Here again Paul sets down two properties of the Testament of works, or of
the law. The first is, that it came from mount Sina. And here lies the
difference between the law and the Gospel: the law is from Sina, the gospel
from Sion or Jerusalem.

The second property of the law is, that it gendreth to bondage: because it
makes them bond men, that look to be saved the ministry of death, 2. Cor.
3. 6. and Paul says, that after he knew his sins by the law, he died, and the
law was the means of death unto him, Romans 7. 10. Here is another difference
between the law and the Gospel. The law genders to bondage: the Gospel
genders to life. For it is an instrument of the spirit for the beginning and
confirming of our regeneration and salvation: and so is not the law, which is
no cause, but only an occasion of the grace of

Where as Jerusalem that now is, is said to be in bondage, as Sina and Hagar.
It is to be observed, that there is no Church in the world, nor people, which
is not subject to Apostasy. For God had made great and large promises to
Jerusalem, Psalm. the deceit of sin: the second is, the hardening of the heart
after men are deceived an evil heart, which grows upon hardness of heart:
the fourth is, unbelief, whereby the word of God is called in question, and
the truth thereof: and after unbelief follows a departure from God and
Christ. That this may not be, we must carefully avoid all the deceits of sin,
as

Again, as Agar figures the law, so does Ismael all iusticiaries, that look
to be saved by the law. Here then we see the condition of the world, the
greatest part whereof are Ismalites. For the Turk and the Jew, look at this
day to be faued by their them are Ismaelites. For they look to be saved by
their good serving of God, and by their good deeds: and they little think on
Christ and his merits. And thus they deprive themselves of all title to
eternal life. Therefore it stands them in hand to condemn nature and the
strength thereof, and to renounce their own works, and to rest only on the
promise of mercy for eternal

Lastly, in that Jerusalem is in bondage like Agar or mount Sina, we see how
vain are the pilgrimages to the holy land, and

26. But Jerusalem which is above is free: which is the mother of

Here Paul shows what is figured by Sara, namely, the new Jerusalem, which is
the Catholic Church, Heb. 12. 22, 23. Revel. 21. 2. the pillar and ground of
truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15. Fourthly, in Jerusalem was the throne of David, Psalm.
122. 5. and subjection to Christ their king, Psalm. 110. 2. Isai, 2. 5. Lastly,
as in Jerusalem the names of the citizens were enrolled in a register: so the
names of all the members of the Catholic Church, are enrolled in the book of
life, Reu. 20. 15. Hebr. 12. 23.

Again the Catholic Church dwelling here below, is said to be above in
heaven for two causes. First, in respect of her beginning, which is from the
Election and grace of God, and from Christ the Mediator, of whose flesh and
bone we are that believe, Ephesians. 5. 30. The justice whereby we are justified is
be above, because it dwells by faith in heaven with Christ: for the property of
faith is to make us present after a sort, when we are absent, Heb. 11. 2.

The use. This being so, we are admonished to live in this world as Pilgrims
and strangers, 1. Pet. 2. 11. and therefore we must not set our love upon any
earthly thing, but our minds must be upon the country to which we are
traveling. And whatsoever is an hinderance to us in our journey, we must

Secondly, we must carry our selves as Burgesses of heaven, Phil. 3. 20. And
this we shall do by minding, seeking, affecting of heavenly things, by speaking
the language of Canaan, which is, to invoke and praise the name of God.
Lastly, by leading a

Thirdly, when Paul says, that Jerusalem which is above is free etc. he shows
that the Catholic Church is one in number, and no more. Cant. 6. 8. My dove is
above, and the only daughter of her mother. Ioh. 10. 16. One sheepefold. There
be many members, but one body, 1. Cor. 12. 12.

Fourthly, hence we gather, that the Catholic Church is invisible. For the
company of them that dwell in heaven by their faith, cannot be discerned by
the eye. John saw the heavenly Jerusalem descending from heaven, yet not with
the bodily eye, but in spirit, Revel. 21. 10. The things which make the
Catholic

Free] that is, redeemed from the bondage of death and sin: and so from the
curse of the law. Of this freedom I will speak

The mother of us all] she is called a mother, because the word of God is
committed to the keeping of the Church, which word is seed, 1. Pet. 1. 23. and
milk, 1. Cor. 3. 2. and strong meat, Heb. 5. 14. And the church as a mother,
which by the ministry

Here a great question is to be propounded, namely, where

The first motive. The Church of Rome has means of sure and certain
interpretation, tradition, councels, fathers: we have nothing but the private
interpretation of Luther, Melancthon, Answ. Scripture is both the gloss and
the text; And the principal means of the interpretation of scripture, is
scripture it self. And it is a means, when places of scripture are expounded
by the Analogy of faith, by the words, scope, and circumstances of the place.
And the interpretation which is suitable to all these, is sure, certain, and
public: for it is the interpretation of God. Contrariwise, the interpretation,
which is not agreeable to these, though it be from Church, Fathers, and
Counsels, is uncertain, and it is private interpretation. Now this kind of
interpretation we allow: and therefore

The second motive. We have no divine and infallible authority to rest on in
matter of religion: but they of the church of Rome have. Ans. In the Canonical
scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, there is divine and infallible
authority:

The third motive. We have no limitations of opinion, and affection, but they
of the church of Rome have. I answer first: we suffer our selves to be limited
for opinion, by the Analogy

The fourth motive. The Roman religion draws the multitude. Ans. It draws
them indeed, because it is a natural religion: but it does not turn them
from darkness to light, from death to life. Secondly, I answer, that Antichrist
in his coming shall draw the multitude. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.

The fifth motive. There were never but two alterations of religion. One, in the
days of Elias; the other, in the days of John the Baptist. Ans. I will show a
third. Paul says, that before the end, there shall be a departure, 2 Thessalonians.
2. and this departure is general in all nations, Revel. 13. 16. and after a
thousand years there shall be the first resurrection, Revel. 20. 5. and this

The sixth motive. The church of Rome has a Judge to end controversies: we
have none. Ans. Christ is our Judge: and the scripture is the voice of this
judge, determining all things

The seventh motive. The Roman religion is suitable to ancient Tradition. Ans.
It is contrary. For it abolisheth the second commandment touching Images, and
the tenth, touching lust.

To these seven, I add three other. The eight motive then is Ans. The offices
of the first restorers of the Gospel were ordinary: and their vocation to the
said offices was ordinary: for they were all either Priests, or School
doctors. It may be said, that they departed

The ninth motive. The church of Rome has true baptism, and therefore it is a
true church. Ans. Baptism in the Papacy,

The tenth motive. The church of Rome has antiquity and succession from the
Apostles. Ans. They are no marks of the church, unless they be joined with
prophetical and Apostolical doctrine. The kingdom of darkness, has also
antiquity, succession, universality, and unity.

Now then we are to hold the church of Rome as a stepmother, nay as a professed
harlot: she is no mother of ours. Come out of her my people, Revel. 18. Let us
therefore come to the true answer.

The catholic Church, our Mother, is to be sought for, and to be found in the
true visible churches, the certain marks whereof are three. The preaching of
the word of God, out of

Again, in that the Church is called our Mother, the Papist gathers that her
commandments must be obaied, Prove. 1. 8. and therefore in their Catechismes,
beside the commandments

The Church is called the mother of us all, that is, of all true

Lastly, in that the church is our Mother, we are taught that we must despise
our first birth, and seek to be borne again unto God, and suck the breast of
our mother, feeding on the milk of the word. Psalm. 45. 11. 1. Pet. 2. 2. Thus
to be borne a member of the new Jerusalem, is a great privilege. Psalm. 87. 5.

27 For it is written, Rejoice thou barren that bear no children, break
forth and cry thou that trauelest not: for the desolate has many more
children, then she which has an husband.

These words are the testimony of the Prophet Isa, c. 54. 1. and they are
brought to prove that which Paul said in the former verse, that the Catholic
Church is the Mother of us all, that is, not only of the Jews, but also of
all believing Gentiles.

In the words, I consider the preface to the Testimony, and the testimony it
self. The preface, It is written: where two points are to be considered. The
first is, who says, It is written? Ans. The Apostle Paul, whose authority was
divine, and infallible,

The second point is, In what question says Paul, It is written? Ans. In a
controversy between him and the false Apostles, touching the justification of
a sinner. This shows that the scripture it self is the means to determine
and decide controversies. There was for this purpose in the old Testament, the
lively voice of God uttered in the Oracle at the Mercy seat: It is written.

In the testimony, I consider three things, the condition of two Churches, the
change of the condition, the joy that is upon

The condition of the Church of the new Testament, in these words, Barren that
bear no children: thou that trauelest not: the desolate.

Barren] The Christian Church is so called, because by the virtue and strength
of nature, it bears no children to God, no more then Sara did to Abraham, Ioh.
1. 13. 1. Cor. 3. 7. Secondly, it is so called in respect of the beginning
thereof, when the Jewish church was yet standing, till the spirit of God was
powered forth upon all flesh, after the ascension of Christ: and before he spent
his strength in vain, Isai, 49. 1. Thirdly, it is so called in respect of the
latter times of the church, in which Christ shall scarce find faith upon the
earth, Luke 18. 8. Further that the

Desolate] that is, without husband in appearance, by reason of the cross and
affliction, and without children: because at the first the christian church was
constrained to hide herself in Answ. The estate of the church is twofold:
inward, or outward. The inward estate stands in the true knowledge of God in
Christ, in comfort touching remission of sins, and life everlasting, in the
hearing

Hence it follows, that the Catholic church is not a visible estate or
company of men under one visible head: because in respect of her outward
estate she may be for a time in desolation. And as this is the estate of the
church, so is it also of the members thereof. They shall be hated of all men,
Luke 21. 17. Men shall think they do God good service, when they kill them.
Ioh. 16. 2. And Christ himself was a man without form, or beauty. Isai. 53.
2.

Having an husband] in these words the condition of the Jewish church is set
forth, that she is married or espoused to God, who is her husband. Ezech. 16.
8, 9. Ose. 2. 19. The like

This must teach us, to dedicate our bodies and souls to God and Christ, and
to give the maine affections of our hearts unto him, as our love, and our joy,
etc.

Secondly, we must adorn and trim our selves with grace, that we may please
our husband. Psalm. 45. 12.

Thirdly, we must be the glory of Christ, as the wife is to her husband, 1.
Cor. 11. 7. and that is by subiecting our selves to Christ, and his laws.

Again, if we be^roath our selves to Christ indeed, we may assure our selves
that Christ is our Christ, and that he has given himself unto us: and
consequently, that he will sanctify us, Ezech. 16. 9. protect us as an husband
does his wife, Genesis 20. 16. and indowe us with all things needful for this
life, and

The second point is the change of the church of the new Testament, because
she shall cease to be barren, and bring forth many children. This is the
promise of God: and hereupon Paul concludes, that the church is a mother of all
believers, let there be this or that, and it was so. Of like virtue is Gods
promise, if we can wait his leisure. God promised that after 430. years, the
Israelites should be delivered out of Egypt,

The third point is the joy upon the change. Rejoice. Here Answ. The church.
Gods kingdom is the place of joy. Romans 14. 17. Rejoicing belongs to the people
of God, Psalm. 68. 3. and 106. 5. The music of the Temple was typical, and
figured the joy of the Catholic Church, where is the assurance of remission of
sins, and life eternal.

The second point is, in what must the church rejoice? Ans. In the redemption
of Christ and the fruit thereof, the conversion of sinners to god. For the
prophet had showed at large the passion and sufferings of Christ: Isai, 53. and
hereupon he says, Rejoice thou barren. The Israelites were commanded to feast
before the Lord, Leuit. 23. 40. 1. Chron. 29. 32. that is, before the Lord's Ark, which was the pledge of his presence. Now this Arc was a figure of
Christ: and the mirth before the Arc, signified, that the foundation of all
our joy, lies in our Reconciliation with God in Christ. The angels

The use. It is false that religion breeds Melancholy, and cuts of all mirth.
It does not abolish mirth, but rectify it: nay it brings men to true and
perfect joy.

Our first and principal joy must be, that we are in Gods favor, reconciled
to God by Christ, Luke 10. 20. In David, the head of his joy, was the good
estate of the church, Psalm. 137 6. And all other petty joys must flow from
this, and be suitable to it.

Break forth] this signifies, that the church upon earth is (as it were) pent
in, with present grief. Our joy in this life is mixed with sorrow. The
paschall lamb was eaten with sour herbs, to signify, that we feel no
sweetness in the blood of Christ, till we feel the smart of our sins. We
here must rejoice in Joy is sown for them that are upright in heart, Psalm. 97.
12.

Crie] in our earthly joys, we must be moderate and sparing: we must not eat
to much honey least we surfeit. Yet in spiritual joys the measure is to rejoice
without measure, if we be ravished

28. Therefore brethren, we are after the manner of Isaac, children

Here Paul shows, that as Sara figured the catholic church: so Isaac was a
figure of all true believers the children of God.

Therefore] or thus, And we brethren.

We] not only the Jews, but also believing Gentiles.

Promise] the promise made to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed: or the promise made to the church, that

Children of promise] believers are so called: not because they believe the
promise (though that be a truth) but because they are made children of God, by
the virtue of Gods promise. For thus was Isaac the child of promise, in that he
was borne to

Hence it follows, that the mere grace of God, is the cause the Ephesians
were predestinate to adoption, Ephesians. 1. 5. And he says, the 7000, that never
bowed knee to Baal, were reserved by the election of grace, Romans 11. 5. And it
is a false Position, to teach, that Election and adoption, are according to
Gods foreknowledge of our faith and obedience. For thus shall we Elect our
selves,

Mark further, the children of God are called the children of the promise, and
this promise is absolute and effectual. Here a question may be resolved: and
that it, whether the child of God in his conversion have a liberty and power
to resist the inward calling of God? Answ. No. The absolute will of God For he
makes men to do that which he commands. Ezec. 36. 26. he gives the will and
the deed, Phil. 2. 13. so as men effectually called, cannot but come. Ioh. 6.
45.

It may be said, that this is to abolish all freedom of will. Ans. It
suffices to the liberty of the will, that it be free from compulsion: for
constraint takes away the liberty of the will, and not necessity. Secondly,
the determination of man's will

29 But as he which was borne

These words, are an answer to an Objection, on this manner. We are hated of
the Jews: and therefore we are not the children of promise. The answer is two
fold. One in this verse, thus, No marvel: this is the old fashion: it was thus
in Abraham's

Observe, that there is a perpetual enmity and opposition, between true
believers and hypocrites. God put enmity between the seed of the serpent,
and the seed of the woman. Genesis

This hatred and opposition, shows it self in persecution: of which, three
things are to be considered.

The first is, who persecutes? Ans. Carnal Ismaelites, such as are of the same
religion and family with Isaac. Thus the Jews and seek the subue^sion of
Church, and land.

The second is, who are persecuted? Ans. Spiritual men, the children of the
promise. They suffer wrong, but they do none. In the mount of the Lord there
is no hurt done. Isa. 11. 9. they turn their spears and swords, into mattocks
and sithes. Isa. 2. 4.

The third point, is* touching the kind of persecution: and that was skorning
or mocking. Genesis 21. 9. It may be demanded, Ans. Mocking and derision, which
rises of the hatred and contempt of our brother, is a degree of murder. He
which says Raca to his brother, is guilty of a Council. Matthew. 5. 22. Here
Raca, signifies all signs and gestures that express contempt, as snuffing,
tushing, iering, gerning, etc. Cain is rebuked of God, even for the casting
down of his countenance. Genesis 4. 6.

Again, the mocking wherewith Ismael mocked Isaac, proceeded from a contemp:
and hatred of the grace of God in Isaac: which Paul notes when he says, that
he was persecuted which was borne after the spirit. This hatred of Gods grace
in men, is the beginning of all persecution, and the deriding of the grace of
God, is as much as the spoiling of our goods, and the seeking of our lives.
Thus Cain hated his brother, by reason of the grace of God: because his deeds
were good. 1. Ioh. 3. bald pate: secondly, for the favor of God showed upon
Elias his master, in saying, Ascend, bald ^ate: that ^us^in. in q^^st.
ascend not to Bethel, but ascend to heaven as Elias did. And this profane
skorning he cursed in the name of God. 2. King. 2. 23. The like skorning is
used among us at this day. For the practice of that religion which stands by
the law of God, and the good laws of this land, is nicknamed with terms of
precis^nes, and purity. A thing much to be lamented: for this bewraies that
there is a great want of the grace of God among ^s. Therefore take heed of it.

30 But what says the Scripture: put out the bondwoman, and her son: for
the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman.

The second answer to the former objection, is in these words, that they which
hate the children of promise, shall at length be cast out of the house of God.

Object. I. These words, cast out the bondwoman, are the words of Sara to
Abraham: therefore they are not the words of scripture. Ans. The words were
uttered by Sara, but they were afterward approved by God, Genesis 21. 12. and
thus they are the voice of scripture.

Object. II. Sara is commended for her subjection to Abraham, 1. Pet. 3. 6. yet
here she speaks imperiously, Cast out the bondwoman. Ans. She speaks this
not as a private woman, but as the voice and mouth of God, and that (no doubt)
by instinct from God. And therefore the words she utters, are to be esteemed

Thevse. I. All carnal hypo^^ites, mockers of the grace of God, shall be cast
forth of Gods family, though for a time they bear a sway therein. This is the
sentence of God. Let us therefore

II. Consolation: the persecution of the people of God shall not be perpetual.
For the persecuting bondwoman, and her son, must be cast out. The rod of
the wicked shall no^ rest upon the Lot of the righteous. Psalm. 125. 3. This is
our comfort.

III. All iustitiarie people, and persons that look to be saved and iust^fied
before God by the law, and the works of the law, either in whole, or in part,
are cast out of the church of God, and have no part in the kingdom of heaven.
The casting

31 Then brethren, we are not children of the servant, but of the freewoman.

The conclusion of the whole argument following directly from the 27. verse. If
we be children of the promise, then are we children of the freewoman and not of
the bondwoman, and consequently we are justified and saved without the works of
the law, by the mere grace of God causing us by faith to

CHAP. V.
1 Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and
be not entangled again

THese words, are repetition of the principal

Further, they are collected and inferred upon the conclusion of the last
argument used in the last chapter, thus: Ye are children of the freewoman: and
therefore ye are free: and therefore ye should hold fast your liberty.

In the words, two maine points of doctrine are propounded. The first is, that
by nature we are all entangled with the yoke of bondage. For the better
conceiving of this, I will handle three points, the nature of this bondage, the
sign of it, and the use.

Touching the nature of it. Our spiritual bondage stands in three things. The
first, is bondage under sin, which Paul teaches when he says, I am carnal
sold under sin. Romans 7. 14. Here remember, that by sin, is meant Original
sin, which has two parts: Guiltines in the first offense of Adam, which is
imputed to all mankind; and the disposition of all the powers

The second thing, is obligation or subjection to all punis^^ment both
temporal and eternal. And it has three parts. The first is, Bondage under
Satan, who keeps unrepentant sinners in his snare according to his own will,
2. Tim. 2. 26. he rules in their hearts like a God, 2. Cor. 4. 4. and has
power to blind

The third part of this bondage, is the obligation to the ceremonial law. It
pertaines not to all mankind, but only concerns

The sign of this bondage, whereby it may be discerned, is to keep a course
or practice in sinning. Ioh. 8. 34. He that commits sin, is a servant of
sin: or again, a life led according to the custom and fashion of this world
in the lust of the flesh,

The use. We must learn to see, feel, acknowledge, and bewail this bondage
in our selves. Deliverance belongs only to such captives, as know themselves
to be captives, Luke 4. I am sold under sin: and, O miserable man, who shall
deliver me from this body of death. To feel this bondage, is a step out of
it: and not to feel it, is to be plunged into it.

Secondly, we must pray earnestly for deliverance. The dumme creatures sigh and
travel till they be delivered from their bondage: much more then must we do
it. Romans 8. 22.

Thirdly, we must learn to detest whatsoever is of our selves: because it
wholly tends to bondage.

Lastly, we must be content with any affliction that God

The second maine doctrine is, that by grace there is a liberty pertaining to
the people of God. Here I consider four things: 1. what this liberty is. 2.
the author of it. 3. the persons to whom it belongs. 4. our duty touching
this liberty.

For the first: Christian liberty is called, the Good, or commodity of
Christians. Romans 14. 16.

It is a spiritual Right or condition, lost by Adam, and restored by Christ. I
say spiritual, because it pertaines to the conscience. The use indeed of our
liberty is in outward things, as meat, drink, apparel, etc. but the
liberty it self is in the civil liberty, which stands in the moving of the
body, in the choice of bodily actions, and in the free use of our goods.

Christian liberty has two parts, a Deliverance from misery, and Freedom in
good things.

Deliverance has four parts. The first, is a Deliverance from the curse of
the law for the breach thereof. Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ. And this comes to pass: because there is a translation
made of the curse from our persons to the person of Christ. Gal. 3. 13.

The second deliverance is from the obligation of the law whereby it binds us
to bring perfect righteousness in our own persons for the attainment of
everlasting life, according to the tenor thereof, Do this, and live. And this
deliverance is procured, because there is a translation made of the fulfilling
of the law from our persons to the person of our Savior Christ.

From these two deliverances arises the Pacification of the conscience, partly
for our Justification, and partly for our conversation.

Touching justification: A sinner in his humiliation and conversion has by
this doctrine a Liberty without respect to his own works, or to his own
fulfilling of the law, to rest on the mere mercy of God for the forgiveness of
his sins, and the salvation of his soul, and to appeal from the throne of
divine justice, to the throne of grace, and to oppose the merit of Christ
against the wrath and judgment of God. And this

Here some man may say, how shall I know that I am freed from the rigor of the
law, and from the curse thereof? Ans. Thou must first set thy self at the
bar of Gods judgment: and there must thou arraigne, accuse, and condemn thy
self: this done, thou must use thy liberty, and make thine appeal

Moreover, touching conversation, our consciences are settled thus: In that we
are freed from the Rigor of the law, God

The third Deliverance, is from the observation of the Ceremonial law of
Moses. Col. 2. 16. And hence arises an other deliverance from the bondage of
humane Traditions, as Paul says, If ye be dead with Christ from the Elements
of the world, why are ye burdened with traditions? Col. 2. 20.

The fourth Deliverance, is from under the tyranny and dominion of sin. Romans
6. 14. Let not sin have dominion over you. For ye are not under the law, but
under grace. In the first tonuersion of a sinner, Original sin receives his
deadly wound, and the dominion thereof is diminished according to the measure
of grace received.

The second part of Christian liberty, is a Freedom in good things: and it is
fourefold. The first, is a freedom in the voluntary service of God. Luke 1.
74. We are delivered from our enemies, that we may serve God in righteousness
and holiness before him all the days of our lives without fear. Paul says,
that the law is not given to the righteous man, 1. Tim. 1. 9. because he is a
law to himself, and freely does good duties, as if there were no law to bind
him. The cause of this freedom, is the Gift and donation of the free spirit of
God. Therefore David prays, Stablish me with thy free spirit. Psalm. 5. 1. And
Paul says, Where the spirit is, there is liberty. 2. Cor. 3. 17. And, The
spirit of life which is in Christ (is a Law to us, and) frees us from the power
of sin, and death. Romans 8. 2.

It may be objected, that this freedom in the voluntary service of God, is
bondage. For Christ says, Matthew. 11. 29. Take my yoke upon you. And we are as
straightly bound to the obedience of the law of God, as Adam was by creation,
nay more straightly, by reason of our redemption by Christ. Ans. The more we
are bound to obedience, the freer we are: because the service of God is not
bondage, but perfect liberty.

The second freedom, is in the free use of all the creatures of God. Tit. 1.
15. To the pure, all things are pure. Romans 14. 14. And the reason is, because
the dominion over the creatures; lost by Adam, is restored by Christ. 1. Cor.
3. 22. And hence it is, that Paul calls the forbidding of marriage, and of
meats, a doctrine of devils. 1. Tim. 4. 1.

The third freedom, is a Liberty to come unto God the father in the name of
Christ, and in prayer to be heard. Romans 5. 2. Ephesians. 3. 12. Whereas according to
our natural condition, our

The fourth freedom, is a Liberty to enter into heaven in the day of our
death: Christ by his blood having made a way. Heb. 10. 19.

Thus we see what Christian liberty is. The use follows. The Anabaptists
gather hence, that among Christians there must be Magistrates, they must have
power to make laws beside the laws of God: but this power they have not,
because Christians have a free use of all the creatures of God by Christian
liberty. Ans. We must distinguish between the liberty it self, and the use
of it. And the Magistrates authority deals not with the liberty which is in
the conscience, but with the

Here is further, comfort for all the godly: for even by Christian liberty,
their consciences are exempted from the power of all creatures, men, and
Angels. 1. Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a prise, be not servants of men, that
is, let not your hearts and

Object. I. Romans 13. 5. Be subject to the higher powers for conscience. Ans.
Conscience here is not in respect of the laws of the Magistrate, but in
respect of the law of God, that binds us in conscience to obey the law of the
Magistrate.

Object. II. Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the oversight of you, and be
subject. Ans. We must be subject to them: because as Ministers of God, they
deliver the word of God in the name of God unto us, and that word binds
conscience. Again, the laws which they make touching order and comelines in
the

Object. III. A thing indifferent upon the commandment of the Magistrate,
becomes necessary. Ans. It is true. But it must be observed, that necessity
is twofold, External, internal. and scandal be avoided. The Apostles made a
law that the Gentiles should abstain from strangled and blood, and things
offered to Idols, Act. 15. 28. yet Paul says afterward to the Corinthians, All
things are lawful, 1. Cor. 10. 23. and whatsoever is sold in the shambles
eat, and make no question for conscience sake, v. 25. because their intent was
not, that the law should

Again, here is an other comfort to all that believe in Christ, that nothing
can hurt them, and that no evil can befall

The consideration of this benefit of Christian liberty, teaches three
duties. The first is, from our hearts, to embrace,

The second point is, touching the Author of this liberty, in these words,
wherewith Christ has made us free. Christ then is the worker of this liberty.
Ioh. 8. 36. he dissolues the works

He procures this liberty by two means, by his merit, and by the efficacy of
his spirit. The merit of his death, procures deliverance from death, and it
purchases a right to life everlasting.

Secondly, the prise that was paid for the procurement of our liberty, namely,
the precious blood of the immaculate lamb of God, shows that the liberty it
self is a thing most precious and excellent, and so to be esteemed.

Thirdly, for this liberty we are to give all praise and thanks to God. This
did Paul at the remembrance of it. Romans 7. 25. 1. Cor. 15. 57. And not to be
thankful is an height of wickedness.

The third point is, concerning the persons to whom this liberty belongs; and
they are noted in these words, Stand ye fast; he has made us free. Whereby
Paul signifies himself and the Galatians that believed in Christ. Believers
then are the persons to whom this liberty belongs. Ioh. 1. 12. 1. Tim. 4. 3.

When Paul says, Christ has made us free, that is, me Paul, and you the
Galatians, he teaches that every believer must by his faith apply unto
himself the benefit of Christian liberty. But to do this well, is a matter
of great difficulty. The Papists in their writings report our doctrine to be
this: that a man Ask, and it shall be given unto you. The fifth is, an
experience of the goodness of God after long use of the means of salvation, and
then upon this experience follows the full persuasion of mercy and forgiveness.

The fourth point, concerns the office of believers, and that is, to stand
fast in their Christian liberty, and in the doctrine of the Gospel, which
reueales this liberty. And by this, we in England are admonished to stand fast
to the religion condemnation, in respect of compulsion to obedience, and
justification, (as Paul shows at large in this Epistle:) and yet the Popish
doctrine is, that we are to be justified by the works of the law. Again,
Christian liberty frees our consciences from the Traditions of men, Col. 2.
20. and yet the Popish religion binds us in conscience to the Traditions of

Here two things are to be considered, the manner of standing, and the time.
The manner, is signified in the very words. For to stand fast, is to hold and
maintain our liberty with courage and constancy, whatsoever comes of it, as
the soldier

The time of standing, is the evil day, that is, the day of trial. Ephesians. 6.
13. And then to stand fast, is a matter of great difficulty. supplication for
all things needful. Ephesians. 6. 18.

2 Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing.

These words, are a reason of the former conclusion, thus. If ye be
circumcised, and go back from your Christian profession, Christ shall profit
you nothing: therefore stand fast.

In the words, I consider a sentence, and the proof of it. The If ye be
circumcised, etc. the proof, J Paul say unto you For the better understanding
of the sentence, Circumcision must here be considered according to the
circumstance of time, three ways. Before Christ it was a sacrament, and a
seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11. after the death of If ye be
circumcised, etc. Again, circumcision must be considered according to the
opinion which the false Apostles had of it: now they put their confidence in
it, and made it a meritorious cause of their salvation, and joined it with
Christ. The Christ shall profit you nothing. The use. Hence it follows, that
the doctrine of justification by works, is an error ouerturning the foundation
of religion, which Ans. Yea even of moral. For that which Paul says here of
circumcision, he speaks generally of the whole law, verse. 4. Ye are abolished
from Christ whosoever are justified by the law. And Ans. Yea even of works of
grace: for the Galatians were regenerate, and therefore looked not to be
justified, and saved, by the works of nature, but by works of grace.

Secondly, hence we gather, that to add any thing to the passion, as a
meritorious cause of our justification, and salvation, is to make Christ
unprofitable. For he must be a perfect Savior, or no Savior: he admits
neither partner, nor deputy in the work of our redemption. And the grace of
God admits Ans. It does so in word: but withal it adds to the foresaid
articles the doctrine of humane merits and satisfactions, which make void the
death of Christ. Again, Papists Ans. It is not the glory of the Emperor to
make kings as partners with him, in his kingdom. And works set up as
meritorious

Popish religion therefore is in no wise, in any place to be tolerated, where
it may be abolished: but it is to be wished that it were banished forth of
town and country: and students are

Lastly, we are here taught to content our selves with Christ alone, and with
his works, merits, and satisfactions. For in him we are complete. Col. 2. 10.

The confirmation of the sentence follows, I Paul say it: therefore it is so.
This kind of reasoning may not seem strange: for the Apostles in writing and
preaching, had the divine and infallible assistance of the spirit, so as they
could not err. This must be held as a Principle in religion: and being
denied,

3 For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is bound to
keep the whole law.

4 Ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever are justified by the law, ye are
fallen from grace.

The meaning. Paul says, I testify again: because he has spoken thus much
in effect before. Gal. 3. 10.

That is circumcised] who is of opinion of the false Apostles

Bound to the whole law] that is, to the whole ceremonial law, to the
judicial law, and to the whole moral law. And further, bound in respect of
justification, and life, to do all things in the law. For he that will be
justified by one act of the law, is

Abolished from Christ] that is, Christ is become an idle and empty Christ
unto you.

Whosoever are justified by the law] that is, are of opinion that they are to
be justified by the works of the law. For indeed

Grace] that is, the love, and favor of God.

The resolution. The third verse is a confirmation of the reason in the second
verse, and it may be framed thus: He which If ye be circumcised, he changes
his speech, saying, Whosoever is justified by the law. Again, least men might
think it a small matter to be abolished from Christ, he shows that it is
indeed to fall from grace.

The use. These verses are as it were a thunderbolt against all Popery. And
first of all, I urge the argument of Paul against the Popish Church, and
against the Popish religion: If ye be justified by the law, ye are abolished
from Christ, and fallen from Christ. Answer is made, that the words are to be
understood of such works of the law, as are from nature, and go before faith:
and not of such works as are from grace, and follow faith: for such works
(they say) are from Christ, and stand with him. I answer, the words of Paul are
to be understood of all works of the law, whether they be from nature, or from
grace. For this Epistle of Paul was written about We are not saved by works
which God has ordained, that we should walk in: and these are the best works
that are or can be. Again, Tit. 3. 5. Of his mercy he saved us, and not of
works of righteousness.

By this text we further see, that we and the Papists differ not about
circumstances, unless Grace and Christ be circumstances.

Again, I urge Paul's argument against them, on this manner. He which is debtor
to the whole law, has no part in

I turn the same argument another way, thus: He which is justified by works,
is bound to keep the whole law: but no

They answer to the minor, by making a double fulfilling of the law, one for
this life, the other for the life to come; and both He which is of the works
of the law, is cursed: Gal. 3. 10. which could not be, if there were a
fulfilling of the law for the time of this life. As for Augustine, it is true
he makes two fulfillings of the law, and one of them for the time of this life:
but this he says is imperfect: and this imperfection he makes to be a sin,
whereas the Papists of our time teach, that men may fulfill the law for the
time of this life without sin.

Where Paul says, If ye be circumcised: mark how the false Apostles abuse
circumcision. It is by divine institution a seal of the righteousness of faith,
and they make it a meritorious cause of salvation. It is indeed rather Gods
work, then our work: and they make it their own work, and that meritorious

As here we see Circumcision was an obligation to the keeping

We are further to observe the condition of the law. It is wholly copulative.
All the parts of it are linked one to another. He that is bound to one
commandment, is bound to all: he that keeps one indeed, keeps all: he that
breaks one, in respect He that is washed is all clean. Ioh. 13. 10. Josias
turned to God according to the whole law. Zachary and Elizabeth walk in all
the commandments of God without reproof. Luke 1. David says, He shall not be
confounded, when he has respect to all the commandments of God. Psalm. 119. 6.
On the contrary, he which has many excellent things in him, if he live in the
manifest breach of some one commandment, is sound in none, nay indeed he is
guilty of all. Herod did many good things: and yet all was nothing: because he
lived in incest. Mark. 6. 20. The devil is able to bring a man to

Whereas Paul says, If ye be justified by the law, ye are abolished from
Christ: First I gather, that the Law and the Gospel are not one in substance of
doctrine, as the Papists teach: for they

Whereas Paul says, Ye are fallen from grace, some gather, that the children
of God may fall quite from the favor of God. Ans. Men are said to be under
grace, two ways. First, in the judgment of infallibility: and thus only the
Elect are under the grace of God. Secondly, in the judgment of Christian to
fall from grace, not because all were indeed under the favor of God, and at
length cast out of ^o be blotted out of the book of lif^, Psalm. 69. 28. when
God makes it manifest that their names were never written there. Secondly, I
answer, that Paul speaks this not absolutely, but upon condition, If ye will
be justified by the law. And therefore v. 10. he says, that he is persuaded
better things of them.

Lastly, here we see it is false that every man shall be saved by his religion:
for he that is abolished from Christ, is quite out of the ^auour of God. And
therefore no religion, but that which is truly Christian, saves.

5 For we in the spirit by faith wait for the hope of righteousness.

6 For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision

The meaning. We] I Paul, the rest of the Apostles, and all other Christian
churches. In spirit] that is, in the powers of the soul sanctified and
renewed. In this sense Paul says that the true circumcision is that which is
in the heart, in spirit, Romans 2. true worship of God is in spirit, Ioh. 4. 24.
And that spirit is here taken in this sense, it is manifest: because it is
opposed to circumcision which is in the flesh.

By faith we wait] Faith apprehends the promise, and thereby brings forth hope:
and faith by means of hope makes them Hope of righteousnes] that is, salvation
or life eternal, which is the fruit of righteousness, Tit. 2. 13. or again,
righteousness hoped for* Righteousness indeed is imputed to them that believe,
and that in this life, yet the fruition and

The sense then is this. All the Apostles and Christian churches with one
consent in spirit by means of their faith, wait

v. 6. In Christ] that is, in the Church, kingdom, or religion of Christ. 2.
Cor. 5. 17. If any be in Christ, that is, if any be a Christian, he is a new
creature.

Vncircumcision] that is, the condition and works of men uncircumcised.

Avails any thing] is of no use, respect, or acceptance with Faith working]
faith effectual in duties of love.

The resolution. These words contain a second reason, where Paul confirms
the former conclusion, and it may be framed thus. That thing which makes us
wait for the hope of righteousness, that iustifies: not circumcision, but faith
makes proposition is omitted: the minor is in the 5. verse. And it is confirmed
by two arguments. The first, is the consent of all Churches, We wait. The
second, is taken from the property of faith in the sixth verse, thus: It is
faith, and

Again, in these two verses, Paul meets with an Objection, which may be
framed thus: If ye abolish circumcision and the ceremonial law, ye abolish the
exercises of religion. The answer we wait. Before he has justified his

Again, it is the office of all Christian people to maintain and defend all
such doctrines and opinions as are founded in the Scriptures, and ratified by
the consent of the true churches

The second point is, what is waited for? Paul says, the revelation of
righteousness, and eternal salvation. Here I observe, that there is no
justification by the observation of the law: and I prove it thus: The
righteousness whereby a sinner is justified, is apprehended by faith, and
expected by hope: but if righteousness were by the law, men should have the
fruition of their righteousness in this life, and consequently the hope thereof
should cease.

Secondly, here is comfort for the godly. They complain of the want of
sanctification: but they are to know, that in this life they shall never feel
righteousness, as they feel sin: here they must hunger and thirst after
righteousness, living in some

Thirdly, we must become waiters for the mercy of God, and for life
everlasting. Genesis 49. 18. Iud. v. ^1. For this cause

The third point is, by what are we to wait? Paul says, We wait by faith.
Hence it follows, that faith brings with it a special certentie of the mercy
of God, and of life everlasting. For men use not to wait for the things
whereof they are uncertain.

The last point is, where is this waiting? Paul says, in spirit. Here observe,
that all the exercises of Christian religion, are to be in the spirit. God must
be worshipped in spirit. Ioh. 4. 24. Romans

In the 6. verse, Paul propounds three conclusions. The first is this: that
external and bodily privileges are of no use and moment in the kingdom of
Christ. Paul says, 1. Tim. 4. 8. Bodily exercise profits little, and that
godliness is profitable for all things. It was a great privilege to be
familiarly acquainted with Christ, and to have eaten and drunk with him: yet
is it of no use in the kingdom of Christ. For of such Christ says, Depart
from me ye workers of iniquity. It was a great privilege to be allied to
Christ in respect of blood, yet in the kingdom of Christ, it is of no use: and
therefore Christ says, He that does the will of my father, is my brother,
sister, and mother. Mark. 3. 33. To conceive, and bear Christ, was a great Not
the washing of the flesh, but the stipulation of a good conscience saves. 1.
Pet. 3. 18. Circumcision is profitable, if thou keep the law. Romans 2. 35.

By this we are taught, not to esteem of men's religion by their riches, and
external dignities. For the fashion of the world is, if a man have riches, and
honor, to commend him to have faith in respect of persons. Iam. 2. 1.

Secondly, by this we are taught to moderate our affections in respect of all
outward things, neither sorrowing too much for them, nor ioying too much in
them. 1. Cor. 7. 30.

The second conclusion. Faith is of great use and acceptance in the kingdom
of Christ. By it first our persons, and then our actions please God: and
without it nothing pleases God. It is the first and the greatest honor we can
do to God, to give credence to his word: and from this flows all other
obedience

First, that we must labor to conceive faith a right in our hearts, by the use
of the right means, the word, prayer, sacraments: as also in, and by the
exercises of spiritual invocation, and repentance. This being done, we must
rest upon the bare word and testimony of God, without, and against sense, and
feeling: and quiet our hearts therein, both in life and death.

Secondly, faith in Christ must reign and bear sway in our hearts, and have
the command over reason, will, affection, lust.

Lastly, it is a thing to be bewailed, that the common faith of our days is
but a Ceremonial faith, conceived without the

The third conclusion is, that true faith works by love. Hence the Papists
gather, that love is the form and life of faith, not because it makes faith to
be faith; but because it makes it to be a true faith, a good faith, a lively
faith. But this Love out of a pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned.
Now every cause as it is a cause, has his force and efficacy in it self, and
receives no knowledge, and apprehension, which some call application, or
special affiance, which affiance faith works by love: or (as they translate
it) faith is acted and moved by love. Ans. The meaning of the text is, that
faith is effectual in it self: and that it shows and

Again, they allege, Iam. 2. 26. As the body is dead without the spirit: so
is faith without works. Ans. 1. The soul of man is not the form of his
body, but of the whole man. 2. Spirit may as well signify breath, or
breathing, as the soul. And so it carries a fit sense. For as the body
without breath is dead, and it shows it self to be alive by breathing: so
faith that is without works, is dead, and it shows it self to be alive by
works. 3. faith that is without works is dead: is true: but to say, faith is
dead without works (as though works gave life to faith) is false; and not the
meaning of S. James, but the former only.

Again, the Papists hence gather, that faith and love are righteousness is
revealed without the law: and therefore without love. And again, that we are
made the righteousness of Christ, as Christ is made our sin, namely, by
imputation, and therefore not by infusion of love. 2. Cor. 5. 21. Thirdly,
faith iustifies by apprehending Christ in the promise, and therefore

They urge for themselves the words of Paul, that faith works by love. Ans.
Paul does not show in this verse, what justifies, but what are the exercises
of Godliness in which Christians must be occupied. And he does not show how
faith justifies, but how it may be discerned to be true faith, namely, by
love.

Secondly, they object that faith and love are always joined: and therefore
jointly work in justification. Ans. They are joined in one person or subject:
and they are joined in the exercise of Christian life: but they are not joined
in the article of justification.

Thirdly, they urge the 2. of S. James, where it is said, that a man is
justified not only by faith, but also by works. v. 24. Ans. Faith in S. James
is put for an historical knowledge of religion; or for the bare confession and
profession of faith. Again, justification is twofold; one of the person, the
other of the faith of the person. Justification of the person is, when a sinner
is absolved of his Justification of the faith of the person is, when faith is
approved and found to be true faith: and a believer iustifies himself to be a
true believer. Of this second justification speaks S. James; and it is not
only by faith, but also by works.

Lastly, it may be objected, that love is of no use, if it do not justify.
Ans. Justification, and sanctification, are two distinct benefits. 1. Cor. 1.
30. and 6. 11. Justification ministers unto us deliverance from hell, and a
right to life everlasting: Sanctification is a fruit of the former, and serves
to make us thankful to

Thus much of the deprauation of the text by the Papists. Hence further I
gather, that many falsely in these last days

7 Ye did run well: who did

The meaning. Ye did run well] In these words, Paul alludes

Who] the interrogation has in it the force of a reproof, or complaint. And
the sense is this: they did evil, which turned you forth of the way, and you
have done evil that you obaied not the truth. The like is, Psalm. 2. 1. Why do
the heathen rage? that is, it is great wickedness for them to rage.

Let] stop, intercept your course, turn you out of the way.

That you should not obay] that you should not give credence to the doctrine of
Paul, and obey it.

The scope. These words, are a repetition of the principal conclusion of the
whole Epistle. And this repetition is not in vain. For it serves to bring the
Galatians to a consideration of their offense, and to amendment of life. Hence
I observe, he turned his feet to Gods commandments. Psalm. 119. 59. And the
cause why there is so little amendment

In these words, Paul sets down three duties of Christian people. The first
is, that they must be runners in the race of God. Indeed the Sabbath of the
Jews figured a rest which is

The second is, that we are to increase and profit in all good duties,
specially in knowledge, faith, repentance. But we in

The third duty is, that we must neither look to the right or left hand, or
look to things behind us to set our affection on them, but we must press on
forward to the price of eternal life. Phil. 3. 13. Luke 9. 62. Here comes a
common fault to be considered: we, in respect of profession go forward: yet we
look back in our course, and mind earthly things.

Lastly, we must not be moved with the speeches of men which are given of us
either to or fro. They are lookers on, and must have their speeches, and our
care must be not to heed them, but to look to our course.

The second duty of Christian people is, that they must not only be runners,
but they must run well. And that is done by believing, and by obaying the
true religion, or as Paul says, by having faith and good conscience. 1. Tim.
1. 18. These are as it were the two feet by which we run to life
everlasting. Under

The third duty is, that we must run the race from the beginning to the
end, and finish our course, so as we may apprehend life everlasting. 1. Tim.
6. 11. 2. Tim. 4. 7. 1. Cor. 9. 24. And for this cause we must cherish in our
hearts a love and fervent

8 It is not the persuasion of him that calls you.

The meaning. This opinion of justification by the works

The scope. Paul here meets with a conceit of the Galatians, which was this:
Why do thou so often and so sharply reprove us? for we hold nothing
against conscience, but are persuaded of the thing which we say. To this Paul
answers here: this persuasion is not of God: because it is against the calling
of God, for he calls you to liberty: and this your opinion draws you into
bondage.

Here we see the cause of men's declining from God and his

Secondly, hence we learn to close up our eyes (as it were)

Thirdly, Paul here sets down a note to discern of false

Lastly, it is to be observed, that Paul says in the time present [of him that
calls you:] for hence it appears, that God continues to call the Galatians,
even after their fall, in which they fell away to an other Gospel, and as much
as in them lay, abolished themselves from Christ. This shows Gods patience:

It may be said, how long does God continue to call men unto him? Ans. So long
as he vouchsafes them the benefit of the public Ministry. Thus then more
then forty years

9 A little leaven, leaueneth the whole lump.

The sense. As a little leaven leaueneth and favors the

The scope. The objection of the Galatians is: Put case, that we err in
joining Circumcision and Christ: yet there is no cause why thou should ^o
sharply reprove us: for it is no great error to join works and Christ in
the cause of our Justification. Paul answers to this objection by a proverb, a
little leaven of false doctrine corrupts the whole body of religion: and one
error, though it seem to be of small moment at the first, may at length bring
with it the corruption and deprauation of many other points.

The use. In the example of the Galatians, we see what is the small and little
commandments. Matthew. 5. 19. To them that make no conscience of sin, great
sins are little sins, and little sins are no sins. Pride is cleanlines,
covetousness is nothing but worldlines, drunkenness good fellowship, fornication
a trick of youth. Thus men put visards upon their ugly sins. The Politician
that is of no religion, says, that we and the Papists differ not in substance,
but in small circumstances: and that if they err, it is but in small points.
But on the contrary, we are to esteem

Here we are taught by all means to maintain the purity of sound religion,
whatsoever befall us. And for this cause we Ans. Leaven is discerned from dow,
not by color, but by taste: even so they which are spiritual, and have the
gift of discerning, directed by the analogy of faith, discern truth from
falsehood. For whatsoever is against one Article of faith, or against any of the
commandments of the decalogue,

Again, that which is said of false doctrine, may be said proportionally of
bad manners. Here therefore we must be put in mind of three duties. The first,
to resist and withstand every particular sin. For even one sin is able to
defile the

Secondly, we must do our endeavor to the uttermost, to cut off every bad
example in the societies of men. For one bad example is sufficient to corrupt a
whole family, a whole town, a whole country. The example of one incestuous
man was Purge out the old leaven. 1. Cor. 5. 6. The law of God is, that
blasphemers, murderers, adulterers, etc. shall be put to death: the reason is,
that evil may he taken away out of Israel, that is, the evil of wicked
example, which being suffered spreads abroad, and does much hurt. The barren
fig tree must be cut down, least it make the whole ground barren. Luke 13. 7.

Thirdly, we are to withstand and cut off the first beginnings and the
occasions of every sin. We say of arrand thieves, that first they begin to
practice their wickedness in pinnes, and points. For this cause idleness,
fullness of bread in excessive

On the contrary, as one point of evil doctrine brings with The entrance into
Gods word, gives light. Psalm. 119. 130. In this respect Christ says, The
kingdom of heaven is like leaven, hid in three peckes of meal: because Gods
kingdom is set up in the heart at the first upon very small beginnings.

10 I have an affiance in you in the Lord, that ye will be no otherwise

The sense. In the Lord] by the gracious assistance of God, who no doubt will
give a blessing to my Ministry.

No otherwise minded] that is, think no otherwise then ye

He that troubles you] the Church is troubled three ways: 1. by false
doctrine. Thus Ahab troubled Israel, 1. king. 18. 18. and the false Apostles
trouble Galatia. 2. By wicked example: A^han troubled Israel. Ios. 7. 25. 3. By
force and cruelty: thus tyrants and persecutors trouble the Church.

Shall be are] shall have his due and deserved punishment, partly in this life,
and partly in eternal death. See this verified in the end of the book of
English Martyrs* in the desperate, horrible, and stinking ends of persecutors.
But yet this threat must be understood with the Exception of repentance.

The scope. The words are an Answer to an Objection, which may be framed thus:
It seems by your former proverb of leaven, that you hold us to be a people
corrupted, and unsavory

The use. When Paul says, I have an a^^iance in you, he teaches in his own
example, that we are to hope the best of men Ans. They are only deceived in
their judgment, and that in things whereof they have no certain knowledge, and
they are not deceived in practice. For it is a duty of love to hope the best.
And they which use to suspect Ans. Judgment of things, and judgment of
persons must be distinguished. Of things, upright judgment is to judge of them
as they are: and if they be doubt^ull to suspend. Now our judgment of the we
must love our neighbor as our selves: and that we despair in respect of our
selves. Ans. We are to despair in respect of our selves, because we are privy
to our own estate: but we are

Again, here we see how we are to put affiance in men. We are to put affiance
in God for all things whatsoever, whether concerning body or soul: but our
affiance in men, must be only for such things as they are able to perform.
Secondly, I believe in God, etc. but all our affiance in men whatsoever, must
be in the Lord.

When Paul says, that he had affiance of them in the Lord, he shows that
renewed repentance is the gift of God. And there are two graces required unto
it, helping grace, and Exciting grace. Helping grace preserues and confirms
the first and initiall repentance. Exciting grace gives the will and the deed.
And without these graces the child of God, if he fall, cannot repent* and
recover himself. They therefore are deceived, who think that they may have
repentance at command, and that

It may be demanded, why Paul uses mild terms, and does not excommunicate
the Galatians? Ans. So long as men are curable, means must be used to recover
them. The sheep or ox that goes astray, must be brought home again, Exodus

Some there be that mislike the Preaching used in these days, because we use
not severity, and personal reproves, after the manner of John Baptist. But
these men are deceived. We have he hoped better things of them.

In the last place, the commination which the Apostle uses, is to be observed,
that troublers of the Church shall bear their judgment. Hence I gather,

1. That God watches over his Church with a special

2. That the doctrine of the Apostles is of infallible certentie: because the
oppugners of it are plagued by the just judgment of God.

3. On the contrary, our duty is, to pray for the good estate of the Church
of God, and for the kingdoms where the Church is planted, and for the
continuance of the Gospel specially in England. For what will all the things we
have do us good, if we be forth of Gods kingdom, and lose our souls?

11 And brethren, if I yet preach Circumcision, why do I yet suffer
persecution? Then is the scandal of the cross abolished.



The sense. Yet preach] now while I am an Apostle. Here Paul takes it for
granted, that when he was a Pharisie he taught and maintained Circumcision:
but he denies that he ever taught it after his conversion in his Apostleship.
The crosse]

More plainly, the words are thus much in effect: It is reported, that I Paul
an Apostle, preach circumcision: but the truth

The drift. Paul here answers a new objection, which is on

The use. In the words. I consider two things, the report given forth of Paul,
and his Apology. The report was, that the Church of England, charging it with
sundry foul heresies. And many among us spare not to charge it with the
heresy of Puritanisme. And I doubt not to avouch it, that some are condemned
for here^^kes in the history of the Church, who (if all were known) should be
found to be good servants of God.

1. This verifies the saying of Ecclesiastes, c. 8. v. 14. There are righteous
men to whom it befalls according to the work of the wicked

2. Ministers must hence be put in mind to use circumspection both for the
matter and the manner of their Preaching.

3. Being defamed, and that wrongfully, they must hence take occasion to be
more careful to please God, as David did in the like case. Psalm. 119. 69.

But how came this report of Paul? Ans. Sometime he tolerated circumcision, as
a thing indifferent for a time: and hereupon

But how did Paul take this report? Ans. He did not requite evil for evil (as
the manner of men is*) but he returns love and goodness for evil: and for this
cause (no doubt of purpose) he begins his speech on this manner, Brethren, if
I yet preach Circumcision.

The Apology and defense follows. And first he denies the report. And this
is: because for his preaching he is persecuted of the Jews. Here observe, that
they which are called to teach, must preach the Gospel, what trouble or danger
soever Ans. In the case of Confession when a man is called to give an account
of his faith, no truth, no not the least truth may be concealed. Again, when
the souls of men are when people be incapable of doctrine, it may be
co^cealed, till they be prepared for it. Christ told his disciples that he had
many things to tell them, which they could not then learn. Some believers must
have no strong meat, but milk only. Thirdly, when the teaching of a lesser
truth hinders the teaching of a fundamental truth, the lesser truth may be
concealed,

Here we see the fidelity of Paul: if he had sought himself, his honor,
profit, or pleasure, he would not have taught any doctrine that should have
caused persecution. The like mind must be in all teachers, nay in all
believers, who are to receive

Paul adds further in way of defense, that the scandal of the cross was not
abolished. Hence it follows, that the Gospel must be preached, though all men
be offended. God must not Let them alone, they are the blind leaders of the
blind.

Again, by the offense of the Jews, we see the mind of men, who cannot be
content with the death and passion of Christ, unless they may add works, or
something else of their own, for their justification and salvation. Thus do
the Papists at this day: and the like do many of the ignorant people among

Touching the imprecation in the 12. verse, three questions are to be
propounded. The first is, whether Paul did well thus to curse his enemies? I
answer, yea: for first we must put a difference the Apostles did in sundry
cases) and hereupon he curses sometime even particular persons, as Alexander
the coppersmith. 2. Tim. 4. 14. Thirdly, we must distinguish the affections of
men. Some are carnal as rash anger, hatred, desire of revenge, etc. some
again are more spiritual and divine, as a zeal of Gods glory, and of the
s^^tie of Gods church. Now

The second question is, whether we may not curse our enemies Ans. No: for we
have not the like spirit to discern the persons of men what they are* and our
zeal of Gods glory is mixed with many corrupt affections, and therefore to be
suspected. We in our ordinary dealings have an other rule to follow, Matthew. 5.
bless and curse not. If we dare go ye know not of what spirit ye are. Luc. 9.
55.

The third question is, how we should use the imprecations that are in the
psalms of David, as Psalm. 109. and in other places of scripture? Ans. they are
to be directed generally against

The word which is translated, disquiet, is to be considered: for it signifies
to put men out of their estate, and to drive them

By this we se that the doctrine of justification by works or by the law, is a
doctrine full of danger and peril, because it puts men out of their estate in
Christ, and ber^aues them of their

Contrariwise, they that would provide well for themselves and their
posterity, and plant themselves in a good estate, doctrine of the Gospel. In
this city is all happiness, and out of it there is nothing but woe and misery.
Enter therefore into the suburbs, of this city of God: as ye profess the
Gospel, so subject your minds and consciences, and all your affections to it,
and be doers of it in the exercise of faith, repentance, new obedience. Thus
shall you have a good estate in Christ, and joyful

13. For brethren ye have bin called to liberty: only use not your liberty

The first part of the Epistle touching the faith of the Galatians is ended:
and here begins the second part touching brethren, ye have bin called to
liberty. And it must be noted, that as these words are the foundation of that
which follows, so are they also the reason of that which goes before, for
brethren, etc. The 2. rules are in the words following: One in these, use not
your liberty as an occasion to the flesh: the other in these, do service one
to another by love.

In the ground of all good duties, namely the calling to liberty,

To the first, who calls? I answer, God the father in Christ by the spirit,
for he is absolute Lord of all his creatures: and therefore calls the things
that are not, as though they were. Romans 4. 17.

The second is, who are called? Ans. All they that any way answer the calling
of God, for Paul says indifferently of all the Galatians that they were
called. Now men answer the calling of God, some in profession, some in heart,
and some in both. And all these are said to be called, yet with some
difference. The calling of God is directed first of all and principally to the
Elect: and then in the second place, it pertaines to them which are not Elect,
because they are mixed in society with

The third point is, what is the calling to liberty? Ans. An action of God
translating men from the kingdom of darkness to his own kingdom. It has 2.
parts, inuitement and admission. Inuitement is, when God offers remission of
sins and life everlasting to them that believe, outwardly by the preaching
Admission is, when men are entered into the kingdom of grace: and it is either
outward or inward. Outward admission is made in baptism. Inward admission is,
when men are taken

The last question is, why Paul mentions the calling to liberty in this place?
Ans. It is the ground of all comfort, by it Paul be ye holy as he that has
called you is holy. 1. Pet. 1. 15. And Paul, walk worthy the calling
wherewith he has called you. Ephesians. 4. 1. If the calling of god do not move us
to amendment of life, nothing will do

We in England have heard the calling of god more then 40. years: and yet very
few of us are moved to change and amend our lives. This shows our Atheism
and unbelief: here is almost nothing but heauing, shouing, and lifting for the

The first Rule follows: Only use not your liberty, as an occasion to the
flesh.

The sense. Flesh] hereby the Papists understand Sensuality or carnal
appetites: but hereby is meant the corruption of all the powers of the soul,
even of reason and conscience. Paul says, that the wisdom or understanding of
the flesh is emnity to God. Romans 8. 7. fleshlines therefore pertaines to the
understanding. they are puffed up in the mind of the flesh, Col. 2. 18. and he
wills the Ephesians to be renewed in the spirit of their minds. Ephesians. 4. 23.

The meaning then of the rule is this, use not the benefit of

The first question is, what is the abuse of Christian liberty? Ans. To use it
as an occasion of fleshly and carnal liberty: and that is done 3. ways. The
first is, when men make more things indifferent the^ god ever made. Thus the
Corinthians used fornication as a thing indifferent. 1. Cor. 6. To many in
these days drunkenness and surfeiting is but a thing indifferent. Men

Secondly, our liberty is abused by an immoderate use of the gifts of god. The
use of them is immoderate 3. ways, first in respect of time, as when Dives
fared deliciously and was arraied in rich attire every day. Thus many gentlemen
and others offend, when they turn recreation into an occupation. Secondly
adding drunkenness to thirst. Thirdly, in respect of the callings and conditions
of men: for every man is to use the gifts of God according to his place and
condition. They

Thirdly, liberty is abused when the blessings of God are made instruments and
(as it were) flagges and banners to display our riot, vanity, ostentation,
pride, for this cause sundry things, whereof some are indifferent in
themselves, are condemned. Isai 3. 16.

The second question is, where is this abuse? Ans. Even among us in England. It
is the fashion of men to take unto themselves a Toleration of sinning some upon
the patience arise and eat. 1. King. 19. 7. but to the men of our days. there
had need come an Angel and say, cease to eat, cease to drink, cease to game.

The third question is, what is the right use of Christian liberty? Ans. It
stands in 2. things: first of all we our selves must be renewed and sanctified
To the pure all things are pure. Tit. 1. 15. The person must first please God
before the action can please him. The second is, that beside the lawful use of
the creatures we must have a spiritual and holy use of the^. The lawful his
use. The like did Abraham when he come into the land of Canaan. And to this end
we must observe. 5. rules. The first, that the creatures of God must be
sanctified by the word and prayer. 1 Timothy 4. the word must show us, what we may
do: and prayer obtaines the doing of it. The 2 rule: we must be circumspect
lest we sin in the use of the creatures. In this respect

Make conscience to observe this rule: and the rather, because the holy and
spiritual use of Christian liberty, is a sign and token that thou art in the
kingdom of God, and a true member thereof: as on the contrary, the abuse of
Gods blessings shows thee to be still in the kingdom of darkness. When men

Lastly, it must be observed that this rule has 2. branches. The first is,
that we must not minister to the flesh any occasion of sinning. The second is,
that we must give no occasion of sinning by means of Christian liberty.

The second maine rule follows, Serve one an other by love: Ans. It sets down
the end of all Apostolic doctrine, as Paul shows. 1. Tim. 1. 5. the end of
the commandment is love out of a pure heart, good conscience, faith unfeigned.
Here men commonly understand by the commandment, the moral law. That is
indeed a truth, but it is not the meaning of the place. In the third verse Paul
sets down a commandment or denunciation to Timothy, that he and the Pastors
of Ephesus, teach no other doctrine, but the doctrine of the Apostles: then in
the 5 verse he propounds the sum and substance or end of the foresaid
antapodaton he inioynes Timothy to observe it carefully. So then the end of al
sound doctrine is love out of a pure heart: and all our Preaching must tend to
this.

The second question is, what is the love of our neighbor, Ans. It is an
affection renewed, whereby we are moved to wish well to our neighbor in the
Lord. I say an affection, to consute Lombard, who says that love is not an
habit in us, (as other virtues are,) but the H. Ghost. I say it renewed to
consute the Papist, who teaches that we have the true love of God and our
neighbor by nature, and that we want nothing but the second act or the
exercise of love, which they say is from grace. Further, I add that love
inclines us to wish well to our neighbor: for this is the formal in the Lord.
Because we are to love him in respect that he is a creature of God, and bears
his image: and not in respect of honor, profit,

The third question is, what is the use of love? Ans. It serves to make us
serviceable to our neighbor. Love seeks not her own things. 1. Cor. 13.
Christ was servant to his enemies in bearing their sins upon the cross. Paul
that was free from all, became a servant to all, to win some. 1. Cor. 9. 19. To
Christ we are to do service: and he has put our neighbor in his stead, so as
that which is done to our neighbor, shall be done to him:

The use. If we examine our liver by this rule, we shall find that there is
very little power of religion among men. There are six sorts of men that live
in the breach of this rule. The first are usurers, who lend for advantage, when
they should lend freely to them that are in need, these serve themselves and
make a pray of all. The second sort are ingrossers, who gather in commodities
to enrich themselves. The third sort are idle per sons of what degree soever,
that spend their time in eating, every man for himself, and God for us all.
And the best men that are, if they

This being so, we are to acknowledge before God this maine offense of ours:
and to entreat for the pardon of it for must apply himself to the uttermost of
his power to do all he can for the good of his country: and he must so deal
that he may be helpefull to all with whom he deals, and hurtful to none. We
are, or should be, trees of righteousness: our fruit must be meat for others,
and our leaves for medecines. We must be as candles that spend themselves to
give light to others.

14. For all the law is fulfilled in one word, which is this, thou shall

Fulfilled] comprised. Romans 13. 9. One word] One precept: for the H. G. calls
precepts, words. It may be demanded, how the whole law should be fulfilled in
the love of our neighbor? Ans. The love of God, and the love of our neighbor
are joined together, as the cause and the effect: and the love of God is
practiced in the love of our neigbour. For God that is invisible, will be loved
in the person of our neighbor whom we see, and with whom we converse: And
the first commandment

Thou shall loue] understand both the affection, and the duties Thy neighbour]
any one that is near unto us in res(...)t of man's nature. Isai. 58. 7. though
he be our enemy, yet i^ by any occasion he be offered unto us of God, he is our
neighbor.

As thy selfe] these words signify not the measure of our love: as though we
should love our selves in the first place, and the^ our neighbor in the second
place, for there are some cases in which we are to love our neighbor more the^
our selves. As for example, we are more to love the soul of our brother, then
our temporal life, and a good subject is more to love the (as) signifies not
quantity, but quality: and that we are as truly and earnestly with love to
embrace our neighbor, as our selves.

The scope. The words co^taine a reason of the second Rule, which may be framed
thus: to serve our neighbor in duties of love, is the keeping of the whole
law: therefore this service must carefully be performed.

The use. Here we see that the end of a man's life is to serve God in serving of
man, for this is the sum of the whole law.

Secondly, here we may observe what is true religion and godliness, namely, to
love and serve God in serving of man. He that says he loves God, and yet hates
his brother, is a lier. 1. Ioh. 4. 20. And here it follows that to live out of
all society of men, though it be in prayer and fasting, (after Monkish

15. If ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one
of another.

The sense. If ye bite] Here Paul alludes to the fashion of wild beasts, as
lions, wolves, etc. And by biting we are to understand all injuries in words,
as railing, cursing, slandering, bacbiting, etc. Deuoure] here Paul understands
all injuries in deed, or violence, even to the shedding of blood. Take heed
lest] here Paul signifies, that contentions and dissentions, breed

The scope. These words are a second reason of the second rule drawn from the
dangerous effect of the contrary, thus. Contentions breed the desolation of
the Church: therefore do service one to an other by love.

The contents, In the words Paul delivers 3 things. The first is, that there
were grievous contentions in the Church of Galatia. The like also were in the
Church of Corinth. 1. Cor. 3. The cause of the former contentions were
differences in points of religion. Some of the Galatians (no doubt)
withstanding Ans. This is but in part verified in the kingdom of grace upon
earth: and it is fully accomplished in the kingdom of glory in heaven.
Again, it may be alleged, that the Church Ans. That is properly meant of the
Catholic Church: but the case is otherwise in particular. Churches, where true
believers are mixed with hypocrites, whereupon arises much dissension. And of
true believers, some are more carnal then

The second point, concerns the quality of these dissentio^s, When Paul
says, if ye bite and devour etc. he signifies that they were fierce, and
violent. And such commonly are dissentions men. This must teach us to detest
railing, cursing, evil speaking, fighting, unless it be in the case of
necessary defense, for by these actions we degenerate to the condition of
beasts, and repel from us the work of grace: for Christ of lions, wolfes,
bears, has made us his sheep and lambs. Isai. 11.

The third point is touching the effect of contention, and that

By this we are to be admonished to study and to use all means to maintain
Christian peace and concord. Ephesians. 4. 3. To this end we must remember one
general rule. Romans 12. 18. have peace with all men. And withal we must
observe the cautions which Paul adds; one is, if it may be with good
conscience, for there are some, with whom there is no peace, unless we sooth
them in their vices, or deny our religion, either in whole or in part. The
second is, If it lie in you, for sometime men are peace must be had with all
men.

It may the^ be demanded, why do not the Protestans make a Pacification with
the Papists? Ans. we are content so to do in respect of civil society, but
not in respect of religion. We have come out of Babylon my people, and touch no
unclean thing. where a pacification is made, both the parts must yield
somewhat: but we may not yield in any point of our religion, to the Papists. In
an Instrument of music, the stringes out of tune are set up, or set

Peace is three-fould, Church peace, Civil peace, Household peace. All these
are to be maintained. Touching Church peace I give 3 rules. The first is, that
for the ending of differences in religion there must be conferences in a free
or christian council, the spirits of the prophets, is subject to the prophet.
1. Cor. 14. ^2. when there arose differences in the Churches of Judea, the
Apostles and elders came together to inquire of the matter. Act. 15. 6. And
this is a thing much to be desired in these days, specially in these Western
parts of the world. It may be demanded, why did not the Protestants join with
the Papists at the council of Trent? Ans. from the first session it was more
then 6 years before

The second rule. There must be a christian toleration one of an other Ephesians. 4.
2. here that we mistake not, I propound 2 questions. One is, in what must there
be a toleration? Ans. A toleration presupposes an error or defect in our
brother. An error is either in judgment, or manners. An error in judgment, if
ye be otherwise minded God will reueile it. Phil. 3. 15. when others

The second question is, to what end must we tolerate the infirmities and
ignorances of our brethren? Ans. Toleration must tend to the good and
edification of men. Romans 15. 2. We must not so tolerate as that we approve of
the least vice, or betray

It may here be demanded, whether there may not be a toleration for Popery?
Ans. No. The toleration of two religions in one kingdom, is the overthrow of
peace. Again, Popery is a religion both heretical and schismatic. It may
be said, that faith and conscience is free. I answer, though faith in the heart
and conscience in it self be free in respect of man's authority: yet is not
the publishing of faith and the profession of conscience free in like sort, but
it stands subject to the power of the Magistrate.

The third rule. Every man in his place, specially teachers must set themselves
to build the Church. Iud. v. 20. Ephesians. 4. 12. Indeed the truth is to be
defended: but mark how. The truth must be confessed, when time and occasion
serves, without opposition: this done all contentions laid aside, we must set
our selves

Touching civil peace, it must be remembered, that the peace Civil peace then
is maintained, when men yield subjection to the Gospel of Christ, which brings
peace to all that receive it.

Touching household peace, I give two rules. One is, that governors of families
must urge and compel all under them to admit, (at the least outwardly,) the
practice of religion in the exercises of faith, repentance, new obedience. Thus
did Abraham, Genesis 17. and Joshua, c. 24. They that do not first of all consent
in Christ, cannot consent among themselves. Secondly, it must be observed, that
a family is the school of God, in which he will exercise our faith,
invocation, love, patience, long-suffering,

Thus we see how we are to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace. For the better enforcing of this duty, Paul Ephesians. 4. 4. gives seven
reasons: one body, one spirit, one Ans. The peace of many is peace in
drunkenness, (called good fellowship,) peace in prophanes, and wickedness. This
is the devils peace, where he bears the sway. The peace of which I now speak,
is in the Lord, and in the true worship of God: of which read Isa. 2. where men
are said hand in hand to go up to the Mountain of the Lord, that they may
hear his will, and jointly obey it.

16. Then I say, walk in the spirit,

The scope. Here Paul returns to the first rule v. 13. and shows the way,
how it is to be observed, thus. If ye walk in the spirit, ye shall not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh: and when the lusts of the flesh are not
fulfilled, there shall no occasion be given to the flesh, by the use of
Christian liberty.

The words contain two parts: a Rule, walk in the spirit: and the benefit
that comes by the rule, ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

In the rule I consider two things, what is the spirit, and The spirit is the
gift of regeneration, lost by Adam, restored by Christ. I say it is a gift: and
this gift is termed by the name of the spirit: because the spirit works it
immediately in us, from the father and the son. Again I say it is a gift of
regeneration, to make a distinction bewteene it, and civil virtue. For there
is a gift of regeneration, which mortifies corruption,

More plainly, The spirit is a Divine nature, quality, or condition, whereby
we are made conformable to Christ, in righteousness,

The spirit has five properties. The first, that it is a rich and liberal
grace of God. For it contains in it the seed of all virtues, and all
necessary graces of God: because it comes in the room of original sin,
which contains in it, the seeds of all vices or sins.

The second is the largenes of it, for this spirit is in all the powers of them
that are regenerat, that is, in the mind, conscience, will, affections, and in
the sensual appetite. 1. These 5. 23. And he that is sanctified in on part, is
sanctified in all. Hence it

The third property is sincerity, for the grace of God is without falsehood
or guile. Psalm 32. 1. hence arises the difference

The fourth property is excellency, for the spirit of grace in Christians is
more excellent then the grace of creation, in two respects. First, in respect
of the beginning thereof. For the spirit is from Christ the second Adam, both
God and man: the grace of creation should have been conuayed unto us from

The fifte propery is liuelines, whereby the spirit is effectual in operation.
Elihu says that the spirit compelled him, and was in him as a vessel of new
wine which must have a vent. Job 32. 19. Of the operation of the spirit, I
deliver three things. The first, that the spirit works in and by the word of
God: which therefore is called the Ministry of the spirit. 2. Cor. 3. 6. The
second, that the spirit works by certain degrees. The first degree and the
very first beginning of his divine operation, is, to make us feel in what
great need we stand of Christ, and to desire to be reconciled and turned unto
God. This is the first motion of the spirit in us: and they which want this,
have the spirit of grace and supplication, Zach. 12. The third action is, to
write the law in our hearts: and that is done by putting a new light of

Thus much of the Spirit. Walking in the spirit, is, to Order our lives
according to the direction, and motion of the spirit. For, as the spirit
renewes our nature within, so it makes us to he must requite evil with evil:
yet he resolves to do otherwise: for (says he) God in Christ has forgiven me
many sins: therefore must I forgive my neighbor. And he remembers that
vengeance is Gods: and that he is taught so to ask pardon as he forgiueth
others. And hereupon he sets

The use. By this rule we see that most of us fail in our duties. For many of
us professing Christ, live not according to the laws of nature, in our common
dealings. We mind earthly things: and therefore we are carnal. It is a
principle with many, that if we keep the Church, observe the Queens laws
(which are indeed to be observed) and avoid open and gross sins, we do all
that God requires at our hands. Hereupon to walk in the spirit, is thought to
be a work of carnal, sold under sin. Romans 7. 14.

Secondly, this rule tells us, that we must become spiritual men, such as
make conscience of every sin, and do things lawful in spiritual manner, in
faith, and obedience, and not as carnal men do them carnally. It may be
said, that Ministers of the word must be spiritual men. I answer, if thou
whatsoever

Thirdly, we must not judge any man's estate before God, by any one, or some few
actions, either good or badde, but by his

The benefit that arises by the keeping of the rule follows, in these words,
Ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Flesh] the corruption of nature, the root of all sins.

Lusts] inordinate motions in the mind, will, and affections. Thus largely is
lust taken in the tenth Commandment, which condemns the first motions to
evil.

Fulfill] fulfilling, is not a simple doing of evil, but the accomplishing

A question. How far does the child of God proceed in the lust of the flesh?
Answ. He is assaulted by the lusts of the flesh: but he does not accomplish
them. More plainly: there Suggestion, delight, consent, the act, perseverance
in the act. Suggestion, and delight, whereby the mind is drawn away, are
incident to the child of God: Consent is not, ordinarily: and if at any time
the child of God consent to the lusts of his flesh, it is but in part, and
against his purpose, because he is ouercarried. Likewise the act or execution
of lust, is not ordinarily and usually in the child of God: if at any time he
fall, he may say with Paul, I do that which I hate. Lastly, perseverance in
evil does not befall the child of God: because upon his fall he recouers
himself by new repentance. He that is borne of God, sins not. 1. Ioh. 3. 9.

The use. Hence it follows, that the lust of the flesh is in the child of God
to the death: and consequently they do not fulfill the law, neither can they
be justified thereby, as Popish doctrine

Secondly, our duty is not to accomplish the lusts of the flesh, but to resist
them to the uttermost. Romans 13. 14.

Thirdly, here is comfort for the servants of God. Some man may say, I am vexed
and turmoiled with wicked thoughts,

17 For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the

These words are a reason of the former verse, thus: If ye walk in the
spirit, ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: for the flesh and spirit
being contrary, mutually refist and withstand

Paul here sets forth a spiritual combat, of which six things are to be
considered. The first is, concerning the parties by whom the combat is made:
namely, the flesh, and the spirit. The flesh signifies the corruption of the
whole nature of man: and the spirit is the gift of regeneration, (as has been
showed.) It may be demanded how these twain being but qualities can be said
to fight together? Ans. The flesh and the spirit are mixed together in the
whole man regenerate, and in all the powers of the soul of man. Fire and water
are said to be mixed in

The second point concerns the means whereby this combat is made: and that
is, a two sold Concupiscence, expressed in these words, the flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. The lust of the flesh
shows it self in two actions. The first is, to defile (...) repress the good
motions of the spirit. In this respect Paul says when I would do good evil is
present and the law of the flesh rebels against the law of the mind. Romans 7.
21. 23. Hereupon the flesh is fitly resembled by the Ephialtes or the mare, in
which men in their slumber, think they feel a thing as heavy as a mountain
lying on their breasts, which they can no way remove. The second action of the
flesh, is, to bring forth and to fill the mind with wicked cogitations, and
rebellious inclinations. In this respect seed of grace keeps the regenerate
that they can not sin. 1. Ioh. 3. 9. The second action of the spirit is to
engender good motions, cogitations, and inclinations, agreeable his raines did
teach him in the night season. Psalm. 16. And the prophet Isai says, thine ear
shall hear a voice saying, here is the way walk in it when thou ^urnest to
the right hand, or to the left c. 30. v. 21. And this voice, (no doubt) is not
only the voice of such as be teachers, but also the inward voice of the spirit
of God in us. And thus by the concurrence of these contrary actions in one and
the same man, is this combat made.

The third point is, concerning the cause of this combat, in these words (and
these are contrary one to another.) The contrariety

The fourth point, is, concerning the persons in whom this combat is to be
found. And they are believers, (not unbelievers I see and approve that which
is good, but I do that which is naught. Ans. This combat is between the
natural conscience, and rebellious affection: this life only, because in death
the flesh is abolished, and consequently the combat it self.

The fifth point, is, in what things does this combat show it self? Ans. In
all the actions of men regenerate, which Paul signifies, when he says, ye
cannot do the things which ye would. For example: in prayer, sometime we feel
fervent desires, and I find by the law of God, that when I would do good, evil
is present. Romans 7. 21. And I do not the good which I would, but the evil
which I would not, that do I. v. 19. And that we mistake not, it must be
remembered, that Paul speaks all this of himself, as being regenerate: that
he speaks it not of this or that action, but of the course of his life, in
which he willed and indeauoured to do that which was good, and acceptable to
God. And that appears to will is present with me. And, I would do good, but I
do it not. Mark further, while Paul wills and endeavors to do that which is
good, if he fail and do amiss, he may well say, It is not I that do it, but
the flesh that dwelles in me. And ungodly men for the covering of their it is
their flesh that sins, and not they, the abuse the holy doctrine, and
example of Paul.

The last point, concerns the effect of the Combat, which is to hinder the
Godly that they cannot do that which they the evil which I hate, that do I.
Thirdly, though in to will is present with me, but I find no means to fulfill or
accomplish that which is good. Even as a sick-man that is in recovery, for his
affection, thinks he is able to walk a mile or

Thus much of the combat, the use follows. Hence I gather, that concupiscence
or lust after baptism, in the regenerate, is a sin. For the lust of the
spirit, is the thing that God requires and approoueth: now the lust of the
flesh is directly contrary to it, as a defect or privation thereof: and
therefore the lust of the flesh is properly a sin, whether consent

Again, hence it follows, that works of the regenerate, are mixed works,
that is, good works indeed, yet not perfectly good, but partly evil: for such
as the cause is, such is the effect: now the mind and will of man, are the
cause of his Object. Sin minor. The transgression of the law is twofold: One,
which is directly against the law, both for matter, and manner: the second is,
when that is done which the law requires, but Ans. Things proceeding from the
spirit of God alone, or from the spirit immediately, are no sins: now good
works proceed not only from the spirit, but also from the mind and will of
man, as instruments of the spirit. And when Ans. They please God; because the
doer is in Christ, and so pleases God. Again, not to be done. Ans. They are
not simply sins, but only by accident. For as God commands them they are
good: and as godly men do them, they are good in part. Now the reason holds
only thus: That which is sin, so far forth as it is a sin, or if it be
simply a sin, is not to be done. Now then upon this doctrine it follows,
that there is no justification

Thirdly, hence it follows, that the grace of God for the time of this life, is
mixed with his contrary, the corruption of the

Fourthly, we are here to be admonished, in all duties of religion to use
industry, and pains, by willing, striving, and indeuouring to the uttermost,
to do that which we ought to do. We must use asking, seeking, knocking,
Matthew. 7. 7. we wrestling in our prayers to God. Romans 15. 30. They that would
have knowledge in the book of God, must do more then hear a Sermon: they
must strive against their ignorance, and blindness, and laboriously exercise
their senses in the discerning of good and evil. They that would believe,
Blessed (says Solomon, Prou. 28.) is the man that fears himself, or inures
himself to fear. Paul says of himself, that he labored and took pains to
keep a good conscience. Act. 24. 16.

Lastly, by reason of this combat, we are put in mind to use sobriety, and
watchfulness over our own corruptions, with much and instant prayer, least we
fall into temptation. Matthew. 26. 41. We should practice these more then we do:
for beside the enemies without, we have an enemy within, that seeks our
perdition.

18 And if ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the law.

In the 13. verse Paul propounds a maine rule of good life, Give no occasion to
the flesh: and for the better keeping of this, he gives a second rule, v. 16.
Walk in the spirit. Of this second rule, he gives two reasons. The first, is
taken from the contrariety of the flesh, and the spirit. v. 17. The second, is
in these they that walk according to the spirit, are freed from the curse of
the law.

In these words, Paul sets down three things. The first, is the office of the
spirit, which is, first of all, to regenerate and renew all the powers of the
soul; and secondly, to guide and conduct them that are regenerate. Psalm. 143.
10. In this guidance or conduction, Preservation, whereby the holy Ghost
maintains the gift of regeneration in them that are regenerate. The second is,
Cooperation, whereby the will of God as the first cause, works together
direction, whereby the spirit of God orders and establishes the Excitation,
whereby the spirit stirs and still mooues the will and mind; after they are
regenerate: because for the time of this life, the grace of God is hindered and
oppressed by inclining. Psalm. 119. 36. new drawing. Cant. 1. 3. new working of
the will and the deed. Phil. 2. 13.

Hence it follows, that beside the antecedent, and first grace, there is
necessary a subsequent, or second grace. For we do

The second thing, is, the Office of all true believers: and that is, to
resign themselves in subjection to the work of Gods spirit. Now Gods spirit
works in and by the word of God. And hereupon this Subjection has two parts.
The first is, to make trial, inquiry, and examination, what is the good will
of God, in every thing. Romans 12. 2. Thus did David, Psalm. 119. 94. I am thine,
save me, for I seek thy commandments. The second part is, to deny our
selves, and to conform our minds,

The third is, the Privilege of believers, in the last words, Ye are not
under the law. Understand this, in respect of the curse

19 Moreover, the works of the



I tell you before (as I also have told you before) that they which do such
things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Paul before delivered his rule in general terms, Give no occasion to the
flesh: and, fulfill not the lusts of the flesh. Now he proceeds further in way
of declaration, to make a Catalogue or rehearsal of the particular works of
the flesh, which were

After Paul's example, every man shall do well to make a Catalogue of the
sins of his whole life. By this means shall we better know our selves, and
take a manifest view of our sinful condition.

In this Catalogue, I consider three things: the condition of the works of the
flesh: the kinds of them: and the punishment thereof. The condition is, that
the works of the flesh are said to be manifest, not only to God, but even to
men that have

Touching the kinds or sorts of the works of the flesh, they are in number
se^uenteene: and I may reduce them to four heads. The first sort, are against
chastity, the second, against religion, the third, against charity, the last,
against temperance.

The works of the flesh against chastity, are four; and they are placed in
the first rank, for just cause: for by them, men are brought to reprobate
minds. Romans 1. 28. and to be without sense or feeling. Ephesians. 4. 19. and the
body which should be the temple of the holy Ghost, is made a stable and a stie
for the devil.

Adulterie] it is the incontinencie of persons married, or of persons whereof
one at the least is married, or betrothed. I say betrothed: because one and the
same punishment is designed to married, and betrothed persons: and therefore
the sin is like in both.

If adultery, which is the breach of wedlock, be a work of the flesh, then
damnable is the decretall of Pope Syricius, that marriage it self was the
pollution of the flesh. It may be objected, that young widows by marrying
have damnation, and break the faith of baptism. 1. Tim. 5. 12. Ans. They are
not

Adultery is named in the first place, and that for special cause. For as it
is a common, so is it also a great sin. For it is the breach of the covenant
of marriage, made in the presence of God, and unto God: and therefore it is
called the covenant of God. Prou. 2. 17. It is the punishment of idolatry.
Romans 1.

Fornication] it is the incontinencie of single persons. Mark how it is made a
manifest work of the flesh. Hence it follows, fornication is no light matter,
or a thing indifferent, as some have taught. It may be objected, that it is
numbered among things indifferent, Act. 15. 29. for with strangled, and blood,
is joined fornication. Ans. The Gentiles indeed esteemed it as a thing
indifferent: and hereupon it may be, it is joined with things indifferent. But
the judgment of the Church was otherwise: and this opinion of the Gentiles is
confuted by Paul. 1. Cor. 6. Again, it may be objected, that the Lord
commanded the Prophet Ose to take unto him an harlot. Ose 1. 2. Ans. It was
done in type or figure: and then the words of the Lord carry this sense, Take
unto thee a wife of fornications,

Again, hence I gather, that there is no warrant for the Toleration of
fornication. For it is a foul and manifest work of the flesh. Magistrates may
not do evil, that good may come thereof. Romans 3. 8. Whosoever does evil,
must fear: because there must be no whore in Israel. Deuteronomy. 23. Therefore the
permission of the Stews in Rome is without warrant: and the rather, because
there the prohibition of marriage (in sundry orders of men) bears sway.

Uncleannes] the incontinencie against nature, as incest, the sin of Sodom,
and such like. Mark, where these sins were known, there they are named
particularly by Paul, as among the Romans, Romans 1. 27, 28. and to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6. 9, 10. but where they were not known, as in Galatia,
there

Wantonnes] that is, the open profession and ostentation of incontinencie, by
unchaste words, wanton gestures, and wanton apparel. Hence it appears, that we
are to detest all signs

The punishment of these sins is in v. 21. in these words, They which do
these things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And it must be remembered,
that this threat or curse must be

The use. There are a number of men that live secretly in these sins,
adultery, fornication, etc. And because they profess Christian religion, and
sometime come to the Church, and to the Lords table, they think all is well,
and they suppose there is no danger. Thus make they a covenant with hell and
death. Isa. 28. But they deceive themselves: for God is unchangeable, and all
his threats shall be accomplished. And no adulterer, no fornicatour, no
unclean person shall enter into the kingdom of God, whatsoever men suppose,
or dream.

Secondly, by the consideration of this threat, we are admonished Blessed is
the man that fears, or causes himself to fear. Prou. 28. 14. now that
shall be done, when we terrify our selves from these offenses

Lastly, some man may say, what shall they do that are overtaken with these
sins, if the doers thereof cannot enter into the kingdom of god? Ans. Their
case is dangerous: and there is but one way to help them in the world: and
that is to cease he that confesses his sins, and forsakes the^, shall have
mercy. Prou. 28. 14. And this promise of God is not

In that these four sins, adultery, fornication, etc. are manifest works
of the flesh, we are taught three things. The first is, shall I do this, and
sin against God? Further, it must be remembered, that without holiness, no man
can see God, or have fellowship with him. Hebr. 12. 14. And while the lust of
concupiscence bears the sway, there is no holiness: and therefore no fellowship
with God.

The second rule is, that all occasions of these sins must be cut off, two
specially, Idleness, and the pampering of the body. For Idleness, consider
David, who when he was out of civil wars, and free from banishment, at peace
in his own house,

The third rule is, that all signs of these vices must be avoided and
detested, that is, any speech or action, that may signify or give suspicion of
an incontinent disposition, as light talk, wanton behavior, curiousnes and
excess in trimming of the body, suspected company, or company that may in
likelihood

Idolatrie] The second sort of sins follow, which are against Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Heresy. Idolatry is the worshipp (...) Idol-gods. An Idol is
taken two ways. First of all, a fiction, or a thing merely devised, is an
Idol: again, when we conceive a thing that is otherwise then it is, it is an
Idol. So likewise Idolatry is twofold. One is, when The voice of a God, Act.
12. 22.
and not of a man. The second is, when any property of the godhead is ascribed
to the creature. The third is, when the affections

The second kind of Idolatry, is to worship the true God with devised worship,
as namely with, in, and at Images, set up Idolatry is forbidden in the second
commandment, as Moses has expounded the law, Deuteronomy. 4. 16. Thou saw no
image in the day I appeared in Mount Sinait therefore thou shall make no image,
namely of God. It is alleged, that the commandment only forbids the making
of the images of false gods. I answer, and of the true God also. Aarons calfe
was an Image of the true God. Exodus 32. 5. And it must be observed, that Iehu
destroyed the Idols of Baal, 2. King. 10. 26. and withal remained still in the
sin of Jeroboam, v. 31. which was to worship the calfes in Dan and Bethel,
which were images of Iehoua. And for this he is discommended.

The use. By this we see that the Romish religion is a carnal religion: for it
teaches Idolatry four ways. First, it inioyneth men to give to the
Consecrated Host the name and honor of God. And thus they set up unto
themselves a breaden Latria, or Doulia, it matters not: it is flat idolatry,
because the honor of God is given to the creature. Thirdly, it teaches that
we may put confidence in works, so it be done in sobriety. Lastly, it adoreth

Again, by this we see that many of us are very carnal. For though we detest
outward Idolatry, yet the inward Idolatry of the heart aboundes among us. For
look where the heart is, there is the God. Now the hearts of men are upon the
world, and upon the riches, and pleasures thereof. For them we take the most
care, and in them we place our chief delight, whereas

Witchcraft] The word (...), properly signifies, poisoning: but here it is
fitly translated, witchcraft: because all poisoning is comprehended under
murder which follows. And the Magitians of Egypt, Exodus 7. are called (...),
in the

Witchcraft signifies all curious arts, wrought by the operation The ground
thereof, and the kinds of witchcraft.

The ground, is a League or Compact with the Devil. It is twofold, an Express
or open league, and a secret league. The open league is, when men invoke the
Devil in express words, or otherwise make any manifest covenant with him. The
secret league is, when men use means, which they know have no force, but by
the operation of the devil. And the very using of such means in earnest, is
an implicit couenanting with the devil.

There are three kinds of witchcraft. The first is, Superstitious divination,
which serves to tell men their fortunes, or to reveal secrets by the flying of
fowls, by the intralls of beasts, by the observation of stars, by consulting
with familiar spirits, and such like. Deuteronomy. 18. 11. The second, is iuggling,
which is to charming or enchanting, which is by the pronouncing of words, to
procure speedy hurt, or speedy help.

The use. By this we see that we are a carnal people. For in the time of
distress upon extremity, figure-casting, and charming, are overmuch used. And
yet both of them are full of superstition, and folly. For the revealing of
things to come is Gods: and the stars are universal causes, working upon all
things alike: and therefore it is not possible by them to foretell events that
are contingent, or casual. And words have no Ans.

It may be said, what should we do in distress, if such helps may not be
used? Ans. We are to use approved and ordinary means: and for the rest,
namely the event, to leave it unto to make have for delivery before the
appointed time. And whereas it is thought that some persons have a gift of God,
by words presently to cure any disease, whereupon wise or cunning men and
women, it is false: it is no gift of God, but rather a curse, that leaves them
to be deluded by the devil, who is the worker of these cures, when Satanical
and superstitious means, and that in a false faith, are used.

For the better conceiving of the sin, it may be demanded what is a witch?
Answ. One that wittingly, and willingly, uses the assistance of the devil
himself for the revealing of secrets, for the working of some mischief, or
for the effecting of some strange cure. I say wittingly, to put a difference
between witches, and some superstitious persons, who use charming, and by it
do many cures, persuading themselves, that the words which they use, have
force in them, or that God has given them a gift, to do strange things. Such
people in a natural honesty, detest all known society with the devil; in
that respect

Again, it may be demanded, what are the signs that serve to discover a
witch? Ans. This discovery is very hard. For witches do their feats in close
manner, not only by foul and open cursing, but also by fair speaking, and by
praising of things. And hereupon we have a fashion in England, when it is a
goodly child, God save it) that our speech may not be suspected of witchcraft.
Nevertheless, there are five special things that serve to discover a witch.
One is, the free confession of the accused,

There are besides these, other signs, but they are either false, or uncertain.
A man is sick, he suspects that he is bewitched: he takes it on his death that
such a party has bewitched him. All this is nothing, but the suspicion of one
man, and therefore no proof. Likewise the testimony of some wizzard is

Heresies] The word heresy generally signifies any opinion, either good or
bad. More specially, it signifies any error in religion. Thus Ecclesiastical
writers take it. For they condemn for heretics such as erred in smaller
points, holding the foundation, as Vigilantius, Novatus, etc. And the very
Opinion that Antipodes, was condemned for heresy, though it be a matter of
small moment. Yet most properly, Heresy may be thus defined: It is an error
in the foundation of Christian religion, taught and defended with obstinacy.
Thus Paul says, Tit. 3. 11. that an heretic is perverted, that is, put beside
the foundation: condemned of himself in his sin, that is to say, he erres
obstinatly even against his own conscience.

I say that heresy is an error in religion, to put a difference between an
error in Divinity, and an error in Philosophy, which is not termed
heresy: and again, to put difference between in the foundation of religion,
to distinguish it from errors that are in smaller points of Divinity. Some
teach that Abraham was borne the 70 of Terah, some the 130 of Terah. Both
cannot be true: yet neither of them are heresy. Some teach that Daniels weeks
begin straight after the return out of captivity: others teach that they must
begin 80 years after: both cannot be true: yet neither opinion is heresy. So
there are sundry opinions touching Ophir, Tarshish, (to which Jonah fled) and
Decapolis in the Gospel: and all cannot be true: yet they are not maintained
with obstinacy, to distinguish heresy, and a single error. For there are three
things in heresy, an error in the maine doctrine, conviction of the party
touching his error, and obstinacy after conviction.

The use. In that heresy, an error in the mind or understanding, is made a
work of the flesh: hence it follows, that the word flesh, signifies more then
sensuality: namely, the corruption

Again, if heresy be a work of the flesh, our duty is, to detest and eschew
heresies. And that we may for ever preserve our selves from them, three rules
must be observed.

I. We must propound unto our selves the right Principles of religion. For as
every Art has his confessed principles, so has Divinity. The head and chief
Principle whereof, is this. All Scripture of the Prophets, and Apostles, is
given by inspiration of God. This is the foundation of all true faith: here is
the God. It may be said, that Scripture is the sense of the written word: and
this sense must be from the Church. Ans. Scripture it self is both the gloss,
and the text. Scripture is the best interpreter of it self. And the sense
which is agreeable to the words of the text, to the scope of the place, to
other circumstances,

II. Read the Scriptures: and be a doer of them in the exercises of invocation,
faith, repentance, then shall thou never be a heretic. It is Gods promise,
Ioh. 7. 17. If ye will obey, ye shall know whether my doctrine be of God or no.
Psalm. 25. 14. The secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him. Mark
them, that make Apostasy, and become Papists: they are such as never had a
mind to love and obey the religion, in which they have bin baptized, and
brought up.

III. Col. 2. 8. Let no man spoil you through Philosophy.

The third head of sins are such as are against Charity, and they are in
number eight.

The first, is Enmity: of it I consider three things. The first is, whether it
be a sin, or no? for somewhat may be objected to the contrary.

Object. I. Psalm. 139. 21. Do not I hate them that hate thee? Ans. David here
speaks of the hatred, whereby he hated Gods enemies, not in respect of their
persons, but in respect of their sins, whereby they were enemies of God. And
this hatred is commendable, and not here to be understood.

Object. II. Luke 14. 26. He that will be a disciple of Christ, must hate
father, and mother, and his own soul. Ans. This hatred is not simply
commanded, but only in a certain respect, namely, as father, and mother, and a
man's own soul, are in comparison opposed to God, and Christ, in regard of
whom they

Object. III. Romans 9. God chose Jacob, and hated Esau: and we must be like unto
God. Ans. We are to be like unto God in holiness, and the duties thereof, and
not in the sovereignty and Lordship over the creatures, whereby he either
loves or hates

Object. IV. It is the universal nature of all creatures to fly their
contrary: therefore men may hate their enemies. Ans. Man and man are not
contrary in nature, or natural properties: but are all one flesh: the
contrariety that is, is by reason of

The second point is, what is this Enmity? Ans. It is a perverse disposition
of mind, whereby men remember injuries, discourtesies, and unkindness, and
carry about them a purpose, and desire, to requite like for like, when time,
and place

The third point, where is this Enmity? Ans. Every where among us. For we
daily see person divided against person, family against family, and
Corporation against Corporation. This maine point there be a concord, in leffer
matters the agreement will be easy.

Debate] It is a contention in words, whereby men strive, who shall show most
courage, who shall get the victory, and who shall carry away the last word,
no respect had of equity, crying, or lifting up the voice, in reasoning, is
condemned. Ephesians. 4. 31.

Emulations] There is a good emulation, and that is when men strive to be like
to them that excel in virtue, or to go beyond them. And it is commanded by
the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 14. 12. a carnal emulation, whereby men that excel in
any thing, grieve that any should be equal to them, or go beyond them.

The use. If to grieve at another man's Excellency, be a when Eldad and Medad
prophesied Numb. 11. 29. And John the Baptist, when Christ increased, and he
decreased. Ioh. 3. 29, 30. And Paul gave thanks as well for the graces
bestowed on the Churches, as for gifts bestowed

Anger] Of it I consider three points. The first is, whether there be any
lawful anger? Aus. Yea. Christ (in whom was no sin) was angry. Mark. 3. 5.
When there is a just cause of anger, then is anger just. When there is a
manifest offense of

The second is, when is anger a sin? Ans. When men are hasty to be angry.
Eccles. 7. 11. and are offended at every thing that goes against their minds.
Or again, having a just cause to be angry, yet they keep no measure in their
anger.

The third point, is the Remedy. And that is here set down. Hastines is a
work of the flesh, or of corrupt nature, and it bars men from the kingdom
of heaven: and therefore it is to be avoided.

Contention] There are sundry kinds of lawful contention: as

Contention is carnal, and finnefull, in respect of matter, and manner. In
matter, when men contend for things, for which they should not contend, as the
disciples for Primacie. Luke 22. or when contention is without forgiving,
forbearing, or suffering; and that in trifling matters. 1. Cor. 6. 7.
Contention likewise is faulty, in respect of manner, when men wilfully defend
their own private causes, no regard had, whether they be right

The use. Do nothing by contention. Phil. 2. 3. And therefore we must forgive,
put up, as much as may be, and yield of our right.

Seditions] The original word signifies such dissentions in (...).
which men separate one from another: and that is done two

Question. Why are not we schismatiks in England, Scotland, Germany:
considering we have dissented and separated our selves, from the Church of
Rome? Ans. We indeed have separated

For the avoiding of schism, and sedition, remember two rules. I. So long as a
Church, or people, do not separate from Christ: we may not separate from them.
II. Prou. 24. 21. Fear the King, and meddle not with them that vary, that is,
make

Ennie] It is a compound of carnal grief and hatred. For it things in them,
are commonly condemned for hypocrites: and their religion for hypocrisy. All
this is but the censure of Envy.

The use. That we may depart from Envy, we must love them that fear God: and
love the gifts and graces of God wheresoever they be: even in our enemies.

Murthers] Object. I. A plant lives, a beast lives, and man lives: the cropping
of a plant, and the killing of a beast, is no sin: why is it then a sin to
kill a man? Ans. God has given liberty for the two first, and has restrained
us in the latter. Again, the life of a plant is but the vigor in the juice,
and the

Object. II. The Magistrate kills without sin. Ans. The killing which is in
the name of God, by public revenge, is not

Object. III. Sampson is said to kill himself, Judge. 16. 30. Ans. Sampson was
a Judge in Israel, and took public revenge of his enemies: and in this
revenge he hazzarded his life, and lost his life. Though he died in the
execution, yet his intent was not to kill himself, but only to take revenge.
Secondly, his example is special. For he he shall be called a Nazarite, are
first spoken of Sampson, and then applied to Christ, in whom was verified that
which Sampson figured. For as Sampson conquered his enemies more in his death,
then in his life: even so did Christ.

Object. IU. For the avoiding of some great danger, or some great sin, as the
denial of Christ in persecution, men may make away themselves: so said the
Donatists. Ans. Death is no remedy in this case, but faith in the promise of
God: which is that he will give an issue in every temptation. 1. Cor. 10. 13.

The use. Seeing murder is a work of the flesh: our duty is by all means to
preserve both our own, and our neighbors lives. Life is a treasure. For by it
we have time and liberty to glorify God, to do good to our neighbors, and
to save our own souls.

The sins of the fourth sort, are against temperance: and they are two:
drunkenness, gluttony. For the better conceiving of the nature of these
sins, we are first of all to consider the right manner and measure of eating
and drinking, of which I deliver two rules. I. We may use meat and drink, not
only for necessity, but also for delight, Psalm. 104. 15. II. That measure of

Drunkenness then is, when men drink, either in wine or

Gluttony is, when men in eating, go beyond the measure reuelling, rioting,
swaggering. And it is fitly joined with drunkenness. For there are men that use
to drink exceedingly, and will not be drunk: and for all this, they are not
free from

These sins are said to be rise among us. The manner of many is, to meet
together, and to fill themselves with wine or

But we must be put in mind, to detest, and to fly these vices.

I. Gods commandment. Keep not company with drunkards, and gluttonous
persons. Prou. 23. 20. Be not drunk with wine, in which is excess. Ephesians. 5. 18.

II. The punishment of drunkenness, is plague, pestilence,

III. The example of the brute beast, that in eating and drinking, keeps
measure, and takes no more then will suffice nature. The horse and the ass,
may be schoolemasters to many of us.

IV. If we cannot forsake a cup of wine, or beer, which is not needful for
us, we shall never be able to forsake wife, and children, house and land, for
Christ's sake. If we have not the command of our selves in a trifle, we may
never hope for it in weighty matters.

V. There are dangerous effects of drunkenness. First, it destroies the body.
For it inflames the blood with an unnatural heat: and this unnatural heat,
ingenders unnatural thirst, which ingenders immoderate drinking, whence comes
dropsies, consumptions, all cold diseases, and death. Secondly, it hurts the
mind: for the spirits of the heart and brain (being the immediate

In favor of drunkenness, it is alleged that Noah's drunkenness Ans. While
Moses sets down the foul effects that followed Noah's drunkenness, he does
indeed condemn it. Secondly, his example is noted in scripture, as a warning
to all ages following. Thirdly, his sin may be lessened, though not excused,

Object. II. Joseph and his brethren, did drink and were drunk together, Genesis
43. v. last. Ans. The meaning of the text is, that they drank liberally, or
that they drank of the best together. For the word (shakar) signifies not
only to be drunk in drinking, but also to drink liberally, or to drink of
the best

Object. III. Learned Physicians, as Rasis, Avicenna, and others teach, that it
is greatly for health, to be drunk once or twice in a month. Ans. As learned
as they, teach the contrary. And we may not do any evil, or sin against
God, for any

Object. IU. It is said to be neighborhood and good fellowshippe. Ans. It is
drunken fellowship. The right fellowship is in the doctrine of the Apostles,
prayer, Sacraments, and the works of mercy.

Thus much of the works of the flesh. Now follows the punishment of the^, of
which I consider three things. First, a Premonition, in these words, whereof I
tell you before, as I also have told you before. Secondly, the designment of
the punishment, in these words, shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Thirdly,
the They which do such things.

In the Premonition, is set down the office of all Ministers: and that is,
often to forewarne the people of the future judgments

Again, all people are warned by this, often to meditate of the future
judgments of God. Thus did David, Psalm. 119.

The punishment of these sins is, not to inherit Gods kingdom. Gods
kingdom, sometime signifies the regiment of God, whereby he rules all things,
in heaven and earth. More specially, it signifies a state or condition in
heaven, whereby God and Christ is all things to all the Elect. 1. Cor. 15. 28.
And thus it is taken in this place. And an entrance or beginning to

The use. I. This must teach us above all things to seek Gods kingdom, and to
establish it in our hearts: and that we shall do, if we know the will of God,
and yield subjection to

II. The kingdom of God comes by inheritance: therefore there is no merit of
Good works.

The persons which are punished, are such as are doers and practisers of the
works of the flesh. Mark the words, not such as have bin doers, but such as
are doers. The word signifies a present and a continued act of doing amiss.

The use. Here is the difference between the godly man, and the ungodly. The
godly man falls into the works of the flesh, and being admonished thereof, he
repents and recouets himself: he does not stand in the way of sinners, though
sometime

I. Warning. They which are privy to themselves of any of the former works of
the flesh, must bewail their offenses,

II. Warning. They which have turned unto God from the works of the flesh must
be constant, and take heed of going back, least they loose the kingdom of
God.

22 But the fruit of the Spirit, is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith,



For the better observing, and the more easy understanding Walk in the
spirit, Paul here sets down a Catalogue of the works of the spirit. In the
Catalogue, I consider three things, the property of the works of the spirit,
in these words, The fruit of the spirit: the kinds of works, and they are nine:
the benefit that comes by them, in these words, against such there is no law.

The fruit of the spirit] It is the property of the works of Gods spirit in
us, to be called the fruits of the spirit. And by this, much is signified:
namely, that the Church is the garden of God. Cant. 4. 16. that teachers are
planters and setters. 1. Cor.

In that the works of the spirit, are called fruits thereof, hence it follows,
that there are no true virtues, and good affections, without the grace of
regeneration. The virtues of the heathen, how excellent soever they seemed to
be, were but shadows of virtue, and served only to restrain the outward man,
and no further.

Again, here we see the efficacy of the spirit, which makes

Again, good works are made acceptable to God even by his grace; and
therefore they are called the fruits of the spirit: and hence it is that they
are acceptable to God. Romans 15. 16.

Lastly, hence it follows, that free will of it self is like a dead or rotten
piece of wood, and that it bears no fruit, but as it is quickened by the spirit
Ioh. 15. 5.

Thus much of the property: now follow the kinds of the works of the spirit.

Loue] It may be demanded, how it is a fruit of the spirit? Ans. First, the
spirit of God works faith, then regeneration, then love. 1. Tim. 1. 5. Love
follows faith: because we must know first that we are loved of God, before we
can love God. 1. Ioh. 4. 19. And love follows regeneration: because till the
will

The love here mentioned, is either of God, or of man. The love of God, is an
holy affection, whereby we love God in Christ for himself. There are three
special signs, whereby it is discerned, I. a desire of fellowship with God,
and Christ, and the holy spirit: and therefore to be much and frequent in the
use of the word, and prayer: because in the word God speaks to us, and in
prayer we speak to him. II. To love the word of God above all earthly
treasure: and to tread our own wills

The love of our neighbor, is to love him simply, in, and for the Lord, and
for no other by-respect. The sign of this love is, to love not in word, but
indeed. And this is to love indeed, to show love, and to do good (when we are
wronged and abused) to them that wrong us, and abuse us.

Ioy] Joy is twofold; joy of glory after this life, and the joy of grace in
this life: and it stands in three things. The first is, to rejoice in the true
acknowledgement of God, that he is our god, and reconciled to us in Christ. The
second is, to rejoice in the work of our regeneration. The third is, to
rejoice in the hope

This joy of grace has a double fruit. First, it moderates all our sorrows,
and makes us rejoice in the midst of our afflictions. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16.
Secondly, it causes men to rejoice at the good of their neighbors. Romans 12.
15. And this joy is here

This fruit shows, that we are most of us bad trees. For the joys of the
world be for the most part in iniquity, and in the

Peace] It is a care and desire to maintain concord, as much as may be, if it
lie in us. Romans 12. 18. It is an excellent virtue. For the kingddome of God
stands partly in peace. Romans 14. good. Romans 14. 19.

Long-suffering] is to moderate our anger, and desire of revenge when many and
great wrongs are done to us. It is an excellent fruit, but it takes very hardly
in these parts. For our manner is, a word and a blow: a word and a stabb: a
word and a writ.

Set and sow this plant in the forrowes of your hearts, and that the weed of
revenge ouergrow it not, use these remedies. I. Gods commandment forbids rash
anger, Iam. 1. 19. for it is a degree of murder. II. The example of God, who is
slow to

Object. I. Anger is a sudden affection: therefore it cannot be ruled. Ans.
Means are to be used before hand, when we are quiet: then shall we better
restrain it.

Object. II. It is hard for flesh and blood to do this. Ans. We are more then
flesh and blood. For we have the spirit of God, else we are but hypocrites.

Gentlenesse] Gentleness is to give good speech, and to show good
countenances, even to them that wrong us, and abuse us,

The courtesy of the world, in the cappe and the knee, and all the complements
of humanity, is commonly severed from good affection: and it is often the
mask of enmity: and therefore

Goodnesse] It is a virtue, whereby we communicate to others, the good things
that are in us, for their good and benefit. It is prescribed by Paul in other
terms, when he says, Communicating to the necessities of the Saints, Romans
12. 13.

Question I. What are we to communicate? Answ. The gifts of our mind, our
temporal goods, yea our lives too, if need be, 1. Ioh. 3. 16.

Question II. Why are we so to do? Answ. We are members all of one body; and
we are members one of another,

Goodness, respects either the body, or the mind. Goodness concerning the
body, has many actions: as to feed the

Goodness concerning the soul, is to endeavor, partly by counsel, and
partly by example, to gain the soul of our neighbor to God: and it stands in
four actions: to admonish the vn^uly, to comfort the distressed, to bear with
them that are weak, and to be patient toward all, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.

Goodness is hard to be found in these days among men: The common practice is
according to the common proverb, Every man for himself, and God for us all.
The study of men is, how to gather goods, honors, riches, for themselves,
and for their children: and the common good is not aimed at. Good

Faith] First, we are here to understand faith toward God, which is to believe
the remission of our sins, and our reconciliation with God in Christ.

This faith is common to all among us: yet is it but a false, dead, and
ceremonial faith, in many men. Reason. I Faith comes and repentance: yet in
many among us, this faith is without any conversion or change of heart and
life: and therefore it is but a dead faith. III. True faith is mixed with
contrary unbelief, so as they that believe, feel in themselves a want of
faith, and much unbelief. But there are many among us that say, they perfectly
believe, and that they never so much as doubted

Secondly, by faith is meant faith toward men, and that stands in two things.
One is, to speak the truth from the heart: the other is, to be faithful and
just in the keeping of our honest promise, and word.

This faith is a rare virtue in these days. For the common fashion of them
that live by bargaining, is, to use glosing, facing, soothing, lying,
dissembling, and all manner of shifts. And with many it is a confessed
principle, that there is no living in the world, unless we lie and dissemble.
They that deal with chapmen

Our care therefore must be to cherrish, and maintain among us, Put away lying,
and let every man speak the truth to his neighbor. Ephesians. 4 15. II. By truth we
are like to God, whose ways are all truth: who hates a lying tongue. Prou. 6.
17. whose spirit is the spirit of truth. III. Liars bear the image of the
devil. He is

Meekenes] The same in effect with long suffering. The difference is, that
meekenes is more general, and long-suffering is, the highest degree of
meekness.

Temperance] It is the moderation of lust and appetite, in the use of the gifts
and creatures of God. For the better practicing of this virtue, remember these
four rules.

I. We must use moderation in meats and drinks. This moderation

II. We must use moderation in our apparel. And that is, to apparel ourselves
according to our sex, according to the received fashion of our country,
according to our place, and degree, and according to our ability. Here the
common fault in to be out of all order: for none almost know any measure. Every

III. We must use moderation, in getting of goods: and that is, to rest
content, if we have food and raiment, for our selves, and them that belong unto
us. 1. Tim. 6 8. Here is our stint; we may

IV. There must be a moderation in the spending of our

Against such there is no law] Here Paul sets down the benefit that comes by
the former virtues. The words carry this

Mark then the condition of spiritual men. They are a voluntary and free
people, serving God freely, without constraint. So as if Christ would not give
unto them life everlasting, yet would they love him, and desire the advancement
of his kingdom. On the contrary, if there were no hell, and God would not
punish adultery, drunkenness, blasphemy, etc. with eternal death, yet would a
Christian man abstain from these things: because he knows that they displease
Christ, and he is governed with another spirit, to which they are contrary.

Also these words are a reason of v. 16. There is no law against them that do
these things: therefore walk in the spirit.

24 For they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections,
and lusts.

The scope. In these words, Paul proves that which he said immediately before,
namely, that there is no law against spiritual men. And of this he gives a
double reason. One is, spiritual men are Christ's: therefore there is no law
against them. The

In the words, I consider three points. The first is, What is a Ans. A
Christian is one that is Christ's, (says Paul.) And he is Christ's five ways.
I. by the right of creation. And so are all men. II. by right of redemption. 1.
Cor. 6. 19. III. by the free gift and donation of God the father. Ioh. 17. 11.
this donation is begun in the eternal Election of God, and it is

The use. This must teach us to resign our selves to Christ, and to suffer him
to reign in our hearts: and to take the yoke of the Gospel upon us. But alas,
it is far otherwise with many of us. For some live in the transgression of
the very law of nature, so far are they from observing the Gospel. Others
They will be saved by faith: but their faith is nothing else but fidelity. They
say they worship God, but this worship is nothing else, but their good meaning,
and their good dealing. These men are content that Christ shall be theirs: but
they will not be Christ's, and suffer him to have a Lordship over them.

II. If thou be Christ's, then commend thy soul, and life,

III. Comfort. If thou be Christ's, he will care for thee, and nothing shall be
wanting unto thee that is for thy good. Ioh. 17. 24. Romans 8. 33. Therefore
remember this lesson, Never grieve overmuch, never care overmuch, never rejoice
overmuch in the things of this world. If thou werest at thine own

The second point to be considered, is, what is the flesh? Ans. It is the
corruption of the whole nature of man. For the right conceiving of this, we
must make a distinction of three things,

In the flesh are two things. Affections, and Lusts. By affections, understand
inordinate affections, which show themselves and bear sway in carnal men, as
anger in Cain, love of pleasures more then of God, in the men of the last
times. 2. Tim. 3. 3. immoderate sorrow in Ahab, when he could not obtain
Naboths

Lusts are inordinate and infatiable desires after the things of this world, as
riches, honors, pleasures, etc. of this sort are covetousness, gluttony,
pride, the lust of the flesh, etc.

The use. By this we see what a Carnal man is, namely, one that is carried
away with some inordinate affection, or some inordinate lust. Herod did many
good things at the advice and motion of John Baptist, whom he reverenced: yet
was he a carnal man. For he was possessed with an inordinate love of his
brothers wife. Judas a disciple of Christ, yet a carnal man: because he was
carried away with the inordinate lust of covetousness.

The third point, is touching the office of a Christian man. And that is, to
crucify the flesh, with the affections, and lusts. For the better conceiving
of this, Crucifying must be distinguished.

The crucifying, which is our action, is nothing else but the Imitation of
Christ crucified, on this manner. He was first attached: so must we bring our
selves into the presence of God. He was arraigned: so must we set our selves at
the bar of Gods judgment. He was accused: so must we indite and accuse

The use. This doctrine serves to condemn the drowsy Protestants of our time,
who profess Christ without making

II. Secondly, they are here reproved, that have many good gifts of God in
them, and yet never proceed to a through reformation. For they use to cherish
in themselves naughty affections, and damnable lusts. There is some one sweet
sin or other, that they cannot abide to crucify.

III. They also are to be blamed, that cannot abide to hear

IV. In afflictions be content, and quiet. For we ought to

Further, of this duty of crucifying the flesh, there are three have
crucified, etc. II. What must be crucified? Ans. The whole flesh, with every
inordinate affection and lust. This makes against them that fly Ans. In it are
two things, the restraint of the exercise of sin, (which is in part in civil
men,) and the killing of Original corruption, in all the parts and branches
thereof. And that is done, when we do not only

25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.

In these words is contained, the last reason of the rule of good life before
mentioned, in the 16. verse. For the understanding whereof, two things are to
be considered, what it is to live in the Spirit? and what to walk in the
Spirit? Touching the first. Life is twofold: created, or uncreated. Uncreated
life, is the life of be two degrees. The first is, when the Spirit of God takes
up his habitation in man, and withal governs all the powers of his soul, by
putting into the mind, a new light of knowledge, into the will and affections,
new motions, and inclinations, whereby they are made conformable to the will
of God. The second degree of spiritual life is, when the spirit dwells in It
rises again a spiritual body, that is, a body living in the second degree
of spiritual life, not being sustained by means, but immediately by the
eternal sustentation of the spirit.

To walk in the Spirit, is, first, to savor the things of the Spirit, Romans 8.
5. 7. And that is, to mind, wish, like, desire, and [walke] imports, in the
original; as if Paul should have (...).
said, Let us, (whilst we live in this world) not only endeavor

The use. This text in the first place, cuts off the shifts and excuses of
sundry persons in these days, who profess themselves Ans. If there life be
naught, they have an unclean. Spirit dwelling in them: and the god of this
world has blinded their eyes, and makes them that they cannot see the right
way wherein they should walk, 1. Cor. 4. 4.

Again, we learn from hence, a true and a pregnant sign, whereby to
discern, whether any man has in his heart the spirit of God or no? The life
of a man will discover and proclaim

Lastly, this teaches, what is the office of all Christian people, namely, to
walk in the Spirit, that is, to frame and order the whole course and tenor of
their lives, according to the line and square of Gods word and Spirit. A motive
to which duty may

26. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another,

The scope. From this 26. verse, to the 11. verse of the chapter following. S.
Paul handles the second Rule, which he had By love serve one another. In the
handling whereof, he first labors to take away the impediments of Love: and
then he sets down the manner, how the rule is to be observed. This 26. verse
is a rule, the end whereof, is to remove the impediments of love.

In this verse four points are especially to be considered. First, what the
desire of vainglory is? Answ. It is a branch of pride, which makes men to
refer all they have, or can do, to their own private glory, and
advancement. For better understanding whereof, consider a little the excuses
that men have,

I. Excuse. Vainglory in effect is no more, but the seeking of men's
approbation, which may lawfully be done. Answ. To seek the approbatio^ of men,
is no fault, so that it be sought in a good manner. The right manner of seeking
the praise of men, is this A man must in this life pass through three
judgments; the judgment of God, of his own conscience, and of his neighbor:
and the order of going through them, is, in the first place, he must seek for
the judgment and approbation of God: in the next, his own: and in the last,
his neighbors.

II. Excuse. There is a good boasting, which David used, and that we may
lawfully use. Psalm. 7. 8. Ans. Boasting is either

III. Excuse. Gods blessings we may seek for: and what Ans. There are two
degrees of honor. The first is, the honor that every man has in his place
and calling. For every calling ordained by God, has a glory annexed unto it:
which being the gift of God, it may be both sought for, and enjoyed. The other

The next point to be considered is, why he admonishes the Galatians of
vainglory? Answ. The Galatians were men of will be proud, even because he is
not proud.

A third point to be considered, is, where vainglory is to be found? Ans. It
is no rare matter, for it is a common vice, and spreads it self far and
wide. Some there are, which never lift up heart nor hand unto God at home, and
yet the same persons in the public assemblies, will make as though they prayed
with

The last thing, is the remedy of pride and vainglory; which is the rather
to be thought upon, because it is a great impediment of Christian love. This
remedy consists partly in meditation, and partly in practice.

Remedies in meditation, are these. 1. God resists all proud persons, and
gives grace to the humble. 1. Pet. 5. 5. the reason is, because the
vainglorious man, seeking himself and not god, robbes God of his honor. Thus
the proud Pharisie exalting

Remedies consisting in practice, are: first, an endeavor to acknowledge the
great Majesty of God, and withal our own baseness, and vileness before him.
2. We ought to ascribe all good things we have, or can do, to God alone, and
nothing to our selves. For in all that befall us, God is the principal agent,
our selves are but tools and instruments in his hand; by right therefore the
commendation belonges unto him, and not to us. 3. In all actions and duties of
religion, first we must endeavor to approve our selves to God, and the next
place is to be given to man, not contrariwise. 4. when we are reviled we must
rest content; when we are praised to our faces or otherwise Contention, and
Envy, provoking one another, envying one another. Men that are ambitious, if
they be crossed in their courses, grow contentious, if they prosper in the
world, then are they enuyed by others. Read for this purpose the history of
Samuel and Saul, 1. Sam. 15. Seeing then vainglory has so badde

FINIS.
THE SVPPLEMENT OR CONTINVATION OF the Commentary upon the sixth Chapter.

ALMA MATTER CANTA BRIGIA

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA



Printed by JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1604.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir BASSINGBVRNE GAVDY, Knight.
RIght Worsh. having been licensed some year ago (according to the ancient
laudable custom of the University) to interpret S. Paul's Epistles: and then
earnestly entreated by M. Perkins his Executor, and others his friends, (which
had some interest in me) to supply that which was defective in his Commentary
upon the Galatians: overcome at the last by their importunity, I undertook
the business, making trial of my simple faculty in this short Chapter, which I
have here according to my poor talent, finished: Yet not daring to publish it
to the view of the world, without pr^mising somewhat in way of excuse for my
boldness. For if Hirtius or (as others think) Oppius, being importuned by his
friend to continue the Commentaries which Caesar left unfinished, durst not
presume to Traef. lib. 8. de bello Gall.
make a Supply, without making first an Apology for himself, for attempting
to take in hand so great a task, seeming therein to compare with him who was
incomparable: Just cause have I to excuse my self for this my bold attempt, in
undertaking to equal him who in the judgment of all (save such, as esteem of
Writers by tale and not by touch) is so substantial, concise, exact,
methodicall, that (as it is said of Caesar) he has discouraged wise men from
writing. Sanos homines a scribendo d^terruit. (...)c. ad Bru^u^. Sue^on. in
C^s. cap. 56.
But seeing J do not in the vain confidence of mine own sufficiency, or
exactnes of the work, proclaim a challenge to all men's censures: nor yet take
upon me (as Michael de Montaign. in his Estayes.
some have don in other writers) so to carry the Author along that the Reader
shall not perceive but that he is still reading him, nor know where he ends,
or where I begin (for that being impossible to attain, were folly to
attempt:) but oenly to finish that which otherwise should have bin imperfect,
to satisfy the request of my friends, and to help forward the Lords building,
though not as a master builder with hewn stones, or polished Saphirs: yet as a
seruer and vnderlabourer as it were with a handful of rubbish. I hope I shall
obtain (at least) this favorable construction, to be thought as far from
vanity herein, as my conscience does witness with me I did it in simplicity,
and without affectation of singularity. And if it were no presumption in
Gillebertus to finish Bernards Sermons upon the Canticles, nor in Clichtoveus
to supply the 5, 6, 7, 8.
four books which were wanting in Cyrils Commentaries upon John, nor in
Wolfius, Reuterus, and other modern writers, to continue the Commentaries of
Martyr, Zanchius, etc. but rather works worthy great commendation, and
deserving well of the Church of God: I trust it wiil not be imputed to me as a
vice, which in others is accounted as a virtue. Further, if I shall seem to
any with the unskillful limmer to have joined humano capiti, cervicem equina^,
in that I exceed as much the other part in prolixitie, as! come short of it in
dexterity, I hope I shall the more easily obtain pardon, considering it was
my first draught, not having taken pensill in hand before: and seeing the work
which I was to finish was caput Veneris, the fair face of Uen^^s, I chose
rather (because I could not hit of the just proportion which J aimed at) to
exceed measure a little, then to be defective: thinking thereby to suit them
the better, seeing beauty or fairenes (to speak more properly) consists only
in greatness, as the Philosopher says. And some perhaps may think that it
falls Ethic. lib. 4. c. 3.
out well, in that I have given it more body, because it had less spirit. But
what others think or say (for as in other things, so in this, lookers on will
have their words) it skilleth not, so I may have the approbation of the godly
and well affected Reader: especially your Worshipful ^^tronage, to whom I
humbly commend it, as the first fruits of my labors, a simple flower growing
in a scholars garden: desiring it may be suffered to grow either in the shadow
or sunneshine of your protection, that so of the godly it may be better
accepted, and of the caterpiller the less touched: (those I mean which will
correct the Uerbe before they understand the Nowne, condemning that which they
ought rather to commend, at least which they cannot amend.) Uouchsafe therefore
Right Worsh. to receive this poor present, as a pledge of my unfeigned love,
and humble duty: and a testimony of my thankefulnes to God for his manifold
graces of prudence, justice, sobriety, meekenes, humility, liberality,
bestowed upon you, especially your love of his truth, and continual meditation
in his word: which was the thing that moved me, (all by-respects s^t aside) to
offer this Commentary to your view, and to have it graced with your
countenance: that by this means I might the more stir up and kindle (if it
were possible) your love and liking of the word, by adding fuel to the fire,
and oil to the flame. It is recorded of Theodosius the second, that he writ
the New Testament over with his own hand: and of Alphonsus King of Spain and
Naples, that he read the Bible 14 times over with the ordinary Gloss, (the
best help he had in those days.) And J doubt not but that you will peruse
this exposition at your leisure, and still continue to read the holy Scripture
as hitherto you have done, and so be answerable to that which is voiced of you,
and to that extraordinary commendation which your faithful Pastor has often
given of your diligence and dexterity in that behalf. Now let me add this
one thing, that though there be not the like efficacy in a dead letter, that
is in a lively voice, yet the bare reading of the Scripture is of great and
singular use, which may appear by this, that it is so often commanded by
pre^^pt, and so highly commended by the practice of the Saints; and so
straightly forbidden, as by cruel Antiochus, so 1. Macchab. 1. 60.
by the Roman Antichrist: neither dare I deny but that God has and does use
it, not only as a means of edification, but also of working the conversion of
many of his servants, as Augustine confesses Confess. lib. 8. cap. 12.
of himself, that he was converted by reading, that place in Paul Romans 13. 14.
converted (I say) not as a heretic only which is reclaimed from his erroneous
opinions, but as a lost sheep which is reduced and brought home from the
error of, his way. Notwithstanding, in reading the Scripture to go alone is
not so safe: a guide therefore is necessary (as the Eunuch confesses) which
may be as Act. 8. 31.
the Mercurialis statua, to point a man to the right way. And this guide is
either the outward, or the inward guide: the outward guide (I speak of reading
only) is a Commentary, especially such a one as a sanctified spirit has much
breathed upon: seeing it is the best learning the Theorick of him which is
skillful in the Practicke. The inward guide, is the spirit of Revelation, which
dwells only in a humble, docible, and obedient heart, which whosoever
brings has apromise that he shall know the truth, Ioh. 7. 17. and understand
the secrets of God, Psalm. 25. 14. and without which the Scriptures are but as a
Riddle or a clasped book. For the full and perfect knowledge of the word
consists (as Epiphanius says) in understanding, (...) in Anchorat.
and feeling, that is, not in bare speculation only swimming in the brain,
but in a sensible saving knowledge sinking into the affections of the heart:
and by this latter the comfortable meaning of the Scripture is better
understood, then by all the speculations of the most curious Skep^^kes: as the
sweetness of honey is better known in a moment by him that tastes it, then by
those that spend many hours in the contemplation and discourse of it.

But I forget my self very much in taking upon me to read a lecture to such an
exercised scholar in the book of God. Therefore without further insinuation
either for pardon for my boldness, or acceptance of my pains, I commend you to
God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you further, and give
you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. From Emanuel College.
August. 13. 1604.

A lover of your Worships virtues, in all duty to command, RAFE CVDWORTH.

CHAP. VI.
1 Brethren, if a man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are

THE Apostle having finished the first part of the Instruction, touching the
faith of the Galatians their calling to Christian liberty. Secondly, two rules
of good life. The first, that we must not use our liberty as an occasion to
the flesh; which is illustrated and handled in particular, we must serve one
another in love, which is amplified from the 26. to the 11. v. of this Chap. In
handling whereof, he first remooues the impediments of love, as vainglory,
envy, etc. v. 26. Secondly, he prescribes the manner, how it is to be
observed, and practiced, restore. they that are overtaken by any offense.
Thirdly, the persons that must restore, th^se that are spiritual. Fourthly,
the manner how, in the spirit of meekenes.

For the first, the duty is set down in the word restore, which in the
Original signifies, to set a joint, or bone, that is broken; (...).
so as it may become as strong and sound, as ever it was: so the word is used,
Matthew. 21. 16.

By this we learn sundry things. First, that it is the nature of sin, to
set all things out of order. It was the sin of Achan that troubled the Jews.
Ios. 7. 25. It was the sin of Ahab that troubled Israel. 1. King. 18. 18. the
sin of false Apostles that troubled the Galatians. Gal. 5. 10. Nay, it drives
men beside themselves, as appears in the example of the prodigal son, who
repenting of his sin, is said to have come to himself. Luke they that are
spiritual ought to restore them that are fallen. Fourthly, hence we are
taught, not to wonder, though sinners be so loath to be reproved, and account
it so painful a thing to be restored, and think those offensive unto them,
and skarse their friends, which labor to reclaim them: considering the same
is to be seen in the body: for he that has a bone broken, or out of joint,
can hardly endure to have it touched, or pointed at. Lastly, in that S. Paul
commands those that are spiritual to restore them that are fallen, and
prescribes not how often, but speaks indefinitely: we learn, that as often,
as our brother falls, we must restore him: for as we are not to forgive our
Peter thought very much) but even seauentie times seven times, that is, as
often as he sins against us. Matthew. 18. so we may not restore our brother,
twice, or thrice only, but toties, quoties: as often as he If he sin against
thee, go and tell him of his fault, etc. Therefore it were to be wished, that
as men have a care to restore their decayed limbs, so they would restore their
brethren being fallen into any sin, even because they are fellow members of
the same mystical body.

The second thing to be considered, is the person to be restored, and that is,
every one that is prevented and overtaken, either by the sleight of Satan, or
allurement of the world, or suggestions of his own flesh: (so he sin not
against the holy Ghost, nor openly skorne religion, and discipline.) as Peter
David with overmuch pleasure. Hence we see the subtlety of Satan, who is
always tripping at the heel, laboring to supplant us; as also the
deceitfulnes of sin, preventing and ouertaking us, before we be aware. We are
therefore to be circumspect and to take heed lest we be hardened through the
deceitfulnes of sin. Hebr. 3. 13. and, that we walk circumspectly, not as
fools, but as wise. Ephesians. 5. 15. that we walk with a right fool. Gal. 2. 14.
and, make straight steps unto our feet, lest that which is halting be turned
out of the way. Hebr. 12. 13. For as those that wrestle and the masteries,
look warily to themselves, lest they be supplanted by their adversaries: so
ought we much more, considering, we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities and powers. Ephesians. 6. 12.

Again, whereas it is said, if a man he overtaken by any sin, he teaches,
that no man is exempted from falling, or being overtaken and supplanted by
sin: for he speaks indefinitely, if a man, as S. John does: if any man
sin, we have an advocate. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. This makes against the Catharists or
Puritanes, who avouch, they neither have sin, nor can sin: because they be
trees of righteousness; and a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit.

Further, hence I gather, that pardon and restitution, is not to be denied to
them that fall, after their conversion, as though Nouatians do err, in
teaching, that sins committed after a man's conversion, are unpardonable,
considering there is hope Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny
before my father which is in heaven, Matthew. 10. 33. is meant only total, and
final denial.) Though a man be a grievous Idolater, a forcerer, and given to
witchcraft, yet he may be restored and find mercy, as Manasses did. 2. Chron.
33. Though a man be defiled and polluted with sins against nature, yet he may
be cleansed and washed from them. Some among the Corinthians but yet were
washed, sanctified, justified. 1. Cor. 6. 9. 11. It may be said, that it is
impossible, that they which once have been enlightened, and tasted of the
heavenly gift, etc. if they fall away, should be renewed again by repentance.
Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. Ans. That text is to be understood If we sin willingly,
after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sin, is to be understood, of a wilful, and malicious
renouncing of the known truth, as the circumstances of the place, and
collation willingly, as Aristotle takes it, Eth. l. 3. c. 2. yet sometime it
signifies, spitefully, and maliciously, as it is used by the Seventy, Exodus
Object. (...), or delicta, may be restored, not (...), or peccata. Ans. They
are used indifferently one for the other, as might be showed, if it were
needful. But it is a confessed truth, avouched by Anselme, and others, upon
this text. Lastly, whereas the Apostle speaks indefinitly; if any man be
nertaken, restore him. I gather, that the gifts and graces of God, bestowed
upon us, ought to be used in restoring those that are fallen, without respect
of persons: for herein spiritual men are debtors, to the wise, and foolish, as
the Apostle says of himself, Romans 1. 14.

The third thing to be considered, is, the persons that are to restore their
brethren, laid down in these words, ye that are spiritual.

Spiritual men are opposed to carnal, as 1. Cor. 3. 1. I could not speak
unto you brethren, as unto spiritual men, but as unto carnal: natural men.
1. Cor. 2. 14, 15. The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of
God: but he that is spiritual discerns all things. Now carnal and natural
men, are of two sorts: either they are such as are altogether fleshly,
destitute of grace and godliness, being in their pure (or rather corrupt)
naturalls, They that are of the flesh, savor the things of the flesh, Romans 8.
5. and verse the 8. They that are in the flesh, cannot please God. Or such as
are regenerate, yet are weak, as being but babes in Christ; the flesh being far
stronger in the^, then the spirit: such were most in the Church of Corinth: for
he could not speak unto them, as unto spiritual men, but as unto carnal. 1.
Cor. 3. 1. for yet ye are carnal; for when there is among you envying, are ye
not carnal* verse. 4. So spiritual men, opposed to carnal, are of two sorts.
First, those that have received the spirit of regeneration, and do begin to
savor the things of If any man think himself to be a prophet or spiritual
--, Of the latter, the words are to be understood: and by the^ he means
those, whom he called perfect men, Philip. 3. 13. Ebr. 5. 4 Now spiritual men
are more fit to restore those that are fallen, then any other. First, because
they are less tainted with sin, then others, and so may more freely
reprove. Secondly, because they have more knowledge and love, both knowing how
to restore, and willing to do it have a tongue of the learned, Isay, 50. 4.
When Peter is converted, he must strengthen his brethren, Luke 22. 32. Hence,
it follows, the more excellent gifts any man has received, the more he is
bound to be serviceable unto others. For if spiritual men must restore them
that are fallen, the more a man is endued with spiritual graces, the more he
ought to restore. For the Apostle says, As every man has received a gift, so
let him minister it unto others, 1. Pet. 4. 10. This duty was practiced by our
Savior Christ, Ioh. 13. 12. And it meets with the sin of many, who having
received great gifts I am as good a man as he, why should I go to him? let him
come to me, etc. have them in singular love, for their work sake, 1. These. 5.
19. For if we must honor the bodily Physician (as Syracides says) Eccles. 38.
verse. 1. who cures but the diseases of the body: how much more ought we

The fourth and last point, is, the manner how we must restore, laid down in
these words, in the spirit of meekness.

Meekenes is, the settling, or quieting of the mind, freeing it Arist. Rhet. ad
Th^^d. lib. (...). c^p. (...).
from perturbation, especially in repressing the reuengeful affection. A meek
and quiet spirit are joined together, 1. Pet. 3. 4. A notable example hereof we
have in Moses, who being provoked, in stead of anger, showed meekenes. It
further makes a man to yield of his right, and not to prosecute the matter in
rigor, severity, 1. Cor. 4. 21. Shall I come unto you with arodde, or in
love, and the spirit of meekness? Hence arises another property; it
bridleth the tongue, and the outward man, either by silence, as Christ being
provoked, wa^ dumme, and opened not his mouth, Isay 53. 7. was silent, and
answered not a word, Luke 23. 9. or by a soft and gentle answer, which
asswageth wrath, Pro. 15. 1. There is great reason why men should restore their
brethren in all meekness: for without it there is nothing but swelling, and
faction, but troubles, and tragedies. Again, as meekness is necessary for
every Christian, Coloss. 2. 12. Tit. 3. 2. so it is most necessary for
Instruct the^ in meekness, that are contrary minded, 2. Tim. 2. 25.

Motives to enforce this duty are these.

First, the exhortation and example of Christ, to be followers of him, 1. Cor.
11. 1. who was lowly and meek, Math. 11. 29. for he wa^ led as a sheep to
the slaughter, and like a lamb dumm^ before his shearer; so opened he not his
mouth, Isa. 53. 7. When he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered,
he threatened not, 1. Pet. 2. 23. as it may appear by that meek answer; If I
have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil: but if I have well spoken, why
smitest thou me? Ioh. 18. 23. Paul has no stronger argument to exhort the
Corinthians, then by the meekness, and gentleness of Christ. 2. Cor. 10. 1.

Secondly, it is a virtue which God does make great account of, 1. Pet. 3. 4. A
^eeke and quiet spirit, is before God, a thing much set by.

Thirdly, God has made excellent promises to them that are of a meek and
humble spirit, that he will guide them in judgment, and teach them his ways,
Psalm. 25. 9. That they shall be hid in the day of the Lords wrath. Zeph. 2. 3.
That they shall inherit the earth, Math. 5. 5.

Fourthly, consider the comfortable effects, and the good that comes thereby. A
soft, meek, and mild answer, turns away wrath, Prou. 15. 1. Meek, and
gentle behavior, heapeth coals of fire upon our enemies head, Romans 12. 20. A
soft to^g^e breaks the bones, Prou. 25. 15. See the example of Gideon
appeasing the Midianites, Judge. 8. 1. etc. and Abigail pacifying David, 1. Sam.
25.

Fifthly, without meekness, we cannot sauingly hear the (...). O(...).
word, either read, or preached, Iam 1. 21.

It is further said, we must restore in the spirit of meeknes. The word spirit
is added, because it proceeds from the spirit of god, who is both the worker
and continuer thereof: as on the contrary, the spirit of jealousy, Numb. 5.
14. the spirit of error, 1. Ioh. 4. 6. the spirit of uncleanness, Zach. 13. 2.
the spirit of giddines, Isa. 19. 14. the spirit of slumber, Isa. 29. 19. are so
termed, because they proceed from a wicked spirit. So quick motions, sudden
perturbations, strong affections, proceeding either from the spirit of God, or
of Satan, are termed by the name of spirit. meeknes, but of all sanctifying
graces, and therefore is called the spirit of wisdom, and understanding; the
spirit of counsel and strength; the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of
the Lord, Isa. 11. 2. Secondly, this teaches us, that all true virtues are
wrought

Thirdly, that when we see the gifts or graces of God in our selves or others,
we return all the praise and glory to God,

Fourthly, this shows, to whom we must have recourse in our need, namely,
not to the virgin Marie, nor any Saint (who stand in as great need of the
favor of God, as our selves) but

Lastly, in that the spirit is set before meekness, it shows that the spirit
of God is present with his graces, to inspire them, to cherish, and increase
them. Therefore the commandment, Quench not the spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. is to
be obeyed, if we will retain the graces of God.

Thus much of the duty. The reasons used by the Apostle, to enforce this duty
follow, to be considered, and they are two. The first is employed in the word
Brethren] which is of great force to persuade us to use moderation, lenity,
and gentleness. Abraham could use no stronger argument to pacify Lot, then
Let there be no strife between thee and me, for we are brethren, Genesis 13. 8.
Moses used it as a motive to accord two Ebrewes: Sirs, y^ are brethren; why do
you wrong one to another? Act. 7. 26. For it is a shame that those whom nature
has so nearly conjoined, should be so far disioyned in affection. But the
reason brethren in the flesh, but also in the Lord, having the same God for
their father, the same Church for their mother, Christ for their elder brother,
being begotten by the same immortal seed, washed by the lauer of one new
birth, conglutinate by the sinews of the same faith, nourished by the milk of
the same word; is so much the stronger, by how much grace is a strai^er bond,
then nature: therefore Paul would have us restore one another in the spirit of
meekness, because we are brethren. Nay, persons excommunicate, are not to be
accounted as enemies, Behold, this dreamer comes, come therefore, let us kill
him, Genesis 37. v. 19, 20. But when they consider him as their brother, they say.
Come, and let us sell him to the ^shmeelites, and let not our hands be upon
him, for he is our brother, and our flesh. v. 27.

The second reason, is in these words, Considering thy self, lest thou also be
tempted. And it is taken from the consideration of our own estate, that we are
subject to fall into, and to fall in temptation, as well as others: and
therefore we ought to deal with them in all meekenes, as we would be dealt
withal in the Considering thy self, that is, looking to thy self: lest thou
also be tempted, that is, least thou offend, and sin, in being too severe a
censurer of thy brother, in reproouing sin with sin. Or thus, Consider thy
self, that is, thine own frailty, how thou may ea^ily be overtaken with
the same, the like, or a greater sin, seeing thou may be taken in the
devils snare, and deceived with his pleasant baits, as well as he was:
therefore deal as mildely with him, as thou would others should deal
mercifully with Mark them diligently which cause division and offenses, and
avoid them, Romans 16. 17. Secondly, that we may be able to reprove and censure
Consider the matter, consult, and give sentence. Judge. 19. 30. Thirdly, that we
may follow their good example. Look on the^, which walk so, as ye have us for
example, Philip. 3. 17. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and
to good works Hebr. 10. 24. But he would have us, especially to consider ou^
selves, that by the consideration of our own weakness, we might learn more
mildnes toward others in our reproves: for seeing we stand in need of
mercy, we ought to deal mercifully: and seeing God forgiueth us innumerable
sins, we ought to forgive seven times, yea seauentie times seven times:
seeing Object. The Pharisie considered himself, when as he said, Lord, I
thank thee, that I am not as other men, thus, and thus, or like this Publican.
Luke 18. 11. and yet he is reproved by our Savior Christ. Ans. True it is:
for Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does: and Paul's practice,
Phil. 3. 13. I forget that which is behind. And never so

Paul would have us consider our selves, because the serious consideration of
our own weakness, will move us to practice this duty of meeknes: for as we
help up those that are fallen, and considers that we are but flesh, and a wind
that passes, and comes not again. Psalm. 78. 39. and Christ became like unto
us in all things, and was tempted in like sort (yet without sin) that he
might be merciful, and a faithful high Priest, and might be touched with a
sense of our Object. He therefore that knows assuredly he cannot be overcome
by temptation, is not to reprove in the spirit of meeknes. Ans. No man is
sure, and therefore no man can be secure. Again, though a man know he cannot
totally nor finally fall away, yet seeing he does find to overcome
temptations, that he might have a fellow feeling of our infirmities. Therefore
spiritual men must remember, that they were once carnal, even babes in
Christ: those that are strong, must consider that they were once weak: old men
that are grave and stayed, must call to mind that once they were in show all
meekenes to all men, because we our selves were in times past, unwise,
disobedient, etc. Tit. 3. 2, 3.

Lastly, mark here how Paul changes the number: for having said, ye that are
spiritual, restore etc. in the plural number, here he says, considering thy
self, in the singular, and not your selves: lest thou also be tempted, and not
you: which he does not through rudeness of speech, as some of the ancient
Divines Hierom in hunc loc^m.
have thought: but with great judgment he uses a familiar Hebraisme, changing
the number. First, to give the greater force, and to set the sharper edge upon
his admonition. For Plutarchs Lamiae, or fayries, which carried their eyes in
their heads when they went abroad, but when they came home put them up in a
box. In doing good and being beneficial, we must not so much consider our
selves. Philip. 2. 4. but in judging and reproouing, we ought to begin with
our selves.

For the better understanding of the doctrine of brotherly correction, and
Christian reproof, I will handle these four questions: I. who are to be
reproved? II. for what? III. by whom? IIII. in what manner?

I. Who are to be reproved?

Ans. All that are brethren: for so our Savior Christ says, If thy brother
sin against thee, reprove him. Matthew. 18. 16. And S. Paul says, Brethren,
if any man etc. The name Brethren, is taken four ways in Scripture, as Jerome
has well observed against Helvidius. I. for those that are brethren by nature,
as Jacob and Esau; the twelve Patriarchs; Andrew and Peter; James and John. II.
for those that are of affinity. Thus the kinsemen of Christ, are called his
brethren: which the Helvidians not observing, thought they had been his
natural brethren, by the virgin Marie: thus Abraham and Lot are called
brethren, Genesis 13. v. 8, 14. though Lot was but his brothers son. Genesis 14.
his brother. Genesis 29. 12. and so Laban calls him. v. 15. III. for men of the
same country. Thus all the Jews are called brethren one to another. Deuteronomy. 17.
15. From among thy brethren shall thou make a king over thee. and, Deuteronomy. 23.
19. Thou shall not give to usury to thy brother. and, Rom 9. 1. Paul says, he
could wish himself anathema, or accursed, for his brethren, that is, the
Jews. IIII. for those of the same religion. 1. Ioh. 3. 16. We must lay down
our lives for our brethren. Matthew. 23. 8. One is your Doctor, and all ye are
brothren. 1. Cor. 5. 11. If any that is called a brother be a fornicatour, with
such a one eat not. To these we may add a fifte acception: for all those that
are confederate, or otherwise joined together, by the bond of nature,
humanity, society, or friendship. Thus Ahab calls Benhadad his brother,
that is, his friend. 1. King. 20. 32, 33. thus Simeon and Leui are called
brethren in wickedness, that is, confederate in evil. Thus all men are called
brethren one to another, by reason Gen 49. 5.
of the bond of nature, Genesis 9. 5. at the hand of a man's brother, will I
require the life of man. In all countries those that associate sworn brethren.
Now we must not restrain the word brethren, to those that are brethren by
nature, or by affinity, or by country: neither enlarge it to all those that
are brethren by the bond of nature: but only to those that are brethren in the
fourth brethren in religion, or brethren in the Lord, (though they be flase
brethren) if they be brethren at least in outward profession: for reproof
being a part of Ecclesiastical Discipline, belongs not to those that are
out of the visible Church, as to Jews, Turks, Pagans; because our Savior If
he hear them not, tell the Church: and if he will not hear the Church, let
him be unto thee as a heathen man, and a Publican. Which cannot be understood
of him that is a heathen or Pagan already. And Paul says, 1. Cor. 5. 11. If
any that is called a brother, that is, a Christian, be a fornicatour, etc. and
then he adds in the next verse, what have I do, to judge them that are
without? that is, such as are no members of the Church, to whom Ecclesiastical
Discipline reaches not; do not ye judge them that are within? that is, such
as are of the visible Church, such as do subject themselves to the censure,
and discipline of the church. It belongs therefore to those that are of the
Church, at least in the head and the members of the same body. 1. Cor. 12.
Therefore all that are in the bosom of the Church, even the mighty Princes
and Potentates of the Ecclesiastical censure, are greatly to be censured: for
herein they contemn the ordinance of God. Let the^ consider that they are not
better then King David, who having sinned, patiently endured reproof by
Nathan. Let the^ remember how Take heed to thy ministry, that thou have
received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it, Coloss. 4. 17.

II. We are bound to reprove all that are in the Church, to whom we owe duty
of love: but we are to love our superiors, as much, if not more then others:
therefore we are bound to reprove them as well as others. III. There is greater
reason we should reprove them then others, 1. Because they being in higher
place, are in greater danger of falling then others, and therefore have more
need of admotions and reproves. 2. Because they have many that will flatter
them, but few or

It will be said, all are not to be reproved which live in the Church; for
some be scorners, who (as Solomon says) must not be reproved. And our Savior
Christ forbids us, to cast pearls before swine, Matthew. 7. 6. I answer, that
only open scorners, they are like swine, which trample precious pearls under
their feet: and of persecutors, when he says, that like dogs they return
again, and all to rend them. 2. Christ being here upon earth, did not hinder
the Pharisees, Sadduces Publicans, and harlots, from coming to his sermons:
much less would he debar them of this censure of the Church. 3. The woman of
Syrophenissa (though called a dog) yet eats of the crummes that fall from
the childrens table, Matthew. 15. 27. 4. Paul did often admonish and rebuke the
Corinthians, though they were carnal and fleshly minded: therefore all men,
though never so public and notorious offenders, (if they be not open scorners,
or persecutors of the known truth) are to be reproved.

Object. Profane men which notoriously offend and scandalize the Church by
their wicked lives, have no fellowship with Christ, but are to be accounted as
dogs, out of the Church.

I answer 1. They are not to be counted dogs, which do acknowledge their
faults, the greatness of their sin, and the Cretians sharply, or pecisely,
for their notable lying and idleness, Tit. 1. 12. 3. Christ denies (...).
not pardon to them that fall by recidiuation, but would have them forgiven,
not only till seven times, but till seauentie times seven times; and Paul
speaks indefinitely in this place, that we should restore him that falls by
occasion into any offense, not specifying how often we should forgive. 4. We
must distinguish betwixt the magistrates sword, and the keys of the Church:
notorious offenders when they repent, are to be received into the bosom of
the Church, as sons of the church: yet for all that, they may, nay they ought
to be punished by the

II. For what faults are men to be reproved?

Men are to be reproved for every known sin: This is manifest from the end
of reproves, which is, the gaining of our Resist not evil. Bless, and curse
not. Do good to them that hate you, etc. Thirdly, it is extended to every sin,
because he which sins against God, or the whole Church, sins also against
thee, and every particular member of the Church. For every Christian If thy
brother sin against thee. I answer, that phrase and (against thee) is not
meant only of private wrongs offered us, (as I have said) but of any sin
committed against God: for in every known sin, we are in a sort wronged: 1.
because we ought to be so zealous of the glory of God, that we ought to be
more grieved when men sin against God, waters, because men kept not gods law.
Psalm. 119. v. 136. and Lot, who vexed his righteous soul, in seeing and
hearing the abominations of the Sodomites, 2. Pet. 2. 8. For to expound these
words (against thee) thou being privy to it, is far from the meaning of the
text, neither can the phrase be showed in that sense.

Now that men are to be reproved for known sins committed against God, of
what nature, quality, and condition soever they be, besides the former
reasons, it is manifest. Leuit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke him, and shall not suffer sin to
rest upon him. Therefore if a man be fallen by occasion into any offense, he
says not, this or that offense, but in general, into any offense, whether in
life or doctrine, by evil example, or otherwise, against the first, or second
table. Yet this is so to be understood, as that injuries and wrongs offered us,
are not to be excluded: for even for them also, are men to be reproved. If he
hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or
three witnesses, every word may be confirmed, Matthew. 18. 16. He bids him
take one or two, that so it may be confirmed by the testimony, not of of two
or three: therefore the party offended is one of the witnesses. III. If it
were unlawful to reprove men for injuries offered us, what course should he
take that is secretly wronged, none being privy to the wrong but himself,
and the party offending? Thus men would be imboldned stance and circumstance
is better known unto him, then to any other. II. Because the reproof (in all
likelihood) will take the better place, when as the offender shall have coals
of fire heaped upon his head, when he shall see, that the party wronged is
desirous of his good, and ready to requite good for evil, in seeking his
amendment, whereas he sought his hurt.

Object. Authors of heresies, schisms, dissentions, are to be avoided. Romans
16. 17. therefore not to be reproved. Ans. General places of Scripture, are
to be expounded, according to particular limitation in other places: now that
general text, Avoid an heretikeafter once or twice admonition.

Object. Paul commands the Corinthians, that without any more ado, they should
proceed forthwith to the public censure of excommunication against the
incestuous person: and as withdraw our selves from every brother that walks
inordinately. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Ans. Paul's practice is not contrary in the name,
and by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 5. 4. in which words the
form of proceeding against him is limited, and that according to Christ's
institution, the name and power of Christ, signifying the word and institution
of Christ. 2. Paul does plainly expound himself in other places, what his
practice was, in that behalf, as 2. Cor. 13. 1, 2. where he signifies that he
did not excommunicate unclean persons, fornicators, wantonness (mentioned

It will be said, that Paul threatens when he comes he will not spare the
rest. 2. Cor. 13. 2. therefore it seems he was resolved to excommunicate them
without any former proceeding against them. Ans. When Paul says, I write to
them which have sinned, and to all others, that if I come again I will not
spare. By all others, he means not some which he purposed to excommunicate
without former admonition, (for in writing this

3. The word there used, signifies reproof in word, as it is taken Luke 17.
If thy brother sin against thee, rebuke him: therefore (...).
the reproof by many, or of many mentioned 2. Cor. 2. 6. may signify as well
the grave, serious, and effectual reproof of the Church, by which the
incestuous person was reclaimed from if you forgive any thing, may as well
signify receiving into favor and familiarity before excommunication, upon
his repentance, as restitution after excommunication.

4. Be it grounted, he were indeed excommunicate (as it is most probable he
was) yet hence it cannot be inferred, that they did proceed against him
without precedent admonition. The Scripture is silent in this point. Therefore
the reason is not good; It is not recorded, therefore it was not practiced.

5. Though the Apostle command we should have no familiarity with inordinate
livers, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. but that we withdraw our selves from them, yet he adds
withal, that if there were any amongst them that would not obey his sayings,
they should note him by a letter, v. 14. and he expressly commands admonish
the inordinate. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. for that was his practice, as it may appear,
2 Thessalonians. 3. Those that are such, that is, inordinate livers, we exhort and
command by our lord Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness, and eat their
own bread.

III. Who are to reprove.

It is duty which concerns all men; our Savior Christ says, If thy brother
sin against thee, reprove him: and the commandment is general, Leuit. 19.
17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but shall rebuke him
plainly: now all Christians are brethren, (as I have showed) therefore all men
are bound to reprove their brethren, as occasion shall serve. Secondly, all
first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou shall see to pull
out the mote out of thy brothers eye. They therefore are severely to be
censured, nay deeply to be condemned, who say with Cain, Am I my brothers
keeper? as though it concerned them not a Genesis 4. 9.
whit whether he sink or swim; as though every man were Philip. 2. 4.
though God had not made every man a guardian to his brother? The dim candle
light of corrupt nature, condemns these men, which teaches that he which may
save and does not, does in effect as much as kill, or destroy. The duty
therefore watchmen, Ezech. 33. and 34. And if they do not strengthen the
weak, heal the sick, bind up the broken, bring again that which was driven
away, nor seek that which is lost, etc. he will require his sheep at their
hands. Ezech. 34. v. 4. 10. Paul inioynes the Pastors of the Church of
Ephesus, that they should take heed to themselves, and to the flocks whereof
the holy Ghost had made them overseers. Act. 20. 28. and he commands Timothy
that he should be instant in season and out of season; that he should improoue,
rebuke, exhors, with all long-suffering and doctrine. 2. Tim. 4. 2. and Titus,
that he rebuke and exhort with all authority. Tit.

Further, it is to be observed, that though all men are bound to reprove their
neighbors if they offend, yet in five cases they are not bound.

I. If a man be ignorant of the offense. For a man that reprooueth S. Augustine
says well, Admonet dominus non negligere invicem peccata nostra non quaerenda
quod reprehendas de verb. dom. ^orm. 16.
sed videndo quid corrigas.

II. If he have repented of his fact, he is not to be reproved, for the end of
reproof is to reclaim him; therefore if he be reclaimed already, there is no
place left for reproof: although the magistrate may punish and correct him in
regard

III. A man is not to reprove, if he be certain his reproof will do no
good: for when the end cease, all things te^ding to the end do likewise
cease; therefore if there be no hope of amendment (which is the end of
reproof) reproof is to be omitted; specially if it be so far from bettering
the party, that it make him much worse. Solomon says, He which instructs a
scorner, gets himself reproach, and he that reprooueth a wicked man,
purchases to himself a blotte, Prouer. 9. 7. And then he adds in the next
verse, Rebuke not a scorner, least he hate thee, rebuke a wise men and he will
love thee. And verily it were great folly to spend labor in vain, in telling
them of their faults, when out schooling will not better them, but incense them
more and more: It were better to be silent, or to separate from them, then to
stir up hornets, or to thrust our hands into a wasps neast. It Muff^t.
wholesome admonitions on such cursed and unprofitable ground, shall reapt
nothing for his pains, but the thorns of mockes and reproaches.

It will be said, the Judge cease not to punish malefactors,

IV. Reproof may be omitted, if it be certain that the parsie will either
presently redress his fault without reproof: or that some others will
admonish him thereof, whom it does more nearly concern. As the giving of
alms may be omitted

V. If it may be done more conveniently and profitably another time, it may be
omitted for the time. Except in these five cases, he that does not reprove his
brother, is guilty of his

IIII. Point. In what manner are men to be reproved?

The manner to be observed in reproouing, I will lay down in ten rules.

I. A man must so reprove his brother, as that it may be most for the
advancement of Gods glory, best for the winning of him to God, and least to
the defaming of him abroad to the world: and that it may appear unto him, that
he does it of love (aiming at nothing but his good) not of any malicious
humor, or si^ister affection of revenge, or vainglory, etc. and that this
may be done, two things must be practiced. First, he If any see his brother
sin a sin that is not unto death, let him pray, etc. Secondly, we may not
traduce him to others, either before or after our reproof, 1. Pet. 4. 8. This
rule is general: the rest following are more special.

II. Every reproof must be grounded upon a certain Secret I call those that
are known only to God, and the conscience of the doer: or only to others,
but not to us. This was practiced by S. Paul,

III. In reproouing others, we must consider our selves, specially our own
weakness, and begin the reproof in our selves, if not for the same fault we
reprove in our neighbor, yet for as great as that (if not a greater) in
another kind: this manner of reproouing is enjoined by S. Paul, when he says,
considering thy self, le^t thou also be tempted: and a man is to consider
himself in three respects: in regard of the time past, present, and to come:
in regard of the time past, that he was as wicked, profane, and graceless as
another: yea that he was (as the Apostle speaks) darkness, and the child of
wrath as well as others: for (says he) we our selves also were in times past
unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts and diverse pleasures, living
in malitiousnesse and envy, hateful and hating one another, Tit. 3. v. 2. 3.
In regard of the time present, that he is but a frail man, ready to fall every
moment, that he is not able of himself to think the least good thought, much
less to resist the least temptation, and that whatsoever he is, he is it out
of By the grace of God I am that I am. So that were it not for this preventing
and cooperating grace, he would fall into as great enormities as other men. In
regard of the time to come, Consider thy self, lest thou also be tempted:
remember Paul's Item, 1. Cor. 10. v. 12. Let him that Aut^umus, a^t ^uimus, vel
po(...) es^e quod hi^ ^st.
thinks he stands, take heed l^st he fall: for if thou have not bin
overtaken with the like sin, yet thou may be hereafter: therefore as thou
would have others to be co^passionate toward thee, if thou were in the like
case; so be thou to the^. The not obserua^ce

IIII. It is very requisite and expedient, that the reproouer be not tainted
with the same, or the like fault which he reprooueth in an other, least it be
said unto him, Physician cure thy self. Luke 4. 23. In that thou iudgest
another, thou condemnest thy self, Romans 2. v. 1. Therefore David says not,
Let the wicked Let the righteous smite me, for that is a benefit, and let him
reprove me, that shall be as a precious o^le: that shall not be wanting to my
head, Psalm. 141. v. 5. For albeit in regard of the reproof it self, it be not
greatly material, yet it is not so expedient, nor so profitable in regard of
the reproouer, 1. because he seems unworthy to reprove another, who is to be
reproved himself, being as deep in fault as any: 2. because it will be
thought, that he which makes no conscience to redress himself, will not be
so ready to reclaim others, of love to their

V. All reproves must so be ministered, as that the party reproved may be
brought to a true sight of his sin: as also to I will reprove thee, and set
thy sins in order before thee: as also of the Prophet Reprove, rebuke,
exhort with all long-suffering and DOCTRINE: 2. Tim. 4. 2.
thereof, and so by unfolding the horrible greatness of sin, to the
conscience of him whom we do reprove. For reproves which are not thus
qualified, are but cold and perfunctorie, Why do ye such things? for of all
this people, I hear evil reports of you: do no more my sons; for it is no
good report that I hear, 1. Sam. 2. v. 23, 24. being a means rather to
cherrish sin in them, then to reclaim them from it. These kinds of
reproves,

VI. The vinegar of sharp reprehension, must be allaied and tempered with the
oil of mild and gentle exhortation; we may not only use the corrasiues of
the law, but withal we must apply the cordialls of the Gospel: bitter pills
of reproof, must be sugered over with loving and affectionate persuasion, lest
the patient abhor the physic: every man in this case is to follow the
skillful Surgeon, who does not always use section and vs^ion in launcing the
wound with sharp instruments, but mollifying ointments, and mundifying waters,
to cleanse and supple the wound, and heal the sore. Paul says, that the
servant of the Lord must be gentle toward all men: and that he must instruct
with meekenes them that are contrary minded. 2. Tim. 2. 25, 26. and in this
place he commands the Galatians that they should restore their brethren with
the spirit of meekenes. The word translated [restore] is very emphaticall: for
it signifies to set a bone that is broken, or any member of the

1 When a man does propound the reproof in his own person, as Paul did. 1.
Cor. 4. 6. Now these things, brethren, I have figuratively applied unto mine
own self and Apollos, for your sakes, that ye might learn by us, that no man
presume above that which is written, etc.

2 When a man does not directly reprove another in plain terms, but closely
shows a mislike of the fact, and conuaieth a reproof in an exhortation, and
so lappeth up pills thou, etc. but yea and nay shall serve betwixt us: what
needs this vehemency betwixt us two? I will as soon take your word, as your
oath, etc.

3 When the reproof is propounded in a parable: as Nathan

4 When we reprove a man directly (as at the length Nathan did David, Thou art
the man, 2. Sam. 12. 7.) we must so the reputation of his name, and eternally
the salvation of his soul; and that we consider our selves herein, how that we
may easily be overtaken, as he was. These cautions observed, the inferior may
reprove his superior, as 2* King. 5. 13.

VII. Every reproof must be fitted to the quality and condition of him whom
we reprove; and to the nature of friendly admonition: and thus one equal is
to reprove another. Secondly, by reverent and submisse exhortation: thus the
younger must reprove the elder, the inferior their superiors. It is Gods
commandment that we should not rebuke an elder, but exhort him as a father. 1.
Tim. (...). 1. And thus Kings and great Potentates are to be reproved* they
being patres Patriae. That saying of the sharp reprehension: thus elders or
superiors are to reprove their inferiors, specially, if the fact be
notorious, scandalous, or dangerous. Paul commands Titus that he should
rebuke the Cretian^, (...), sharply, that they might be sound in the faith.
Tit. 1. 13. Fourthly, by due chas^isment and correction: thus the superiors
must reprove their inferiors over whom they are set, as the father the
child, the master the servant, the magistrate the subject, etc. and thus the
inferior cannot reprove his superior, nor one equal another, though he do

Secondly, we shall fit our reproof to the offense committed, if in spiritual
wisdom and discretion we put a difference betwixt sin and sin, as the
Apostle teaches us, Iud. v. 22, 23. Have compassion on some in putting
difference: and other save with fear, pulling them out of the fire. Sins
committed of humane frailty, or through ignorance, must be distinguished from
those of malice, of pride, and presumption; both must be reproved, yet after a
different manner: for the one must be won with gentleness, the other with
sharpnes: the one with Christ, to the other with the lamentation of John
Baptist. To the one in the spirit of Elias: to the other in the spirit of
Moses. When gentle admonition would take no place, Christ thundreth out threats
against Corazin and Bethsaida. And Paul threatens severity, when lenity will
do no good. 2. Cor. 13.

VIII. Every reproof must be administered in fit time when we may do the
most good: therefore if in wisdom we shall foresee fitter opportunity to
win our brother, we are that a word spoken in due time, is like apples of
gold, with pictures of silver. Prou. 25. 11. Now if this be true of a word
spoken in due time, it is much more true of a reproof delivered in due season.
There is a time for all things. Eccles. 3. 1. And surely if every thing that
comes to pass in the world have his set time, and opportunity, reproof
must needs have his time and season.

IX. Secret sins known only to thee, or to a few, must be reproved
secretly, betwixt thee and the party alone: they if thy brother has ought
against thee, go thy way, and be reconciled to thy brother. Matthew. 5. 23, 24.
If he have trespassed against thee, or thou have ought against him, go and
tell him his fault between him and thee alone. Matthew. 18. 15. And albeit
Solomon say, That open rebuke is better then secret love, Prou. 27. 5. yet it
makes nothing against this rule: for he understands not that reproof which
is uttered before witnesses, but that private reproof which is given to his
face, and not behind his back, betwixt Them that sin, rebuke openly, that
the rest also may fear. Which text of Scripture must rightly be conceived: for
it is not a general commandment given to all, (as some have thought, in
alleging it to prove that they may lawfully Church, and not before all men,
in every place, and assembly, where they offend. For we have no warrant in
Scripture so to do. Secondly, this open disgraceful rebuking of men will
rather harden them in their sins, then any way reclaim them from sin.
Augustine says well, Prae pudore incipiet defendere peccatum suum, and quem
vis correctiorem, facis peiorem. De verb. Dom. se(...). 16.
Thirdly, they might as well say, a man is to be reproved for every sin, and
that openly before all men, as for open sins, because Paul says not, Them
that sin openly, rebuke before all men, but them that sin, rebuke openly.
Fourthly, the words depend upon the former verse, where it is said, Receive
not an accusation against an Elder, under two or three witnesses: and then it
follows, Those that sin, rebuke openly: that is, those elders that sin,
and have been first privately admonished, and after that before witnesses, if
they be accused by two or three witnesses; then reprove them openly, before
all men: that is, before

X. We must carefully observe the order set down by our Savior Christ, Matthew.
18. 15. First, we must try whether by private reproof our brother will be
reclaimed or no^; if he be, we must proceed no further, for then we have
attained the If he hear thee, thou have won thy brother: If not, we must
take one or two, which may witness v. 15.
the fact, and that for sund^ie causes* the first is given by Saint Hierom,
upon the place, That they may witness that to be a sin, for which he is
reproved, and that he is worthily reproved reprove with all long suffering.
It may be objected that Paul bids Titus he should avoid an heretic after
once or ^wise admonition. Tit. 3. 10. Therefore we are not to proceed against
offenders according to Christ's commandment. Ans. That text makes nothing
against this orderly proceeding commended unto us by our Savior Christ. For
first, this commandment is not given to condemned of his own self, Tit. 3.
11.

Nevertheless, there be certain cases, in which we are not

I. When the sin committed tends to the hurt of the Church, or common
wealth, and there be danger in delay* as also danger to the party that is
privy to it, and does not detect Me(...)s est v^ pe^eat^nus q(...)m (...)
(...)ero^.
good: better it is that one man perish, then that the bond of unity should be
broken.

II. When the fault is greater if it be committed, then the loss of his credit
that committed it, though it be published. Act. 24 (...) (...), 17
eat nor drink, till they had killed Paul: he does not go and reprove them
for this fact, but relates it to Paul: and Paul hearing of it, does not
counsel him to go and reprove them first, and if they would not harken to
him, to take two or thee witnesses, etc. but sent him straight, to the chief
captain, that he might take order to prevent their bloody attempt.

III. When a man is assured private reproof will do no good, and that the
party offending will not brook it, nor take he brought unto his father their
evil sayings, Genesis 38. 2. Albeit others say, that their sin was public, and
therefore needed no private admonition: and others, that he did admonish the^
secretly, before he did relate it to his father; (although it be not expressly
set down in the text.)

2. Bear ye one another burdens,

In this verse, the Apostle propounds another rule, touching Bear ye one
another burdens: And this rule is enforced by an argument taken from the
excellency thereof, in And so fulfill the law of Christ.

First, for the rule: The Apostle calls slippes, infirmities, and sins, by
the name of burdens, taking his metaphor from travelers, who use to ease one
another, by carrying one another burden, either wholly, or in part: that so
they may more cheerfully, and speedily go on in their journey. Men's burdens
are of two sorts: either such as every man is to bear by himself alone,
without shifting them off his own shoulder, and laying them upon other men (of
which we are to entreat, when we come to the fifth verse.) Or such as may be
borne of others, as Bear ye one another burdens: and there are four sorts of
them: First, those whereof our brethren may either be wholly disburdened, or in
part eased, such is the heavy burden of poverty, sickness, nakedness,
hunger, thirst, banishment, in weeping with those that weep^^ and in remembering
those that are in bonds, as though we were bound with them, those that are in
affliction, as if we were also afflicted in the body, Ebr. 13. v. 3. This was
Paul's practice, 2. Cor. 11. 29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is
offended and I burn not? Secondly, by bearing with Bear with the weak, 1.
These. 5. 14. Thirdly, by putting under our shoulders, and bearing part of the
burden with them; in helping and easing of them in their necessities. Romans 12.
v. 13. Distributing unto the necessities of the Saints. The two would not leave
so much as a hoof behind him, Exodus 10. 26. And Paul would not give place to
Peter and them that were with him, no not for a moment, that the truth of the
Gospel might continue with them, Gal. 2. (...). They must therefore be borne by
disburdening the^ of the^, by gentle and mild admonition, or if they cannot be
redressed, by bearing and tollerating of them, in passing by them, Rom 14. 1.
and 15. 1.
as though we did not perceive them, for as Solomon says, It is the glory of
a man to pass by infirmity: or lastly, by praying for them For if we shall
break the bond of brotherly love, and Prou. 19. 11.
Christian society, by reason of these or such like infirmities, burdens, as
the Apostle commands in this place, and Ephesians. 4. 2. Support one another,
through love. And surely, this is a most necessary precept, of great use and
consequence, in the life of man: for except we bear and tolerate the frailties
of men, in passing by them in such sort, as I have Eremites, and Anchorites
have done, because they could not (by reason of their froward and wayward
natures) digest (...). Po^* ^5.
must support the infirmities of the weak, that so the whole building being
compact and knit together, may grow up to Hard with heard, never makes a good
wall. By which is signified, that as stones Duro con duro no^ fa bon (...)o.
cobbled up one upon another, without mortar to combine them, make but a
tottering wall, that may easily be shaken; but if there be mor^er betwixt them,
yielding to the hardness of the stones, it makes the whole like a solid
continued body, strong and stable; able to endure the shocke of the ram, or
the shot of the cannon: So that society, where all are as stiff as stones,
which will not yield a hair, one unto another, one being as August. ser^ 21.
de verbi Apost. (...) hun^ locu^ ^x August.
upon the back of another: the foremost that has none to support him,
changing his place, and resting his head up on the hindermost. Thus in a
family, the husband must bear with the nicenes, and frowardnes of his wife:
the wife with the fastnes, or hastines of her husband. Those Magistrates, and
Ministers, which are too cold and backward in good things, must bear with the
over great heat, and forwardnes, of their fellowmagistrates, or
fellow-ministers: and those must bear with Luther and Melancthon were happily
joined together, and did bear with one another, Luther with his softnes,
Melancthon with his hastines; he with his boldness, he Melancthon did well
temper the heat and zeal of Luther with his mildnes, being as oil to his
vinegar; and Luther on the other side, did warm his coldness, being as a fire
to his frosennes. Thus the Apostle commands, that we should bear with the
infirmities of those that are weak, and not sufficiently catechized in the
doctrine of our spiritual liberty purchased unto us by Christ, and not to
please our selves too much, but rather to please our neighbor in that which is
good to edification. Romans 15. v. 1, 2. For amongst other properties of love
reckned up by S. Paul, 1. Cor. 13. this is not it suffers all things, v. 7.
that is, all such things as may be borne and suffered with good conscience, for
the good of our brother. For look as a lover, does suffer all things in regard
of his love, in three respects. First, in undergoing any labor that may be for
her good, as Hercules did for the love Omphale. Secondly, in bearing patiently
all hard measure that is offered him for her sake, as Jacob did for the love of
Rachel. Thirdly, in enduring any thing that is imposed upon him, and putting up
what wrong soever is done unto him by her, as Sampson did for the love of
Dalilah. So Christian charity pro fratribus, to endure any labor, cost, or
travel, for their good. Secondly, propter fratres, to bear all afflictions
for their sakes, as Paul says he did for the Church. 2. Tim. 2. 10. Thirdly, a
fratribus, to bear wrongs, and put up injuries at their hands, as he did,
being shamefully Philippi, stoned, scourged, etc. This must be considered of
us all, but specially of such as will give a man as good as he brings, who are
but a word, and a blow: a lie, and a stab: a word, and a writ: such as cannot
bear coals, (as they say) nor brook any little wrong, nor endure any small
frailty in their brethren. These men must remember, that in bearing coals,
that is, in suffering, and forbearing, they heap up coals of fire upon their
heads, (as Paul speaks, Romans 12. 20.) as also that God does bear with them
in greater matters, even when they wound him with their oaths, Leuit. 24. 11.
and give him the lie thorough (...). Act. 13. 18.
to follow has borne our infirmities, Esa. 53. and does ease them that
travel, and are heavy laden. Matthew. 11. 28. and therefore we treading in his
steps, must forbear one another, and forgive one another, if any man have a
quarrel against another, even as Christ forgave us. Coloss. 3. 13. Thus, if
when we see any sin in our brother, we reclaim him from it, by reproves,
exhortations, admonitions, we are Gods instruments, to save a soul from death,
and so do cover a multitude of sins, even before shall cover a multitude of
sins before men. 1. Pet. 4. 8.

Thus much touching the rule. Now I proceed to the reason, whereby the Apostle
urges the practice of this precept, in these words, And so fulfill the law of
Christ. The reason stands thus: That which is the fulfilling of the law of
Christ, must be practiced of us: but the bearing of one another burdens,

I. It may be demanded, what the Apostle understands by the law of Christ?
Ans. Nothing else but the doctrine, precept, A new commandment give I unto you,
that ye love one another, as I have loved you, etc. And it is all one, as if he
had said, Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the commandment of
Christ, who has after a special manner Law, then Commandment, because he
would make a clearer antithesis betwixt the law of Christ, and the law of
Moses, so vehemently urged by the false Apostles: as if he should have said,
You Galatians are taught to observe the Law of Moses, circumcision, days, and
times, months, and years, and so ye do indeed. Well, if ye will needs be
observing of Laws, here is a law for you to observe, bear with the frailties
one of another, and so you shall fulfill the most excellent law that ever was,
the law of Christ, which is necessary to be kept, whereas the keeping of the
Ceremonial law is

II. Quest. Why does Paul call the love of our brethren, the law of Christ,
rather then the law of nature, or the law of God, or the law of Moses? seeing
it was written in the mind Ans. It is so called, because it is a new
commandment given by Christ himself, after a special manner. But it is
hereupon further demanded, why this as he has loved us. Now this manner of
loving our brethren (as Chrysostom expounds Cyril of Alexand. upon John,
expounds it, it stands in this, that as Christ loved this is a new
commandment, that ye love one another, and never adds, as Christ loved us:
the which he should [as I have loved you] be an essential part of the new
commandment, which he enioyneth us to observe.

Besides, our Savior himself says, a little after, By this shall all men
know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another, not as I have loved
you: therefore, the new commandment is laid down in these words, Love one
another, not respecting those that follow, as a modification or limitation, as
I have loved you. Besides, this exposition takes it for granted, that the
moral law, Love thy neighbor as thy self, is a certain rule, by which we
are to square our love, vz. that we must begin at our selves, and look how much
we love our selves, so much we ought to love our neighbor, and no more, and
that therefore Christ should give a new commandment of greater perfection, then
that in the law, to wit, that we love one another as he loved us, that is,
more then our selves. But this is a flat mistaking of the scripture: Love thy
neighbor as thy self, is no exact rule whereby we are to try and examine our
love, (as the Popish doctors, and some others teach). For then Paul and diverse
of the Saints of God, should have done works of supererogation, more then the
law requires, in loving their neighbors Thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2.
Sam. 18. 3. for ^s, is a note of similitude, and (...). Theophylactus. Sic Hugo
de S. Victor. lio. quast. in Epist. ad Rom q. 308.
not of equality, signifying, that as we love our selves heartily,

Others, by a new commandment, understand another diverse or different
commandment; for Christ in the beginning of the Chapter, had given them a
commandment to fly pride, to be humble, to live at peace, and concord one
with anther: and then he says, But I give you a new commandment, i. (...)
that ye love one another.

The word New is often taken in scripture in this sense, as Exo. 1. 8. There
arose up a new king which knew not Joseph: that is, (as the 70 interpreters,
and S. Luke, Act. 7. 18. translate it) another king. Mar. 16. 17. they shall
speak with new tongues, that is, other, diuer^, or different languages, from
their usual tongue: for (...).
the meaning is not, that they invented a new language, which was never spoken
before, but that they spoke in a language diverse from that which they used
before: for so it is said, Act. 2. 4. They began to speak with other
tongues: Thus our Savior (...).
Christ tells his Apostles, that he will not drink any more of the fruit of
the vine, till he drink it n^we with them in the kingdom of God, Matthew. 26.
29. Where by new wine, he means not the liquour or juice of the grape, to
preserve animal life: but another different drink, wherewith he would
entertain

I take it therefore to be called a new commandment, either in respect of
Christ, or of us: in respect of Christ two ways: 1. Because he renewed it, not
only by freeing it from the a new commandment. 2. Because he abrogating the
ceremonial law, and many judicials, only renewed this precept of the moral
law, in commanding it as his law to the Church. Ioh. 15. This is my
commandment, that ye love one another, as if he should say. Though I have
abrogated a new commandment, and that in two respects: 1. Because it being
defaced, and almost clean blotted out of the mind of man by original sin,
is renewed again in the hearts of believers, by the powerful operation of the
spirit of God, both in their minds, and affections: In their minds, because
viz. not only their friends, but even their enemies: with what kind of love, to
wit with a ^eruent love, not in word, or tongue only, but in deed, and truth:
and that with free, sincere, and constant love in their wills, and affections:
in that they are persuaded by the inward working of the spirit, to love: and
are inclined thereto, being renewed by grace. 2. Because it does after a
peculiar manner belong unto us, who are under the New Testament, in the
kingdom of grace, seeing that this commandment only is renewed by Christ, as
his own proper commandment, all old things pass away, and all things become
new, 2. Cor. 4* For to them, the law is no killing letter, written in tables
of stone; but a quickening spirit, as being written in the fleshly tables of
it is true in him and in you* in the sense before specified: both in regard of
Christ, and the believers in Christ.

III. Quest. Seeing the commandment of loving our brethren, is called the law
of Christ, and a new commandment, is not the Gospel a new Law? Ans. In no
wise: for albeit the Law and the Gospel agree in sundry things, as first in
the Author, God being the author of them both; of the Gospel. in two respects.
1. Because by faith we apprehend the righteousness of Christ, and so in him
(who has fulfilled the law for us) we fulfill it, and so establish it. 2.
because having our hearts purified by faith, we live no more according to the
flesh, but according to the spirit, and so by inchoa^e obedience we fulfill the
law.

Lastly, in the end, in that both the law and the gospel tend directly to the
manifestation of the glory of God.

Yet they differ in 5. things. First, in the manner of revealing: the law
before the fall was perfectly known by nature, and Those things which the eye
has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor the heart of man conceived, are they
which God has prepared for them that love him: therefore the Gospel is called
a mystery, Romans 16. v. 25, 26. First, We have not received the spirit of the
world, but the spirit of God, that we might know the things that are given to
us of God* 1. Cor. 2. 12. Secondly, in the subject or doctrine it self, and
that in two respects. First, the Law preaches nothing but absolute justice, to
the transgressors thereof: the Gospel shows from all things from which ye
could not be absolved by the Law of Moses, by him every one that believes is
justified, Act. 13. 39. Secondly, the Law teaches what manner of men we ought
to be, and what we ought to do, that we may come to eternal life, but shows
not how God has made him to be sinn^ for us, who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2. Cor. 5. 21.

Thirdly, in the object, The law is given to the vni^st and lawles, ungodly,
and profane, 1. Tim. 1. 9, 10. that it may show them their sins, and the
punishment thereby deserved, and so may accuse and condemn them: the Gospel is
to be published and dispensed only to the penitent, which are contrite and
broken in heart, and mourn for their sins. Math. 11. Esaias, 57. Luke 4.

IIII. The law promises eternal life upon condition of works: Do this, and
live: If thou wi^^ enter into life, keep the commandments. The Gospel
promises eternal life freely without any condition of works. Romans 4. 5. To
him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted to him for righteousness. Romans 3. 21, 22. The righteousness of
God is made manifest without the law, by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all,
and upon all that believe.

V. In the effects. The Law is no isntrumental cause, of faith, repentance, or
any saving grace: it is the minister of death. causing wrath. Romans 3. 15. But
the Gospel causes life: it is the grace of God which brings salvation. Tit.
2. 11. for this cause Paul calls the Law, a dead, or killing letter: the
Gospel, a quickening spirit. 2. Cor. 3.

Fourthly, it may be demanded, whether any man be able to fulfill and so fulfill
the Law of Christ? Ans. No mere man can perfectly fulfill the Law in this
life. This conclusion S. Paul proves in sundry of his Epistles, specially by
these arguments.

First, by the great and general deprauation of nature, which remains in
part even in the regenerate, stayning their best actions, and making them like
a menstruous cloth: confessing withal, that his best works are not
answerable to the law, by reason of the remainders of original corruption. He
that offends in one, is guilty of all: and the that abides not in all
things written in the book^ of the law to do them. Popish Doctors answer,
first, that original corruption (which they call the fuel of sin) and the
first motions to evil, preventing ^omes (...)
all consent of will, are indeed in the regenerate; but primo primae, or
secundo primae, (as Schoolmen speak) or it forbid does nothing but the
motions, which are with consent of will, which were forbidden in the former
commandments, and so in effect there are but nine commandments, the tenth
forbidding no special sin.

Again, Paul teaches, that these motions preventing all consent of will, are
formally opposed to the Law, I see another law in my members rebelling against
the law of my mind. Secondly, Romans 7. 23.
they answer, that Paul, Romans 7. speaks not of himself, but in the person of
the unregenerate, according to the opinion of S. Augustine. Ans. Augustine
indeed was once of that Retractations, and the 6. book, against Julian the
Pelagian,) and that for these reasons. First, because Paul says, To will is
present with me: and I do not the good I would: and J delight in the law of
God concerning the inward man: the inward man, which is all one with the new
man, or the new creature: which agrees only to the regenerate. Thirdly,
because he says, he is led captive to sin, v. 23. whereas the wicked O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? v.
24. which can viatores, which is sufficient: though they be not perfect for the
condition comprehensores, which is not required at our hands in this life: for
they make a double perfect fulfilling of the law: one, for the term of this
life, which is to love God above all things, and our neighbor as our selves.
The other after this life, and that is to love God with all the soul, with all
the powers and faculties of the soul, and with all the strength and vigor of
all these powers.

And this distinction they make to be the ground of their opinion, touching the
fulfilling of the law, and justification by works, etc. But it is a sandy
foundation, and therefore that He which continues not in all things written in
the Law to do them, is accursed. So that he which loves not God with all his
soul, mind, and might, with all his valde suo, that is, with all the
faculties of his soul, Cursed is he that continues not in all things, etc. is
not only given to men glorified, but to those that are in the state of grace.
And S. Paul does so apply this sentence to men even in this life, t(...) he
pronounces all that are of the works of the law, to be under the curse.
Again, if this were so, the Jews had no cause to fear If we hear the voice
of the Lord any more, we shall die: considering Exodus 20 Deuteronomy. ^8.
they were able to keep and fulfill it, according to this Popish opinion.
Neither would God have promised them a Messiah or Mediator to redeem them
from the curse of the Deuteronomy 13


Besides, the patheticall exclamation of Paul, O miserable man that I am, etc.
Romans 7. 24. and that saying of Peter, in calling the Law a yoke, which neither
we nor our fathers were able to bear, Act. 15. should be childish, and
ridiculous, if that which is impossible in the law (as Paul speaks) did not
appertain unto Romans 8. 3.
us.

The third argument. If a man could fulfill the Law, he should not stand in
need of a Mediator. For if righteousness be by the Law, Christ died in vain.
Gal. 2. 21. It is answered, that Christ died in vain, if men by the strength
of nature could fulfill the Law: but the fulfilling of the Law is by he is made
unto us righteousness. we are made the righteousness of God in him. 2. Corinthians.
5. 21. not by him, as an instrument. That we are complete in him. Coloss. 2.
10. and not complete of our selves, by him.

Lastly, the Scripture shuts up all men under sin, even the most
sanctified. Prou. 20. 9. 1. Ioh. 1. 9. Job confesses he cannot answer one of a
thousand. Job 9. 3. and David says, If thou, Lord, shall mark what is done
amiss, who can abide it? Psalm. 130. 3. and Paul says of himself, that he
found no means to perform that which is good. Romans 7. 18. He says further,
that it is impossible to be kept, by reason of original corruption. Romans 8. 3.
It is answered, that all these places and examples must be understood of
venial sins, which make men sinners indeed, yet are not against, but beside
the law; and therefore Ans. the common received opinion in Schools, that some
sins are mortal, others venial of their own nature, is a witless
distinction. For if all sins deserve death, as Paul teaches, Romans 6. 23.
either venial sins are no sins, or Moses says, that he that abides not
in all things written in this Law, is accursed. Deuter. 27. 26. where the
words, this Law, may not be restrained only to the Catalogue of great and
heinous sins, which are there reckened up, but extended to all sins, as
Paul applies it, Gal. 3. 10. pronouncing him accursed, that continues not in
all things written in the law, not this law. So that every sin, even the
least sin in thought, makes a man subject to the curse, and so in rigor of
divine justice deserves eternal death. And it is but a poor shift, to say
that some sins are against the Law, as all mortal sins, and others
besides the Law, as venial. For the doing of that which God forbids, is a
sin not beside, but against the Law. But idle words, jesting, and gibing,
etc. (which the Popish Doctors account venial sins,) are expressly
forbidden in the word; Of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give account at the day of judgment. And Paul forbids all foolish talking,
and ^esting, as things uncomely, Ephesians. 5. 4. Therefore they are not beside, but
flat against the law. Secondly, they answer, that these places and the like
are to be understood of several works and actions of the Saints, Answ. It is
false. For Paul speaking of the same individual work, says, I find when I
would do good, that evil is present with me, Rom 7. 21. In my mind I serve
the law of God, in my body the law of sin, v. 25. And the Prophet says,
that all our righteousness is as a menstruous cloth, Isay 64. 4. Therefore
every good work is stained

Thus much shall suffice to show that it is impossible for any man in the time
of this life to fulfill the law: The reasons alleged to the contrary, are
sufficiently answered before, Page 188. etc. To which place I refer the

It may further be said, if we cannot perfectly fulfill the law, why does Paul
command us to bear one another burdens, and so to fulfill the law of Christ?

Answ. The law is said to be fulfilled three ways. First, by personal
obedience, and thus Christ only fulfilled it. Secondly, by imputed obedience,
thus the regenerate fulfill it in Christ, he being their righteousness. 1. Cor.
1. 30. and they complete in him, Coloss. 2. 10. Thirdly, by inchoate obedience,
thus Zachary and Elizabeth are said to have walked in all the commandments of
the Lord, without reproof. Luke 1. 6. And thus all the faithful fulfill the
law, in laboring to obey God in all his commandments; according to the
measure of grace received: and thus we are said to fulfill the law in this
place, God accepting the will for the deed. We are further to consider, that
fulfilling of the law is sometime opposed to the transgression of the law, the
end of the law for righteousness, to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4.
Sometime it is opposed to hypocrisy, and dissimulation, inchoate obedience, to
what end serves it? Answ. It has a threefold use even since the fall. First,
it serves to restrain the outward man, by keeping men in order, through fear
of punishment, of which use Paul speeketh, the law is not given to a righteous
man, but to the lawless and disobedient, etc. 1. Tim. 1. 9. Secondly, to
arrouse the drousie conscience: and this it does many ways. 1. By revealing
sin, for by the law comes the knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 20. 2. By
revealing the wrath and anger of God for the law causes wrath, Romans 4. 15. 3.
By conuicting the conscience of sin. When the commandment came, sin
revived, Romans 7. 9. 4. By arraigning and condemning us for sin, for the law is
the minister of death, 2. Cor. 3. 7. and so putting us out of all heart in our
selves, it causes us to fly to the throne our schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ. Gal. 3. 24. Thirdly, it serves as a rule of good life: David says,
that the word of God (specially the law) is a lantern to his feet, and a
light to his paths, Psalm. 119. 105. So that though a regenerate man be not
under the law, in regard of justification, or accusation, or Bear ye one
another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ: the word S O has great
Emphasis, for it implies the manner how the Galatians, and all men are to
fulfill the law, not by observing circumcision, days, or times, months, or
years, as the false Apostles taught: but by bearing, forbearing, and
tollerating the infirmities of their brethren. It may not unfitly be applied to
the religious orders of Franciscans, Dominicans, Carthusians, etc. Let them not
think that they keep S O they shall fulfill the law of Christ.

v. 3. For if any man seem to himself, that he is somewhat, when he is
nothing, he deceives himself

In this verse the Apostle remooues an impediment, which hinders most from
performing the former duty, of bearing He that seems to himself, etc. where
by the way we may observe the method of the Apostle, first, to give rules of
direction; after, to remove impediments which may hinder our obedience. 2. We
see here the force of the word, which searches the secrets of the heart, Ebr.
4. 12. in that it casts down the imaginations, and every high thing that is
exalted against the knowledge of God: and brings into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ, 2. Cor. 10. 4. In the words we may observe
these four things: 1. That men are nothing of themselves. 2.

For the first: it may be demanded how it can be truly said, that men are of
themselves mere nothing? Is he nothing that is created after the image of God,
in holiness and righteousness? Are Princes and Potentates nothing that are
called Gods in scripture? Are they nothing that Prophecy, and work miracles?
Answ. Paul speaks not of the gifts of God, bestowed upon men, but of the men
themselves: and of them, not as

For first, all are by nature the children of wrath, and firebrands of hell. 2.
the gifts of God bestowed upon us whether of nature or of grace, are not ours,
but Gods, the giver of them. If thou have received them (says Paul) why
boastest thou thy self, as though thou had not received them? 3. Be it
(...). Damaseenus.
himself to be. 3. Though he have some gifts and graces of God, yet is he
nothing, because he is far short of that which he ought to be. 1. Cor. 8. 2.
Upon these considerations dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27. David comparing himself
with the magnificence of Saul, says, What am I, or, what is my fathers house?
1. Sam. 18. 18. Nay whether we consider man absolutely in himself, or
relatiuely in respect of other creatures, as those glorious bodies, Lord what
is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou
regardest him? Psalm. 8. 4.

Paul confesses himself to be nothing, in, of, or by himself: but by the
grace of God (says he) I am that I am, 1. Cor. 15. 10. And again, I was
nothing inferior to the very chief Apostles, although I am nothing. 2. Cor.
12. 11. The Apostle affirms of every man, which thinks he knows some
thing, that he knows nothing as he ought to know. 1. Cor. 8. 2. and of many,
that they are puffed up and know nothing. 1. Tim. 6. 4. For a swelling conceit,
and emptines, usually go together.

The second general thing to be observed in the words, is this, That it is
natural for men to think too well of themselves, to magnify themselves above
others in their conceits, and in a manner to deifie themselves: and to nullify
others in comparison of themselves: and this ouerweening of a man's Narcissus
are in love with themselves, and do^e upon their own gifts; judge the vices
which they see to be Simon Magus though a wicked wretch, a limme of the Devil,
a sorcerer, etc. yet had this conceit of himself, and gave it out also, that
he was some great man. Act. 8. 9. to wit, the great power of God. v. 10. The
Church of Laodicea, thought she was rich, and increased with goods, and had
need of nothing: whereas she was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked. Apoc. 3. 17. And so the skarlet stru^pet thought her self a
Queen, and that she was out of all danger of downfall, when she was
already fallen. Apoc. 18. 2, 7. Yea this corruption is so natural, that even
the regenerate knowledge puffs up. 1. Cor. 8. 1. The Apostles which of them
should seem to be the greatest. Luke 22. 24. Yea in all ages there have been
some in the Church ouerweening themselves, as in Christ's time the Iustitiarie
Pharisees: after them, the Catharists, or Puritanes, who both proudly and
odiously called themselves by that name, thinking themselves without sin: the
Donatists, that they were a Church without spot or wrinkle: the Iovinianists,
that a man cannot sin after the lauer of regeneration. The Pelagians, that
the life of a just man in this world, has no sin in it at all: and of later
times the Semi-Pelagian heretic, who will Ans. So did the Pharisie, Luke 18.
11. and yet a wicked Iusticiarie for all that. Now all this arises from
sundry causes: the first is, the

The second is, the overmuch considering the good things

The third is, the comparing of our selves with the infirmities that we see to
be in others: the Pharisie was puffed up, by

The fourth is, the false flattering, and applause of men, which sooth us up in
our humors, in persuading us to be that which in truth we are not, as the
people flattered Herod, The voice of God, and not of man. Act. 12. 22.

The third point is, that they which thus ouerweene their gifts, in thinking
themselves somewhat when they are nothing, do notably deceive themselves: as
those that think Like as an hungry man dreameth and behold he eats, and
when he awaketh his soul is empty: or like as a thirsty man dreameth and lo
he is drinking, and when he awaketh behold he is faint, and his soul longs.
Men are deceived two ways, either by others, or by themselves: by others, as
by flatterers, they are deceived occasionally; by themselves, causally, or
properly. For he that does judge himself to be that which indeed he is not,
he may happily please himself, but he does but please himself in an error:
for in truth he deceives himself in his imagination: (...)
the Apostle James says, If any man seem (specially to himself) to be
religious, and yet refraineth not his tongue, he (...)
deceives his own heart, his religion is vain, Iam. 1. 26. So likewise,
deceive their own selves, Iam. 1. 22. And verily this corruption (...)
is so great, that as men can be content to be deluded by flatterers, and
clawebackes, which please them in their itching Alexander the great, being in
India, caused his soldiers, Plutarch. in Alexandro.
an extraordinary greatness; hudge spears, massy shields, big helmets, long
swords, and other furniture for horse and man, fitting rather Hippocentaurs, or
Giants, then men of ordinary stature; and all to the end, it might be said in
future time, that Alexander was a mighty Monarch indeed: So many there be, who
(setting the fair side outward) make goodly glorious shows in the eyes of
men; and so would have other to think of them accordingly, (far above their
desert,) that posterity might judge them to be that which indeed they are not:
and so Alexander in deceiving others, they wittingly deceive themselves. Which
spiritual guile of deceiving our selves in matters touching our salvation, is
most dangerous, when men delude themselves, in persuading themselves falsely,
that they know sufficient, that God is to be loved above all, our neighbor vz.
in the knowledge of themselves, and that which is yet more, in a matter of
greatest moment, in the salvation of their souls. What marvel therefore is
it, that men should be deceived by the seducer of all seducers, the devil, who
are so easily deceived of themselves, or rather willing to deceive themselves.

Further observe, that proud conceited persons, such as have an ouerweening of
themselves and their gifts, and of all men think foul scorn to be deceived,
even they are easiliest deceived, yea and that of themselves: for so the
Apostle says, He that thinks that he is somewhat, etc. deceives himself in
his imagination.

Again, mark hence, that no men, be their gifts never so rare, their callings
never so high, their places never so great, are to good to bear other men's
burdens; for they that think themselves to be somewhat, some great men, that

Lastly, consider that this selfe-conceitednesse, and ouerweening of a man's
self, is the very bane and poison of love; Non been convenient, etc. maiestas
and amor. It may may be said, may not he that is privy to his own virtues, in
conscience of his own worth, judge himself to be somewhat, that is, to be
that which indeed he is, or to have a greater measure of knowledge, grace, and
other gifts, then they that have less?

Answ. He may. For humility is not sottish: the master in humility cannot
think his scholar more learned then himself, except he shall think against
his conscience. For that saying, Let every man think better of another, then
of himself, Phil. 2. 3.
in regard of their inferiors. Secondly, I answer, that the Apostle in that
place, speaks not of the gifts and graces bestowed upon men, but of the
persons themselves, and Let every man think another more learned, wise,
discreet, sober, then himself (for so he may think against his conscience)
but Let every man think another (that is, any other that is his brother in the
better then himself, to wit, before God. And this every man may do with good
conscience; for albeit another shall outwardly seem more ignorant, negligent,
backward, in matters of religion then himself, yet for any thing he knows, he
may be higher in the favor of God, then he. And therefore Publican accounted
the proud Pharisie better then himself. For he held him as just, himself not
worthy to look up to heaven: yet herein he sinned not, nay he is commended
Pharisie. And so if the Pharisie had reputed the Publican better then himself,
that is, higher in Gods favor then himself, he had not sinned, nor done
against his conscience. For though he might judge himself more just then the
Publican, in regard of his life past, David knew in the particular quarrel
betwixt Saul and him, that Saul was unjust, and he innocent, yet if he should
have thought better of Saul in general, then of himself, he should but have
done his duty.

The fourth and last point, contains the remedies of this evil, which are
the rather to be considered, because it is a great sin, one of those seven
which the Lord does most of all detest, Prou. 6. 17. a dangerous sin, having
a heavy woe attending upon it, Woe to them that are prudent in their own
eyes. Isa. 5. 21. a sin almost incurable, See thou a man that is wise in
his own eyes? there is more hope of a feel then of him. Prou. 26. 12.
therefore the remedies are more carefully to be known, and applied. The
remedies are specially five.

The first is, to look our selves in the glass of the Law, which will show
what we are without flattery, or partiality: and to deny our selves, as
Christ's commands, but even to abhor our selves, repenting in dust and ashes,
as Job did, chap. 42. 6. causing us to become flat nothing in our selves, that
we may be something in Christ, as Paul says, 1. Let no man deceive himself:
If any man among you seem to be wise in this world, let him be a fool, that
he may be wise.

Secondly, when we feel our selves to be tickled with the itching humor of
self-love, and selfe-liking, arising from our hidden corruption, either in
regard of outward gifts, or inward

Thirdly, we must consider that the things for which we look so high, and
swell so in our own conceits, are not our own: but lent us for a time. For
what is there, that thou have not received? whether in gifts of body, or
graces of mind? nay whether thou speak of soul, or body it self? and if
thou have received it, why boastest thou thy self as though thou had not
received it? what vanity is it, for a man to be proud of another man's garment?
or for a woman to boast of her borrowed hair? The wicked persecutors of the
Church are reproved for sacrificing to their nets, and burning incense to
their yarne. Hab. 1. 16. Further, we must consider we have not only received
Give an account of thy stewardship. Luke 16. 2. Therefore we ought not so much
to be puffed up with the greatness of our talents, as to be humbled with the of
him, to whom much is committed, much shall be required.

Fourthly, to the end we may avoid this ouerweening of our selves, let us
compare our selves with the majesty of God, in to him ene^y knee does Phil.
2. 10.
bow, of things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, and thou will not be
so conceited of thy self, that a silly man does to him every tongue does
confess, and sing v. 11.
his praises, the blessed angels crying continually Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
of Sabbath, heaven and earth are full of thy glory: and then a short blast of
wind, or popular applause, shall not so easily puff thee up, like an empty
bladder, or carry us, in every gift and blessing of God, in regard of whose
honors and preferments we are but base and contemptible: in regard of whose
knowledge, we are but children, and know nothing: in regard of whose riches, we
are but beggars, and have nothing. For as David, when he beheld the wonderful
frame of the heavens, those glorious creatures, the sun, the What is man that
thou are mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou Psalm. 8. 4.
visitest him? So when we compare our selves with others, that

4 But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself only, and not

Here the Apostle lays down another remedy against self-love, and
ouerweening of our selves, and it is the fifth and Let every man approve his
own work. And he gives two reasons, why every man ought then shall he have
rejoicing in himself only, and not in another: the second, in the next verse,
for every man shall bear his own burden.

Touching the remedy. Let every man prove his own work. The word translated
(...).
prove, signifies also to approve, as Romans 14. 22. Blessed is he that
condemns not in himself in the thing that he approoueth. 1. Cor. 16. 3.
Whosoever ye shall approve (...)
or allow of by letters. And so the word is used in English, when (...)
we say such a one is to prove a will, that is, approve it.

The word in this place (I take it) may be understood in both senses, to prove
our works and to approve them. How we are to prove our works by taking
trial and examination of them, I have already showed in the former verse. But
we are further to approve them to God according to Paul's commandment, study
to show thy self approved unto God. 2. Tim. 2. 15. and his practice, in
coveting always to be acceptable unto him. 2. Cor. 5. 9. This approouing of our
works is a sovereign remedy against ouerweening of our selves, for he that
alwaise stands upon his trial, and Gods approbation, cannot be puffed up

Now we shall approve our works unto God, if we observe Who required these
things at your hands?

Secondly, that we perform all our actions sincerely and uprightly, as in the
presence of God, with an honest heart, and a good conscience: as Abimelech
protests of himself, Genesis 20. 5. and Hezekiah, Isay, 38. 3. and Paul, Act.
23 1.

Thirdly, that they always tend to a good end, as the glory of God, Whether ye
eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10
30. and the good of our brethren, Let all things be done to edification, 1.
Cor. 14 26.

It may here be demanded, whether we may not approve our selves, and our
actions to men? To which I answer that we our light should so shine before men,
that they may see our good works. And Paul bids us to procure honest things
in Math. 5. 16.
the sight of all men. And whatsoever things are true, and honest, Romans 12. 17.
and just, and pure; whatsoever appertain to love, and are of good report, we
must think on them, and practice them, Phil. 4. 8. Yet we must seek for the
approbation of men, with these cautions.

First, we must so seek for the approbation of men, as that we do not seek
it, nor rest in it alone, but withal seek to be approved of God. For he that
praises himself (and so consequently, is not approved, but he who^e the Lord
praises. 2. Cor. 10. 18. How can ye believe (says our Savior Christ) which
receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes of God
alone? Ioh. 5. 44.

Secondly, we must seek for the approbation of God in the grew in favor first
with God, and after with men. Luke 2. 52. and the Elders, who by faith obtained
a good report. Hebr. 11. 2. read Romans 14. 18.

Thirdly, we must never look for the approbation of the Woe be to you, when
all men speak well of you. Luke 6. 26. Thus Christ says, He sought not praise
of me^. For those that are addicted to popular applause, and are over curious
of their Ioh. 5. 41.
credit, immoderately seeking to get and keep a good name with all sorts of
men, while they seek for fame they loose a good name, in seeking fame from the
wicked, which is but a shadow, and loosing a good name in the opinion of the
godly, which is the substance.

Fourthly, we must so far seek for the approbation of the wicked, that we
minister, no not the least occasion of offense unto them. 1. Cor. 10. 32. Give
no offense, neither to the Jew, nor to the Gentile. but to convict their
consciences, and to stop their mouths by our godly and unblameable
conversation, which Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they
which speak evil of you, as of evil doers, may by your good works which
they shall see, glorify God in the day of the visitation.

Fifthly, in doing our duties, we must not respect the judgment of the world,
neither fearing the faces, nor the censures of men. This was Paul's practice. 1.
Cor. 4. 3. I pass very little to be judged of you, or of man's judgment: we
must go through good report, and evil report. 2. Cor. 6. 8.

Lastly, we must seek to be approved of men, not so much in regard of our
selves, as that, by this means Gods glory may be more and more advanced: for
our light must so shine before men, that they may see our good works, and
glorify our father, which is in heaven. Matthew. 5. 16. If we observe these six
cautions,

Thus much of the Remedy. The reason follows, And then shall he have whereof
to rejoice in himself, and not in another. (...).
rejoice, signify, to glory: which is more then to rejoice. There is a double
ground of glorying: one, out of a man's self: another in himself. Out of
himself, in God alone, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the
strong man in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches. But let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me. Ier. 9. 23, 24.
1. Cor. 1. 31. In himself, in the comfortable testimony of a good conscience.
Our glorying is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity,
and godly pureness, we have had our conversation in the world. 2. Cor. 1. 12.
The one, is For no flesh can glory in his presence. 1. Cor. 1. 29.

It will be said, This glorying in a man's self, is vain glory, and a branch
of pride. Ans. It differs from vain glory: first, in

Object. Paul reprooues those that consider their own gifts only, never
comparing themselves with others. 2. Cor. 10. 12. They understand not that they
measure themselves with themselves, and compare themselves with themselves.
Therefore it seems that a man, by comparing himself with others, may have
whereof to rejoice. Ans. He reprooues the false Apostles in that place for
glorying in the gifts which they had, and the number of Proselytes which they
had won, never comparing themselves

Further, we may rejoice, or glory in the testimony of a good conscience, if
we observe these rules.

I. In our best desires, endeauours, actions, we must labor to feel our own
defects: that we do not the good we should, nor in that manner we ought.

II. We must labor to have even our best works, (our alms, prayers, etc.)
covered with the righteousness of Christ: offered with the prayers of the Saints
upon the golden altar. Revel. 8. 3.

III. We must acknowledge all the good things we have, the will and the work,
the purpose and the power, to proceed

IIII. We must rejoice in them, not as causes, but as fruits of justification:
so that if the question be whether we be justified by them, or not? we must
renounce them, tread them under our feet, and account them as dongue, as Paul

Hence we learn sundry things.

I. That if we would have a light heart, and pass our time merrily with
comfort and content, we must look to approve our hearts to God in all our
actions.

II. It contutes the opinion of the multitude, who judge those that make
conscience of sin, and lead a more strict life then the common sort,
endeavoring with Paul to have always a clear conscience toward God, and
toward men, of all Act. 24. 26.
others to lead a most melancholic, sad, and uncomfortable life. For the
truth is, this is the only true joy, all other joy is but counterfeit in
comparison: it is radical, proceeding from the heart: the other but
superficial, from the teeth outward: it comforts a man in the midst of
afflictions: whereas a man may have the other, and yet in the midst of mirth
his heart a continual feast. Prou. 15. 15. and Peter calls it joy unspeakable,
and glorious. 1. Pet. 1. 8.

III. This shows, that there is much false joy in the world, consisting wholly
in honors, profits, pleasures: none of which have their ground in a man's
self: and therefore being out of a man's self, they are not true and durable,
but false and vanishing joys. Now those which have no comfort but out Think
not to say with your selves, we have Abraham for our father etc. Mat. 3. 9.
Fourthly, such as rejoice and think themselves in a good case, because they
see others worse then themselves: this is right the Pharisees joy, O God I
thank thee, I am not thus, and thus, or like this Publican. Luke 18. 11. This
is it which the Apostle directly aims at in this place: when men think
themselves

5 For every one shall bear his own burden.

Here Paul lays down a second reason of his assertion, in the former verse,
why every man ought to prove his own work, rather then to be curious in
searching into the lives, and skanning the actions of other men, because every
man shall bear his own burde, which is all one with that Gal. 5. 10. to bear
a man's own judgment: and that Romans 14. 12. to give an account to God for
himself. It is a prouerbiall speech, the meaning whereof Every man that eats
the sower grape, his teeth shall be set one edge. And by that which is common
amongst us, Every vessel shall stand upon it own bot. to^e: that is, every man
shall bear the punishment of his own

For the better understanding of the words, sundry questions

First, it may be demanded, how every man should bear his own burden, seeing
we are commanded to bear one another burdens? Ans. There are two sorts of
burdens. The first is, of giving an account to God: thus every man shall bear
his Onus rationis ^^dden ^ae^onus inf^^mitatis participandae. August. contra
^cript. Petil. lib. 3. Beda and Lumbard i^ hunc ^ocum Hugo d^ S. Victor. in
(...). qu^st. 58.
own burden, for every man must give an account for himself unto God, Romans
14. 12. The second is, of bearing one another infirmities, of which Paul
speaks, verse. 2. In this sense a man is not to bear his own burden: but
every man his brothers. For the Apostle (to cross the opinion of those which
thought a Every man shall bear his own burden. And to meet with the
carelessness of others, who respect themselves alone, never minding the good of
their brethren: he says, Bear ye one another burdens.

II. Object. By bearing of our own burdens, is understood His blood will I
require at thy hand. Hebr. 13. 17. They watch over your souls, as they that
must give account. Answ. Governor: and superiors, are not to give account for
the sins of those that are committed unto them: but for the sins which
themselves commit, in not looking unto them, not admonishing them, not
restraining them, not taking condign punishment of them for their offenses.
This is plainly If thou do not admonish the wicked of his way, he shall die
for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at the hand. Nevertheless, if
thou warn the wicked of his way, to turn from it, if he do not turn from his
way, he shall die for his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul.

III. Object. Infants which have not sinned after the manner of the
transgression of Adam, do bear the burden of Adams sin: therefore all do
not bear their own burden. Ans. First, the words are properly to be understood
of personal, or actual sins, which are proper to every man in particular,
In se^^inali principio.
when he sinned, we also sinned, as the Apostle says, Jn whom all sinned,
Romans 5. 12. For so the words are in the original, and (...).
not as it is commonly translated, for as much as all men have sinned.

IV. Object. In the second commandment, the Lord threateneth to visit the
sins of the Fathers upon the children, to Ans. The clause in the second
commandment, of visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children, does
not contradict that of Ezekiel. 18. 19. The son shall not bear the iniquity of
the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son; the same
soul that sins, that shall die. For they are reconciled, v. 14, 17. If he
(that is, a wicked man) begette a son that sees all his fathers sins,
which he has done, and fears, neither does the like -- he shall not die in
the iniquity of his father, but shall surely live. Therefore the threatening in
the second commandment, is not to be understood absolutely, as though God
would always plague the children for the fathers sin, but conditionally, if
they persist and continue in their sins, walking in their ways, and treading
in their steps. upon those that hate him. It may be said, The sins of the
parents are not vindicated upon the children, because the punishment inflicted
upon their posterity, is not felt of the parents. Ans. First, children are (as
it were) a part of their parents, and therefore they being punished, their
parents are punished with them. Secondly, it is a corrasiue and a torment to
parents, to know th^^ their children shall be severely punished and afflicted

Object. V. Numb. 25. 4. The chiefest of the Israelites were hanged up before
the Lord, for the fornication and idolstrie, Ans. They were punished for their
own sin, for they consented to worship the idol, and commit folly with the
daughters of Moab: or r^ther were principal ringleaders, and first actors in
this Commick-tragedie, as may appear by the practice of Zimri Prince of the
family of the Sime^nites, v. 6. in bringing C^sbie a Madianitis^ woman, into
his tent, in the sight of Moses, and the whole congregation. Therefore because
they did not hinder them from committing this fact, as they might, being in
place of government, but did partake with them in the sin they are first
punished, and that more severely: for a thousand there fell in one day 23
thousand. 1. Cor. 10. 8. meaning of the common sort, excluding those that were
hanged

Object. VI. David sinned in numbering the people, and they were punished for
his sin: Achan sinned, and the people fell slain before the men of Ai:
therefore every man does not bear his own entire burden. The like may be said
of the Ans. The people were punished for their own sins: and so was David,
albeit not in his own, but in their persons: for God punished him in his kind,
in destroying the people with that fearful it is Gods mercy, that we are not
consumed. Lam. 3. 22.

And albeit all the infants perished in the Deluge, and in the overthrow of
Sodom and Gomorrha, which could neither imitate, nor approve the actions of
their forefathers: yet their death was deserved. For though infants be truly
called innoc^^ts, in regard of actual sin: yet they are not innocents in
regard of original: for from the womb they carry a woluish nature, which
prepares them to the spoil, though they never did hurt: the Scorpion has his
sting within him, though he do not always strike: and though a Serpent may be
handled whilst the cold ^ath benumbed him; yet when he is warmed, he will hiss
out his venomous poison. Man's practice does blood defiles the land, which
cannot be cle^sed of the blood that was shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it. Numb. 35. 33. And thus Achans sin, though not known to the
people, made the whole army guilty before God, till he was put to death.
Josh. 7. 11, 12. Lastly, if the tithing of an army, for the offense of some
few, have been thought lawful Decima^io ^x^rci^^s.
and just: why should the death of 36 men seem unjust for the August. lib.
quaest. in Josh. q. 8. and Calvin in 7. cap. ^osh.

Object. UII. If every man must bear his own burden, David shall as well
bear the burden of his murdering Vrias, by the sword of the children of
Ammon, as Saul the murdering of himself with his own sword, Peter his
denying Christ, as Judas his betraying him, etc. Ans. By the sentence of a yoke
(as Peter says) which neither we, nor our fathers, were able to bear. Act.
15. Secondly, from the burden of miseries, and crosses, which sin, that is,
accounted a sinner, and 2. Cor. 5.
made a sacrifice for sin, for us: as also by easing them that are heavy
laden, in pacifying the perplexed conscience. Matthew. 11. 28. It will be said,
if Christ bear the burden of our sins, every man shall not bear his own
burden. Ans. Both be true, and may well stand together: for Legally, every man
is to bear his own burden, the Law requiring personal obedience, or
satisfaction, or both. Euangelically, Christ our surety does bear the burden
of them, and satisfy the justice of God for them. 1. Pet. 2. 23.

Use. Hence we learn, first, that no man can pay a ransom

Secondly, here we see the nature of sin, that it is a burden like a gri^^ous
burden, too heavy for him to bear. Psalm. 38. a burden unto him, that he was
weary to bear it. Isa. 1. 14. Behold, I am pressed under you, a^ a cart is
pressed that is full of sheaues. Amos 2. 13. To the creatures, who groan under
this burden, being by man's sin subject to vanity,

Thirdly, we are not to wonder, that sin being so heavy

Fourthly, this shows that the more a man does feel the burden of his sins,
the greater measure of grace and spiritual life he has: and the less he
feels it, the more he is to suspect

Fifthly, by this we see, that the greatest part of the world are dead in their
sins, in that they have no sense nor feeling of this heavy burden. There is
indeed great crying out of the stone in the reins, because it is felt to be a
great ^orment to the body: but there is little or no complaining, of the stone
in the heart, because men want spiritual life, and sense to discern it. All
men can take pity upon a beast, if he lie under his burden, and will be
ready to help him up again. But all have not the like sight and sense of the
spiritual burden of sin, not sympathy of the misery of their brethren,
groaning under it.

Sixthly, whereas Paul says, Every man must bear his own burden, he meets
with the profaneness and Atheism of our time, when men make a mock at the
day of judgment, and the strict account that every man is to give for
himself. The Jews were wont to ^east at the threatenings of God, denounced
o^us Iehouae, the burden of the Lord, in a merriment, using it a^ a byword.
Ierem. 23. 34, 36, 38. Thereby signifying that the threats of God, were but
vain bugs, or scarre-crowes, which might perhaps terrify children, but could
not heart them. The

Seventhly, we are here admonished to take heed of every sin, for there is
no sin so small but has his weight, and such a weight, as will press down
to the bottomless pit, To. 6. 23. And though some be greater then others, and
sink a man deeper into condemnation, yet many small sins will as easily

Eighthly, seeing the guilt and punishment of sin, is so heavy a burden, we
are to ease and disburden our selves thereof. Ephialtes or mare, feeling (as it
were) a great mountain lying upon them, and pressing them down, would give all
the world the weight might be removed. So we feeling the weight and burden of
our sins, are to labor to be disburdened and eased thereof: and this we
shall do by our repentance toward God, and faith in Christ. Math. 11. 28. Come
unto me all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you.

ver. 6. Let him that is taught in the word, make him that has taught him
partaker of all his

In these words the Apostle lays down an other rule touching the maintenance
of the ministry, and competencie of allowance, for the ministers of the word:
for it seems that the

In handling of the rule, I will first show the meaning of the words;
secondly, the reasons of the rule: thirdly, the objections against it: lastly,
the doctrine, and uses, that are to be gathered

The meaning.

Let him that is taught] The word translated taught, signifies (...).
him that is catechized, or taught familiarly, by word of mouth, or lively
voice, as when children are taught the first (...) id est, (...).
taught and instructed, whether it be in the first principles, and rudiments,
or in points of greater difficulty; whether plainly, and familiarly, (as
catechizers use to do:) or more profoundly,

Taught in the word] What needs this addition (may some say) is there any
catechizing without the word? Answ. The Apostle adds in the word, to show
that he means not so much the doctrine of Christian religion, contained in
the scriptures, exoche, or peculiar excellency, is called the word. Act. 16.
6. They were forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia: which is
expounded, v. 10. to be the preaching of the Gospel: Thus it is used, Act. 14.
25. when they had preached the word in Perga. Mark. 4. 14. The sower sows the
word. And so in sundry other places. And it is further called the word of the
kingdom, Matthew. 13. 19. because it teaches what is the kingdom of grace, and
glory: and because it being believed, or (as the Apostle speaks) being
mingled with faith in our hearts, does make us freedenizens of the kingdom
Heb. 4. (...).
the word of God, because he is the author of it, and no creature, man, or
angel, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13. Thirdly, the word of salvation, Act. 13. 26. because it
shows the way and means of attaining salvation. word of life, Act. 5. 20.
because it does not only show the narrow way, that leads to eternal life;
but is in it self a lively word, and mighty in operation, Heb. 4. 12. For as
the powerful word of God in the beginning, did give being to things that were
not; so the Gospel (being the power of God to salvation,

Make him that taught him] q. d. catechized him. Yet as before it must be taken
generally for any kind of teaching, or instruction; for so the word is used
else where in scripture, as

Partaker of his goods] By goods he (...) Oecumen.
understands food, raiment, lodging, books, and other necessaries without
the goods, according to the common opinion, which so judges of them. Luke 12.
19. Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years. Luke 19. 25. Son,
remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy good things.

Make them partaker] That is, communicate, affoard, give unto them these
temporal things, seeing they give you spiritual.

Of all his goods] Not in giving all away, but imparting to their teachers what
they stand in need of, accounting nothing

There are four principal duties, which the people are to perform to their
Pastor, three of them are recorded else where in Scripture. The first is, to
hear them as Ambassadors sent of God, with reverence. The second is, to obey
them, and submit 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13.
themselves unto them in the Lord. The third, to love and Hebr. 13. 17.
honor them for the work sake. The fourth, the Apostle (...). These. 5. 13.
speaks of in this place, to give them not only countenance, but also
maintenance.

The reasons of this rule are many and weighty.

We are bound (even by the bond of nature) to maintain our parents if they be
in want; because they maintained us, and gave unto us our being: Paul says,
It is an honest thing, and acceptable before God, for children to recompense
their parents and progenitors, 1, Tim. 5. 4. Now if this be so, men are bound
by the same right to maintain their spiritual fathers in Christ, that have
begotten them a new by the preaching of the word: as Paul says, He traveled
in pain of the Galatians, till Christ was formed in them. Gal. 4. and that he
begat Onesimus in his bonds Philem: v. 10. And 1. Cor. 4. 15. In Christ Jesus I
have begotten you through the gospel. Hence Paul commends the Galatians, Gal.
4. 15. for that if it had been possible, they would have plucked out their
cies, and have given them him. And surely Aibeit I do not say unto thee that
thou owe unto me, even thine own self.

II. It is a law of nations, and a conclusion grounded upon Beware that thou
for sakest not the Levite, so long as thou live on the earth.

III. Every trade, calling, and condition of life, is able to maintain them
that live therein (as experience shows:) therefore we may not think, that the
ministry, being the highest calling, should be so base, or barren, as that
it cannot competenly

IV. The ministers are the Lords soldiers, his captains, and
standard-bearers, and therefore are not to go a warfare 1. Cor. 9. 7.
at their own cost: the Lords laborers in his vineyard, and therefore are
worthy of their wages, and ought to eat of the fruit of the vineyard: the
Lords shepherds, set over the flock of Christ to feed his sheep, and
therefore ought to eat of the milk of the flock. And seeing it was forbidden
that no man should muzzle the mouth of the ox, that treads out the Deuteronomy. 25.
4.
come: shall we think, that God would have those that thresh in his floor,
and separate the wheat from the chafe, the precious 2. Cor. 9. 9, ^0.
for they are worthy double honor, that is, all honor, reverence, help, and
furtherance, which labor in the word and doctrine. 1. Tim. 5. 17.

V. The Ministers are to give themselves wholly to reading, exhortation,
doctrine, and to continue therein. 2. Tim. 4. 13, 15, 16. they are wholly to
deuote themselves to the building of the Church, and to the fighting of the
Lords battles: and therefore not to be entangled with the cares of this life.
2. Tim. 2. 4. therefore

VI. It is the ordinance of God (as Paul says, 1. Cor. 9. 14.) that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: therefore those that do not
their endeavor, and enlarge not

I add further, it is the will of God, that the Ministers which labor in the
word and doctrine, should be plentifully and liberally provided for: (yet with
moderation, that they draw not all men's wealth into their purses, as the Pope
and Church of Rome have done into their coffers, of whom it is truly verified,
Religio peperit divitias, sed filia devoravit matrem.) which I prove from the
Leuiticall law: for the whole land of promise, being no bigger in compass
then Wales, or the fourth part of England: yet yielded unto the Levites, at the
appointment of God, besides the share which they had out of the sacrifices,

It may here be demanded, whether the Ministers of the word are now to be
maintained by common contribution, and liberality of the people, or not?

Ans. We must consider, that if the Ministers be sufficiently provided for, by
set stipends, as by some foundation, or by the revenues of the Church, men are
not bound to contribute unto them, and make them partakers of all their goods;
although in regard of thankfulness, they owe unto them even themselves, as Paul
tells Philemon; but only such as have not else

And that it is much more convenient for the Ministers to be maintained by set
stipends, arising from goods proper to the Church, then by voluntary
contribution, it may appear

In the next place, I will answer the common objections that are made to the
contrary, by such as think it is as easy a matter, to say service in the
church, as to do service in the house: to stand at the altar of God, as to
follow their masters plough; to preach in the pulpit, as to talk in the
tavern.

I. Object. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. They which will not work, must not eat. But
Ministers never plow, nor sow, nor hedge, nor ditch, nor use any painful
labor: for of all men they have the easiest lives: their greatest pains is to
read over a few books, or to speak a few words, once or twice a week.
Therefore they are not to be maintained. Ans. There is a twofold labor, one of
work of the ministry. Ephesians. 4. 12. nay, a worthy work. 1. Tim. 3. 1.
therefore Paul says, that those Elders are worthy double honor that labor
in the word and doctrine. 1. Tim. 5. 17. and he exhorts the labor among them;
and that they have them in singular love for their works sake. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12,
13. Hence it is that the Scripture does usually compare the work of the
ministry, to the most toylsome labor that may be, as to the work of the
husbandman, to were idle, and did nothing: he stands not to the tackling, he
stirs not the pumpe, he drives not the oars, he sounds not the deep, he
rides not the ropes; but only sits still at the stern, and looks to the
pole-starre, and guides the compass; yet his labor passes all the rest:
were it not for him, the ship would run her self under

II. Object. Paul labored with his hands in making of Tents, Act. 18. 3. that
he might not be chargeable to any, Act. 20. 34. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8. Therefore
Preachers are to maintain Ans. Paul's example proves not, that the minister
ought to live by the labor of his hands: for first, himself received a
contribution of the Philippians, when he was absent from When I was in
Thessalonica ye sent once, and afterward again for my necessity. Therefore if
Paul received exhibition from other churches, where he did not labor, it is
lawefull for the ministers to receive of those whom they do instruct.
Secondly, consider the reasons why Paul would not We wrought with labor and
travel, day and night, because we would not be chargeable to any of you. 2.
Cor. 11. 9. In all things I kept and will keep my self, that I should not be
grievous unto you. II. That he might Not but that we had authority, but that
we might make our selves an example to them to follow us. III. That he might
manifest what his end was in teaching the Gospel, not to seek himself, but
the salvation of his hearers. 2. Cor. 11. 14. I seek not yours, but you. And
verse. 19. We do all things for your edification. Not that I desire a gift, but
the fruit which may further your reckening. IV. That he might confound the
false Apostles, which taught not freely, but received wages for their labor,
whereas he received none: or lest they should, slander him and his ministry,
if he should receive wages: that he did it for filthy lucre. 2. Cor. 11. 12.
But what I do, that will J do, that I may cut away occasion from them which
desire occasion, that they might be found like unto us in that wherein they
rejoice. Therefore Paul's example is altogether impertinent, and proves nothing.
For 1. he himself took wages: 2. when as he refused

III. Object. Math. 10. 8. Freely ye have received, freely give: therefore as
it was unlawful for the Apostles to take any reward Ans. I. This text is
specially to be understood of the extraordinary gift of working miracles,
which Christ having freely bestowed upon them, he would have them to use
freely, not seeking thereby to enrich themselves by exacting or taking any
thing, Thy money perish with thee, because thou think that the gift of God
may be obtained by money, Act. 8. 20. 2. Because it is not in man's power to
sell them, seeing he is not Lord over them, but steward and dispenser of them,
1. Cor. 4. v. 1. 3. Because that which God has given freely, ought not to be
sold basely: seeing by that means, that is made saleable, which God would have
free, it cross not other precepts in this commission, and that Christ be not
contrary to himself, which he should be, if it were unlawful for preachers
to take any thing for their pains: for in the 10. verse he says, The workman
is worthy of his meat: therefore he may receive it: and verse 11. he enioyns
them to enquire in every town where they came, who is worthy, and there abide.

IU. Object. Math. 10. 9. The Apostles are forbidden by Answ. We may not
precisely urge the letter of the text, for so we shall make the Apostles
practice contrary to Christ precept: and so he should condemn himself, for
he had his bag, which Judas bare. He had But now he that has a bag let him
take it, and likewise a s^rip, etc. II. It was a temporary precept, given them
in commission only

Use. Here we see that there are two sorts of men in the Church, some teachers,
others to be taught, called in scripture teachers and hearers. The ground of
this distinction, is taken God might have all the glory of it, as the Apostle
speaks, 2. Cor. 4. 7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of that power, might be of God, and not of man. There is setdown,
Deuteronomy. 5. v. 23. etc. a notable ground for the institution of the holy
ministry by man, in stead of Gods lively voice They have done well to say so,
I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and I
will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I
command him. Deuteronomy. 18. 17, 18. This crosses the curiosity of those, who not
contenting themselves with the word of God delivered by the ministry of man,
desire that God would speak unto them with his own mouth from heaven. For the
Israelites found it by experience, they may hear it no more, lest they die.
Deuteronomy. 18. 16. But the Anabaptists object that under the N. T. all shall be
taught of God. Ioh. 6. v. 45. and Ier. ^1. 34. He^. (...). (...).
they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lord. Therefore the public ministry is now needless. Ans.
The words must not be understood simply, but comparatively, and
synecdochically. Comparatively, that there shall be far greater knowledge
under the new Testament, then was under the old. Isa. 11. 9. The Apostle says
Synecdochically, not of perfect and absolute knowledge, for we all know but in
part, 2. Cor. 13. 12. But of initiate, or inchoate knowledge, which shall be
consummate in the life to come.

Further, upon this distinction it follows, that hearers are not to
intermeddle with the public duties of the ministry, for every man is to
abide in the calling wherein God has placed him, and therein to live
contented. 1. Cor. 7. For no man may take unto himself this honor, but he
that is called, as was Aaron, Heb. 5. 4 For albeit it be true which Ambrose
writes, that in the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel, and founding I^
comment. (...) (...) ^d Ephesians.
male nor female in Christ, but we are all one in him, Gal. 3. 28. namely, in
receiving of the Gospel: yet in dispensing of it, there is great difference: it
being unlawful for a woman to preach, or publicly to teach. I permit not a
woman to teach, 1. Tim. 2. 12. Let women keep silence in the Churches, for it
is not permitted unto them to speak, 1. Cor. 14. 34. Apoc. 2. 20.

Again, when Paul says, He that is taught in the word, etc. him that taught
him in the word, etc. he shows what the duty of the minister is, that looks
to live by his ministry, namely, not to feed his auditorie with Philosophy,
or fables, or lying Legends: nor to preach Poetical fictions, Thalmudicall
dreams, Schoolemens quiddities, Popish decrees, or humane the word of God: for
there is no word nor writing in the world besides, that has a promise to be
the power of God to salvation. Romans 1. able to make babe, that is, a nouice in
religion, and strong meat for him that is of years: and therefore being
perfect nourishment, the bread of life for him that is hungry, and the water
of life for him that is thirsty, what needs there any more? Besides, no word
nor writing has the property of fire save only the word of God, to dispell
the darkness of ignorance by enlightening What I shall command thee, that shall
thou say. And the Apostles, You shall teach what I have commanded you. Christ
himself taught nothing but that which he had heard and received of his father.
that they teach no 1. Tim. 1. (...). (...) nec aliud, vt Bez^, nec ^liter, vt
vulg ed^^io.
diverse doctrine, either for matter or manner, for substance or circumstance.
Yet here we must take heed of extremities: for in some cases it is lawful in
preaching to use Philosophy, the testimony of profane writers, and
quotations of Fathers.

I. When we have to deal with heathen men (who will not be so easily moved
with the authority of the Scriptures) Aratus, Act. 17. 28. and the Cretians,
by the testimony of Epimenides. Tit. 1. 12.

II. In preaching to a mixed congregation, where some are infected with Popery,
or some other heresy, and will not receive the doctrine delivered, nor yield
unto the truth, except it have the consent of the fathers of the Church.

III. In handling of some controuersall point of divinity,

IIII. To cut off the calumniations of the malicious adversaries, who must
needs have their mouths stopped by some other means then by the Scriptures.

V. In the necessary unfolding of the meaning of certain places of Scripture,
which without Philosophy cannot be conceived. In such a case we may use
humanity in descending to

This shows, that the maine scope of the ministry, is, to preach the word
purely, and to apply it powerfully to the consciences of men: and it condemns
all deceitful handling of the word, and all huckster-like dealing, in mingling
wine Volusi^n. epist. 1. ad Nichol. 1. Scripturarum mammillas du^ durius
press^rnnt, sanguine^ pro lacte biberunt.
press the two dugges of the Scriptures, the old and new Testament, itching
ears, in heaping up to themselves a multitude of teachers, take heed also
that they have not tingling 2. Tim 4 3.
ears, when they shall hear of the judgments of God for (...). Sam. 3. 11.
the contempt of his word.

Further, whereas Paul says, He that teaches, is to be maintained: Item for
all idle drones that will not labor, and all dumme dogs that cannot bark,
they may not expect the maintenance which is due unto the Ministers: for it is
ge nerally true of all men, and much more true of the Minister, that he which
will not labor, must not eat. And great reason it is (...). These. 3. 10.
that he which looks for his hire, should do his work: he that would live
of the sacrifice, should minister at the altar: he that looks to be fed with
corporal bread, should break 1. Cor. 9.
unto his hearers the bread of life: he that would reap carnal things should
sow spiritual things: he that would not have his Canon law, but grounded upon
the law of nature, that beneficium postulat officium, a benefit requires a
duty: or more plainly, a benefice requires an office, and diligence in the
office. They therefore that c^re not so much for the feeding of the sheep, as
for the feeding of themselves, and fear not so much the loss of the flock,
as the loss of the fleece, do not only violate

Again, hence I gather, that those that labor in the word and doctrine, may
lawfully take wages, albeit they have sufficient of their own to maintain
themselves: it is the very equity the labourer is worthy of his wages. Yet
this one caveat must be remembered,

We may here further perceive the great want of devotion, fools, and such
like, are very lavish and profuse, to their great cost. This has been the
practice of the world, and the contemptible estate of the Ministry in former
times. Four hundred false prophets were richly provided for at Iezabels table,
1. King. 18. 19. whereas the true Prophets of God in the mean time were feign
to hide their heads, having scarce bread and What shall we give the man of God?
1. Sam. 9. but now with the sacrilegious Church-robbers, they say, Come, and
let us take the houses of God in possession. Psalm.

Lastly, if they that do not put too their helping hand to

7 Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall
he also reap.

Here the Apostle preuenteth sundry secret objections against we dente the
faith, and are worse then infidells. 1. Tim. 5. 8. others, are poor and
needy, fitter a great deal to receive, then to give: and those that can give
are not so to give, that others may be eased, and they themselves pinched. 2.
Cor. 8. 13. And as for the Ministers themselves, many of them are covetous and
insatiable, and therefore it is evil spent that is bestowed upon them: some of
them need not, and therefore we need not to give: and why do not those that
are needy, follow Paul's example, who labored with his

To these and all other vain and frivolous excuses of the same kind, made by
worldlings of corrupted minds, the Apostle answers in these words, Be not
deceived, God is not mocked, deluded with such vain excuses: therefore take
heed lest in going about to deceive them, you deceive your selves: for look
how you deal with them, God will deal with you: and with what measure you
mete unto them, the same he will measure to you again; for as you sovve, so
shall you reap. So that in these words the Apostle does summarily comprise Be
not deceived. Secondly, a reason of the dehortation, showing that these their
excuses are but frivolous and vain, God is not mocked. Thirdly, a confirmation
or proof of his former reason, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall be
reap. The disswasion is laid down in these words. Be not deceived. The like
phrase of speech we have in sundry other places, as in that advertisement which
Hezekiah gives the Levites. 2. Chron. 29. Now my sons be not deceived. And
Paul the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 6. 9. be not deceived, neither fornicators, etc.
1. Cor. 15. 33. be not deceived, evil speeches corrupt good manners. Now men
err and are deceived sundry ways, both in divine and humane things (which
appertain not to this place.) Touching Malach. 2. 17.
when a man is persuaded that God is to be worshipped in an image: that when he
persecutes the saints of God, he does God

Use. Hence we may observe the deceitfulnes of sin, which makes men think
all is well with them, and that there is no danger, etc. when the case is far
otherwise. This shows that the heart of man is deceitful above measure (as
the Prophet says) who can find it out? or who can sound the depth of the
deceit of his own heart? or who knows the infinite windings and turnings which
are in this intricate Labyrinth? Now this comes to pass, partly by reason of
original corruption, which the Apostle says is deceitful, Hebr. 3. 13. Take
heed lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin: partly, by
reason Blessed is the man -- in whose spirit there is no guile. For from this
double ground it comes to pass, that men are so witty in defrauding the
Ministers of their due, in cutting Let no man deceive you with vain words:
for, for such things-commeth the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.

Again, hence I gather, that in the prime of the Church in the Apostles days,
when the Church of the New Testament by this means to Christ our head, who was
not only neglected of all, not having where to rest his head, Luke 9. 58. but
laughed to skorne, accounted a pot-companion, a drunkard, and a glutton, a
sorcerer, one that had a devil, and was mad, Ioh. 10. 20. For if we suffer
with him, we shall be glorified with him. Romans 8. 17.

Thus much of the dehortation: the reason follows to be considered in the
second place, in these words, God is not mocked, where the Apostle shows that
their excuses are but vain, because God is not mocked, nor will not be deluded
with such

First here the Apostles dealing is worthy to be observed, in that, reproouing
them which neglected their duty to the ministers of the word, he brings in
God himself taking the matter into his own hand, making the ministers
quarrel, his own quarrel: and this he does, to the end we might see whom
against God, yea against him alone. Psalm. 51. 4. yet in these and such like
cases which tend to the undermining of his Church, and the decay of his
religion and worship, he takes himself more directly aimed at, and more
nearely touched. When the Israelites refused to have Samuel and his sons to
They have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should not
reign over them 1. Sam. 8. 7. When the Levites were defrauded of their due,
the Lord by his prophet tells the people, Ye have spoiled me in tithes and
offerings, Mal. 3. 8. So, in this place, when the Galatians did Caveat unto us,
to take heed how we contemn or neglect the ministers of God, seeing
whatsoever wrong is done them, Christ takes it as done to himself, Matthew. 25.
45. Act. 9. 4. This lets us see the heinous sins of many that profess the
Gospel, specially in this kind, who, now at this day (if ever) are ingenious in
defrauding, and eloquent in declaiming against the ministers of the word: in
laughing them to skorne, as they did our Savior Christ, Mark. 5. 40. and
abusing them balde pale, (no doubt following the example of their parents, of
whom they learned it) ascend thou balde pate, ascend thou balde pate, 2. King.
2. 23. that they are too full of the spirit, as they derided the Apostles, in
saying, they were full of new wine, Act. 2. 13. in making them their table
talk, making songs of them, as the drunkards did of David, and Jeremy. In
scourging them with the whippe of the tongue, as the Stoics called Paul a
babbler. Act. 17. 18. and Festus, a mad man, Act. 26. Now in that they thus
scornefully abuse his ministers, O virgin daughter of Sion, he has despised
thee, and laughed thee to skorne: O daughter of Jerusalem, he has shaken his
head at thee. Whom have thou railedon, and blasphemed? and against whom have
thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the holy
one of Israel. Esaias, 37. v. 22, 23.

The use. Hence we learn, that God has an exact knowledge of all our actions,
and cannot be deluded, Prou. 15. 11. Hell and destruction are before him, how
much more, etc. Psalm. 11. 4. His eyes consider, his eye liddes try the
children of men. Psalm. 139. v. 2. He knows our thoughts long before they be.
Hebr.

II. This shows the madness of those which say, God

III. Hence we are taught in our prayers, to power forth our hearts before the
Lord, without concealing so much as the least sin, seeing we may easily
delude men, and deceive our selves, but God we cannot deceive.

IV. It ought to be a bridle to us to curb and keep in our corruptions,
considering his eyes pierce the darkness, the most secret and hidden places,
yea even the secret closets and cabinets of our hearts.

Thus much of the reason: I proceed to the confirmation or proof of his
reason, in these words, For whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap.
Where the Apostle proves, that God will not be mocked with vain excuses,
seeing he will render sowing and reaping so often used in Scripture, as 5. Cor.
9. 11. 2. Cor. 9. 6. in which places, labor and cost in doing good, and being
beneficial, specially to the ministers of the word, is compared to seed; the
workers to seedsmen; the ministers to whom this benefit is conferred, to the
tilled ground: the gain that accrewes unto them thereby, to the harvest,
wherewith God will reward them, and that according to their works, in the
general day of retribution. This metaphor of sowing, does elsewhere signify
all the moral actions of a man's life, whether they be good or evil. Of good
actions He that sows righteousness, has a sure recompense, Prou. 11. 18. Of
evil actions, he says, He that sows iniquity, shall reap affliction.
Prou. 22. 8. But here Paul restraines it, to those good works of liberality,
which are performed in the maintenance of the ministry. And he calls that
which is seed, which being sown, does recompense the cost, thirty, sixty,
an hundred fold: that so they might not think their labor lost, nor their cost
bestowed in vain, seeing they were to receive, that which they laid forth,
with advantage.

But here it may be said, This prouerbiall sentence is not alwaie true: for
sometime men sow much, and gather but little, Deuteronomy. 28. 38. Agg. 1. 6. nay
sometime they sow, and reap not. Mich. 6. 15. Again experience shows, that,
that which is sown, may Ans. It is not necessary that prouerbiall sentences
should be true at all times, and in every particular: if they be true for the
most part, or in that for which they are brought, it is sufficient, as that,
Matthew. 13. 57. a prophet is not accepted in his own country is for the most
part true, though not always. So, whatsoever a man sows, the same commonly,
and usually, he does reap.

But it will be said, how can a man reap that which he sows; seeing that
Christ affirms it to be a true saying, that one sows, and another reapeth?
Ioh. 4. 37. Ans. In that one sows, and another reapeth, it is not to be
imputed to nature, but to sows not the body that shall be, 1. Cor. 15. 37.
Therefore he reapeth not that which he sowed. Ans. He reapeth not the same
individual, but yet the specificall body. It may further be doubted of the
truth of that which is signified by this prouerbiall sentence, namely, whether
every man shall receive according to his works, for so every man should be
condemned. To which I answer, that it is not universally true, for if the
righteous commit iniquity, all his righteousness shall be no more remembered:
and, if a wicked man turn from his sin, none of his sins that he has
committed shall be mentioned unto him, Ezeck. 33. 13, 16. It must therefore be
restrained thus. He that does wickedly, and perseuereth therein to the end:
He that does well, and continues in well doing, Come ye blessed of my father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you, for I was hungry, and ye fed me, etc.
their sins and imperfections, not so much as once named, but concealed and
passed over.

II. Object. It may be said, that neither the good nor the bad do reap that
which they have sown: the godly for the seeds of good works, reap nothing but
affliction: the wicked for the cursed seeds of a damnable life, comfort and
contentation.

III. Object. The whore of Babylon must be rewarded double. Apoc. 18. 6. In the
cup that she has filled to you, fill her the donble. And the Saints pray
thus to God, Render to our neighbors seuenfold into their bosom. Psalm. 79.
12. Therefore it seems that some men shall not be judged according to their
works, because they are punished above their deserts. Ans She is rewarded
double, yet not above, but according to her deserts, give her double according
to her works, v. 6. the meaning is not, that she should be punished twice as
much as she had deserved (for it is the law of God that the malefactor should
be beaten with a certain number of stripes, not above, but according to his
trespass. Deuteronomy. 29. 2.) but that she should be tormented, rewarding double,
or seven fold, signify, that God will pay wicked men whom to the full (a
definite number being put for an indefinite) as Genesis 4. 15. Doubtless,
whosoever slaieth Cain shall be punished seven fold.

IIII. Object. Infants have no works whereby they may be judged, seeing they
do neither good nor evil, as the Scripture speaks of Jacob and Esau, Romans
9. 11. therefore all shall not be judged according to works. Ans. These
phrases of Scripture, As a man sowes, so shall be reap: every one shall
receive according to his works, etc. are not to be extended to all, but must
Hugo de S. Vict. does, upon the Romans quaest. 59. that they shall be condemned
for the sins which their parents committed in their conception and nativity,
as though they themselves had actually committed them, is contrary to that
Ezekiel. 18. 20. the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father.

U. Object. But how shall they be pronounced just, who being come to years of
discretion, yet have no good works, as Lazarus, and the thief upon the cross,
who living leudly all his life long, was converted at the last gasp? Ans. That
Lazarus Lazarus by reason of his Abraham to sacrifice his son, as though he
had sacrificed him indeed. Genesis 22.

VI. Object. God does not proportionate the reward to the work, because he
does reward works which are finite and temporal, with infinite and eternal
punishment. Ans. Sin being considered in respect of the act, as it is a
transient action, is finite. But in a threefold confideration, it is infinite.
First, in respect of the object against whom it is committed: for being the
offense of an infinite Majesty, it does deserve infinite punishment: in
infinitum, committing of sin even with greediness.

Thus having the meaning of the words, let us come to the seed, to teach us
that as the husbandman does sow his corn in the ground, never fearing the
loss thereof, but hoping for a greater increase: not doubting his own want,
but assuring himself of greater the last judgment is the harvest; and that as
certainly as the husbandman which sowes his seed looks for increase, so we for
our good works, a recompense to the full; O how fruitful should we be, how
plentiful, how full of good works? But the cursed root of infidelity, which
is in every man by nature, they lend unto the Lord, and whatsoever they lay
out, the Lord will restore to them again. Prou. 19. 17. For if they were as
well persuaded of a recompense at the last day, as the husbandman

Further let it be observed, that though these words be but generally expounded
in the verse following, where the Apostle says, He that sows to the flesh,
shall of the flesh reap corruption* ^e that sows to the spirit, shall of the
spirit reap life everlasting: yet are they more particularly and distinctly set
down elsewhere in Scripture: as 2. Cor. 9* 6. He that sows sparingly, shall
reap sparingly, and he that sows liberally, shall reap liberally: that is,
the For every man shall receive his reward according to his proper labor. 1.
Cor. 3. 8. For the more the husbandman sowes, the more he does usually reap
(except shall be easier for them of Sodo^ and Gomortha at the day of judgment,
then for them of Capernaum. Secondly, that there are sundry degrees of glory
and felicity in heaven, proportional to men's works: for all men do not sow
alike, neither are their works equal; but have sund^^e degrees of goodness in
They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and they that
turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for evermore. Therefore
as there Every man shall receive his reward, according to his own labor,
therefore seeing all men's labors are not alike, their reward shall not be
alike. This is further confirmed by the parable of M(...). 20. 1^.
it is true of essential glory, all the elect shall have equal glory: but
it is not true of accidental glory, therein all shall not equal. Take
sundry vessels of diverse bigness, and cast them essential glory: though in
respect of accidental glory, some shall have more, and some less. Secondly,
the scope of the parable is not to show the equality of glory, kind, in the
quantity, and in the quality. In the kind; in that some are more noble in
their kind, some more base; as to cure the maladies of the soul is a more
excellent work in it kind* then to cure the diseases of the bod^e: and
therefore it has a greater degree of glory prom^^ed. Dan. 12. 3. They that
turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for evermore. In the
quality, or manner, in that some are done with greater love, some with less:
some with greater zeal, some with less: some with greater care and Every man
shall receive his wages according to his own labor. 1. Cor. 3. 8. In the
quantity, in

Further, as God does reward the good works of his servants, according to the
kind, the quantity* and quality: so he rewards It is a just thing with God
to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. Thus he threatens that to
the froward he will show himself froward. Psalm. 18. he that sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Genesis 9. 6. And, all that take the
sword, shall perish by the sword. Matthew. 26. 52. And, he that stops his
ears at the cry of the poor, shall cry unto the Lord, and he will not hear
him. Pro. 21. 13. And, judgment merciless shall be to him that shows no
mercy. Iam. 2. 13. And, Woe be to thee that spoilest, and wast not spoiled,
and do wickedly, and they did not wickedly against thee: for when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled: and when thou shall make an end of
doing wickedly, they shall do wickedly against thee. Esa. 33. 1. For with what
judgment men iudg^, they shall be judged, and with what measure they mere, it
shall be measured to them again. Matthew. 7. (...). Neither does God barely
threaten this, but he does it in deed; in handling sinners in their kind. Genesis
2. 17. Because thou have eaten of the tree, cursed is the earth for thy sake,
in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thus God punished
the filthy Sodomites in their kind, in that, for their burning lust he rained
upon them fire and brimstone from heaven. Genesis 19. 24. Nadab and Abihu censing
with strange fire, were consumed with fire from heaven. Numb. 10. 1, 2. The
like may be said of Adonibezek, for as he caused seventy Kings having the
thumbs of their hands, and of their feet cut off, to gather Agags sword made
women childlesse, so his mother was made childlesse among other women, being
hewn in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal. 1. Sam. 15. 33. Thus God punished
Absalom defiled his wives in the sight of all Israel, 2. Sam. 10. 22. and his
murder in slaying Vriah by the sword of the children of Ammo^, in that the
sword did never depart from his house. 2. Sam. 12. 10. Because the Grecians
accounted by the foolishnes of preaching to save the^ that believe. 1. Cor. 1.
21. Thus as Chrysostom. has observed, the rich glutton was met with in his kind:
for whereas he would not Epist. 3 ad Cyriac. ^icas c^dentes de me^sa non ded^,
quid miru^ si aquae guttam non accepit?
give Lazarus a crumme of bread to slake his hunger, god would a drop of
water to cool his thirst, Luke 16. and therefore he says, Hieme non seminavit
misericordiam, venit aestas and nihil messuit. Thus he punishes spiritual
fornication, with bodily pollution, because the Israelites went a whoring from
God, therefore their daughters became harlots, and their spouses whores. Hos.
4. 12, 13. And this is verified in the Church of Rome at this day: for as he
gave up the heathen to reprobate minds, by reason of their idolatry; so has
he given them up, as we may see in their unclean cloisters; their Sodomiticall
Stews, their beastly brothelhouses, and the like. So they that the redness of
the wine, shall have red eyes, as a punishment of their sin. Pro. 23. 30.
Thus God punished the pride of the women of Jerusalem: for in stead of a sweet
savor, there was a stink, in stead of agirdle, a rent, in stead of dressing
of the hair baldnes, in stead of a stomager, a girding of sack cloth, and
burning, in stead of beauty. Esa. 3. 24. And thus the Lord shut up every womb
of the house of Abimelech, because of Sara Abraham's wife. Genesis 20. 18. Thus the
wise man says, Because the Israelites worshipped serpents which had not the
use of reason and vile beasts, the Lord sent a multitude of unreasonable beasts
among them for a vengeance, that they might know, that wherewith a man sins,
by the same also shall he be punished. Wisd. 11. 13. And this manner of
punishing sinners in their kind, Job acknowledges to be most just, when he
says, If mine heart have been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait an
the door of my neighbor: let my wife grind unto another man, and let other men
bow down upon her. Job 31. 10, 11.

Use. First, here we see the justice of God in awarding the last sentence, nay
his bounty and severity: his bounty, in recompencing Romans 11. 22.
men above their deserts; his severity, in punishing a drop of water to
cool his tongue, Luke 16. 24. 25. so he will recompense any thing in mercy,
that will recompense a cup of cold water. Math. 10. 42. This integrity in
judgment without partiality, is signified by the white throne, Reu. 20. 11.
and it serves as a pattern and example for all Judges and Magistrates to
follow, in laying judgment to the rule, and righteousness to the balance, Esa.
28. 17. that is, in hearing causes indifferently, and determining equally,
examining them (as it were) by line and square, as the mason Leo and Libra,
thereby signifying that there must not only be courage in executing, but also
indifferency in determining. The Egyptians express the same by the
hieroglyphicall figure of a man without hands, winking with his eyes; whereby
the throne of the house of David, mentioned Psalm. 122. 5. which was placed in
the gate of the city toward the sun rising: in the gate, to signify that
all which came in and out by the gate of the city might indifferently be
heard, the poor as well as the rich, and might have access and regresse, too
and from the judgment seat. Toward the rising of the sun, in token that
their judgment should be as clear from corruption, as the sun is clear in
his chiefest brightness.

Secondly, this confutes the common opinion of the Schoolmen, supra meritum,
above their desert; so they erroniously teach that he punishes the reprobate,
citra condignum, less then they have deserved. For God powers upon the
wicked, after this life, the full violls of his wrath, punishing them in the
rigor of

Lastly, this doctrine seriously considered and thought upon, that we shall
drink such as we brew, reap such as we sow, and

Again, in that every one shall reap as he sows, that is, shall be rewarded
not according to the fruit and success of his labor, but according to his
labor, be it more, or less, better or worse: it serves (first of all) to
comfort the ministers of the at is hid to them that perish, in whom the God of
this world has blinded the minds of the infidells, that the glorious Gospel
of Christ should not shine unto them. 2. Cor. 4. 3, 4. Besides, let them yet,
that their judgment is with the Lord, and their work with their God. Isa. 49.
4. remembering that God will give to every man according to his work, according
to the kind, the quantity, the quality thereof: and not according to the
fruit, or success of his work.

It may serve also as a cordial to every man that is painful and faithful in
his calling, though never so base and servile, as to a shepherd of the Lord he
shall receive the reward of inheritance. Coloss. 3. 22, 23, 24. And the promise
is more general, Ephesians. 6. 5. Know ye, that whatsoever good thing any man does,
the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.

It serves further, as a comfort against inequallitie, whereas the wicked
flourish in all manner of prosperity, and the godly lie in contempt and
misery; for the time shall come, when every one shall reap even as he has
sown. When God will punish The patient abiding of the righteous shall not
perish for ever. And again, doubtless Psalm. 10. 18. Psalm. 58. 11.
there is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that judges
the earth.

Again, this condemns the damnable opinion of Atheists, who think all
things come to pass by nature, or fortune; and It is in vain to serve God,
and what profit is it, that we have kept his Malach. 3. 14.
comma^dements; and that we have walked humbly before the Lord of boasts* as
though good works should never be rewarded, nor sin punished: albeit the
Lord has said, Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to
every one as his works shall be. Apoc. 22. 12.

Besides, it meets with the practice of those men, which sow nothing but
cock^e, and yet expect a croppe of wheates or nothing but darnell, and yet
look to reap a barley harvest: that is, such as sow nothing but the cursed
seeds of a damnable life, and yet look to reap the harvest of eternal life:
for as a man sows, so shall he reap: such as he brueth, such shall he
drink; Every one shall eat the fruit of his own ways, and be filled with
his own devises, Prou. 1. 31.

It does further detect the folly of those which fraught the ship of their
soul, with nothing but faith, resting (in carnal presumption) upon a vain
opinion of faith, and never caring for good works: against whom Saint James
writes, chap. 2. v. 14. What avails it, though a man say he has faith, when
he has no works? can the faith save him? 20. Will thou understand, O thou
vain man, that faith which is without works is dead? We must therefore sow
the seeds of good works in this life, if after this life we look to reap
the harvest of eternal life: and give all diligence by good works to make our
calling and election

Lastly, it crosses the wicked conceit and imagination of those men, that
sing a requiem to their souls, in promising to I(...). 2. 24.
weary himself with following after these wild asses, used to the
wilderness, which snuff up the wind by occasion at their pleasure, and none
can turn them back, but will seek for them, and find them in their months,
that is, when their iniquity shall be at the full, the Lord will meet with
them.

8. For, he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but
he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

Here Saint Paul specifieth that in particular, which before he had delivered
in general, vz. what he meant by sowing, and reaping. And this he does by a
distribution, or enumeration of the kinds of sowing, and reaping: she wing,
that there are two sorts of seeds which men sow in this life good and evil.
Two kinds of sowers, spiritual men, and carnal men. Two sorts of If ye live
after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye mortify the deeds of the body, by
the spirit, ye shall live. Romans 8. 13. These two sorts of haruests

Tacianus the heretic, and author of the sect of the Encratites, does gather
from this and the like places, that marriage is Syricius, who reasons after
the same manner, to prove that Priests ought not to marry, because (says
he) they that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8. 8. where he
condemns all marriages as unclean Distinct. 82. (Understanding, as though
Paul should speak properly of seed and of the flesh,) But worthily was
Tacianus his opinion confuted, and he condemned for an heretic: for the
Apostle speaks not of the works of nature, but of corrupt nature which
ouerturneth marriage is honorable among Ebr. 23 3.
all men; (not the first only, but also the second, third, etc. and among
Clergy men, as well as others:) and therefore the marriage bed being
undefiled, that is, being used in holy manner, Catharinus in comment. in bunc
locum.
doctors, are enforced to confess. Lastly, Paul says not He that sows to
the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but, he that sows to his
flesh. etc. Now no man (except he be worse then a bruit beast) does abuse
himself by sowing to his own flesh. (as Jerome says upon this place.)
Others, by sowing to the flesh and spirit, understand the following after the
fruits of the flesh and of the spirit, mentioned in the former chapter, verse.
19. 22. But this exposition cannot stand in this place; because the illatiue
particle (for) in the beginning of the verse, shows evidently, that these
words depend upon the former, as an exegesis

By sowing to the flesh therefore the Apostle means nothing

Here sundry objections are to be answered, for the clearing of this text.
First, the papists reason thus, Works are seeds: Catharinus in ver. 10.
^heman. in v. (...). Bellar. de Iustif. lib. cap. 3.
but seeds are the proper cause of the fruit: therefore good works are the
proper cause of eternal life, and not faith only. So that as there is a hidden
virtue in the seed, to bring forth fruit: Ans. First, as in a parable, so in a
similitude, whatsoever is beside the scope and drift thereof, (as this their
dispute is) proves nothing. The scope of the similitude is this, that as he
which sows wheat, shall reap wheat: so he that sows to the spirit, shall
of the spirit reap life everlasting; and as he that sows tares, shall reap
nothing but tares: so he that sows to ^he flesh, the cursed seeds of a
wicked life, shall of the flesh reap nothing but corruption: and as he that
sows plentifully either of these, shall reap a plentiful harvest of either
of them: so he that sowes the seed of a godly or wicked life, in plentiful of
condignitie: which may be understood 3 ways either in regard of the dignity
of the work alone; or in regard of the promise of God alone, and his divine
acceptance: or partly in regard of the dignity, and excellency of the work;
partly in regard of the promise of God. Now albeit some of them Scotus,
Ariminensis, Durandus, Uega, Bunderius, Coster, and the like: others, in
respect partly of their own worthiness, partly of Gods promise, and acceptance,
as Bonaventure, Biel, Driedo, (lingius, Iansenius, Bellarmine, B(...)ldius
witnesleth:) yet no^e of them (excepting only Caietan) affi^^e that they are
meritorious only in regard of the dignity of the work: which
notwithstanstanding the Rhemists, and others, labor to prove out of this
seed and good works, contrary to the current and stream of their own
Doctors. Thirdly, I answer that good works are seeds, yet faith is the root
of these seeds: and in that good works are made the seeds of eternal life,
it is to be ascribed to Gods merciful be said, not only the order, but the
cause is set down, as it may appear by the antithesis: for as sowing to the
flesh, is the cause of destruction, so sowing to the spirit, is the cause of
eternal life. Ans. It is true in the one, but not in the other. For first,
sins or works of the flesh, are perfectly evil, as being absolute breaches
of the law, and deserve infinite punishment, because we are not sufficient of
our selves to think any [good] thing as of our selves, 2. Cor. 3. 5. but from
the spirit of God, who works in us both the will and the deed; and are his
works in us: therefore being not ours, we can merit nothing by them at the
hands of God. Thirdly, shall of that which he has sownercape life everlasting,
but, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. Where we see the Apostle
attributes nothing to our works, but to the grace of Gods spirit. Lastly, Romans
6. 23. the holy Ghost puts manifest difference between The wages of sin
is death: but eternal life is the gift of God. He says not, that eternal
life is the reward of good works, but the gift of God: now in the reward of
sin, there is merit presupposed: in the gift of eternal life, nothing but
grace, and favor.

Object. II. God gives eternal life according to the measure and proportion
of the work. v. 7. As a man sows, so shall he reap. 2. Cor. 9. 6. He that
sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he that sows liberally, shall
reap liberally. 1. Cor. 3. 8. Every one shall receive his proper wages
according to his own labor. Ans. Fulness of glory, called by Schoolmen
essential glory, is given only for the merits of Christ, in the riches of
Gods mercy, without all respect of works. Accidental glory, (when one Come
ye blessed; for I was hungry, and ye gave me meat. Matthew. 25. I answer, it is
one thing to be just, an Psalm. 1. 3. Ier. 17. 8. Math. 3. 10.
not known what it is, by his sap, but by his fruit: neither are men known
to be just by their faith, but by their works. Indeed a tree is therefore
good, because his sap is good: but it is known to be good, by his fruit. So,
a man is just, because of (for the books must be opened, and Apoc. 20. 12.
men must be judged of those things, that are written in the books) all must
be judged by their works, which are evident and apparent according to our
works, but it is no where said, for our good works. Gregory says, God will
give to every one according to his works: but it is one thing to give
according In Psalm. 142. ^eddendum (...)que secundu^ opera, sed aliud est
secundu^ aliud propter opera redde^e.
to works, an other thing, for works. For works are no way the cause of
reward; but only the common measure, according to which God gives a greater
or lesser reward. Take this resemblance. A King promises unequal rewards to
runners, Come ye blessed --, for I was hungry, and ye fed me. I answer,
first, that the word [for] does not always signify a cause, but any argument or
reason taken from any Topic place: as Romans 3. 22, 23. The righteousness of God
is made manifest unto all and upon all that believe. For there is no
difference: for all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God. Where
sin is no cause of the righteousness of faith, but only an antecedent, or
adiunct, common to all men. So when we say, This is the true mother of the
child, for she will not have it divided. There [for] does not implie the
cause, as though her refusing to have it divided, did make her the true mother
of it: but only the sign, that she was the true mother indeed. Secondly, be
it granted that it implies the cause, yet not the meritorious cause: for good
works are said to be causes of [for] does here signify the cause, as well as
in the words following. Go ye cursed.., for I was hungry and ye gave me no
meat: seeing our Savior Christ speaks after the same manner of the reward of
the godly, and punishment of the wicked. I ans. The paritie of the reason,
stands in this, that as by good works we come to eternal life, so by wicked
works, we run headlong to perdition. The dissimilitude is this, that evil
works are not only the way, but also the cause of death: good works are the
way, but not the cause, as Bernard says, they are via regni, non causa
regnandi.

Object. III. Here God promises eternal life to good works: therefore good
works merit eternal life. Answ. There Legal, and Evangelical. In the legali
covenant, the promise of eternal life is made unto works. Do this and live.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. But thus no man can
merit, because none can fulfill the law. In the Evangelical covenant, the
promise is not made to the work, but Be faithful unto the end, and I will
give thee the crown of life, the promise is not made to fidelity, but to the
faithful person, whose fidelity is a sign that he is in Christ in whom all
the promises of God are yea, and Amen, that is most certain and infallible.
Secondly, if any thing 2. Cor. 1. 10.
be due to works, it is not of the merit of the work, but of gods merciful
promise. Augustine says, God made himself a debtor, not by owing any thing,
but by promising. Thirdly, no reward is in Psalm. 31. Non debendo, sed
premittendo, deus se fecit debito^om.
due to works of regeneration, upon compact and promise: Bel^^^. de Just.
(...). 5. c. 3.
teach, that the promise made upon condition of performing the work, makes
the performer to merit, is very false. This is not sufficient to make a
meritorious work: it is further required,

Object. IV. Sowing to the spirit, is a good work, and reaping eternal life,
the reward: but reward presupposes memerit: therefore sowing to the spirit,
does merit eternal life. Ans. There is a double reward, One of favor, another
of debt. Romans 44. To him that works, the wages is not counted by favor, but
by debt. So says Ambrose, There is one reward of liberality, (...). Epist. 1.
lib. 1. Alia est merces liberalitatis and g^atiae: a^iud virtutis stipendiu^,
alia laboris remunera^o.
and favor: another reward, which is the stipend of virtue, and recompense of
our labor. Therefore reward signifies generally any recompense, or any gift
that is bestowed upon another, whether it be more or less, whether answerable
to the work Fear not Abram, I am thine exceeding great reward, that is, thy
full content and happiness. Psalm. 127. 3. The fruit of the womb is a reward,
that is, a blessing, and a free catachresis, which yet is not an intolerable
catachresis (as Bellarm. either ignorantly or de Iustif. l 5. c. 3.
maliciously affirms) but easy and familiar; for in the phrase of the
Scripture, eternal life is called a reward, in a general signification, a
heel, signifies also a reward, because it is given when the work is ended:
And eternal life has this resemblance ^ekeb. Psalm. 19. 12. acharith. Pro. 23.
18.
with a reward, in that it is given at the end of a man's life, a reward and an
end, are used indifferently one for the other. 1. Pet. 1. 9. Receiving the end
of your faith, (...).
the salvation of your souls, that is, (as Beza has fitly translated (...).
it,) the reward of your faith: for to translate it, the end of your faith
cannot agree to the word receiving, for we receive not an end, but a reward.
Thus reward signifies a free gift, or free remuneration, as when the master
gives his feruant something for his faithful service (though done upon duty)
when as he owes him not thanks, much less reward. Luke 17. 9. Does he thank
hat servant, because he did that which was commanded unto him? I trow not.
Thus God gives us eternal life, not because he is bound in justice so to do,
(for he owes us neither reward, nor thanks, for our labor, because when we
have done what we can, we have but done our duty. v. 10.) but because his
goodness, and merciful promise made thereupon, does excite him thereunto. And
yet eternal life is called a reward, because it does as certainly follow good
works, as though it were due. And, good works are mentioned in the promise,
because they are tokens that the workers is in Christ, for whose merit, the
promise shall be accomplished. And it is further called the reward or fruit of
our faith, (as here the harvest) because it is the way and means of obtaining
it.

II. Eternal life is called a reward of good works, not causally, Non (...)
vel causaliter: sed (...) five co^sequative.
as procured by them, but consequently, as following them. properly for the
merit of Christ apprehended by faith: yet it is given consequently as a
recompense of our labors: as an inheritance is given to the heir, not for any
duty or service, but because he is the heir: yet by consequent it is given He
that forsakes father and mother -- shall receive a hundred fold more in this
life, and in the world to come eternal life, Mark. 10. 29, 30.

III. Reward does not always presuppose debt, but is often free, for whereas it
is said, Math. 5. 46. If you love them that love you, what reward shall ye
have? It is thus in Luke 6. 34. What tha^k shall ye have? by which we see that
reward does not always signify due debt, but thankful remembrance, and
gracious acceptance.

IV. Coloss. 3. 24. Eternal life is called the reward of inheritance, (...).
whereby is signified, that it is not given, for our works, but because we are
the sons of God by adoption. Bellarmine answers, that it may be both a
reward, and an inherua^ce: a reward, because it is given to laborers upon
compact: an inheritance, because it is given to none, but those that are
children. But the reward, signifies a gift freely given without respect of
desert, it being all one with (...), as Bafil teaches upon the 7. psalm.

V. The Scripture teaches that God gives rewards four ways. First, he
gives reward of due debt. in respect of merit: honesty, and that he may
testify what he approoueth, and what he disliketh. Lastly, he gives good
success in interprises, and attempts, according to his own decree, and the
order of divine providence: which metaphorically is called a reward, Ezekiel. 29.
v. 19. 20. because it has a similitude thereunto,

Further, let us here observe the different manner of speech which the Apostle
uses, in speaking of the flesh and of the He that sows to his flesh, etc. Of
the latter, He that sows to the spirit, not to his spirit, by which is
signified, that what good so ever a man does in being beneficial to the
ministry, in furthering the Gospel, etc. he does it not by any goodness that is
in himself, but by the spirit of god, Jerome says. On the contrary, what
evil soever a man does, he Et Primasius in hunc locum. Dei dona sunt
(...)cunque bona sunt.
does it of himself, God being neither the author, the furtherer, nor the
abetter thereof.

Again, we hence learn that all unregenerate persons, are

Further, observe here, that though there be some that are Neuters in religion,
luke warm gospellers, halting between two opinions, such as are neither fish
nor flesh; yet in moral duties, there are no Neuters, nor mediators: for all
men are ranged into one of these two ranks, either they are sowers to the
flesh, or to the spirit.

Here also we see who are true worldlings indeed; to wit, Phil. 3. 1^.
such as mind earthly things, in spending themselves, their strength,

This serves first of all, to discover unto us our own estate, whether we be
indeed carnal, or spiritual: for if we sow to the flesh, that is, be always
poring, and digging in the earth with the mole, setting our affections upon it,
not referring the blessings of God, to his glory, and the furtherance of the
Gospel, but to

Secondly, this bewraies the paucitie of spiritual men, even they ate, they
drank, they bought, Luke 17. 27.
they sold, they planted, they built, that is, wholly addicted and devoted
themselves to these things: So in these latter days (which thereof, nor
practicing the Apostles rule, so to use the world as though they used it not.
1. Cor. 7. 31.

Again, here we see how the wisdom of God is counted folly, among worldly
wise men: and how the wisdom of the world is foolishnes before God. For if a
man sow to the spirit, in not following blind reason, nor corrupted affection,
nor fashioning a fool: whereas God accounts who having found a pearl of great
price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it. Matthew. 13. 46. For the
less he lays up for himself upon earth, the more he treasureth up for
himself in heaven: wise and provident men: when as God accounts them stark
fools: Thou Fool, this night shall they fetch away thy soul, and the^ whose
shall those things be which thou have provided? and then it follows, Luke 12.
20, 21.
So is he that gathers riches to himself, and is not rich in God. For the
more they treasure up riches, the more they treasure up to themselves wrath
against the day of wrath. Romans 2. 5. and fat themselves against the day of
slaughter. Iam. 5. 5.

Lastly, we are here warned to take heed of the Devils sophistry. It is a
notable policy, one of the cunningest stratagemes the Devil has, in good
things commanded, to sever the means from the end: and in evil things
forbidden, to sever the end from the means He labors to sever the means
reap life everlasting. For we may not dream of a good harvest, without a good
seed time, of sowing nothing to reap something, or sowing tares to reap
wheat. Again, he seuereth the end from the means, by persuading men that
they may use the means and never come to the end, that though they sow to the
flesh, yet they shall not reap corruption. Thus

9 Let us not therefore be weary of well doing: for in due season we

In these words, the Apostle expounds the fifth general rule appertaining to
all sorts of men: and in it he ascends from the hypothesis to the thesis,
that is, from the particular, to the general, therefore does implie) by way of
necessary illation, and consequence: for seeing that they which continue in
well doing, in sowing to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life
everlasting, v. 8. therefore no man ought to be weary of well doing. It
consists of two parts: of a rule, or precept, in the former part of the
verse, Let us not therefore be weary of well doing: and for in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not. In the rule, the Apostle speaks that plainly,
which in the former verses he had delivered more obscurely: for here he
expounds himself, what he meant by sowing to the spirit, namely, doing of
good, or (as it is in the next verse) doing of good unto all, which may also
appear by that which follows, we shall reap, if we faint not, that is, we
shall reap the fruit of that which we have sown to the spirit, if we faint
not: therefore to sow to the spirit, is nothing else, but to do good. Now, by
well doing, the Apostle means not only the outward work, who began in the
spirit, but being weary of that walk, turned aside, and made an end in the
flesh. Gal. 3. 3. Like Ephraim and Judah, whose goodness was as a morning cloud,
and as the morning dowe which vanishes away. Hos. 6. 4. This wearisomnes in
well doing what profit is it that we keep his commandments, and that we walk
humbly before the Lord of hosts? Malach. 3. 14. nay they count it a wearines
unto them, and snuff thereat. Malach. 1. 13. Hence it is, that the Holy Ghost
is so frequent in stirring us up to the performance of all good duties, with
alacrity, and chearefulnes, and so often in rousing us from that drowsines and
deadnes, wherewith we that we ought always to pray, and not to wax faint.
Ephesians. 3. 13. I desire (says Paul) that ye faint not at my tribulations. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 13. And ye, brethren, be not weary in well doing. And so in this
place, Let us not therefore be weary of well doing.

Now the reasons which make men so weary of well doing, are in general these
three. First, the strength of the flesh, which even in the regenerate is like
the great giant Goliath, in comparison of poor David. Secondly, the weakness
of the spirit, and spiritual graces. Thirdly, the outward occurrences, and
impediments of this life. In special they be these. First, men by nature are
wolves one to another. Esaias. 11. v. 6. and so they continue, til this woluish
nature be mortified, and renewed by grace, being so far from helping,
furthering, releeuing, tollerating 1 Samuel 25. 10.
The slothful person says, a lion is in the way, etc. Lastly, the manifold
occasions and affairs of this life, do so distract the mind, as that a

Now to all these obstacles, and pul-backs, we are to oppose the Apostles
precept, Let us not be weary of well doing For verily, Luke 9. 61.
shall look back again: with Lots wife cast a long look toward Genesis 19. ^6.
Sodom; and with the Israelites in our hearts turn again into Egypt. For as
he that observes the wind shall not sow, and as he that regards the
clouds, shall never reap. Eccles. 11. 4. So he that regards the ingratitude
of some, the evil example of others, the manifold distractions, and
occurrences of this life; and shall cast perils in carnal wisdom, of this,
and that trouble, or inconvenience, that may ensue, shall never do his duty
as he ought.

And assuredly, he that faints in a good course, and gives it over before he
come to the end, is like unto the slothful husbandman, who having plowed and
tilled, and in part sowed

Now most men are sick of this disease, which shows the

Well, whatsoever the corrupt practices of men be, let us learn our duty, to
go forward without weariness, nay to do good with cheerfulness, as Paul
says of himself, Philip. forgetting that which is behind, and indeauouring
himself to that which is before. Let us consider that it is the property of a
liberal mind, to devise of liberal things, and to continue his liberality,
Esaias. 32. 8. Neither is this all, not to be weary, or to persist and continue,
but we must proceed on from strength to strength, bring forth more fruit in
our age, Psalm. 92. 14. as the Church of Thiaiyra, whose works were more at the
last, then at the first, for which she is worthily praised by our Savior
Christ, Revel. 2. 19. It was the motto of Charles the fifth, Plus vltra, and it
ought to be every Christians motto to strive to perfection, and as To be
steadfast, immoneable, and not to make stay there, but to be abundant always
in the work of the Lord. 1. Cor. 15. 58. And that we may do this indeed, we
must set this down as a certain conclusion, that we will not recoile, nor
give back, come what will come: and withal we must labor

Thus much of the rule: now follows the reason of the rule, or the motive to
encourage us to the performance of this duty, for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not, as if he should say more fully, thus, Let us be assured
of this, that continuing and increasing in well doing, our labor is not lost,
nor spent in vain. 1. Cor. 15. 58. for though we imagine that we labor in
vain, and spend our strength in vain (as the Prophet speaks) our work is
with the Lord, and our labor with our God, Esaias, 49. 4. And albeit we may
seem to our selves and others to cast away our goods in being beneficial
unto some, and (as the wiseman speaks) to sow upon the waters; yet after
many days we shall find them again. Eccles 11. 1. In the motive there We
shall reap. Secondly, the circumstance of time, when this harvest shall be
reaped, we shall reap in due season. Thirdly, the condition that is required
on our parts, that if we faint not. Of these in order, and first of the reason
or promise it self.

Whereas the Apostle to the end we may not be weary of a good course, does
encourage us to proceed on, by setting before our eyes the promised reward, I
gather, that we may encourage, precept, by promise, by practice, by reason. For
precept. It is the commandment of Christ we make us friends of unrighteous
ma^mon, or of the riches of iniquity, that when we shall want, they may
receive us into everlasting Tabernacles, Luke 16. 9.

For promise, besides this place (which is very pregnant to the purpose) Paul
exhorts servants that whatsoever they do, they would do it heartily, as to
the Lord, and not to men, knowing that of the Lord they shall receive the
reward of inheritance. Coloss. 3. 23, 24. And generally what good thing soever
a man does the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.
Ephesians. 6. 8. He that forsakes father and mother, etc. for Christ's sake, shall
receive a 100. fold more in this life, and in the world to come life
everlasting. Math. 19. 29. These and the like promises were to no purpose, if
it were not lawful for us to look to the reward, and if we might not by
considering of it, incite and stir up our selves, to greater alacrity in the
course of Christianity, in making us more seruent and frequent in the duties
of piety.

Thirdly, it may be proved by the practice of the saints of God: Abraham was
contented to forsake his native country at the command of God, and to dwell
in a strange land, yea and that in tents, because he looked for a city having
a foundation, whose builder and maker is God, Ebr. 11. v. 9. 10. Moses esteemed
because he had respect unto the recompense of reward, v. 26. Christ (whose
example is without all exception, being exemplum indeficiens as the
Schoolmen speak) did sweeten the bitterness of the cross with the
consideration of the glory which a little for the joy that was set before him,
he endured the cross, and despised the shame. Ebr. 12. 2. The Colossians are
commended by the Apostle, for that they continued, and increased, in faith to
God, and love to man, for the hopes sake that was laid up for them in heaven,
Coloss. 1. 5. And Paul shows this to have been the practice, and to be the
duty of all the saints of God, so to run that they may obtain, 1. Cor. 9.
24.

Lastly, it may be proved by reason. For first, that which is the end of our
actions, ought to be considered of us, as a means Ye have your fruit in
holiness, and the end everlasting life. 1. Pet. 1. 9. Receiving the reward of
your faith, the salvation of your souls. Therefore we may, nay we ought to
cast our eyes upon it, and to direct They that try masteries abstain from all
things, that they may obtain a corruptible crown: but we for an
incorruptible. It is Saint James his reason, Iam. 5. 7, 8. as the husbandman
waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it,
until he receive the former and the latter rain; So must we be patient, and
settle our hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws near, and he will
recompense every man according to his works. Thirdly, if it be lawful for a
man to abstain from sin, for fear of eternal only, or principally for his
hire, either not minding the glory and honor of God, or less respecting it,
then his own private advantage; so that when the hope of his gain is gone, he
leaves his charge, and flies away: like the Popish Monks, who were right
hirelings indeed: for they minded nothing but No penie, no Pater noster. But
to look to the recompense of reward in the second place, after the glory of
God, the performance of our duty, and discharge of a good conscience, is no
property of a hireling; seeing God has promised to give to them which by
continuance in well doing, seek glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal
life. Romans 2. 7.

By this that has been said, we may see the impudency of the Rhemists, who
in their marginall notes upon Luke 14. 1. Ebr. 11. 26. and Apoc. 3. 5. do
notably slander us and our doctrine, Cardinal Bellarmine, de Iustificat. l.
5^8. de Iustif and mer. Sect. 4. memb. 5. concl. 15.
Bintfeldius, and others. For this is our constant doctrine, that we may, and
ought, to stir up our dulnes to all chearefulnes, in the discharge of our
duty, by setting before our eyes the reward only, nor principally, to respect
the reward: for the zeal of Gods glory, the care and conscience we have to
discharge our duty, ought rather to move us to be plentiful in good works
(in lue of thankfulness unto God for the riches of his mercy) then the love of
God ought to constrain us. 2. Cor. 5. 14. And here we must with thankfulness
acknowledge the endless love and mercy of God toward us, seeing that, when he
might exact strict obedience without any promise of recompense for our labor:
nay, when he might shiuer us in pieces with his iron scepter, yet as
Abashuerosh did to Queen Esther, he holds out his golden scepter unto us in
the preaching of the word, that we might lay hold of it, and by it apprehend
eternal life. Yea it pleases him

The second general point, is the circumstance of time, when we shall reap,
to wit, in due time. This due time may be understood in part of this life: for
godliness has the promise of this life, as well as of the life to come, and the
works of mercy have been even in this life recompensed to the full. The widow
Zanepta for entertaining the Prophet Eliah, was miraculously sustained in the
dearth: the meal in her barrel did not wast, and the oil in her cruise did
not diminish. 1. King. 17. 16. And so the Shunamite for the like kindness showed
to the Prophet Elizeus, being barren, obtained a son: and when he Sarepta
did hers at the prayer of Eliah. 1. King. 17. 23. For As God does always give
to his children in this life the first (...) of his spirit: so he does often
give them the first fruits of their labors, as a taste of their future
felicity, and an earnest of this due time is properly meant of the life to
come, which has two degrees, the first is at the day of death, when the soul
enters into happiness: the second, at the day of

Use. Seeing God has set down a set and certain time when we are to reap, it
is our duty with patience to expect it, as the husbandman does; who having
sowed his field does not look for a croppe the next day, or week, or month:
but patiently expects the harvest, that he may receive the precious seed of
the earth. For he is too unreasonable, who having sowed in September, looks
for a croppe in October: he must wait for the month of August, till the
harvest, and in the mean time indurestorme and tempest, wind and weather,
snow and rain, that he might have mercy upon us. Esa. 30. 8. he waits at
the door of our hearts, and stands knocking to be let in, Apoc. 3. 20. nay
he calls unto us standing without, Open unto me my sister, my love, my dove,
my undefiled: for my head is full of dew, and my locks with the drops of the
night. Cant. 5. 2. We unto thee Jerusalem, will thou never be made clean?
when will it once be? Ier. 13. 27. More particularly, Gods waiting and all the
day long. Esa. 65. 2. I have stretched out my hand all the day long, to a
disobedient and gainsaying people. Secondly, forty days together, Yet
forty days, and Niniue shall be destroyed. Ion. 3. 4. Thirdly, all the year
long, as the husbandman I looked for grapes, and lo wild grapes. Esa. 5. 4.
Fourthly, he expects our amendment, many years together. Luke 13. 7.
Behold, these three years have I come and sought fruit on this figtree, and
find none. Fifthly, the Lord suffered the manners of the Israelites forty
years in the wilderness. Psalm. 95. 10. Act. 13. (...), not (...), as some would
have it.
Peter says, 1. Epist, 3. 20.) did patiently expect the conversion of the old
world, all the while the Arc was in preparing for the space of an hundred and
twenty years. Seventhly, he expected the Canaanits, and Amorits, for the
space of four hundred years, yea he suffered three thousand years together.
Act. 14. 16. Now if God be so patient in expecting our amendment from day to
day, from year to year; we ought to be patient in expecting the
accomplishment of his promises day after day, and year after year, as we are
commanded. Habac. 2. 3. Though the vision tarry, yet wait for it, for it shall
surely come, and shall not stay: and though it be long before we reap any
fruit of our labors, yet let us with patience expect it, for in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not. For, if God wait upon us, with a fervent desire
to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God. Romans 8. 19, 20. and as the word signifies, they expect with
a longing desire, even with thrusting forth their (...).
heads, as the poor prisoner that is condemned does, who eftsoons puts
forth his head out of the window, in a continual earnest expectation of the
gracious pardon of the Prince. It I am weary of my crying, my eyes fail me
whilst. I wait for my God. For if we give over our patient expecting, and
faint in our minds, seeking to anticipate this DVE TIME, this period which God
has prefixed in his unchangeable will, Endor, as Saul did, 2. Sam. 28. or to
the wizzard of Pethor, as Balack did, Numb. 22. or to the sorcerer and
figure-flinger of Babel, as Nebuchadnetzer did, Ezekiel. 21. 21. or if all these
fail, Israel did, 2. King. 6. 33. Behold this evil comes of the Lord,
should I attend on the Lord any longer? or in the depth of discontent, we play
the desperate part of Razez, and lay violent hands upon our selves. 2. Macchab.
14. 41.

The third thing to be considered, is the condition required on our part, that
we may reap in due time; set down in these words, if we faint not. The words
in the original are thus: we shall reap in due time not fainting: which may
be (and are of ^some) taken in a double sense: either as a promise, or as a
condition. (...). a Occumen. in hunc locum, and alii.
a promise, thus, If we be not weary of well doing, we shall reap in due
season without all fainting and wearines, either to the body, or mind, that
is, we shall reap with all joy and comfort, as it is Psalm. 126. 5, 6. They
that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: and they that went weeping and carried
precious seed, shall come again with joy, and bring their sheaues with them.
As a condition, that if we continue constant in well doing to the end without
fainting, we shall reap in the time that God has appointed: and in this sense
it is to be taken in this text, to wit conditionally, as it is well translated,
if we faint not.

We are further to consider that there is a double fainting, which left her
first love. Apoc. 2. 4. Yea all the saints of God have their turbida
intervalla, troubled and distempered fits, sometime in the full, sometime in
the wane, sometime zealous and forward in the service of God, sometime again
heavy and backward, etc.

The second is such a fainting and languishing, that we clean therefore we
faint not, but though our outward men perish, yet the inward man is renewed
daily. And the author to the Hebrews, we must consider Christ, who endured
such speaking against of sinners, least we should be wearied, and faint in our
souls. Heb. 12. 3. And again, Despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither
faint when thou art rebuked of him. This fainting is meant in this place.

Whereas Saint Paul says we shall reap, if we faint not, he signifies, that
we must persevere and continue to the end, otherwise we cannot look to reap
the harvest of eternal happiness. Finis coronatopus. Of all ve^tues it is
only constancy is crowded. Non caepisse, sed persecisse virtutis est.
that does crown all our good works. Be constant (says our Savior Christ to
the church of Smyrna, Apo. 2. 10.) and I will give thee the crown of life*
Jerome says, It is the property of true virtue, not to begin well, but to
end well. Paul blames these Galatians for beginning in the spirit and ending
in the then that of Judas, whose end was worse then his beginning. Leuit. 3. 9.
the tail of the sacrifice was commanded to be offered upon the altar, by which
was signified, that in every good work we must not only begin, but continue
in it to the end, and sacrifice the end of it to God, as well as the
beginning: otherwise we loose our labor, and miss our reward, therefore Saint
John bids us look to our selves, that we loose not the things which we have
done, but that we may receive a full reward. 2. Ioh. v. 8. The laborers in the
vineyard came at sundry times, some in the morning, others at the third, others
at the sixth, and ninth, others at the twelfth hour of the day, yet none
received Alpha and Omega, and therefore requires a good end, as well as a good
beginning, and it is our duty not only to obey the commandment of Christ,
venite ad me, come unto me, Matthew. 11. 28 but that also, manete in me, abide in
me, Ioh. 15. 4. for he only that continues to the end shall be saved. Matthew.
24. 13.

Further, whereas the Apostle says, we shall reap, if we faint not. It may be
demanded, whether the Saints do so faint at any time, that they finally fall
away? To which demand I answer totally and finally fall from grace. For first,
if any thing should make them fall away, it is sin; but they cannot sin,
because the seed of regeneration and grace remains in them. 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
And though the Church sleep, yet her heart waketh, Cant. 5. 2. And if any
work together for the best unto them that love God, Romans 8. 28. And therefore
these are no hindrances but furtherances rather to their salvation. Secondly,
they are built and founded upon the promise of God, I will put my spirit into
their hearts, so that they shall not depart from me. Ierem. 32. 40. Therefore
Christ does so preserve them by his power, prevent them by his grace, guard and
guide them by his spirit, that they shall never fall away, and that none shall
pluck them out of his hand. Ioh. 10. I add further, that they are built upon
the God is faithful and will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be
able, but will give the issue with the temptation, that ye may be able to bear
it. 1. Cor. 10. 13. Thirdly, upon the prayer of Christ, who prayed that they
might be kept from evil. Ioh. 17. 15. that they might be one in the Trinity,
as he in the father, and the father in him. v. 21. that they may be with him,
and see his glory. v. 24. Now Christ was always heard in that which he prayed
for. Ioh. 11. 42.

Lastly, upon the life of Christ, which is communicated to all his living
members, Gal. 2. v. 20. When Christ which is their life shall appear, then
shall they also appear with him in glory. Coloss. Quest. If they cannot
altogether faint and fall away, why does the holy Ghost make a doubt of it, as
though they might? Ans. It is the will of God to move us to perseverance, and
to stir up our dullness by such speeches, that we should not be

10. While we have therefore time let us do good unto all men,

In these words the Apostle does iterate the conclusion propounded in the sixth
verse, as also in the ninth verse immediately the object to whom we must do
good, and by the circumstance of time, how long we must continue therein. And
herein he answers a secret demand, which might be made upon the former We
must do good unto all men, but specially to them of the household of faith.

In the words we may consider three things First, the duty it self, Let us
do good Secondly, the object or persons to whom we must do good, which is
laid down comparatiu^ly, we must do good to all, but specially to those that
are of the household of faith. Thirdly, the circumstance of time, when and how
long we are to do good, whilst we have time; of these in order, and first of
the duty.

This general duty of doing good is recommended unto us by sundry arguments.
The first may be taken from the maine end and scope of a man's life in this
world, which as Paul signifies in this place, is nothing else but to do good:
and this doing of good stands in three things: the first concerns God, in
praising, magnifying, and adoring his holy name. David O let my soul live and
it shall praise thee. The second concerns our selves, in seeking the kingdom
of God, and the righteousness thereof, by making Let us hear the end of all;
fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.
Eccles. 12. v. 13. The third concerns our brethren, in doing good unto them
so far forth as possibly to be beneficial unto all.

The second may be taken from the example of God himself. We must do good to
them that hate us, that we may be the children of our heavenly father. Matthew.
5. v. 44, 45. For we are more conformeble unto God in doing good unto others
(it being an essential property in God to do good to every man, seeing that
every creature does drink, or at least taste of the sweet cup of Gods
goodness. Psalm. 145. v. 9.) then in receiving My goodness reaches not to
thee, Psalm. 16. v. 2. To the example of God we may add the example of godly
kings. The chiefest praise and commendation of Hezekiah, and Josiah, is noted
by their goodness. Concerning the rest of the acts of goodness or
bountifulness, was (as

The third is drawn from testimony, divine, and humane. Our Savior Christ
says, It is a blessed thing to give, rather then to receive. Act. 20. 3. that
is, to do good, rather then to receive good. Orat 27. d^ pauperum amore, (...).
Nazianzen says, that a man does resemble good in no property so much as in
doing good. And the heathen Orator Demosthenes could say, that (...). Bonum
prophylacticum vel conservativum: congregativum: communicativum.
doing of good, and speaking the truth, makes us most like to God himself.

But to consider this more particularly. Goodness is threefold. Preserving,
Uniting, Communicating: in all which particulars we are to practice this duty.
And first, for the preserving goodness: we must do good not only to our
selves, but to others also, in who coming to Antioch and seeing the grace of
God that was given them, was glad, and confirmed them therein, exhorting them
that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. Act. 11. 22. and
for this cause (as I take it) it is added, v. 23. that he was a good man, and
full of the holy Ghost, and faith.

The Uniting goodness, is likewise to be practiced, in setting peacemakers, the
children of God. Matthew. 5. 10. because herein they lively resemble the goodness
of God their heavenly father, as any son does

The Communicating goodness (being especially understood in this place) has
four degrees. First, for temporal things we must communicate to the
necessities of the Saints, Romans 12. 13. spiritual blessings we must remember
the saying of Peter, Let every man as he has received a gift so minister the
same unto others as good disposers of the manifold grace of God. 1. Pet. 4. 10.

Secondly, we must be plentiful in the works of mercy, not contenting our
selves with this, that we are beneficial to some Charge them that are rich in
this world, that they be not high minded, that they do good, and be rich in
good works, ready to distribute and to communicate. We must be like Tabitha
(or Dorcas) who clothed the poor with the garments which she made at her
own proper cost and charges, Act. 9. 39. and for this cause the holy Ghost
gives this testimony of her, that she was rich or full of good works and
alms which she did. v. 36. like to the virtuous woman, Prou. 31. 20. who
opens the palm of her hands to the poor, and stretched

Thirdly, we must be much in goodness (as the Scripture speaks of God) that
is, abundant in goodness, in communicating Paul exhorts the Corinthians, that as
they did abound in faith and love, so they would abound in rich liberality. 2.
Obadiah did, in spending his living, and venturing his life, in hiding an
hundred of the Lords Prophets, from the furious rage of wicked Iesabel. 1.
King. 18. 13.

Lastly, we must be exceeding or superabundant in goodness; in exceeding measure
(if it may be) in doing good: like the poor widow who had rather want her
self, then be altogether wanting in contribution to the treasury of the Lords
Temple: and therefore though it was but two mites which she cast into the
Corban, yet Christ preferred it before all the superfluity, but she of her
penury, cast in all that she had, even all her living. Luke 21. 4. It is well
said by S. Ambrose: We must relieve the wants of others according as we are
able, and sometime Offic. l. 2 c. 28. Necessitates aliorum quantu^ possnmus
iuvare debemus, and plus interdu^ quam postumus.
even above our ability, as Paul witnesses of the Corinthians to their great
commendation, that to their power, and beyond their power, they were willing,
2. Cor. 8. 3.

Further, in doing good, we must observe these rules. I. We must do good of
that only which is our own: for we Peter, to cloth Paul. The Lord abhors
even burnt offering, if it be of that which is gotten by rapine and holocaustum
de rapina.
spoil. Esa. 61. 8. and hence it is that David would not offer burnt offering
without cost, of that which was not his own. 1. Chron. 21. 24.

II. We must do good with chearefulnes and alacrity, for God loves a
cheerful giver. 2. Cor. 9. Ambrose says fitly and Offic. l. 1 c. 30.
Beneficentia ex benevoleutia munate debet, affectus ^uus nomen imponit operi
tuo.
finely to this purpose, Well-doing ought to proceed from wellwilling: for
such as thine affection is, such is thy action. Therefore if we give, we must
do it freely, otherwise it is no gift: for what more free then gift? therefore
we may not play the hucksters in doing good, for that does most blemish the
excellency of Lactantius says, Danda beneficia non foeneranda. Instit. divin.
lib. 2. cap. (...).


III. We must so do good, as that we do not disable our selves for ever doing
good; but may continue in well doing, and as the Psalmist speaks, bring forth
more fruit in our age. Psalm. 92. 14.
Solomon commands that the streams of our wells should flow to others, yet so,
as that the fountain be still our own. Psalm. 112. 5. Prou. 5. 15.
A good man is merciful, and lends, and will guide his affairs with
judgment, that is, he will so discreetly dispose and order all his actions, as
that he will keep himself within his compass; so beginning to do good, as
that he may continue: therefore In the house of the wise there is a precious
treasure, and ointment, but a foolish man deuoureth it. Prou. 21. 20. All the
disciples that were at Antioch, sent succor to the brethren which were in
Judea, in the great famine that was in the time of Claudius Caesar, yet every
man according to his ability. Act. 11. Paul's rule, we must not so give, that
others be eased, and we our selves pinched. 2. Cor. 8. 13.

IIII. We must do all the good we can possibly within the compass of our
callings, and hinder all the evil. It will be said, God (whose example we are
to follow) does not all the Thou shall not do evil that good may come of it.
Romans 3. 8. whereas God is not bound nor subject to any Law, no not to his own
law, but is above it, and has power to dispense with it. Secondly, because he
is able to draw good out of evil, light out of darkness; which we cannot do.
Thirdly, because God is the General good, we particular. Now there is great
difference betwixt these two, for it belongs to the nature of the particular
good, to procure all the good that may be simply to every one, and to hinder
all evil: whereas to the nature of the general or universal good, (...)
things appertain. First, that all things should be good in some measure of
goodness. Secodly, that some things should be better evils, should be ordained
to the common good: as in a well ordered house, all the parts thereof are good
in their kind. Secondly, some better then others, as Paul says, In a great
house there are vessels of gold and silver, of wood and stone, some for
honor, and some for dishonor. 2. Tim. 2. 20. Thirdly, those that are
destitute of goodness, as sinkes, draughts, and other like places (serving for
base, though necessary uses) are ordained to the common good of the whole
house, which it cannot want. And therefore if the master builder (to prevent

Thus much of the first part, namely the duty: Now I proceed We must do good
unto all, but specially to those which are of the household of faith. Touching
the first; It may seem, that some among the Galatians were of the Pharisees
mind, who thought to do good unto all, suitable to that of our Savior Christ,
love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
pray for them that hurt you and persecute you. Matthew. 9. 44. Let us consider
the good Samaritans practice: Albeit there was mortal hatred betwixt the Jews
and the Samaritans. Ioh. 4. 6. Yet we must do good to our enemies beast, his
ox or ass going astray, in bringing him home again; Exodus 23. 4. Much more
ought we to do good to our enemy himself. For the more beneficial and
communicatiue we show our selves to be, the greater goodness we show to be
in us, as the fountain which powers forth his streams unto all, and the
candle which stands

The reasons why we ought to do good unto all, (even to our enemies) are
principally four. The first may be taken from three: the first is the image of
God, which being in all men, yea even in profane persons in part, ought to be
the loadstone of love to draw our affection unto it. The second is communion
and fellowship in the same nature, and therefore homini, yet we must do it
humanita^i, as the Philosopher said. The third is participation in the death of
Christ, in that all men have part in Christ as well as Matthew. 5. 45.
the ground of the unjust, as of the just, being kind unto Matthew. (...).
(...).
Fourthly, our profession and the reward which we look for, require this at
our hands, for if we do good unto them only

The second point, (which contains the order to be observed in doing good,)
is laid down in these words, Let us do good to all, but specially to those
which are of the household of faith. By them of the household of faith, we are
to understand those which by faith are of the same family with us, namely of
the same Catholic church upon earth; the house of God being often put to
signify the Church of God, as 1. Tim. 3. 15. The house of God is called the
Church of God, the ground and pillar of truth. Ebr. 3. 2. Moses was faithful
in all Gods house, that is, his Church: and thus this phrase is expounded. Ephesians.
2. 19. Ye are no more strangers and forrainers, but citizens with the Saints,
and of the household of God. So that by them of the household of faith, we must
understand only the faithful; Indeed among men, not only children, but also
man-seruants, and maide-seruants are counted to be of the family, but God
accounts them only family of faith; even as fanaticall dreams, fantastical
opinions, allegorizing of the literal sense of the scripture, denying the
resurrection of the flesh, do characterize family of love.

Having the meaning, consider the duty, which is, to do good principally to
the faithful, the Saints and servants of god, that is, we must do good unto
the^ before others, and more the^ to others, My well-doing reaches not to
thee, but to the saints that are in the earth, and them that excel in virtue.
Psalm. 16. 2, 3. For it is alone as if the Apostle should have said, As it is
fit and convenient, that they that are of the same family should be helpefull
and beneficial one unto

Now the reasons why we ought especially to do good to good unto all, Psalm.
145. 9. yet in a special sort he is good to Israel to them that are of a pure
heart, Psalm. 73. 1. He is a Savior of all men, specially of those that
believe. 1. Tim. 4. 10. Secondly, because whatsoever is done to one of Gods
saints is done unto him, Matthew. 25. 44. Thirdly, in respect of the excellency
of their persons, in that they are sons of God, heirs of his kingdom,
members of Christ, Temples of the holy Ghost, etc.

Further, in that all the faithful are called a household and a family, this
teaches us, that as we have one bed and one board, one bread to seed upon,
and one cup whereof all drink: so we should have one mind and one heart, we
should family of love join together, why should not we which are of the
family of faith hold together? If those of the kingdom of darkness combine
themselves together, as it is Psalm. 2. 2. The kings of the earth band
themselves, and the Princes are assembled together, a against the Lord, and
against his Christ. Act. 4. 27. Doubt less against thine holy son Jesus,
whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and
people of Israel, gathered themselves together. Psalm. 83. 5, 6, 7, 8. They have
consulted together in heart, and have made a league against thee; The
tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites. Moab, and the Agarims, Gaball, and
Ammon, and Amalec, the Philistims, with the inhabitants of Tyrus: Ashur also is
joined with them: they have been anarme to the children of Lot. How much more
therefore ought the children of light to company and consort together? But the
children of this

Again, this may minister comfort to all the faithful being under the
cross, to consider that they are of Gods family; and for he that provides not
for his own, and specially for them of his family, has denied the faith, and
is worse then an infidel.

Lastly, in that the faithful are called a family, it shows that they are
but few, even a handefull in comparison of the world; for what is a family to
a country or a kingdom? Indeed I grant, if those of the family of faith, be
considered by themselves, they are many. Matthew. 8. 11. I say unto you, that
MANY shall come from the East and from the West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. After these things I
beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could number of all nations
and kindreds and people and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the
lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palms in their hands. But being
compared with infidels, which shall be condemned, they are but few, Matthew. 7.
13, 14. Enter in at the strait gate: for it is the wide gate and broad way
that leads to destruction, and MANY there be which go in thereat: Because
the gate is strait, and the way narrow, that leads unto life, and FEW there
be that find it. MANY are called, but FEW chosen. Here they are called a
family, and a little flock. Luke 12. 32. and a remnant. Romans 9. 27. Let the
Papists therefore brag of their Universality and multitude, as much as they
list, in the mean time, let not us fear to join our selves to the little
flock of

The order which we are to observe in doing good to others, is else where more
distinctly set down in scripture: and it stands in these degrees. First, and
principally, a man must do good to of his family, as to wife, children,
servants. 1. Tim. 1. 8. If there be any that provides not for his own, and
especially for (...), not well translated, Namely.
them of his household, he has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel.
Secondly, after those of our family, we must do good to our parents and
progenitors. 1. Tim. 5. 4. If any widow have children or nephews, let them
(that is, those children or nephews) learn first to show godliness toward
their own house, and to recompense their parents. Mark, they must first do
good to (...), no^ well translated Kindred.
their own house, and then in the second place to their parents, that is,
their fathers and mothers, if they be children, their grandfathers and
grandmothers, if they be nephews. Thirdly, after our kindred. 1. Tim. 5. 8. If
any provide not for his own -- he has denied the faith, etc. where by own,
we are chiefly to understand, those poor widows that are near of blood, or
kindred unto us; or generally all those that are of our kindred in the flesh, who
are therefore called ours, because they do more nearely concern us, as being
linked unto us, by the bond of nature. They that are of our kindred, are to be
respected and relieved of us in the third place, if they be of the household of
faith; otherwise, the Saints of God, which are neither kith nor kin unto us,
are to be preferred faithful before others. Fifthly and lastly, we must be
beneficial to all, whether friends, or foes, of our kindred, or strangers, of
the house of God or otherwise, as God in We must do good unto all men. It will
be said, we are to love all men alike (seeing we must love our neighbors as
our selves:) and therefore we must do good to all men alike, not respecting
the faithful more then others. I answer, our love of our brethren, object, in
wishing a greater or a less good unto them: and thus we must love all men
alike, in wishing to them eternal life: or in respect of the intention of our
love, in having a greater desire of the good of some, then of othersome: and
thus we are not bound to love, Barnard says, Meliori mayor affectus,
indigentiori mayor effectus tribuendus.

This doctrine invested with the former examples, may shame the base, servile,
and beggarly liberality of the common sort of men, which profess the Gospel,
whose hands are tied

The third thing to be considered in the words is the circumstance of time; we
must do good to all, while we have time.

Here sundry points are to be observed.

I. If we must do good while we have time, we must make a holy and profitable
use of our time, (the rarest jewel, and greatest of all earthly treasures)
because time will not always last: and therefore we must take time while it is
time, seeing time and tide will tarry for no man. Let us consider what a Front
capillata est, post est occasio calva.
the head of a man that has locks of hair before, which a man may take hold
of, but has none behind; whereby is signified, that when opportunity is past,
there is no possibility left to exhort one another daily, while it is called
to day. And the wise man, Prou. 3. 28. Say not to thy neighbor, go and come
again, and to morrow will I give thee, if thou now have it. For he may die,
and so cannot come again, or by thy delaying of him, may be discouraged from
coming, or thou may be hardened against him, or may with the rich man in
the Gospel, be suddenly taken away from thy riches, or thy riches taken from
thee. Our Savior bids walk in the light, while we have light. Ioh. 12. 35.

II. If we must do good while we have time, we must observe the Apostles
golden rule, Ephesians. 5. 16. Redeem the time: which is nothing else, but so to
employ it, and use the benefit of it, as that we suffer it not to slip away
from us without fruit or profit, either for sloth and idleness, or by reason of
vain and transitory pleasures, or other occasions of this life: but to gain
that time we formerly lost by negligence, with double diligence, yea to redeem
it with the loss of our ease, our pleasures, our profits. And we shall the
better practice this duty, if we consider that time is short, precious,
irrevocable: it is short, and precious, and therefore to be redeemed by an high
estimate and account of it, in not being too lavish of it: in bestowing it
upon our friends, not upon our enemies: in placing it as a Jewel in our golden
age, and wearing it in our new garments, the robes of Christ his irreuocable,
and therefore it is to be redeemed by taking the opportunity thereof.

III. Paul commanding us to do good while we have time, would have us know
times and seasons; to observe the shortness of time, to number our days that we
may apply our hearts to wisdom. The not knowing and observing of time, is a
sin much inueighed against by our Savior Christ, Matthew. O hypocrites, you
can discern the face of the sky, and can ye not (...).
discern the signs of the times? Luke 12. 56. why (...).
discern ye not this time? the Lord does prefer the very bruit beasts before
his people, because they know their appointed times and seasons, whereas his
people knew not the time of mercy and grace, which was offered unto them. Even
the storke in the air knows her appointed times, the turtle, and the crane,
and the swallow, observe the time of their coming, but my people knows not
the judgment of the Lord. Ier. 8. 7. And Christ threatens Jerusalem, that one
stone should not be left upon another, because they knew not the time of their
visitation. Luke 19. 44. And verily unto him, we shall stand with the five
foolish virgins, and knock at his mercy gate, and say, Lord, Lord, open unto
us, when it will be too late, when heaven shall be shut against us. Matthew. 25.
11, 12. For, for this cause among others, they are called foolish virgins,
because they considered not the time of the bridegroomes

Here it will be said, observing of time is forbidden, Gal. 4. 10. Ye observe
days, and times, and months, and years, I am afraid of you, least I have
spent on you labor in vain. Ans. There is a twofold observing of time, good,
and evil; lawful, and unlawful. Jewish, or Heathenish: the Jewish, and
superstitious observation of times, is, when religion is placed in the keeping
of them, in an opinion that they bind the conscience to the strict observing of
them, as their Iubilies, feasts of the Passover, of weeks, of Tabernacles,
Calends, Heathenish, when times are observed in respect of good, or badde
success: as when men make two Egyptian days.
unlucky days in every month, in regard of health: when they count
leape-yeare ominous, as Valentinian did, who being newly created Emperor,
would not come forth and show Manse malu^ Maio cubere vulgus ait.
to marry in the month of May. To observe Planetarie hours, and
Climactericall years, the Horoscope or time of a man's birth, and the position
of the heavens at that time. Both these kinds are forbidden. Paul was afraid of
the Galatia^s, first, because they observed days and months, and years, that
is, Jewish ceremonies, and beggarly rudime^ts. Secondly, because they observed
times or seasons, that is, heathenish superstitions mentioned before. And
assuredly, besides the unlawfulness of this practice, it is also vain even in
the judgment of the heathens themselves. Alexander the great commanded July,
and so got the victory over Darius. Lucullus being to fight with Tigranes
upon an (...).
unlucky day, in which Cepio was overcome of the Cimbrians: (...).
I will (said he) make it fortunate to the Romans, and got the victory. And
who knows not that the self same day has been fortunate or luckie to some
(as they use to speak,) unfortunate and unlucky to others? The same day was
Crassus slain by the Parthians, and Pachor king of Parthia taken by Ventidius.
The same day was unto Pompey, the day of his birth, and the day of his death.
The same day was to Frederick the second, his coronation day, and his funeral
day.

The lawful observing of time is twofold. Humane, Divine, Humane is
threefold, Natural, Civil, Ecclesiastical. Natural is, the observing of the
motion of the sun, the moon, and the

Civil is, when times are observed in regard of policy, or of the good of
the common wealth, as faire-times, market-times,

Ecclesiastical, when set times are observed in the Church for

Divine is, when upon the consideration of the shortness and uncertainty of
our lives, we prepare our selves against God so number our days that we apply
our hearts to wisdom. Psalm. 90. Or, observing the day of Gods merciful
visitation, we take the opportunity and use the means that is offered, for
our conversion and salvation. Or, observing the time of Gods visitation in
judgment, and indignation, we

IV. Hence we learn, that there is no possibility of doing good or being
beneficial unto others after this life, for Paul (...). Oecumen.
bids us do good while we have time, thereby insinuating, that after death,
all possibility of doing good is clean cut off. The time allotted to do
good, being included within the limits of this life, The dead that die in the
Lord rest from their labors, Revel. 14. 13. Therefore no good works are
performed after this life. Paul being aged and ready to die, the term of
his life being almost expired, says, I have finished my course, 2. Tim. 4. 7.
which could not be truly said, if he were to perform We must give account for
all things we have done in the body, that is, in this life. Where it is to be
observed, that the Apostle speaking of all the works whereof we are to give
account, does confine them Quando istine excessum est nullus locus poenitentia
est, nullus satisfactionis effectus. Jerome. Dum in praesenti saculo sumus,
sieve orationibus, sine concilijs invicem posse nos coadinvari, cum autem ante
Christi tribunal venerimus, non Job, non Daniel, nec Noe rogare posse pro
quoquam, sed vnumquemque portare onus suum. And again, In hac vita, licet
nobis quod volumus seminare: quum transierit, operandi tempus auferetur, etc.
Hence I gather two things. First, that the doctrine of Purgatory is a mere
fable, because there is no time after this life be ended,

Secondly, seeing all opportunity, nay all possibility of doing good is
confined in the compass of this life, every man must follow the counsel of
the wiseman Solomon, All that thy hand shall find to do, do it with all thy
power; for there is neither work nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom,
in the grave whither thou go. Eccles. 9. 10. David says in the grave no man
will or can praise God. And this is the cause wherefore Paul does so instantly
urge all men to take the present opportunity, Behold, now is the acceptable
time: behold, now is the day of salvation, 2.

V. Hence we are taught to account every day, even this present day, as the day
of death, or the day of judgment: for we must do all the good we can while we
have time, now our time is the instant, or present time, for we are uncertain
whether we shall live till to morrow or no. Iam. 4. 14. Therefore look what we
would do at the hour of death, if we were now at the last gasp panting for
breath, or if we did see Christ coming in the clouds to judgment; the very
same thing we ought to do every day, with like zeal and feruencie of sp(...)t,
to praise and

VI. This doctrine meets with all miserable minded me^, who having great
means and opportunity of doing good yet let slip, or rather cut off all
occasions that might induce them thereto, who in a brutish mind like to the
sw^ne, never do good, nor profit any, till their dying day. I speak not
against go^ly uses, by a man's last will and testament; but against those that
do who ^e men of g(...)d wile. bu^ ^ad deed
little or no good all their life long, till the hour of death: Let these men
consider, that as the late repentance of malefactors, a little before their
death, is commonly but a ceremonial repentance: the funeral beneficence of
those who give little or nothing in all their life, is usually no free, but a
formal, and extorted gift: formal, in doing as others do(...)torted, in that
it is given to stop the mouth of an accusing conscience; The vital
beneficence is that which God accounts of, and by so much

VII. The circumstance of time has here the force of an argument, for it
inforceth the exhortation much, that we should do all the good we can, and
take the benefit of the opportunity, And this I say brethren, because the time
is short, hereafter that both they that have wives, be as though they had none:
and they that weep, as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though
they rejoiced not. Ebr. 3. v. 7, 8. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts. and v. 13. Exhort one another daily, while it is called to
day. The godly in all ages have practiced this duty. Peter knowing that the
time was at hand, that he was to lay down his tabernacle, stirs up himself
to I will not be negligent to put you in remembrance of these things, so long
as I am in this tabernacle, seeing I know the time is at hand that I must lay
it down as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me. 2. Pet. 1. 12, 13, 14. The
Church prays thus to God, Teach us to number our days, that that we may
apply our hearts to wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12. But wicked men's practice is clean
contrary, for they take occasion upon the shortness of their time, to live as
they list, to take their pleasures, and to follow the lusts of their hearts:
therefore Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Esaias, 22. 13. Our
life is short and tedious, and our time is as a shaddowe that passes away --
Come therefore and let us enjoy the pleasures that are present. Wisd. 2. v. 1,
5, 6. And hence it is that some knowing that he has but a short time. Apoc. in
the morning he shall say, would God it were evening, and in the evening, would
God it were morning. Deuteronomy. 28. 67. In this case is every idle loiterer, who
through idelenes is weary of himself, and grieved the time passes away so
slowly: and to these qui nihil agunt, we may join them qui male agunt, and
those also qui aliud agunt, all which are condemned in this text, and against
them Titus the heathen Emperor shall rise in judgment, and shall condemn
them, because he remembering on a time as he fate at supper, that he had trifled
away the day in doing nothing, said, Amici, hodie diem perdidi: Friends, I have
lost this day.

II Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand.

Here begins the Conclusion, being the third general part of this Epistle,
consisting of two parts: an Insinuation, in the II. verse, and a
Recapitulation, in the verses following. He insinuates Ye see how large a
letter I have written: secondly, from the isntrumental cause, in that he writ
it with his own hand, where he gives authority to it, and a kind of eminency
above his other letters. And in both,

The word translated, ye see, is ambiguous, and may be taken (...).
either as a commandment, See how large a letter I have written: or as an
assertion, Ye see --. The like ambiguitie is in the word amongst whom you do
shine: or, see that you shine as stars. It is not material In whether
acception it be taken, seeing the sense is all one.

The first argument to move the Galatians to attention, and acceptance of
Paul's pains, and good affection, is taken from large, is strangely wrested by
sundry interpreters, without (...).
cause: in Psalm. ^18.
Hilarie referring it to the loftines of sentences: Hyperius to the profunditie
and depth of matter: Jerome to the greatness of the character: Chrysostom and
Theophylact, to the badnes of his hand, as not being able to write well. H^imo
to the Hebrew quality, but as properly quantity, as Heb. 7. 4. Consider (...).
how great this man was. And the word that answers unto it, signifies as
well quantity, as quality. Coloss. 2. 1. I would ye (...).
knew what great fight I have --. Iam. 3. 5. Behold, how great a thing (...).
a little fire kindles? The plain and simple meaning therefore of Paul, is
this, that he never wrote so long an Epistle with his own hand, unto any
Church, as unto them. He writ indeed the Epistle to Philemon with his own
hand, but that was short in comparison of this. And he wrote larger Epistles to
other Churches, as to the Romans, Corinthia^s, etc. but by his Scribes, not
with his own hand. Therefore seeing this is the longest, and largest letter
that ever Paul writ with his own hand, it ought to be more regarded, and
better accepted: So that as his pains were greater in writing, our diligence
should be greater

This shows Paul's great care of the Churches, not only when he was present,
but when he was absent. How painful he was being among them to win them to
the Gospel, how

And it may serve as a president to all Pastors having cure of souls, to use
the like diligence, and conscience, in their Ministry;

It further teaches us, that if the Minister being carried with discreet
zeal for the good of the Church, go further either in word, or writing, then
he intended, or is thought fit by some: (as it seems Paul did in this place,
for what needs this large letter (may some say,) a shorter would have done as
well) Rhetoric, Epimone was to long, he was ouerseene in dwelling so long
upon the point: it had been better, a word and away, etc.

His second argument is taken from the isntrumental cause, that he wrote it
with his own hand. In hac Epistola sicut tradunt Doctores, ab hoc loco vs^ ad
sinem, proptia manuscripsit --
Haimo says it is the opinion of the Doctors, that Paul wrote not this whole
Epistle with his own hand, but only from hence to the end: which opinion is
confuted by the very text, You see how large a letter I HAVE WRITTEN with mine
own hand: speaking of the whole Epistle, in the time past: or if of any one
part more then of another, of the former part, rather then of the latter.
Secondly, his assertion is not true, for (if we except Jerome) none of the Vbi
holographa manus, falsum dici tion potest.
Ambrose, who says, Where the whole writing is his own hand, there can be no
falsehood. Not In caeteris subscribebat quid em, hic vero totam ipse scripsit.
Chrysostom, who says, To the rest of his Epistles he did subscribe, but this
whole Epistle he writ himself. Not Primasius, using the word perscripsit, that
he writ it through with his own Totam (vt videtur) have scripfit Epistolam.
Theodoret, affirming that it seems Paul writ the whole Epistle. Not Edi sum
minime apprime scribendi peritus: compulsus sumtamen vel ^ea manu h^c ad vos
Epist. scribere.
Theophylact, who brings in Paul speaking to them in this manner; I am
enforced to write this Epistle unto you with mine own hand. Not Occumenius,
who calls it, (...), an Epistle written with his own hand. Not Epistolam istam
scripsi ego propria manu. Non notarii manu, sed mea.
Anselme, who paraphrasing the text, says, it is all one as if he had said;
This Epistle I writ with mine own hand. And a little before. Not with the
Scribes hand, but with mine own hand: (albeit Anselme cannot so prejudice his
assertion, who lived long after him.) Not the Author of the Commentary upon
the Epistles Jerome, Tom. 9. for he upon the 2 Thessalonians. 3. 17. says plainly,
His verbis omnes Epistolas subscribebat: excepta Galatarum, quam ex integro
manu propria perscripsit,
With these words he subscribes all his Epistles, excepting that to the
Galatians, which he writ from the beginning to the end with his own hand. And
upon these very words which we now entreat of, Intelligite quam non ^imeam, qui
liter as manu mea nuper scripsi.
See how I am not afraid, which of late time have written with mine own hand.
(Where by the way, we may observe, that Jerome is not the author of those
Commentaries, being so contrary to himself.) This I confess is a light
matter, and not to be stood upon, were it not, that some are too hasty to
swallow whatsoever comes in their way, under the title of the Doctors. caveat
unto us, not to be too credulous in believing every one that shall avouch this
or that to be the opinion of the Fathers, no though it be affirmed by a Father,
especially by such a one as draws near the dregs, as Haimo does.

It is certain then, that Paul writ this whole Epistle with his own hand: the
reasons are these. First, that it might appear under his hand, that he was no
changeling, but the same man that he was before, in that he did not preach
circumcision, or the observation of Jewish ceremonies, as the false Apostles
standered him. Gal. 5. ^1. Secondly, that this his letter was not counterfaited
by another, and sent in his name, as the false Apostles might have objected,
and the Galatians suspected. Thirdly, that he might testify his sincere love
toward them,

We may hence further observe a threefold difference of the books of Scripture
in the new Testament. Some were neither I have written it with mine own hand:
J will recompense it --. Now that Paul subscribed every Epistle with his own
hand, he himself witnesses 2. Thessalon. 3. 17. The salutation of me Paul
with mine own hand, which is a sign in every Epistle (that it is mine, and not
forged in my name by another) so I write; the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. In which place he warns the Thessalonians they would not be
troubled by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as though it came from him --.
And here he shows how they may know whether the Epistle be his or not: if it
have this sign, it is mine, else it is counterfeit: for this [which is a Sign
in every Epistle] cannot be meant (as some are of opinion) of the former words
only, viz. The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand. First, because he
says, it is a sign in every Epistle, whereas it is only so I write, should
be false, if they be referred only to the former words, because that manner
of salutation, is not to be found in every Epistle, (as I have already the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. they have either none, or a very hard
construction. Thirdly, if Paul's salutation (which he affirms to be a certain
note of his Epistle) be understood of these words. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. it agrees unto all (as Anselme confesses) whereas being meant
of the former words only, it does not agree to all, but to a few: and yet
Paul makes it, a general, infallible note, and sign, of every Epistle.
Besides Ambrose, and Primasius, in their commentaries upon the place, as also
the Author of the Commentaries which goes under Ieroms name, affirm, the
sign the grace of our Lord, etc, Chrysostom. and Theodoret likewise say, that
Paul calls the salutation, Salutationem appellauit benedictionem quae in fine
sita est. Hinc ergo discimus, quod hoc, Gratia Domini, etc. pro eo quae est
vale scribere consueverat.
a benediction, or blessing, which is in the end of the Epistle: and a little
after, Hence we learn that he was accustomed to write these words, The grace,
etc. instead of adiewe or farewell unto the^. And Haimo (long after) expounds
these words, so I write, how? (says he) even thus as it follows, The grace
of our Lord, etc. I grant it is probable that Paul writ his own name in the
end of every Epistle (whether in the Greek tongue, and in the Hebrewe Haimo
affirms) I leave it as uncertain) and that by the salutation or sign of his
Epistle, his name written with his own hand, is in part to be understood: yet
it is not only nor principally meant. The certain sign therefore of his
Epistles, is beside the subscription of his own name, the farewell The grace
of our Lord Jesus. Christ be with you all, or the like to the same effect. I
say to the same effect, because these very formal words, are not to be found
in every of Paul's Epistles. Therefore Caietan is far wide, who takes the
entire and formal salutation, as it is literally set Grace be with you: and
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, as it is in all Coloss. 4. 18.
his other Epistles. But first, it is an untruth, for they are not only
wanting in the Epistle to the Colossians, but also in the 1. to Timothy, and
in that to Titus, where it is only said, Grace be with thee. Grace be with you
all. Secondly, it is a flat mistaking of 1. Tim. 6. 21. Tit. 3. 15.
always understood, though not expressed.

12. As many as make a fair show in the flesh, compel you to be circumcised,
only because they would

From hence to the end, is laid down the second part of the Recapitulation,
wherein the Apostle does very artificially (as Orators are accustomed) repeat
those things which he would have specially to be remembered, the maine points
handled in the Epistle. First, that neither circumcision

In this verse and the next following, Paul describes the false they make a
fair show. The second, that they compel men to the observing of their
devised religion. The third, the end and scope they aim at, that they may
always be in the sunshine, living at ease, and having the world at will;
only because they would not suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.

First, the Apostle says, that they make a fair show in the flesh: which is
taken diversely, for it signifies sundry things. First, to make an outward
glorious show according to the flesh, as that Seeing that many glory after the
flesh, I will glory also. They are Israelites, so am I: they are the seed of
Abraham, so am I. Secondly, to please the Israelites, which are after the
flesh, and to approve themselves unto them, which held the keeping of the
ceremonial law. Thirdly, to vaunt themselves to the Jews, and them of the
circumcision, of the Galatians, whom they had circumcised in the flesh, as
being made proselytes, and wenne to their profession by their means. Lastly,
to pretend great zeal and religion in outward observing of the law, standing
in carnal rites, and

Here we have a notable property of false teachers, which is, to set a fair
face upon the matter, to carry all before them art thou on our side, or on our
adversaries? Joshua, 5. 13. So his instruments transform themselves, as though
they were the Apostles of Christ, and ministers of righteousness, 2. Cor. 11.
13, 15.

In the old Testament, false prophets were accustomed touch not, taste not,
handle not, (which had a show of wisdom in voluntary religion, and
humbleness of mind, and not sparing of the body) did undermine the religion
of God. Coloss. 2. 21, 22, 23.

And after that, in the primative Church, the heretics called Catharists,
under a show of holiness, fasting, prayer, etc. did sow most damnable
heresies in the Church.

And as in former times, the Jews under the glorious titles of the children of
Abraham, the scholars of Moses, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, made many proselytes by deceiving the souls of the simple: So, at this
day, under the glorious titles of the Church, of Councels, fathers, antiquity,
consent, universality; the pretented Roman Catholics, have ensnared many a
simple soul: and no marvel, considering that these are the times of which
Christ foretold, that false prophets through the efficacy of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceive ableness of
unrighteousness, among them that perish. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. And all this is
sheep clothing, and it stands in these four Matthew. 7. 15.
particulars. First, in great swelling titles, as the only true Catholic
Church, the Vicar of Christ, the Oecumennicall Bishop: most profound,
illuminate, Angelical, Seraphicall Doctors: Lord, Lord, Matthew. 7. 22. Or as
the Jesuitical faction do, Jesus, Maria. Secondly, (...), with enticing words,
consisting in probable reasons, and persuasiue arguments. show of godliness,
2. Tim. 3. 5. to be Peter cloak of wickedness. 1. Pet. 2. 16. so that as the
Devil (...).
with fair words put Eve into a fools paradise, till at length he had driven
her out of the terrestrial Paradise, and made her also hazard the celestial.
So, his ministers false teachers, by fair and flattering speeches, deceive the
minds of the simple, and cause them to fall from their own stabilitie.

By this we may see, how hypocrites and false teachers, stand especially upon
outward things, as external rites and ceremonies, which are but devices and
doctrines of men. Matthew. 15. 9. The Let us go hear a Mass: now the common
saying in Italy is this, Let us go see a Mass. Let us therefore try the
spirits before we trust them, and especially in matters not to judge by the
outward appearance, Ioh. 7. 24. But to judge of Prophets, by the fruit of their
doctrine, Matthew. 7. 16. and of their doctrine by the touchstone of the word.
Isa. 8. 20. so that though the Devil transform himself into an angel of
light; nay, though an who was prudent in the fear of the Lord, and did not
judge by the sight of his eyes, nor reprove by the hearing of his ears. Isa.
11. 3.

The second note and mark of these false teachers, is, that they compel men
to be circumcised. The word compel, has great emphasis, for it signifies,
that they did not convince the judgment, or persuade the will, and affection
of the Galatians, but enforced them against their wills: for though
circumcision be nothing of it self (as Paul says) yet to be compelled to
receive circumcision, and to place justification in the use of it, and sin in
the neglect of it, is the ready way to ouerturne Christ, the foundation of our
salvation. Gal. 5. 4.

Here suodrie questions are to be answered. First, it may be demanded, whether
it be lawful to compel men to embrace Ans. The Magistrate may and ought to
compel obstinate Recusants to profess true religion: for he is ^^stos
vtriusque tabulae, and therefore is to have care that true religion be Josiah,
who caused all that were found in Jerusalem and Benjamin, (that is, all his
subjects) to stand to the covenant which he made with the Lord, nay which is
more, he compelled all that were found in Jerusalem to serve the Lord their
God. 2. Chron. 24. 32, 33. among which multitude many there were (no doubt)
which did like better of Idolatry, then of Gods worship, as the word
compelled, does import. The King that made that great supper, commanded his
servants to compel the guests to come in unto him. Luke 14. 23. whence
Augustine

Object. I. To compel men to embrace true religion, is to Ans. I. If it were
so heinous a sin to compel any to embrace true religion, because it is
against their conscience; why do Popish Prelates, and Magistrates, compel
Protestants (and that by exquisite torments) to reconcile themselves to the
Church of Rome, to swear obedience to the that which is unlawful, because
they are persuaded in conscience they ought to do it? For if they compel men
to omit that which they believe to be good, because they know it to be evil,
(as their own practice proves, in that they will not suffer Protestants to
pray publicly in a known tongue, nor receive the Sacrament in both kinds,
etc.) why do they not compel Augustine testifies of the Donatists) that they
which did profess religion at the first merely by compulsion,

Object. II. Men ought to be persuaded to embrace religion, and induced to
believe, but not compelled: for the will can not be compelled. Ans. True it is,
the will cannot be compelled; Persuade^^ vu(...) des, non cogi.
and as true is it likewise, that the Magistrate does not compel any to
believe: for when a man does believe, and from his heart embrace true religion,
he does it willingly: notwithstanding means are to be used, to make them
willing, that are unwilling, and the means is, to compel them to come to our
assemblies, prove the spirits, 1. Ioh. 4. 1. that so they may know the truth,
and cleave unto it. Augustine says fitly, and finely to this purpose, Quod
Contra Gauden^. ^^ist alib 2. c. ^7.
autem vobis videtur invites ad veritatem non esse cogend^^, erratis nescientes
Scripturas, neque virtutem Dei, qui eos volentes facit, dum coguntur inviti.
Secondly, when Papists receive the Sacrament, swear allegiance to their
Prince, present themselves in our congregations, who knows that they do these
things against their conscience? nay rather we ought in charity to

Object. III. The Magistrate by compelling Recusants to the outward profession
of religion, makes them to play the hypocrites, to counterfai^, and dissemble.
Ans. The Magistrate in executing the laws, has no such intent, but only that
they might hear the word, believe it, and be saved. Again,

II. Quest. How can it be truly said, that the false Apostles compelled men to
receive circumcision, seeing Titus was not compelled to be circumcised? Gal. 2.
3. Ans. That place makes nothing against the text in hand: the meaning is,
that Paul for for all the false brethren that crept in, v. 4. that is,
notwithstanding

III. It may be demanded, whether that circumcision being so vehemently urged
by the false Apostles, might not Answ. It might not. For albeit it be in it
self a thing indifferent, and so it skilleth not, whether a man be circumcized
or not, (as Paul says) Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing:
yet being urged as a matter o^ absolute necessity, as without which men could
not be saved. Act. 15. 1. it ought not to be used. The like may be said of all
indifferent things, if they be made essential p^rts of Gods worship, or
necessary to salvation; as the use of meats and drinks, observing of times
and seasons, wearing this or that habit, or attire: forbidding of marriage to
some orders of me^. For when things indifferent are made necessary, the nature
of them is changed. Ezekiah brake in pieces the brazen serpent, when the
Israelites began to worship it, 2. King. 18. 4.

First, let us observe, out of these words, they compel you to be circumcised,
that Paul does not only use Christian policy, but deals very rhetorically,
excusing the Galatians, as though

Here we have a second note of false teachers, which is, not

It is further to be observed, how they abuse circumcision, for whereas by
Gods ordinance it was but a seal of the righteousness of faith. Romans 4. 11.
they perverting the end of it, make it a meritorious cause of salvation; and
therefore compel men to be circumcised: it is Gods work, they make it their
own work, yea such a work as by which they hope to be saved. And this their
dealing, may fitly be paralleled by the Popish practice at this day, in making
baptism which is but a sign and seal of

Lastly, see here how the perverseness of the corrupt heart of man, does
thwart the ordinance of God. As long as circumcision was commanded by God.
most abhorred it; for the heathen testify so much, that the Jews were odious
for it. But Apolla Iudaeus
now being abolished, they take it up again; receive it, and urge it as a
thing necessary to be observed upon pain of damnation. Whereas if God should
enjoin it again, they would (no doubt) account it as heavy yoke, which
neither they nor their fathers were able to bear. This improuing of that which
enmity against God, Romans 8. 7. It must therefore teach us to captiuate our
reason, and to subject our wills to the will of God in all things.

The third property of these false Apostles is, the teaching of circumcision,
that is, of false doctrine; because they would not suffer persecution for the
cross of Christ, that is, for preaching the true doctrine of the Gospel,
concerning Christ crucified. It may be demanded whether it was necessary that
those which If I teach circumcision, why do J yet suffer persecution? The
reason was this. The Roman Emperor had given liberty to the Jews to live
according to their Hieron in Comment. in have locum.
the ceremonial law, and taught no departing from Moses: whereas they which
taught, that ceremonies were abrogated, and that men were justified only by
faith in Christ, wanted this privilege, and so were persecuted of no men more
then of the Jews, either by themselves, or by incensing others against them.
1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. 16. The false Apostles therefore to avoid persecution, coined
a new Gospel; in matter of salvation, joining Christ and Moses, justification
by faith, and by Interim under Charles the fifth, and the six articles under
Henry the eight: by our mediators and reconciliators, who either (as it is
said of old Consiliator) labor to accord fire and water: or else like
hucksters mix wine and water for their own advantage: and by Tabor, but not
not upon mount Caluarie, crowned with glory, but not crowned with thorns.

Further, we may hence gather an essential difference of true and false
teachers: the one seeks the good of the Church, the other seeks themself: the
one the glory of God, the other their in ordine ad Deum yet they intend
themselves doing all things in ordine ad seipsos^ it being the mark they
shoot at in all their Machiavellian cum digmeate ocium, a Lordly command, and
a lasie life.

Again, here we see that the love of the truth, and of the world, the fear
of the face of man, and the fear of God can never stand together. As also how
dangerous a thing it is to As soon as tribulation or persecution comes. by
and by they are offended. Whereas we ought to have the same mind that Paul
had, who knowing that bonds and imprisonment abode him, yet passed not for
them, neither was his life dear unto him, Act. 20. 23. and was not only
ready to be bound, but to die also, for the name of the Lord Jesus. Act. 21.
The Apostles departed from the counsel, rejoicing that they were accounted
worthy to suffer rebuke for his name. Secondly, it is a means (by the
merciful promise of God,) to procure and obtain the blessings of this life.
Mar. 10. 30. Thirdly, it has blessedness annexed to it, with a promise of
assistance and help of Gods spirit, 1. Pet. 4. 11. If ye berailed on for the
name of Christ, blessed are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God rests
upon you, which on their part is evil spoken of, but on your part is
glorified. Lastly, the end of the cross, is glory unspeakable, If we suffer
with him, we shall also be glorified with him. Romans 8. 17.

Further, whereas Saint Paul linketh together persecution, as many as will live
godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. 2. Tim. 3. 12. Moses is said to
have chosen rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season. Heb. 11. 25. Where we see that affliction
is the let and portion of the godly. The reason hereof is twofold. The
malice of the Devil who is always nibbling at the heel, Genesis 3. 15. And the
hatred of the malignant Church (the devils seed) ever maligning the because
they saw their own works to be evil, and theirs to be good. 1. Ioh. 3. 12.
And if it be demanded, why those that preach the word plainly and powerfully
to the consciences of men, in evidence of the spirit; are so extremely hated
and maligned? Ans. It is for no other thing, but even for the works sake, for
which they ought to be reverenced, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. and because they prophecy
not good unto them, but evil, 1. King. 22. 8. that is, preach not pleasing
things, by sowing pillowes under their elbowes, and lulling them asleep in the
bed of security, but denounce the Puritans, and Precisians, but this, which
our Savior Christ gives, Because they are not of the world, therefore the
world hates them? Now all this comes to pass, by reason of that enmity
which God has put betwixt the woman, and the serpent; his seed, and her
seed. Genesis 3. 15.

This teaches us, first, that we should suspect our selves, that Woe be to
you, when all men speak well of you. Luke 6. 26.

Secondly, that we must not be discouraged in our profession, Paul, Act. 28.
22. Concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against: or
take us up with Nicodemus, Ioh. 7. 52. Art thou also of Galile? search and
look, for out of Galile arises no Prophet. In these blasts and storms of
temptations, we ought to make that saying of Christ our anchor hold, Blessed is
he that is not offended in me. Mat. 11. 6.

Lastly, that we think it not strange when we find affliction, or meet with
persecution. 1. Pet. 4. 12, 13.

13 For they which are circumcised, keep not the Law, but desire to have you
circumcised, that they

Here the Apostle preuenteth and objection, which might be made against his
former conclusion. v. 12. For it might be said, Paul did them wrong in
standering them, to urge circumcision only because they would avoid
persecution, when as they did it, as zealous obseruers of the Law. To this he
answers negatiuely, that whatsoever they did pretend, they intended no such
thing. And he proves his former assertion, by two arguments, and withal
describes the false Apostles by two other to compel men to the observing of
that, which they will not observe themselves. For thus these seducers urged the
ceremonial law. Resembling herein the Scribes, who bound heavy burdens and
grievous to be borne, and laid them on men's shoulders, whereas they themselves
would not move them with one of their fingers. Matthew. 23. 4. The Popes, and
Prelates of the Romish Church, are notorious in this kind, in urging men to
make conscience of that, which they themselves shall properly bind the
conscience; yea to tread Kings and Emperors under his feet, and cause them
like vassalls to hold his stirrup. Again, they compel others to fast,
especially in Lent, when as they in the mean time feast; their fast being to
eat fast, and drink fast, in mortifying the flesh with their Indian capons,
and peacocks, and that upon good friday; whereas to bullae, mere trifles, and
such as buy them, stark tools; witness the speech of the Duke of Ualence,
bastard to Pope Alexander the sixth, who having lost certain thousand crowns
at a throw at the dice; Tush (said he) these are but the sins of the Germans.
And that of Charles the fifth (though a favorer and maintainer Paulus the
third, with excommunication, if he would not yield up Playsance into his hands,
let him understand by his Ambassador, that he would thunder at S. Angelo with
his canons and Leo the tenth, to Cardinal Bembu^: O Bembus, what riches have
we gotten by this fine fable of Iesiu O Bembe, quartum nobis profuit fabula
illa de Christo?
Christ? By this we are contrarily admonished, to practice that we profess:
the Ministers of the word, especially, ought verba vertere in opera, (as Jerome
speaks) that is, to turn words into works, that their lives may be real
Sermons to the

Moreover, upon this depends another property of seducers, which is, to set
a fair gloss upon the matter, and to wake the world believe, they do these
and these things, for such and such ends (as these false teachers did,
pretending religion and conscience, but intending freedom from the cross, and
their own vain glory) whereas they mean nothing less: like Herod, who made
show of worshipping Christ, when his purpose was to have destroyed him. Matthew.
2. This property and practice is, and has been usual, specially in the
Church of Rome. For generally, they would have the world believe, that the
Popes triple crown, and Hierarchy of that Sea, is for the maintenance Europe,
to maintain the holy war (as they call it) pretending the recovery of the
holy land, out of the hands of the Turks, and Sarracins: when as (at least in
the beginning) they intended nothing less,

We are therefore here admonished to take heed of dissembling,

v. 14. But God forbid that I world is crucified to me, and I unto the world.

In these words Paul comes to the Reddition of the dissimilitude betwixt him
and the false Apostles, his glorying and in nothing, save in, etc. Secondly,
the thing wherein he would glory, In the cross of Christ, whereof he renders
a reason in the words following, taken from the effects which the cross
wrought in him, For, by it, the world was crucified to him, and he unto the
world.

For the first: To glory, implies three things. First, to rejoice, exult, and
triumph in a man's self, in regard of some good thing, or some supposed good.
Secondly, to bewray this great exultation, by speech, or action, or both.
Thirdly, by boasting the cross of Christ: and a right end, the glory of God,
it is good; otherwise it is evil: such as was this glorying of the false
Apostles, and all other vain glory. Vain I say, first, in regard of the things
wherein men glory, which are either such as are not, as when man boasts of
that which he has not, but would seem to have: or such as he has not of
himself. 1. Cor. 4. 7. or such as have as grass, and all the glory of man,
but as the flower of the field. Isay. 40. 6. Secondly, it is vain in regard of
man, from whom we look for glory, and wisdom, strength, riches: all which
we have received, and thereof ought not to boast of them, as though Ier. (...).
23.
of nature, our ignorance is greater then our knowledge. He that knows not
that be knows nothing in these things, let him read the book of Job, chap.
28. and 37, and 38. And as for wisdom in divine things, We know nothing as
we ought to know. 1. Cor. 8. 2. for we know but in part, and see but as in a
glass, darkely. 1. Cor. 13. 12. And as for practical wisdom, standing

Now if wisdom may not be gloried in, much less may strength, seeing that
wisdom is better then strength, Eccles. 9. 16. seeing that the greatest
strength of man, is not comparable

And as for riches, besides that they make us never a whitte the better, (nay
oftentimes much worse) they are also uncertain. Solomon says, they make
themselves wings like an Eagle, and fly away. Pro. 23. 5. They may not unfitly
be compared to Jonas his gourd, which flourished in the morning, yielding him
content and delight, but shortly after (to his great grief,) it was stricken
by a worm, and withered away. The like may be said of honors, and pleasures.
For what more vain then to glory in honor, which is not in a man's power,
seeing as the Philosopher teaches, Honor is not in him that is honored, but
in him that honors: and therefore Courtiers are compared to counters, Ethic.
l^. c. 5.
which stand sometime for pounds, sometime for pence, being now advanced, now
debased, according to the pleasure of the Prince. Haman to day highly honored
in the court at (...)h 7.
of Job, and Nebuchodonosar, (in whom we may see the mutabilitie of worldly
dignity.) Consider it in the glass of these examples. First of Geliner a
puissant Prince of the Vandals, Procopius.
who was brought so low, that he was enforced to request Date obolum
Bellisario. And of the victorious Emperor Henry the fourth, who had fought
52. pitched fields; and yet was driven to that exigent, as that he became a
suter for a poor Prebend in the Church of Spira, to maintain himself in his
old age. And as for worldly pleasures, in the midst of laughter, the heart is
sorrowful. Prou. 14. 13. And lastly, seeing they leave a sting The end of
rejoicing is mourning. For feasting and Prou. 14. 13.
banqueting are often turned into surfeiting and vomiting: drinkings into
palsies: lusts into goutes, etc. And if pleasures were but only painful, the
matter were the less; but they are also

By this we see that Paul had just cause in this earnest manner, to say, God
forbid I should glory save in the cross of Christ considering that this
boasting in outward things, is not only a fault of vanity, but also of
impiety, as may appear by these reasons. I. God has expressly forbidden it.
Ier. 9. 23. Gal. 5. 26. II. He has alwaie severely punished it, as in David,
for numbering the people in a vainglorious mind. 2. Sam. 24. In Ezekias, for
showing his treasures in a bravery to the Ambassadors of the king of Babel.
Isay. 39. In Herod, for ascribing to himself the glory proper to God alone,
Act. 12. III. The If I must needs glory, I will glory in neine infirmities, as
if he should say, I will be far from carnal boasting. IV. The heathen by the
light of nature have condemned an odious, and burdensome (...). Demost de Coro^.
thing. And the Roman Orator proves it be most true by his own practice,
making his words which flowed from his mouth as sweet as honey, to taste as
bitter as wormwood, by interlacing his own praises.

Object. I. Paul gloried in something besides the cross of Christ, when he
said, It were better for him to die, then that any should make his glorying
vain. 1. Cor. 9. 15. Answ. Paul in glorying does distinguish his calling,
from his person; Of such a one I will boast, of my self I will not boast, and I
was nothing inferior to the very chief Apostles, although I am nothing. 2.
Cor. 12. 5. 11. Of his person or personal gifts he boasts not: but only of
his Apostolical calling, and his faithful discharge thereof, to the end he
may stop the mouths of the false Apostles. Thus to confess the good things
we have to the glory of God, being of the cross, and his glorying in the
testimony of his conscience; in that it was washed by the blood of the cross,
as Paul speaks, Coloss. 1. 20. In his afflictions, in that they were the
afflictions of Christ, and he by them made conformable to him.

But it will be said, that he gloried in his revelations, in his Ans. First, he
did it being urged thereunto; secondly, he did it to defend his calling, and
the credit of the Gospel: and therefore this boasting

Here we see what glorying is Unlawful; namely, when men ascribe unto
themselves either that which they have not, or more then they have, or as
proceeding from themselves, their wisdom, strength, industry, in sacrificing
to their own netts, Paul gloried in his cruel persecuting of the Saints before
his conversion, Act. 26. 11. or presumptuously, when men glory in wickedness,
notwithstanding they be persuaded in conscience, that it is evil: and then it
is the sin of Sodom. Isa. 3. 9. or maliciously, to despite God, and

The second point to be considered in the words, is, the thing wherein he will
glory, called here the Cross of Christ: Sane in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The words in the original translated save, are exceptiue: as if he
should say, I will glory in (...).
nothing except in the cross of Christ: and exclusive, only in the cross of
Christ, and in nothing else. Albeit they are sometime aduersatiue, as Gal. 2.
16. and Apoc. 21. 27. There shall enter into it no unclean thing, (...), but
they that are written, etc. where the words are not exclusive: (for then it
would follow Those thou gave me have I kept, and none of them is lost, but
the child of perdition: that is, but the child of perdition is lost. For the
words, (...).
(...), (as I take it) are not so well translated by the exceptiue conjunction
nisi, as by the aduersatiue sed: seeing here is no exception made of Judas, as
though he had been given to Christ, and afterward had fallen away: which
exposition must needs be made, if the words be read, nisi filius perditionis.

Further, by the Cross of Christ, the Apostle understands synecdochically,
the all sufficient, expiatorie, and satisfactorie sacrifice of Christ upon the
cross, with the whole work of our redemption: in the saving knowledge where of
he professes he will glory, and boast. For Christ is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness -- that as it is written, He that glories, should (...). Cor. 1.
30, 31.
glory in the Lord: even to make boast of him all the day long, as the
Psalmist speaks. And the reason why Paul professes that he will glory only
in the Cross of Christ, is, because Christ crucified is the treasury, and
storehouse of the Church: it is changed by the death of Christ, it is but a
passage from this trans^torie life, to eternal life. Christ by his death has
taken away sin, the sting of death: so that though it seize upon us, yet
(having lost it sting) it cannot hurt us. So that in a word, in Christ
crucified, are all things that a man can glory of. If we would glory in
knowledge, and wisdom; He is the wisdom to know nothing among the
Corinthians, but (brist and him crucified. 1. Cor. 2. 2. for this knowledge is
eternal life. Ioh, 17. 3. If in the love and favor of great men: by him we
are highly advanced into the to those things which eye has not seen, ear
has not heard, neither can the heart of man conceive. It may be said, why does
Paul glory in the ignominious death of Christ, rather then in his glorious
resurrection, triumphant ascension, and imperial jurisdiction Ans. These are
not excluded, but included in the Cross: yet he names the cross rather then
them. First of all, to show that upon the cross, Christ did fully finish the
work of our redemption: for being now ready to give up the ghost, he said,
It is finished. August de verb Apost. Se^m. 20.
accursed death of the cross was a matter of great difficulty,

The Popish sort abuse this text two ways. First, in applying it to the
transient cross. Secondly, to the permanent or material cross. To the
transient cross., in that they glory in it: First, as having a virtue in it,
(when it is made in the air,) to drive away Devils. Secondly, being made in
the forehead to be as an amulet against charms, blastings, and other such like
casualties. To the material cross, when they adorn it Crucigeri wear it in
their hats in a white, read, or green color. When they put their confidence
in it, and pray unto it, Holy Cross, save us. This is Popish

The reason why he would glory in nothing but in the cross of Christ,
follows to be considered, in these words, By which the world is crucified to
me, and I unto the world. It is taken from a double effect, which Christ, or
the cross of Christ, wrought in him: (for the words, (...), by which, may be
referred to either indifferently.) The first, to be crucified to the world: the
second, the world to be crucified to him. By the world, we are not To be
crucified to the world, is to be dead unto it, to despise and contemn it, to
count all the glory of it to be crucified to us, when it hates and persecutes
us, and accounts us the filth and the offscouring of all things. 1. Cor 4. 13.
Yet here observe that we are crucified to the world, and the world to us, by
the

Here we see who those are that can truly glory in the cross of Christ, namely
those that are dead to the world, and the world to them: such as feel the
power of the spirit of Christ crucifying the flesh in them, with the affections
and lusts. Others can no more glory of the cross of Christ, then he that
glories of the victory which his Prince has gotten over his enemies, himself
in the mean time being a vassal, and slave unto them.

Secondly, that it is not sufficient for a Christian, that the world is
crucified to him, except he also be crucified to the

Thirdly, that to be crucified to the world, is not to profess monastical
life, and to be shut up in a Monastery: but to renounc^ the world, and the
corruptions that are therein, both in

Fourthly, we are taught to carry our selves to the world, as crucified and
dead men, not to love nor like it, to seek or affect it, but to renounce and
forsake it, with all the vanities, delights, and pleasures thereof: and to be
as dead men to our own wicked wills, and to our carnal reason, letting them lie
dead in

Fifthly, by this we may examine our hearts, for if we have

v. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcifio^ avails any thing,

Here the Apostle proves his former assertion, v. 14. that he neither did, nor
ought to glory in any thing, save in the cross of Christ, because nothing is
of any account in the kingdom of God, but a new creature. And this he proves
by the remoouall of all those things that are either opposite to, circumcision
and uncircumcision. And withal he lays down two conclusions. The first is,
that in Christ Jesus, that is, in the kingdom of grace, neither circumcision,
nor uncircumcision are any thing, that is, are neither acceptable to God, nor
available to salvation* Under circumcision comprising the pre-eminence of the
Jew, and the profit of circumcision, which was much every way. Romans 3. 1.
seeing that to them appertained the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants,
and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises. Romans 9.
4. Under circumcision containing the Gentiles, with all their wealth, wisdom A
un
strength, laws, policy, and whatsoever is of high account, and glorious in
the eyes of the world. All which he exclude; nothing in respect of
regeneration. For that which is highly accounted of among men, is abomination
in the sight of God. Luke 16. 15. Therefore wisdom, wealth, nobility,
strength, are nothing. 1. Cor. 1. 26. Outward callings, as to be King or
Kaesar, Prophet or Apostle. Outward actions of fasting, not the washing away of
the filth of the flesh (that is acceptable to God) but the stipulation of a
good conscience, which makes requests unto God. 1. Pet. 3. 21. and if the
communicant at the Lords table, do not eat panem Dominu^ as well as panem
Domini (as Augustine speaks) that is, if he do not receive Christ
spiritually by the hand of his faith, as he does corporally receive the element
by his bodily hand, he receives unworthily, and so eats and drinks his
own judgment. 1. Cor. 11. 39. Now the reason why these outward things are
nothing availeable, is, because the things that are accounted of with God, are
spiritual and eternal, not tempo^rall and carnal, as these are: which as
they shall utterly cease in the kingdom of glory, Matthew. 22. 30. (for then
Christ will put down all rule, authority, and power. 1. Cor 15. 24.) so are
they not of any moment or account in the kingdom of grace, as Paul teaches.
2. Cor. 5. 16. Gal. 3. 28. Coloss. 3. 11. It may be said, these privileges and
outward things, as Prince, and people; Master, and feruant: wives, submit your
selves to your husband^. Coloss. 3. 18. children, obey your parents, v. 20.
servants, be obedient to your masters. v. 22. But if man be considered in
respect in righteousness, peace of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost. Romans
14. 17. there is no distinction of calling, condition, or sex; for we are all
on in Christ. Gal. 3. 28. or Christ is all and in all things. Coloss. 3. 11. in
that though we be many, yet are we but one body in Christ. Romans 12. 5. seeing
we are quickened with one spirit. Ephesians. 4. 4. The Popish opinion therefore which
teaches that there be some outward callings and actions which commend us to
God, as to lead a single life, to fast, Paul says, that outward privileges
will not serve the turn, and that meat commends us not to God 1. Cor. 8. 8.

Again, neither this nor the like places Gal. 3. 28. Col. 3. 11. do any thing
favor the Anabaptisticall fancy, of bringing in an anarchie, that is, an ataxy
into Christian society; by taking away christian magistrates, and distinction
betwixt masster and servant: for by the same reyson we may consound the sex of
man and woman, for Paul says, there is neither male nor femalle, but we are
all on in Christ, the meaning thereof is this, that although in respect of our
inward or spiritual estate before God, there be no such difference: yet that
hinders not but there may be in respect of our outward estate.

Further, we learn from hence, that no man is to think highly of himself in
regard of outward privileges, as birth, honor, wealth, favor, nor to glory in
them. Ier. 9. 23. rich men must not be high minded. 1. Tim. 6. 17. Nay, the
King may not lift up his mind above his brethren. Deuteronomy. 17. 20. Paul's example
is notable, who accounted all the privileges which he had before his
conversion, whilst he was a Jew, (as that he was a citizen of Rome, a Pharise,
a great Rabbin, instructed by Gamaliel, of the tribe of Benjamin, circum cised
the 8. day etc.) and after his conversion being a christian (as that loss or
dunge in respect of being a new creature in Christ, that is, in respect of
justification, and sanctification. And therefore we may not set our minds to
much upon outward things, as riches, honors, pleasures

Besides, this teaches all those that are but in mean and base estate, to be
content: for outward privileges avail nothing: outward wants and miseries,
hinder nothing. If a man be rich, he is nothing the ne^rer, and if he be poor,
he is not a whitt he that is called being a servant is Gods free man: and he
that is called being free, is Christ servant. 1. Cor. 7. 22.

Lastly, this crosses the opinion of the multitude, who think that if a man be
increased in riches, graced with favor, advanced with honor, that he is a
godly, wise, religious man; and to have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in
respect of persons. Iam. 2. 1.

The second conclusion is, that the new creature is the only thing that is
acceptable to God. Circumcision, etc. ^^aileth nothing, but a new creature. By
the new creature, the Apostle understands the image of God, or renouation of
the whole man, both in the spirits of our minds, and in the affections of our
hearts, which is also called the new man. We shall the better conceive it by
the contrary, namely, by the old man; which is The new man then, is the
restoring of all these defects. For the understanding hereof, consider, that
there are three things knowledge. Coloss. 3. 10. Ye have put on the new man,
which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him. In the
will and affections, they are principally two, righteousness, and holiness, both
which are in truth and synceritie, without all hypocrisy. Ephesians. 4. 24. Put on
the new man, which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness:
where holiness, and righteousness, are opposed to concupiscences, Truth (which
has relation to both) to spiritual guile, and dissimulation: so that each of
these qualities, have two parts, a want of the contrary evil, and a positive
quality or habit of goodness. Holiness respects god, and contains all duties
of piety, contained in the first table: Righteousness, respects man, and the
creatures, and compriseth all the duties enjoined in the second table. Truth
respects the manner how both the former are to be practiced, viz. with an
upright and sincere heart, free from all hypocrifie and deceit. These three
making a perfect harmony in all the faculties Holiness performing all the
duties of piety: righteousness the duties of humanity: truth seasoning both
the former with sincerity.

But (may some say) how is the new creature opposed to all external things, or
said to be of any force in the kingdom of Christ, seeing it is not available
to justify a man before God' being stained with manifold imperfections? For
answer whereof, we are to know, that outward things are sometime opposed to
Christ, and his righteousness, as Coloss. 3. 11. There is neither Jew, nor
Grecian, circumcision nor uncircumcision, etc. but Christ is all, and in all
things. sometime to faith, as Gal. 5. 6. Neither circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. sometime to the new
creature or sanctification, as in this place, and 2. Cor. 7. 29. Circumcision
is nothing, etc. but the keeping of the commandments of God. But the sense

Further, whereas both here, and 2. Cor. 5. 17. the image of god is called a
new creature, (or as it is in the original [(...)] a new creation) the meaning
is not, that either the substance, or faculties of the soul are created a new;
but that the work of regeneration is wholly to be ascribed to God alone, (not
as though we were stocks or stones without life or motion) but because God does
create these new qualities in us, quickening

If regeneration then be a new creation, it must needs follow, that before our
conversion we were not only dead, but even flat nothing, in godliness, and
grace. By which we see what Semi-pelagian heresy, which teaches, that a man
by an internum principium, may dispose himself to will that which is truly
good: and that man is not stark dead in sin, but only sick or wounded and
half dead, as the man which fell among thieves, Luke 10. or as a prisoner that
is shackled causa removens prohibens, which (as Logicians teach) is but causa
sine qua non, which in truth is no cause at all. So that they make themselves
their own Saviors, and Christ to be but an instrument whereby they save
themselves: for if he do but remove the impediment, they without any more
ado, are able to move and act themselves. When as the conversion of a sinner
is as great a work as the creation of heaven and earth: for Paul calls it
here a new creation. Nay, here is a greater power required (if I may so speak)
then that whereby the world was created. For though an infinite power be
required as well to the creating of the great world, as the recreating or
regenerating of the less Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the
palsy, Thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise, take up thy bed and
walk? yet the holy Ghost seems, of the two, to make it more difficult, to
create a new heart, then a new world, in that speaking of the creation of the
world, By the word of the Lord were the heavens made. Psalm. 33. 6. or by his
fingers, when I consider the heavens, the works of thy fingers. Psalm. 8. 3. or
by his hands. Psalm. 102. 25. The heavens are the works of thy hands. But the
redemption of man, and the conversion of a arm of God. Marie in her
Magnificat, says, He has showed strength with his arm. Luke 2. 51. nay, he
was feign to set his side to it, and it made him shed many a tear, and sweat
as it were drops of blood, trickling down to the ground. Luke 22. 44. Before
our conversion, we are like all old things pass away, and all things become
new. 2. Cor. 5. 17. For it opens the eyes of our understanding, making us
discern of things that differ. Ephesians. 1. 18. Philip. 1. 10. it boareth a new
ear of obedience in us,

Further, this serves to detect the natural Popery of the multitude, and of
our own hearts, when we persuade our selves (though falsely) that though we
go on in our sins, yet O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in
himself: and Paul says, Ierem, 10. 23. Qui dabit poenitenti venia^, non dabit
peccanti poenitentiam.
that it is as great a work to create a new heart, as to create a new world:
for regeneration is a new creation. 2. Cor. 5. 17. Augustine says well, He
that will grant pardon to him that repents, will not always give repentance to
him that sins.

Again, in the sense that Paul calls the image of God, a new creature, or
the new man, and corruption the old man: we grant, that our religion is new,
and Popish religion is old. For as the new men, is the restored image of God,
in which Adam was first created, though afterward defaced by his own
inventions: Tertullians sense, ours is the old religion, and theirs the new: as
the image of God is the Quod antiquiss^mum, id verissimum.
old man, and corruption the new.

Use. If we be not changed in our lives, but remyane old Adams still, even the
same men we were before, in minding, willing, affecting earthly things, and
fashioning our selves to the guise of the world; we are no new creatures,
though we promise If any be in Christ (says the Apostle) he is a new creature,
old things are passed away, behold, all things are become new. If therefore we
a. Cor. 5. 17.
be new creatures, why lead we not a new life? if we be changed in affection,
why are we not changed in conversation?

But by this we may perceive that all which are christians in profession, are
not christians in conversation: all that are washed arising from legal
terrors: but have no through change nor renouation.

Lastly, we may not marvel if the world hate and malign those that are
new-creatures: seeing they neither mind nor affect the same things. For there
can be no true love, where there is contrariety of judgments, wills,
affections, which has been, is,

v. 16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace shall

Here Paul commends this glorying in the cross of Christ, peace and mercy. In
the words two things are generally to be considered: First, the duty of
walking, in these words, As many as walk according to this rule: Secondly, the
reason of motive to the practice thereof, in these, Peace shall be upon them
and mercy: which is amplified by as many as walk according thereto, and upon
the Israel of God. The duty is, that we walk according to this canon, or
rule: the (...).
word translated walk, signifies not simply to walk, but to walk warily and
circumspectly (as it is expounded Ephesians. 5. 15.) or to walk by Canonical,
because it se^tes down an exposition of this rule: there being nothing from
the first chap. in Genesis to the last words in the Apoeal. which aims not at
one of these two, either repentance towars God or faith in Christ

Here all ministers are taught what rule to follow in preaching the word, or
building the church of God, namely faith, and repentance, the doctrine of the
cross, and conversion, or the new creature. And all ^earers according to what
rule to order

And here we see that there is a certain rule for the regulating of all things
apertaning to faith and manners, though we cannot apply it nor use it as we
should: The fault is in us, not in the rule.

Whereas Paul says as many as walk according to this rule, he shows that
Christians have but on only rule which they are to follow, and according to
which they must frame their lives; for the Apostle exhortes us that we all
proceed by on rule. Phil. 3. 16. Therefore the Papists do notoriously offend
not only dissension? Jerome against the Luciferians says, Sieubi audieris ^os
qui dicuntur Christi, non a Domino lesu Christ^, sed a quoquam alio nuncupari,
puta Marcionitas, Valentinianos, Montenses, Campates, scito non ^cclesiam
Christi, sed Antichristi esse Synagogam. that is, whersoeuer thou shall hear
those that are called Christians not to have their name from our Lord Jesus
Christ, but from some other, as Marcionites, Valentinians, Montenses, Campates,
know thus much, that they are not the church of Christ, but the Synagogue of
Antichrist. Nay further, solitary life in leaving the society of men, and
sequest^ing themselves from all company, which is to renounce the corruption
that is in the world through lust. 2. Pet. 1. 4. These and the like reasons
made the Philosopher to say, that he which left the society of men and
Aristot. P^li^. ^^b. (...). ^^p. a.
betook himself to a solitary life, was either a God, or a beast.

By this we may see what Lesbian rules they follow: and how that which they
account the highest degree of perfection, is in truth the depth of abomination:
that it has been the cause of much wickedness, as of idleness, hypocrisy,
whoredom, so domitry, peace shall be upon them and mercy. By peace, we are to
understand outward peace, as prosperity, and good success in all things we
go about. For whatsoever they do, shall prosper. Psalm. 1. 3. And peace with
the creatures; as first with the good Angels, Colos^. 1. 20. who are ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister, for their sakes that shall be heirs of
salvation, Ebr. 1. 14. pitching their tents about them, Psalm. 34. 7. and
bearing them in their hands as the nourse her child. Psalm. 91. 12. Secondly,
with the godly. The Prophet says that in the kingdom of Christ, the wolf
shall dwell with the lamb, the leopard shall lie with the kidde, etc. that is,
men of fierce, savage, Isa 11. 6.
and woluish natures, shall be so changed by grace, as that they shall live
peaceably and lovingly together. Thirdly, with the wicked their enemies, partly
because they seek to live in peace, as David says of himself, I labor for
peace, Psalm. 120. 7. peace of conscience which passes all understanding. Phil.
4. 7. Which is peace with God, being reconciled and at one with him. Romans 5.
1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. And peace with our
selves, which is three fold, as it is opposed to a threefold dissension in man.
follows the calming and quieting of the mind, opposed to the combat between
the flesh and the spirit. The third is, when the conscience persuaded of
remission of sins, and reconciliation with God, cease to accuse and
terrify, and begins to excuse, and comfort us: opposed to the conflicts that
a distressed conscience has with legal terrors, and the anger mercy (which
is the cause of this peace) are understood, all spiritual blessings, which
flow unto us from the love, and favor of God in Christ, as remission of
sins, justification, sanctification, and eternal life it self. The words
(...), upon them, have great emphasis, signifying, that these blessings come
down from heaven, and light upon them that follow this rule, and that they
cannot he hindered by the malice of men.

Let the Pope then anathematize, curse, and excommunicate us, both Prince and
people, because we tread not in the the causeless curse shall never come. Pro.
26. 2. for what though they did curse, yet God would bless. Psalm. 109. 28. and
let us comfort our selves in this, that he will curse them that curse his
people. Genesis 12. 3.

Again, if peace and mercy shall be upon them that walk according to this
rule, then wrath and indignation shall light upon those that follow any other
rule, or devise any other way, or set down any other means of salvation
besides, or contrary to this. False therefore is the opinion of Pucksius, that
if a their crooked ways, shall be led with workers of iniquity, whenas peace
shall be upon Israel. Psalm. 125. 5. Other uses are made of mercy and peace,
Page 11. and 12. to which places I refer the reader.

The Apostle adds, that peace and mercy shall be upon all them that walk
according to this rule, and upon the Israel of God. There is a doble Israel
mentioned by Paul. Israel according to the flesh. 1. Cor. 10. 18. and the
Israel of God: as there is a twofold Jew, one outward, in the flesh: another
inward, in the spirit. Romans 2. 28, 29. By the Israel of God, the Apostle
means all such as are like to Nathaniell, who was a true Israelite, in whom
there was no guile. Ioh. 1. 47. whether they be all are not Israel, which are
of Israel. Romans 9. 6. but that all they which are of

v. 17. From hence forth let no man put me to business: for I bear

Here the Apostle lays down his last admonition, preventing from hence forth
let no man put me to business, And withal he adds a reason of it, for I bear
in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus: as if he should say, The bonds, the
imprisonments, the stripes, wounds, and scarres in my body, do sufficiently
testify my fidelity in my ministry, the observation of the ceremonial Law
as a thing necessary to salvation, and so you have made a revolt from my
doctrine, and by that means have dobled and tripled my labor and pains among
you: But from hence forth cease to be troblesome unto me, you may take
experiment and proof from me; the marks that I bear in my body do
sufficiently witness and seal the peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God; And I say again and again, that we ought to strive
and contend for it, to observe and keep it, as a thing most necessary to
salvation: (...), as for othings not necessary to salvation, as circumcision
etc. Let no man troble me in the execution of mine Apostolical function, or
hinder the course of the Gospel, by urging any other doctrine or ceremony
contrary or diverse from this, as necessary to salvation: This one thing is
necessary, other things are needles and fruitles in comparison, therefore
neither I, nor the church

Secondly, consider how that the most and greatest trobles of the church have
been for matter^ not of substance, but of circumstance, partly not necessary,
partly contrary to the rule: which notwithstanding have be urged with fire
and faggot, as things most necessary.

Lastly, he that stands forth for the defense of Gods truth (as Paul did, and
all Ministers ought to do) must let go all circumstances, and look to the
substance. Not with Martha to Luke 10. 41.
trouble himself about many needelesse things, when as one

The reason follows in these words: For I bear in my body the marks of the
Lord Jesus.

The word in the Original translated marks, does properly (...). vide Lip^ium
de militia Romana, lib. 1. dialogo. 9.
signify prints with a hot iron. But it is here used generally

The marks of Christ are of two sorts, either inward and invisible: or outward
and visible. The invisible marks are two. The first, is Gods eternal
Election, which is called Gods seal or mark. 2. Tim. 2. 19. The foundation of
God remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his. All the
Elect are his sheep. Ioh. 10. The second, is regeneration, or the imprinting
of the defaced image of God in the soul. By this mark (which is the true
indel^ble character, never to be blotted out) are all believers sealed. 2. Cor.
1. 22. Ephesians. I bear in my body the marks.... The outward visible marks are
twofold: Typical, or Real. Typical, as circumcision, which was a mark set
in the foreskin of Real marks of Christ, are either in his natural, or in
his mystical body. In his natural body, the wounds which were given him in
his hands, feet, and sides; which he showed to his Disciples after his
resurrection. Ioh. 20. 27. which whether they be now to be seen in his
glorified body (as some affirm) or abolished (as others,) I leave to the
Reader, as a thing uncertain, and mystical body, are those, which are in his
members, as wounds, skarres, whippings, maimednes, etc. of which Every where we
bear about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus. and 2. Cor. 11. 24, 25.
Five times received I forty stripes save one: I was thrice beaten with
rods, once stoned, etc. And these the Apostle here calls the marks of
Christ, by his stripes we are healed, 1. Pet. 2. 24. These in his mystical
body are glorious in the sight of god (as the death of his Saints is;) yet not
meritorious. Secondly, those in his natural body, were prophesied of before
in particular. Psalm. 22. 16. They pierced my hands and my feet. These in his
mystical body only in general,

In this place Paul speaks of the latter only, which were in his own
person; and this he does, not to put any merit in the^, as (S. Francis did) but
to testify himself to be a faithful servant of Christ. And he further meets
with the false Apostles, who

Here we see what we are to think, and what use we are to make of the wounds,
ska^res, and blemishes, that are in any of the Saints for the profession of the
Gospel, and maintenance of the truth. First, that they are the sufferings,
wounds, and marks of Christ himself (as Paul terms them here, and Coloss.
1. 24.) seeing they are the wounds of the members of that body, whereof he is
the head. Secondly, they have this use, to convince the consciences of
persecutors, and wicked men, that they are Paul did. For as it is a glory to a
soldier to have received many wounds, and to have many skarres, in a good
cause, in his Princes

This makes nothing for the fratres flagellantes, who glory Cyprian says) but
the cause that makes a Martyr. Secondly, the marks which men set upon
themselves contrary to the Law, Leuit. 19. 28. are not the marks of the Lord
Jesus: but those only which are

Again, if this be the glory of a servant of Christ, and a note of constant
profession, what shall we say of them who have not only their consciences
seared with a hot iron, but by drinking, whoring, rioting, etc. get the marks
of Bacchus and Venus in their bodies? For if these be the marks of Christ,
those must needs be the marks of Satan.

Lastly, hence we are taught a special duty, and that is, to suffer bodily
affliction in the profession of the truth: and though bonds and imprisonment
abide us in all places, not to pass for them, so that we may fulfill our
course with joy, according to Suffer affliction as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ. 2. Tim. 2. 3. The reasons are these. First, by suffering bodily
affliction, we are made conformable unto Christ, and fulfill the rest of the
afflictions of Christ in our flesh Coloss. 1. 24.

18. Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with your spirit, Amen.

Here, the Apostle concludes his epistle with his usual farewell commending
the Galatians to the grace of God, and wishing unto them all things
appertaining to spiritual life and godliness. grace. There is a twofold grace
mentioned in Scripture, Grace which makes a man gracious or acceptable to God,
gratia gratum faciens: and grace which is freely given, gratia gratis data.
Gratia gratum faciens, is the favor and love of God, whereby he is well
pleased the first grace, as being the cause of all other subsequent graces.
Gratia gratis data, is the free gift of God bestowed upon men, whether
natural, or supernatural: natural either in the state of innocence, before
the fall, as original justice, etc. or in the state of Apostasy, since the
fall, as the gift of illumination. Ioh. 1. 9. and such like: Supernatural,
either common gifts, as the gift of miracles, prophesying, tongues etc. or
saving graces, as the grace of election, effectual vocation, justification,
the second grace, because they flow from the first, as the stream from the
fountain. Thus Paul distinguishes them, Romans 5. 15. calling the former the
grace of God, the latter the gift by grace. Now grace in this place is not to
be restrained only to the benefit of first grace: and of the saving grace of
regeneration, which is the second grace, or the gift by grace. And it the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, first, because he is the fountain of it. Ioh. 1. 16.
of his fullnes all we have received, and grace for grace. Secondly, because he
is the conduit or pipe, by which it is conuaied unto us. Ioh. 1. 17. Grace and
truth came by Jesus Christ: for he is our propitiator by whom alone grace,
that is, the favor of God, and reconciliation: for grace, that is, for the
favor and love which God the father bare unto his son; we being accepted of
God, and beloved in his beloved. Ephesians. 1. 6. Christ is further called [our Lord]
in five respects. First, by right of creation. Ioh. 1. 3. All things were made
by him. Secondly, by right of inheritance. Hebr. 1. 2. He is made hoyre of all
things. Psalm. 2. 8. I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
ends of the earth for thy possession. Thirdly, by right of redemption. 1. Cor.
6. 20. Ye are bought with a price, which is neither silver, nor gold, but the
precious blood of by right of propriety, as a King redeemes his subjects, the
master his servants: or by right of affinity, as the father may redeem the
son, one brother an other, and one kinsman an other. Fourthly, by right of
conquest. Luke 11. 21. When a strong man armed keeps his palace, etc. but
when a stronger then he comes upon him, and overcomes him, he takes from
him all his armor wherein he trusted, and divides the spoil. Lastly, by
right of contract and marriage. Hos. 2. 16. Thou shall call me Ishi, and shall
not call me Baali. and v. 19. I will marry thee unto me for ever in
righteousness, judgment, mercy, and compassion, I will marry the unto me in
faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord.

The Apostle proceeds and says, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
your spirits. For the better understanding of which phrase, we are to know,
that Man consists of two essential soul, and body. Eccles. 12. 7. Dust
(that is, the body) returns to the earth, whence it was taken: and the spirit
returns to God that gave it. Albeit the Apostle else where deuideth man into
three parts, spirit, soul, and body, when he prays 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
for the Thessalonians, that their whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be
kept blameles, unto the coming of Christ. Where he subdiuideth the soul into
two parts, into reason or understanding, which he calls the spirit: will, or
affection, which he terms (by the common name agreeing to both) the soul:
God having given reason to see, and will to seek, after that enter through,
even to the dividing a sunder of the soul and the spirit. and Ephesians. 4. 17. 18.
the Apostle distinguishes the soul into three Faculties, the mind,
cogitation, heart: (...).
when he says the Gentiles walked in the vanity of their minds, and had their
cogitations darkened, because of the hardness of mind, meaning the hegemonicall
part or understanding: by cogitation, the inward senses, as memory, fantasy,
etc. and by heart, the affections.

Now by spirit in this place, is not meant the understanding alone, or the soul
alone, but by a synechdoche the whole man is Men's (...), is (...) qu(...).
is placed immediately and properly in the spirit, or mind of man; and in the
body accidentally, where it does bewray it self by outward actions. Secondly,
for that, as the seat of grace Non ait vobiscum, quid ita? abigens eos a rebus
hisce, arguensque non a lege bos spiritum, sed a gratia accepisse. So that, it
is all one, as if he should have said, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all, as it is Philip. 4. 23. and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 18. as it may appear by
the like: for that farewell which Paul gives Timothy in his latter Epistle,
The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit, 2. Tim. 4. 22. is all one with that
in his former, Grace be with thee. 1. Tim. 6. 21. And that salutation Philem.
15. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, is all one with
that Coloss. 4. 18. Grace be with you.

Hence that phrase and form of speech in our English Liturgy, or Common
prayer book, (though misliked by some, and cauilled at by others) has his
warrant and ground, when The Lord be with you; and the people answer, And with
thy spirit, wishing the same to him, that he to them, that God would be with
his spirit, that is, with him.

Again, mark how the Apostle as he did begin with grace, chap. 1. 3. so he
does end with grace, to teach us first of in a holy kiss, or (as Peter
speaks) with the kiss of love. 1. Pet. 5. 14. Romans 1^. 16.


This confutes the Popish Doctors, who do not only ascribe the beginning of
their salvation to themselves, in coworking

Further, observe, with what emphasis the Apostle concludes his Epistle: First
opposing Christ the Lord of the house, to H^b. 3. 5, (...).
of Christ to inherent justice, and merits of works. Thirdly, the spirit, in
which he would have grace to be seated, to the flesh, in which the Apostles
gloried so much. Lastly, brotherly unity one with another, implied in the word
brethren, to the proud and lordly carriage of the false Apostles over them.

The Conclusion.
In the end of all, it is added, in the Greek, and Siriacke copies, that this
Epistle was written to the Galatians from Rome. Which postscript seems to be
erroneous and false: for first, Rome: whereas in all the rest, which are
written from thence, Paul makes mention of his bonds, and imprisonment.
Secondly, the variety of copies sent from Ephesus, as Caietan and Hyperius
affirm, in their Commentaries upon this place. Thirdly, Baronius (if Annal.
Tom. 1. page 657. l. 26. Antuerp.
his authority be of any weight in this case) affirms that it is not likely
or credible that it was written from thence. But, be it written from Philippi,
and sent by Stephanas, Fortunatus, Achaicus, and Timotheus: when as it is
certain, it was written from Ephesus. For first, He will come to them when he
shall go through Macedonia. Therefore Paul was not then at Philippi, a chief
city in Macedonia. Secondly, in the 19 of the same chapter, he says, All the
Churches of Asia salute you, which shows plainly, that when Paul writ this
Epistle, he was at Ephesus in Asia, not Philippi in Europe. Thirdly, v. 8. he
says, he will abide at Ephesus till Pentecost, therefore he was not then at
Philippi. Fourthly, that it was written before the tumult in Ephesus raised by
Demetrius and his accomplices, and so consequently before his coming to
Philippi* as also that it was sent by Timotheus and Syriacke translatour
agrees with me, in affirming that it was written from Ephesus; and so does
Baromius Annal. tom. 1. page 494. l. 39. Again, the postscript of the 2. to
the Corinthians, has it was written from Philippi of Macedonia, and sent by
Titus and Luke: whereas the Rhemists (if we may give any credit to their
testimony, who elsewhere make titles part of the Canonical scripture) say, it
was written at Troas, as it is thought. And Baron. annal. ^om. 1. page 590. l.
51. Antuerp* thinks it was written at Nicopoli, upon this Titus carried this
Epistle (as it is in the postscript) Paul says, he sent Titus to them, and
another with him. 2. Cor. 8. 18, 22. and 12. 18. for Paul speaks of Titus his
coming unto the^ before that time: neither may it be thought that T^tus was
sent the second time unto them, considering that departing from Macedonia, and
taking Titus with him, he left Creete. See Caesar Baron. annal. tom. 1. Antuerp.
p. 591. l. 40. Besides, the Rhemists control the subscription of the first
Epistle to the Thessalonians, which has it thus, The first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, written from Athens. For in their preface, they are bold to
affirm, that it seems rather to have bin written at Corinth, then at Athens:
and they give this reason of it, because after the sending of Timothy to
Thessalonica, Paul and he meet not at Athens again, but at Corinth. And
Baronius affirms, that it seems to have been written presently after that
Sylas and Timotheus came to him to Corinth, out of Macedonia, Annal. tom. 1.
page 457. l. 1. And Emman^^i Sa does censure the Syriacke postscript, which
says it was sent from Athens by Timothy, seeing that Timothy was then
absent. The like they affirm in the argument of the second Epistle: for albeit
the Greek postscript Athens, yet they rather think it was written from
Corinth, where Paul abode a year and six months, Act. 18. 11. because the
title is like unto the first Epistle, Paul and Sylvanus and Timotheus, etc. And
Baronius says, that it should be written from Athens, impossible est
affirmare; because it was written soon after the former, as may appear by the
inscription, Paul and Sylvanus and Timotheus, (they continuing together:) but
the former was written from Corinth, (as has bin proved,) and therefore the
latter: specially considering that Paul went thence from Athens, and abode at
Corinth a year and a half, and returned not back again to Athens, but went
to Ephesus. Annal. tom. 1. page 457. l. 2^.

Add hereunto that whereas the postscript of the 1. to Timothy says it was
written from L^odicea the chief City of Phrigia Pacaciana, the Rhemists
notwithstanding in the argumen^, affirm that it is uncertain where it was
written: and though L^odicca, yet it seems to be otherwise, because it is
like he was never there, as may be gathered by the Epistle to the Colossians
which was written at Rome in his last trouble* a little before his death: for
Coloss. 2. 1. Paul seems to insinuate that he was never at that Laodicea of
Phrigia, near to Colossos, and Hierapolis, and that they never saw his person.
Besides, neither Pl^nie (who writ after Paul) nor any other ancient classique
author, does make mention of Phrigia Pacaciana, so that it seems to have
been so called long after Paul's discease: the first mention that is as I
besought thee to abide at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia; so do -- The
same does

Again, the subscription of the 2. to Timothy, that it was written from Rome
unto* Timothy the first Bishop elected of the church of Ephesus: cannot well
stand as some think with that of Paul, 2. Timothy 4. 5. Do the work of an
Euang^list, seeing that Evangelists were not tied to personal residencie, to
abide in one place (as Bishops and pasters are) but were to go from place to
place, to confirm the Churches planted by the T^tus, says it was written from
Nicopolis of Macedonia: the deuisers of which assertion Titus 3. 12. where Paul
says, be^iligent to come to me to Nicopolis, for I have determined there to
winter: mistaking the text, for he says not, be diligent to come to me to
Nicopolis* for I have determined here to winter (as being there already) but
I have determined there to winter. By which it is plain that when Paul wrote
to Titus, he was not at Nicopolis, (as the postscript affirms,) and so we see
the text which they allege for them, makes most against them. And this is
the judgment and reason of Baronius, Annal. tom. 1. page 575. l. 33. Antuerp.
howsoever Claudius Espencaus shifts

Thus much concerning Subscriptions: a word or two touching Inscriptions or
titles prefixed before Epistles. That these be no part of scripture written by
the Apostles, but added to the Epistles by some others, it may appear by these
reasons. First canonical as well as the epistles themselves, the Fathers would
never have doubted (as they did) whether Paul were the author of the epistle to
the Ebrewes or not, seeing in all copies save one (as Beza has observed) it
bears his name: but some of them ascribe it to Barnabas, as Tertullian:
others to Luke, as Jerome witnesses, others to Clement: Oecumenius infitleth
it only thus, The epistle to the Ebrewes, without adding the name of Paul or
any other as the penner of it: and so Hentenius a papist does translate it out
of Occumenius. James, Peter, John, Jude) have unfit titles prefixed before
them, in that they are called sometime Canonical, specially of the Latin
church) and sometime Catholic (chiefly of the Greek church) neither of which
were ever given them, by any Apostle, or Canonical, it may seem strange that
this inscription should ever have been appropriated unto them, which is common
with them to the whole word of God: as though in them were contained a more
perfect and absolute rule of doctrine and manners, of things James, the 2. of
Peter, the 2. and 3. of John, and that of Jude, of all which it was doubted in
ancient time, as we see in Eusebius; and the Syrian church receives them not
to this day, as being not in the Syriacke translation; and Caietan a popish
writer, and the Lutherans at this present, reject them, as may appear by their
writings. Secondly, that this inscription was added to these Epistles without
sufficient ground, and warrant of reason, may appear, in that no reason can be
given why these seven should be called Canonical, rather then the Epistles of
S. Paul, or that to the Ebrewes (whosoever was the penner thereof.) For whereas
the ordinary Canonical, because they were received into the Canon with the
other epistles; by that reason they should be no more Canonical then the rest,
nay, not of that authentical, at least of that undoubted authority the rest
are Canonical. Lastly, this title was never given to these Epistles by the
Greek church (which was more ancient) but only by the Latin church, as might
be proved by manifold testimonies, if it were a thing necessary to be stood
upon. Nevertheless, howsoeur this inscription cannot be defended, Moses: the
2. the former prophets, viz Joshua, Judges, 2. books of Samuel, 2. books of
the Kings: the 3, the later prophets, as Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, and the small
prophets: the 4. they called Kethubim, which in English is as much as the
scriptures, not as though those 11. books were more properly scripture then
the Pentateuch of Moses, holy writts, not because they had a peculiar holiness
proper to them above other parts of Gods word, (seeing all scripture is equally
given Solomon, who penned three of these books whether he were elected or
rejected; whereas it is not doubted of the rest:) but only (as I To^. 1.
p^^not. Elucid. c. 12. quia nullam. habent specialem proprietatem qua
distinguantur a^ caeteris, commune nomen* quasi proprium obtinent.
Hugo, de S. Uict. has well observed.

In this sense this title Canonical, may be given to these Epistles without
danger: but if we shall understand it in any other sense, we shall be so far
from being able to defend it, that we shall not be able to excuse it.

The second title which is given them, is, that they be called Catholic, which
inscription is as unfit as the former: for they are so called (as some would
have it,) because they were written, and directed to the whole Catholic
Church, consisting both James chap. 1. 1. directs his Epistle only to the 12
tribes that were dispersed, and not to the Gentiles. And Peter, who was an
Apostle of Circumcision, 1. Epist. 1. 1. writes only to the strangers
Catholic, for that they were not sent to one man, or family, or city, or
country: but generally to the whole body, company, and society of the
Jews, wheresoever dispersed Catholic: forasmuch as two of these seven, viz.
the second and third of John, were written to particular persons, the one to
the elect Lady, the other to Gains. And by this reason the Epistle to
Timothy, that to Titus, and Philemon, Catholic, as well as these.

Again, be it granted, that they were all directed to all the Jews, yet I
see not why the Epistle to the Ebrewes, may not as well challenge this title to
be called Catholic, as any of these seven, considering it was written to all
the Jews, and only to

Thirdly, others affirm them to be called Catholic, because they contain
Catholic doctrine, such as appertains to all men generally, of what estate,
place, condition, or calling so ever they be. But in this sense all Paul's
Epistles may be called Catholic Epistles. For whatsoever is written, is
written for our learning, that we through patience and consolation of the
Scriptures might have hope. Romans 15. 4.

Secondly, the word Catholic, is not so ancient: for Pacianus an ancient
father, says, it was not used in the Apostles days. Sed sub Apostolis
(enquies) nemo Catholicus vocabatur: esto, sic fuerie, vel illud indulge, cum
post Apostolos, haereses Biblioth. sacrae tom. 3 ad Sympronian. No^atian. de
Cathol. nomine Epist. 1.
extitissent, diuersisque nominibus Columbam Dei atque reginam lacerare per
parts, and sciudere niterentur; nonne cognomen suum pleb^ Apostolica
p^stulabat, quo incorrupti populi distingueret vnitatem, ne intemeratam Dei
virginem, error aliquorum per membra laceraret? that is, But thou will say,
under the Apostles no man was called Catholic: well, be it so, yet admit this
withal, when after the Apostles there were heresies, and men began to rend
in pieces, and divide gods done, and Queen, by sundry different names, did not
the Apostolic people require their surnames, whereby they might distinguish
the unity of the vncorrupt people, least the error of some, should rend in
sunder gods undefiled virgin? where we see Pacianus does freely grant, that
this surname Catholic Annalium tom. 1. page ^19. Antuerp.
was not in use in the time of the Apostles. Which testimony Baronius does
notably dissemble, in showing the original Pacianus; affirming, but not
proouing it to be as ancient as the Apostles. Now this error has not only
befallen the Latin, and Greek copies, but the Syriacke likewise, as may
appear in the title prefixed before the most ancient Syrian translation, where
we shall find these words, The 3. Epistles of the 3. Apostles before whose eyes
our Lord was transfigured, James, Peter, John. In which inscription be couched
2. soul errors. First, in that this translator makes but 3. epistles of
James, Peter, and John: whereas there are six, he omitting Peter, the 2. and
3. of John (as also that of Jude) as no part of holy scripture; and therefore
the Syriack church (as I have already said) does not receive these Epistles
into their Canon unto this day. The second is, in that he affirms James
before whom our S. Christ was transfigured in mount Tabor, to be James before
whom Christ was transfigured in the mount, was James the son of Zebedeus,
and brother of John. Matthew. 17. 1. After six days, Jesus took Peter and
James and John his brother, and brought them up into an high mountain, and was
transfigured before them. Which James Herod long before the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the dispersion of the 12. tribes, Acts 12. v. 2. About that time
Herod the king stretched forth his hand to vex certain of the Church: and
he slew James the brother of John with the sword. Therefore James the author of
this epistile, was James the son Alphaeus. For to feign an other James the
brother of our Lord as some have done, is childish, seeing it is plain by
sundry places of the N. T. that there were but two of that name mentioned in
Scripture, James the son of Zebedeus called James the greater; and James the
son of Alphoeus, brother to Jude, called the lesser, and brother of our Lord.

GRATIAS TIBI DOMINE IESV.
COMMON PLACES HANDLED IN THIS Commentary.
The first figure shows the page, the second the line.

1 HOw a man may be assured that the Scripture is the word of God? 31. 33 2 How
we may be assured that the calling of our Pastors is from God? 33. 36 3 Of
Phariseisme. 41. 18 4 Of preventing and cooperating grace in man's conversion.
51. 9 5 Of a Lie, and whether it be always a sin? 62. 22 6 Of the form and
use of an Oath. 65. 14 7 Whether faith may be lost? 69. 25 8 Of Satisfaction,
or restitution. 99. 20 9 Of the distinction of Jews and Gentiles. 114. 2 10 Of
Justification, at large. 116. 6 11 Of Christ's Obedience. 119. 12 12 Of
justifying faith and apprehension. 124. 35 13 How to live wisely, godly,
justly: sundry rules. 138. 32 14 How Christ lives in us, and how it may be
known? 145. 15 15 How we live by faith? 149. 24 16 Of Judging. 156. 1 17 Of
witchcraft, and what a witch is? 158. 2. and 429. and 431 18 Of imputation, and
imputed righteousness. 175. 16 19 Of the curse of the Law. 184. 2 20 That no man
can perfectly fulfill the law in this life. 186. 35 and 499. 17. 21 The
difference between the Law and the Gospel. 194. 35 22 How Christ became a
curse for us? 198. 19 23 Whether all Couenan^s are to be kept, and how far
forth? 208. 7 etc. 24 Of the Judicial ^aw. 230. 27 25 Of Baptism, at large.
243. 32 26 Of the Parents authority in appointing his child's marriage and
calling. 274. 27 27 Of the mystery of the Fathers sending the Son. 279. 5 28
How Christ was subject to the Law? 286. 5 29 Of the observation of days. 314.
4 30 Of good Jealousy. 331. 23 31 Of Polygamie. 342. 9 32 Where our mother the
Church is to be found? ten motives answered. 352. 25 33 Of spiritual bondage.
364. 39 34 Of Christian Liberty. 366. 12 35 Of Imprecation or cursing. 396. 29
36 Of the right use and abuse of Christian Liberty. 400. 12 37 Of brotherly
Love. 403. 11 38 Of Christian peace and concord. 408. 14 39 Of the spirit, and
walking therein. 411. 20 40 Of the combat of the flesh and the spirit. 415. 38
41 Of Idolatry. 427. 22 42 Of Heresy. 432. 21 43 Of Enmity. 435. 3 44 Of
Murder. 438. 7 45 Of Drunkenness and gluttony. 439. 11 46 Of Long-suffering.
445. 2 47 Of Goodness. 445. 38 48 Of Temperance. 448. 3 49 Of Uaine-glorie.
454. 35 50 Of Christian reproof, at large. 469. 31. etc. 51 Wherein the Law
and Gospel agree and differ? 497. 24 52 Of Merit of works. 594. 31 53 Of the
kinds of goodness, and rules to be observed therein. 588. 1. etc. 54 Of
observing of times. 600. 10 55 Whether it be lawful to compel men to embrace
true religion? 614. 5 56 Of Inscriptions of Epistles, and post-scripts, at
large. 655. 4
A Table of all those places of Scripture which are briefly expounded in this
Commentary.
Genesis.
Chap. verse. Page lin. 15 13 213 22 17 1 188 36 17 14 257 3 43 22 440 28

Exodus.
4 28 258 3 12 40 213 29 29 10 292 34

Deuteronomie.
30 6 188 16 32 4 190 25

I. Kings.
15 5 189 9

II. Kings.
2 23 362 30 23 25 188 18

II. Chron.
21 2 270 17

Psalms.
40 6 131 33 69 28 378 38 106 31 176 17 139 21 435 6

Proverbs.
24 16 105 4

Isai.
64 24 298 4

Ezechiel.
33 13 551 25

Matthew.
5 22 156 25 5 22 362 14 7 6 472 10 6 10 189 26 10 8 537 10 13 57 5^0 14 25 35
568 12 28 19 245 34

Mark.
9 24 127 5

Luke.
1 6 189 11 14 26 435 11

John.
3 5 257 10 4 37 551 7 6 45 539 24 13 34, 35 494 15 496 13 17 12 630 8

Roman.
7 18 189 32 8 4 189 40 8 5 205 39 11 32 225 10 13 5 369 22 13 14 267 4 16 18
25 10 16 17 475 16

I. Cor.
Chap. verse. Page lin. 5 4 475 31 7 12 5 12 10 8 525 10

II. Cor.
5 17 380 2 5 19 225 7 13 12 475 34

Philip.
2 3 511 6 3 15 188 36

Coloss.
2 8 434 20 3 17 247 26

I. Tim.
1 5 402 39 2 4 270 8 1 9 368 7 5 12 424 15 5 20 485 32

Titus.
3 10 487 3

Hebr.
6 4, 5, 6 462 25 6 6 250 34 10 19 122 1 10 26 462 27 13 17 521 1

James.
2 10 377 32 2 24 385 1 2 26 383 39

I. John.
3 9 190 10 5 3 190 16

Apocal.
18 6 552 26 21 27 630 3

An exact Table of all particulars contained in this Commentary.
The first figure shows the page, the second the line.

A
THe blessing of Abraham came from the cursed death of Christ. 203. 20 Children
of Abraham are of two sorts. 177. 30 All believers are children of Abraham
three ways. 177. 33 We must do three things to walk in the steps of
Abraham's faith. 178. 20. Of Gods not Accepting the person of man. 90. 18 Who
are to be Accursed? 25. 35 How the church should accurse any man, and in what
order? 26. 2 Admission into the kingdom of grace is either outward or inward.
399. 18 Of Adoption. 291. 25 In the grace of Adoption there be two acts of God.
236. 33 The foundation of our Adoption. 264. 35. Adultery to be punished with
death. 233. 34 what Adultery is, and how great a sin? 424. 6 Of flying
adultery and fornication. 426. 6 Two special occasions of Adultery and
fornication 427. 4 In that Adultery, fornication etc. are works of the flesh
we are taught three things. 426. 29 Inordinate affections what? 450. 28 Bodily
Affliction to be suffered joyfully for the profession of the truth. 651. 9 Agar
figures Jerusalem two ways. 345. 20 All put for many. 181. 37 Anathema what it
is? 25. 31 Anger whether any lawful, and when a sin: and the remedy of it?
436. 22 Remedies against Anger. Objections answered. 445. 8 Apostasy has five
degrees. 349. 24 What it is to be an Apostle? 1. 37 Apostolic authority
ceased with the Apostles. 5. 18 The Apostles doctrine gods immediate word. 5. 3
What is the office of an Apostle? 68. 5. Application of Christ and his benefits
is to be made by certain degrees. 371. 30 Apprehension of Christ stands in two
things. 125. 4 Three grounds of Apprehension. 125. 23. Two degrees of
Apprehension. 126. 25. Arabia where situate? 57. 22 Authority of Scripture: se
Scriptures.
B
Three marks of inward Baptism. 241. 40 Baptism in the church of Room no
sign of the true church. 243. 3. Baptism taken six ways. 243. 37 In the
covenant of Baptism Gods actions are two, man's one. 248. 2 The ends of
Baptism are four. 249. 11. The efficacy of Baptism. 249. 21 Arguments of
Papists Aswered. 250. 14. Baptism does not abolish original sin. 251. 20
How baptism conferres grace? 253. 17 Of the necesitie of Baptism. 256. 22.
Four questions of the person that must administer Baptime. 257. 30 The grounds
of infants Baptism. 260. 15. Objections against Baptism of Infants, Answered.
261 Children of Turks and Jews are not to be baptized. 261. 30 Children of
professed Papists may be Baptized, two cautions observed. 261. 32 Children of
wicked christians and of parents Excommunicate may be Baptized: 262. 15
Baptism is to be administered but once. 262. 26 Of the place of Baptism. 263.
1 The use of Baptism. 263. 9 Papists abuse baptism. 377. 12 We must be
bearers and how? 490. 32. Bear one with another. 491. 492 Believers must be
Bearers and sufferers. 168. 169 Four kinds of Believers in the visible
church. 319. 6 Why believers are called children of promise: see promise.
Funeral beneficence. 603. 21 Vital beneficence. 603. 25 Blessing came by the
curse. 203. 20 There is a good and lawful kind of boasting. 89. 12 Boasting is
either lawful or unlawful. 455. 11 whether Bondage may stand with Christian
religion? A treatise of spiritual Bondage. 364. 39. Our spiritual bondage
stands in 3. things. 365. 1 Of the nature, sign, and use of it. 365. What is
meant by Brethren. 5. 38 61. 25. The name Brethren of force to persuade us to
use gentleness. 466. 29 Brethren taken four ways in Scripture. 469. 39 Burdens
of two sorts, and what they be? 520. 24. To bear one another burden what?
520. Bearing of our own burden what it is? 520. 35 Uses upon this, that every
man must bear his own burden. 528. 6 Sin, a burden to wicked Angels, man,
god, and the creatures. 528. 11. What kind of burden sin is? 528. 27. The
Jews sporting at the threatenings of the Lord, calling them the burden of the
Lord. 529. 10 Men's Burdens are of two sorts. 489. 3. Four sorts of those
burdens that may be borne of others, as well as of our selves. 489. 9 The two
first sorts borne three ways Jbid. 20 The two latter how to be borne? Ibid.
Sundry objections against Bearing only our own Burdens, propounded and
answered. 520. 35 to 528. Infants bear the burden of Adams sin, and why?
521. 15 True believers freed by Chirst from a threefould burden. 527. 26 How
Christ and we are said to bear the Burden of our sins? 527. 39
C
Paul's Calling was not by the church of Antioch. 2. 23 It differs from the
calling of other Apostles. 2. 23 A good calling necessary for a minister. 3. 1
The Anabaptists arguments that a man may preach without a calling, answered. 3.
7 Every lawful calling is of God. 3. 22. Four reasons why ministers calings
must be manifest to their consciences, and to their auditors. 3. 31 Three notes
to know whether a man be called to the ministry. 4. 10. Three kinds of
calling in the Church 4. 25. Two sorts of calling. 34. 1 Three kinds of
extraordinary callings. 34. 4 Three rules to be observed for the trial of an
extraordinary calling. 34. 22. God in his eternal counsel assigns to every
man a calling. 48. 1 The child of God in his conversion has not power to
resist the inward calling of God. 306. 35 Who calls? who are called? what is
the calling of God? 398. Men answer the calling of god three ways. 399. 1 Gods
calling is either operative or significatiue. 399. 7 Every man ought to have
two callings. 404. 28 Carnal, vide natural. Roman Catholykes like unto the old
False prophets for outward shows. 612. 2 Their outward shows stand in four
particulars. ibid. 3 Ceremonies are of two sorts. 231. 13. Ceremonies
considered three ways. 309. 39 Charming a kind of wichcraft. 429. 37. How we
may discern of charms? 403. 10 Two degrees of Gods children. 336. 4. Why
beleuers called children of promise? vide promise. Who are the children of
Abraham? vide Abraham. A Child of God is two ways. 536. 26. A Child by grace
is three ways. 36. 28. The excellency of this benefit to be the Child of God.
236. 39 The duties of Gods children. 238. 2. 238. 24. A Treatise of the
authority that parents have in disposing their children. 274. 28 Children must
be subject to their tutors and governors. 276. 25 What a man must do to be
assured he is Gods child? 277. 14 What the union with Christ is? vid. Union. Is
what respect they are said to be one with Christ? 265. 1 How all believers are
made one with Christ? 265. 3 Of the donation of Christ. 265. 36 Of our
receiving of Christ. 266. 15 What communion with Christ is? 266. 23 How the
Lord Jesus is put on. 267. 4. Of the apprehension of Christ. vid. Apprehension.
Why Christ called Son? vid. Son. Whether the Son be God? vide Son. Christ
took not to himself the office of a Mediator. 281. 16 A treatise of Christ's
incarnation, why, how far forth, and how he was made flesh? 282. 4 Of the
uniting of the flesh to the godhead of the Son. 284. 12 Of Christ's subjection
to the law. 285. 35. Of Christ's obedience in fulfilling the law. 286. 18 Of the
application of Christ. vide Application. Christ crucified the storehouse and
treasury of the Church, which is showed in five points. 630. 25. 28 Why Paul
gloried rather in the cross of Christ then in his resurrection? 631. 23 The
Papists wicked glorying in the cross. 632. 1 Christ is called our Lord in five
respects. 652. 25 Christ was made a curse for us. vide Curse. How Christ
suffered the wrath of God? 200. 1 Christ must be really learned before he be
taught. 53. 9 When Christ's obedience began and ended? 119. 14 How Christ
could obey being God and satisfy for us being man? 120. 4. In what order
Christ gives himself unto us? 146. 8 Christ is God. 5. 25 Christ which gives
grace and peace, why called our Lord? 12. 38 How Christ is said to give
himself? 13. 26. Two ends why Christ gave himself. 14. 38 Christ's death and
sacrifice was voluntary. 14. 10 Every man must apply the gift and sacrifice
of Christ unto himself, and how it may be done? 15. 22 How they of the old
testament were partakers of the body and blood of Christ? 21. 35 Christ is the
great Prophet and doctor of the church. 36. 39 Christ's office stands in three
things. 37. 2. Christ teaches those that are to be teachers, two ways. 37. 37
What a Christian is? 449. 21 A Christian is Christ's, five ways. ibid. 22. The
uses of one being Christ's. ibid. 31. The office of a Christian man. 451. 5 The
Church of Rome no church of God. 9. 24 How the Church can be wasted, and why
the Lord suffers it to be so? 43. 24, 30. Authority of the church no
principle. 433. 39 Unity is not an infallible and inseparable mark of the
church. 407. 18 Three certain marks of the catholic church. 335. 1. 1 Why the
Christian church is called barren and desolate? 357. 1. 14 The estate of the
church is either inward or outward. 357. 18 The use that ought to be made that
the church has Christ for her husband. 358. 9 The catholic Church on earth is
said to be in heaven for two causes. 351. 6 Of the churches rejoicing. 358. 37
It is one in number, and no more. 351. 37. How the church is troubled? vide
Trouble. The catholic church why called our mother? 35. 2. 17 Where our mother
is to be found? 352. 25. The order to be used in the censure given upon a
church. 9. 10 Jerusalem the mother church rather then Rome. 61. 15 The church
was before the writing of the word, but not before the word. 77. 6 It is
invisible. 352. Of Circumcision. 79. 32 Circumcision considered according to
the circumstance of time, three ways. 373. 15 Circumcision in it self a thing
indifferent, yet not to be used if it be urged as a matter of absolute
necessity. 614. 35 Civil virtues, and a civil life, are no better then
sins. 16. 10 What is the combat that natural man have? 417. 28 The cause of
the spiritual combat, and the persons in whom it is. 417. 5. The use of the
combat. 419. 1 The commandments of God are not grievous three ways. 190. 15
Concealements of the truth sometimes lawful. 63. 13 How it must be understood
that in the commandment the sins of the fathers are visited upon the
children. 521. 29 Papists make three degrees of concupiscence. 252. 11
Concupiscence. vide Lust. Conference of Pastor and people, necessary. 338. 13
How conscience is free, and how subject to the power of the Magistrate? 410. 1
Three objections removed that the laws and traditions of the church, bind
Conscience as truly as the word of God. 369. 21 The consent of Pastors and
people excellent. 6. 25 What is the force of consent? 6. 27 Consent no certain
mark of the church. 6. 37 The catholic consent of believers in points of
religion, is not the true and lively Scripture. 7. 5. Consent stands in three
things. 7. 15. Consent not to be found amongst the papists. 7. 18. Consent is
to be found amongst us in the foundation of religion. 7. 23. Consider our
selves and others. 467. 468. 469. Constancy. vid. standing. Consultation not
to be used in matters of religion, nor in obedience. 56. 19. 37. The use of the
contemplation of Christ by faith. 162. 30 The effect of contention. 408. 6
Contentions some lawful some sinful. 436. ^5 Contract in some cases may be
dissolved. 209. 11 Sins after conversion are pardonable. 462. 4 Three causes
of Paul's conversion. 46. 32. The order and dependence of causes in a sinners
conversion. 47. 13 Five Questions of Paul's conversion. vide Paul. Conversion
wrought by certain degrees. 336. 20 Corruption not felt by corruption but by
grace. 528. 33 Covenants being lawful are to be kept with heretykes and
enemies. 208. 23. What covenants with loss are to be kept and what not? ibid.
30 Covenants of two sorts, legal and evangelical. 569. 6 The covenants of
works has two properties. 348. 27 Conferences and councels are laudible. 75.
32 Three caueats in gathering a council. 76. 5 For this ending of differences
in religion there must be conferences in a free or christian council. 408. 37.
Why the protestants joined not with the papists in the council of Trent. 409.
5 Five rules for our liberty in using the creatures. vid. Liberty. why we
ought to take up our cross and follow Christ, certain reasons. 620. 5 what is
men's by the cross of Christ. 630. 16. Crucifying is either the action of
Christ or our action, of Christ threefold. 451. 7 Three means to crucify the
flesh. 451. 26 Reasons why a man hanging on a tree is cursed. 202. 8 What the
curse is that Christ was made for us? 198. 19 How Christ was a curse? ibid. 28
Whether Paul did well in cursing his enemies? 396. 30 Whether we may curse
ours? 397. 10 How we should use the imprecations in David's Psalms? 397. 18
D
A fourefould kind of observation of days. 314. 4 Against the Popish
observation of holy days. 316. 7 How Protestants observe them? 316. 28.
Against observing days of good and bad success. 317. 2 Two rules to be
observed for the right manner and measure of eating and drinking. vide Eating.
Christ's temporal death did counteruaile eternal death. vide Death. We must
carry our selves as dead men in three respects. 144. 29 There are two degrees
both in the first and second death. 199. 20. 24. What debate is? 436. 3 There
is a deceit called dolus bonus. 64. 2. Of men deceiving themselves. 508. 30. A
man may be deceived both in divine and humane things sundry ways. 546. 19 A
man deceiues himself two wries. 546. 20. The heart of man deceitful. 546. 40.
from whence that springs? 547. 3 Good desires distinguished from carnal
d(...)es by three properties. 297. 32 Of the desires of our hearts and that
they are cries, and how? 598. 6 Of the league of compact with the devil. 429.
20 What is the chief principle in divinity? 433. 24 What drunckennes is?
439. 11 Two things in this sin. ibid. 14 To be given to drincking, is a
sin. 439. 21. Inducements to detest drunckennes. 439. 30. Arg. for
drunkenness, answered. 440. 20.
E
Two rules to be observed for the right manner and measure of eating and
drincking. 439. 5 Election arises not of the will of man but of the grace of
God. 40. 27. How we may attain to the assurance of our election? 47. 31 There
is a double election. 194. 14 Gods election is the root of all the gifts of
God is us. 308. 15 The mere grace of God is the cause of our election. 360.
^6. In religion there ought to be a holy emulation. 44. 36 There is a good
emulation, and a carnal emulation. 436. 8 whether Paul did well in cursing his
enemies? 396. 30 whether we may curse our enemies? vide Curse. Enmity. vide
Hatred. Envy what it is? 437. 36 Error in the foundation, or beside the
foundation of religion. 8. 30 Error of humane frailue or of obstinacy. 8. 35
No man can set down the precise time when errors had there be ginning. 84. 12
Error is either in judgment or ma^ners: both are of two sorts. 409. 20. In the
examination of our selves four rules must be observed. 218. 8. The contagion
of evil examples must be cut off in the society of men. 109. 40
Excommunication when to be used? 390. 32 Offenders are not to be excommu
nicated at the first, but orderly to be proceeded against. 393. 9. 486. 37.
F
Faith is of great use in the kingdom of God. 382. 32 when faith first begins
to breed in the heart? 240. 30 How faith in Christ is conceived in the heart?
241. 5 whether faith may be lost? 69. 25 what Iustifyng faith is, as the
Papists define? 123. 32 The object of Abraham's faith was double. 123. 38 what
true justifying faith is? 124. 35 Faith and confidence are two distinct gifts
of God. 125. 11 Two causes why a believer is said to live by faith. 149. 16
How men live by faith? 149. 24 Faith considered two ways. 175. 34 That we may
live by faith, we must do two things. 194. 5 A particular or special faith
has 3 acts or effects. 239. 22 Arguments of the Papists against special faith,
answered. 239. 30 Every grievous fall does not abolish the favor of God. 237.
13 Of the faith of Infants. 261. 15 What faith toward God is? 446. 31.
Reasons to prove that the faith of the most is but false and fained. 446. 35
Faith works by love, being the cause of love, and love the fruit of faith.
383. 13 In faith two things. 385. 24 Faith toward men stands in two
particulars. 447. 12 Reasons to move us to maintain faith and truth among
men. 447. 25 By faith we do not abrogate but establish the law. vide Law. The
duty of governors of families. 410. 24 God is called a father in two
respects. 336. 13 Or the Fathers sending his Son. vide God. No man exempted
from falling. 461. 37. Fainting twofold. 585. 7 Spiritual fainting twofold.
585. 12 Faults of Churches be of two sorts. 8. 18. Of natural fear, how it is
good and how evil? 108. 4 Three kinds of fear. 108. 20 Figures and Allegories
used in scripture. 346. 16 Of the spiritual combat betwixt the flesh and the
spirit. vid. Combat. How the flesh and spirit fight together? 416. 4 The lust
of the flesh has two actions. 416. 21 A treatise of the works of the flesh,
where is handled the condition the kinds, and the punishments thereof. 423. 22
Flesh signifies more then sensuality. 433. 15 What the flesh is? 450. 18 In
the flesh are two things: Affections, and lusts. 450. 27 Means to crucify the
flesh. 451. 26 For, signifies not always a cause, but any Argument. 568. 14
The foreknowledge of God. vide God. Fornication what it is? 424. ^4 Against
tolleration of fornication. 425. 12. To fly adultery and fornication. 426. 6.
Two special occasions of them. 427 4. Freedom in good things fourefold. 368.
3
G
The Galatians revolt. 8. 10 What the churches of Galatia were. 9. 28 How the
Galatians received the gospel? 28. 30 To Gentilize what it is? 112. 5
Gentleness, what? 445. 29 The gifts of God are inordinately used three ways.
vide Inordinate. The more excellent gifts any has received, the more he is
bound to be serviceable to others. 463. 39 The glory of heaven twofold,
Essential, and Accidental. 556. 23 To Glory, implies three things. 625. 13.
Two Grounds of glorying, one in God, another in himself. 517. 12. How they
differ, and how we may do both? ibid. Objections against glorying and
rejoicing in our selves. 517. 30 How glorying in a man's self does differ from
vain glory which is a branch of pride. 517. 30 Four rules to be observed
that we may glory in the Testimony of a good Conference. 518. 15 Lessons to be
learned from this that we are to glory in the Testimony of a good conference.
518. 31 Glorying when it is good and when evil? 625. Glorying good or evil.
ibid. 27 Evil glorying is vain glorying in three respects. ibid. 23. Wherein
we ought not to glory. ibid. 35. neither in wisdom, strength, riches, honor,
nor pleasures. ibid. Glorying in outward things, not only vain but impious.
Four reasons. 627. 40 There is a two fould lawful bosting or glorying, one
before god, another before man. 628. 29 Objections for Boasting answered. 628.
16. Unlawful glorying when it is? 629. 17. Glorying in wickedness three ways.
629. 30. Reasons, why Paul did Glory rather in Christ's death, then in his
resurrection. 631. 21 The Papists wicked Glorying in the cross. vide cross.
Gluttony what it is? 439. 16 False Gods are set up two ways. 304. 16 How God
is to be acknowledged and worshipped? 12. 15 Gods foreknowledge is not severed
from his will. 108. 12 In what order the foreknowledge of God stands to his
will. 180. 25 God is called a father in two respects. 236. 13 How God is said
to repent? 220. 19 A child of God two ways. 236. 26 A treatise of God sending
his son. 279. 5. God knows exactly all our actions. 549. 26 How the godly
man's sins do not condemn him in the latter Judgment, three resons. 551. 27
The godly reap not that they sow, therefore there is another life. 552. 11.
Seven rules to live godlily. 139. 10 What a man must do to be assured that he
is Gods child? 297. 14 Why affliction is the portion of the godly two reasons.
620. 28 Uses of this that the godly are persecuted and afflicted. 621. 15 Good
things are commonly done in evil manner. 330. 5 How they may be well done,
three rules. 330. 21 The Godly fail in the manner of doing good. 344. 1 The
duty of doing good declared by sundry arguments. 588. 1 Doing of good
stands in three things. 588. 4 Rules to be observed in doing good. 590. 34
We are not allwaies to imitate God in good and evil, for three causes. 591. 34
God is the general good, we the particular. 591. 40 To the nature of the
general good three things appertain. 595. 4 Reasons why we are to do good to
all men. 593. 9 How we are to do good especially to the household of faith?
594. 20 Reasons to do good especially to the faithful. 594. 35 The order to
be observed in doing of good to others. 596. 23 There is no possibility of
doing good after this life. 601. 37 Goodness what it is? 445. 38. Goodness
respects either the body or the mind, and stands in four actions. 446. 9
Goodness three fould, preserving, uniting, and communicatiue. 589 Communicatiue
Goodness has 4. degrees. 589. 29 What is understood by God? 531. 24 A felicity
to receive the doctrine of the Gospel, and what benefits come thereby? 326. 27
The law and Gospel not on in substance of doctrine. 378. 9 The Gospel must be
preached rather then the law, for two causes. 54. 1. It must be preached to the
Gentiles for two causes. 54. 38 There is but one Gospel and one way of
salvation. 21. 31 Popish religion subuertes the Gospel of Christ. 23. 15 The
doctrine of the Gospel called the truth for two causes. 159. 20 The antiquity
of the Gospel. 181. 19. How it differs from the law. Vide Law. The Gospel was
not reueiled to the world till after the coming of Christ. 228. 11 Persecution
and the preaching of Gospel go hand in hand. 620. 20. The Gospel is no new
law. 497. 23. In what the law and Gospel agree? 497. 24 They differ in five
things. 498. 9 Why the Gospel is called a mystery? 498. 16 The doctrine of the
Gospel called by an excellency the word, also the word of the kingdom, of
God, of salvation, of life. 530. 36. Our salvation placed alone in grace. 654.
15. A child by Grace three ways. 236 28. Uide Child The knowledge of the true
God stands in six points. 248. 20 What is meant by Grace? 10. 5 The causes of
grace be the father and Christ, and how they are distinct in regard of the
manner of working? 10. 38 Grace in god, is the first cause of all good things
in us. 11. 7 Grace and peace are the chief good things to be sought for. 11.
30 Gods order in the communication of grace and peace. 12. 21 Grace and works
cannot stand together in justification. 20. 18 Wherein stands the efficacy of
preventing grace? 52. 10 Whether it can be resisted? 52. 30 How efficacy of
grace and liberty of will stand together? 52. 37 Grace in Scripture signifies
two things. 153. 10 Preventing grace is two fould. 308. 24. The works of grace
in God Imprint their Image in the hearts of them that belong to God. 308. 32
Falling from grace though but in part is dangerous. 339. 23 The hatred of Gods
grace in man is the beginning of all persecution. 362. 21. What is our Guide
now in the new Testament the law being abrogated? 234. 22 Men are said to be
under grace two ways. 318. 28 One little grace of God brings many other with
it. 391. 11 Beside the antecedent and first grace there is necessary a
subsequent, or second grace. 421. 34 Grace mentioned in the Scripture twofold.
651. 33 Gratia gratum faciens, and gratia gratis data. ibid. 34 Gratia gratum
faciens, natural, or supernatural. ibid. 40. and 652. 1 Why the favor and
love of God is called the Grace of Christ? 652. 15. The soul the proper
subject of Grace. 652. 32
H
Hatred whether a sin or not? 435. 4. What it is. 435. 27 What a right heart
is? 111. ^7 What a humble and honest heart is? 111. 18. Man's heart perverse to
Gods ordinance. 618. 12 What Heresy is? 432. 12. 18 Difference between
heresy and schism. 432. 36 Difference between heresy and a simple error.
433. 9 Three things in heresy. ibid. 10 Three rules to preserve our selves
from heresies. 433. 20 There are two degrees of honor. 455. 22.
I
Idolatry committed two ways. 304. 16. That Idolatry may be rooted out of
the mind, what is to be done? 305. 37. What Idolatry is? 427. 22 An Idol and
Idolatry taken* two ways. 427. 22 the Romish religion teaches Idolatry
four ways. 428. 9 their Arguments answered. ibid. 24 Jealousy twofold. 329.
16 Good Jealousy stands in 3 things. 331. 26. 332. 6. What the name of [Iew]
signifies opposed to Gentiles? 270. 13 Of the distinction of Jews and
Gentiles, the cause of it. 114. 3 Wherein it stands? 114. 16 How long it
endured? ibid. 31 The nation of the Jews shall be called, and converted before
the end of the world, but when or how God knows. 182. 2 Jerusalem a type of
the catholic church in six respects. 350. 21 Whether Ignorance be a sin in
those that want the word of God. 303. 25. the Image of God stands in two
things. 335. 13 Whether Images be necessary in the congregation of the people
of God? 161. 10 Immoderate use of Gods gifts is 3 ways. 400. 27 Imposition of
hands by the church of Antioch upon Paul no calling but a confirmation of his
calling. 2. 13. Imputation what? 175. 18 Imputation twofold. 175. 25. Things
indifferent not to be used as often as we list and how we will. 80. 22. Two
things restrain, the use of the^ indifferent. 80. 29 A thing indifferent when
it is made necessary to salvation is not to be used. 8115. Infantes how they
are to be termed innocents, and how not? 525. 39 Infantes have no good works.
553 8. Infantes to be judged not by the book of Conscience, but by the book
of life. 553. 10 Inscriptions no part of Scripture. 658. What the Intercession
of Christ is. 298. 7. Certain Interpretation of Scripture where to be found?
352. 33 Joy is twofould. 444. 17 Joy of grace in this life stands in three
things, and has a double fruit. 444. 18. 23 Paul made five Iourneyes to
Jerusalem. 74. 2 We are to have some warrant for our Iournies where three
sorts of me^ are to be blamed. 75. 15. 20 Israel twofould. 646. 1 Israel of
God, what? ibid. 4 Israel of God why mentioned? ibid. 6. Iudisme what it is?
41. 12 What it is to Iudaise? 112. 3 Judge the best of others: three obiectio^s
moved* and answered. 392 10. In giving Judgment of Churches three rules to be
marked. 8. 15 Three things are subject to Judgment. 156. 3 Judgment is
twofould. 159. 25 The duty of ministers often to forewarne the people, and the
duty of the people often to meditate of Gods judgments. 441. 10. 15. Iugling
a kind of witchcraft. 429. 35. What the word justice signifies? 116. 8. The
subject of justification. 117. 10 False causes of justification. ibid. 35 What
is that thing in Christ by and for which we are Justified. 118. 32. We are not
Justified only by the passion of Christ. 121. 10 The means of justification.
123. 30. Faith alone Justifies. 129. 17 Justice twofould, of the person and of
the act. 176. 18 The danger of the doctrine of Justification by works. 397. 29
Justification is twofould: of the person, of the faith of the person. 385. 5
Arguments against Justification by works. 375. 3 Faith and love no joint causes
in Justification. 384. 10 384. 10. Whosoever obstinately maintains the
doctrine of justification by works cannot be saved. 373. 30 Objections
removed. ibid. The kinds of justification. 131. 8 The practice of them that
are justified. 131. 36 But one Justification. 177. 1 Papists in the day of
death renounce Justification by works. 183. 34 There is a Justification before
God, and a Justification before men. 193. 3. We are Justified not only by the
death but also by the obedience of Christ. 286. 18 No Justification by works.
419. 9. 420. 6. The twofould popish Justification confuted. 348. 12
K
Kingdom of God what? 42. 25 Gods kingdom what it signifies. 441. 22.
Knowledge of the true God stands in two points. 248. 20 Knowledge of god is 2.
fould. 303. 5 Knowledge whereby men know God is either litterall or spiritual.
306. 4. The properties of spiritual are th^^e 306. 18. The Knowledge whereby
God Knows men stands in 2. things 308. 10. and it has two properties. 309.
24
L
The distinction of Latria and Dulia frivolous. 313. 6 We are free from the Law
in four respects. 136. 10 The maine difference between the Law and the
Gospel. 194. 36. 214. 17. Why the law is urged though we cannot keep it?
196. 16 The difference of the promises of the Law and the Gospel. 210. 17
Impossible for any man in the time of this life to fulfill the Law. 186. 35.
Obections removed etc. ibid. 11 There are two kinds of fulfilling the Law.
189. 11 The Law is not grievous three ways: vide commandments. The difference
of the promises of the Law and the Gospel. 210. 17 How the Law revealed sin
before Christ and after? 216. 14. The use of Gods Laws. 227. 23 The Law is a
Schoolmaster to Christ in two respects. 229. 10 When the Law of Moses was
abrogated? 230. 19 How far forth the Law is abrogated? 230. 38 What is the
Moral, Ceremonial and Judicial law? 230. and 231 And how far forth they are
all abrogated? ibid. Two notes whereby a Judicial Law may be discerned to be
Moral. 232. 30. What is our guide the Law being abrogated? vide. guide The
Law considered 2. ways. 288. 22 The Law is a yoke 3. ways. 288. 28 A treatise
of being under the Law and redemption from it. 288. 20 Our liberty by Christ
frees us from the Law three ways. 272. 8 The fulfilling of the law in this
life is imperfect. 377. 4 The true difference between the law and the Gospel
in 7. things 347. 23. The false difference confuted. 348. 1 How the whole law
is fulfilled in the love of our neighbour' 405. 15 Transgression of the Law
twofould. 419. 19. Wherein the law and the Gospel agree? vide Gospel By our
faith we do not abrogate the law but establish it in two respects. 498. 1
Wherein the law and Gospel differ. vide. Gospel No man in this life can fulfill
the law, proved by four Arguments. 499. 17. The Law is said to be fulfilled
three ways. 503. 35 Fulfilling of the law taken two ways. 504. 5 League with
the Devil twofould. 429. 20. The law has a three fould use though it cannot
be fulfilled. 504. 18. Why men are so cold in liberalie? 555. 9. 5. Rules for
the use of liberty. 402. 2 Christian liberty abused. 3. ways. 400. 17. What
is the abuse of liberty and where it is to be found, and what is the right use
of it? 400. 12 Five degrees in the way* and order used in procuring our
liberty by Christ. 278. 35 A treatise of liberty by grace. 366. 1^ What is
the authority of it, the persons to whom it belongs, and our duty touching
this liberty? ib. Of the parts of christian liberty. 366. ^4. Magistracy and
Christian liberty may stand together. 369. 5* Christ procures liberty by two
means. 370. 29* Popish religion is flatt against Christian liberty, and that
two ways. 372. 7. Our liberty frees us from the Law three ways. 372. 8. Our
life ought to be a pilgrimage 351. 16. There is a natural and spiritual life
138. 20. There are 3. degrees of life. 140. 24 The spiritual life stands
especially in three things. 149. 26 Life is created or uncreated: created is
natural or spiritual. 452. 35 Two degrees of spiritual life. 453. 1 In what
sense life eternal is a reward? 570 11. What resemblance it has with a reward?
ibid. 20 Of our limitations of Opinion and affection. 353. 23. Long* suffering
what, and the mane^ to use it? 445. 2 Self-love. vide Ouerweening. Of loving
our Neighbor vide Neighbor. Of mutual love between Pastor and People. 320.
27 How faith works by love? 383. 13 The use of love, though it do not
justify. 385. 13 What the love of our Neighbor is? 403. 12. What is the use
of Love. 403. 29 Six sorts of men live in the breach of the rules of Love.
404. 1 How love is a fruit of the spirit. 443. 27. Love follows faith and
regeneration: therefore the first act of love is not by nature as the Papists
teach. 443. 29 The love of God what? 443. 40 Three especial signs whereby it
is discerned. 444. 1 The Love of our Neighbor what ibid. 12. Why the Love of
our brother is called the love of Christ rather then of nature, of God, or of
Moses? 494. 8 The grounds of Love three. 593. 12 The Love of our Brethren
greater or lesser, two ways. 597. 15 How we must love all men alike and how we
may not? ibid. 18 How far does the child of God proceed in the lusts of the
flesh? 414. 33. Five degrees of lusts. 414. 36 The lusts of the flesh has two
actions. vide. Flesh The lusts of the spirit has two vide. spirit. Lust after
Baptism in the regenerate is a sin. 419. 2 Lusts what? 450. 33 What a lie
is, and whether a sin or no? 62. 23. 64. 10 Difference between a lie and a
Parable. 63. 7 And between a lie and the concealment of a thing. 63. 13
Between Lying and fayning. 63. 26 Reasons against lying. 447. 26
M
Whether Magistrates be necessary in the societies of Christians? 268. 23.
Magistracy and Christian liberty may stand together. vide liberty. How the
law of the Magistrate makes an indifferent thing to be necessary? 369. 37
Marriage what it is? 341. 40 Marriage noe sowing to the Flesh as Tacianus the
Heretic and Syritius the Pope would have it, but to the spirit. 563. 19 By
Marks what is signified. 648. 9 Marks of Christ of two sorts. ibid. 20.
Visible or invisible: Outwart or inward. typical or, real. ibid. 34 Real
marks double either in his natural body or mystical. 649. 1 How the marks in
his natural body do differ from those in his mististicall body. ibid 19 What
use to be made of Paul's marks. 650. 2 The makes of the Fratres flagellantes to
be derided. ibid. 25 Legaces given to the maintenance of the Mass, may be
applied to the maintenance of the true worship of God. 208. 9 The difference of
Meekenes and long suffering. 448. 1 What meekenes is? 464. 30. and 465. 29.
The effects of it. ibid. 34 Motives to Meekenes. 465. 10 How there is but one
Mediator? 217. 32. How Moses was a Mediator? 219. 23. How we are to put
affiance in men? 392. 32. We serve God in serving of men. 406. 5. How men are
nothing of themselves. 506. 1. 25. Men naturally think too well of themselves.
507. 8 How we are to please men and how not? 515. 32 Herein six cautions to be
used. 516. 3. Gods mercy great to sinners. 49. 26 It has a double effect in
us. ibid. 33 It is much abused and how? 40 By mercy what is understood? 645. 7.
All Merits and satisfactions for sins are to be reduced to the person of
Christ and if there be no humane satisfactions nor meritorious works. 14. 24
Merit of condignitie may be understood three ways? 565. 16 What Papists hold
merit of good works in regard only of Gods promise and divine acceptance, and
what in respect partly of their own worthiness partly of Gods acceptance, and
what only in regard of the dignity of the work? 565. 20 Ministers must
deliver nothing of their own. 6. 10 Ministers which are to be teachers must
first be taught. 38. 3 They must be taught by men where revelation is wanting.
38. 22 Ministers are pillars and how, with the use of it? 97. 1 Ministers of
the word must of necessity join with good doctrine the example of good life.
109. 5 What kind of men Ministers ought to be? 318. 16 Ministers duty specially
to reprove. 477. 37 Ministry is painful like the travail of a woman. 334.
12 The dignity of the Ministry. 334. 26. Ministers must temper their gifts
to their hearers. 338. 37 Ministers subject to slanders. 394. 37. Whether a
Minister may not conceal the truth some time? 395. 31 Ministers lives should
be real Sermons: 623. 30 The condition of faithful Ministers is to be full of
troubles. 647. 28 In what case a Minister in his preaching, may use
Philosophy, testimony of Profane writers, and quotations of Fathers. 541. 25
Ministers that labor in the word may lawfully take wages though they have
sufficient of their own. 543. 18. Abuse of the Ministers proved to be the
abuse of God. 548. 11 Of Professors deriding and defrauding Ministers of the
word. 549. 1. Why Ministers are not to sell the preaching of the word? 437. 26.
What they are to aim at in their preachings, and what not? 537. 20 A Minister
is to teach his Auditors only the word of God, and why? 540. 23. whether
Ministers are to be maintained by common contribution and liberality of the
people or not? 533. 37 That it is more convenient for Ministers to be
maintained by set stipends, arising from goods proper to the Church, then by
voluntary contribution, sundry reasons. 534. 17 objection, That the Ministers
place is an easy office, answered. 535. 1 what a Minister is? 171. 20 the
Devil cannot work a true Miracle. 171. 33 how Mocking is persecution? 362. 9
the Modesty of Paul. 19. 34 the practice of the godly to Mourn for other men's
sins. 337. 27 Objections in defense of Murder removed. 437. 7
N
The kinds of Nakedness. 266. 28 Nature does counterfeit grace, and how? 330. 28
A natural man can do the works of the moral law, yet in him they are
sins. 224. 25 Nature and Person distinguished. 279. 32. what Nature is? ibid.
Natural and carnal men are of two sorts. 463. 13 Necessity is twofold. 369.
35 how we must love our Neighbors? 328. 6. what the love of our Neighbor is?
vide Love. how the whole law is fulfilled in the love of our Neighbor? 405. 15
who is our Neighbor? 405. 27 In some cases we must love our Neighbor more
then our selves. 405. 34. Of the love of our Neighbor. vide Love. The new
Creature, or new man, and old man what it is? 637. 1 The uses of this, that we
are new creatures in Christ. 638. 23 Greater power required in the regeneration
of man then in the creation of the world. 639. 3 how men are Nothing of
themselves. vide Men.
O
Four things in an Oath. 65. 15 The form of an oath is to be plain and
direct, in the name of God, and not of creatures. 65. 35 An Oath is to be used
only in the case of extremity. 66. 13 Observation of days and times. 314 4.
The Gospel must be preached though all men be offended. 396. 15. Men have an
ouerweening of themselves naturally. 507. 8 The cause of it. 508. 10 Such
notably deceive themselves. 508. 30. It is the poison of love. 510. 25 Whether
a man may not judge himself to have a greater measure of gifts then they that
have less? 510 38. The remedies of this evil. 511. 36 Outward privileges or
dignities are of no moment in the kingdom of Christ. 382. 1. and 24
P
How a pacification is to be made in religion? 338. 29 Papists teach and
maintain the worship of false Gods. 305. 1. etc. Papists and we differ not
about circumstances. 376. 15 Mo pacification with the Papists for religion, but
civil society. 408. 25. Papists teach Idolatry four ways. vide Idolatry.
Papists urge their own ceremonies more strictly then Gods truth. 617. 28.
Papists like to the false teachers in Paul's time, in making things which be
signs of salvation meritorious causes of it. 618. 4 The Popes and Prelates of
Rome like to false teachers in compelling men to observe that which they
themselves will not observe. 518. 23. The Popish Church like to false teachers
in pretending religion, and conscience, for their ease and cloaking of their
impiety. 624. 3 It is showed in two particulars especially. ibid. In pardon
there be four degrees. 70. 28. Parents sustain a double person. 115. 12. Of
Parents authority over their children. vide children Parents truly punished in
their childrens punishment, notwithstanding it is not felt by them, whereof be
four reasons. 522. 14 Four Principal duties to be performed by the people to
the pastors and what they be? 531 34 Pastors are to have not only countenance
but maintenance of the people. 532. 6 Whether pastors are to be maintained by
co^tributio^ or not? 533. 37 Reasons to prove that it is more convenient for
ministers to live upon set stipends, then voluntary contribution. 534. 17
Objections that the Pastors office is an easy office. vide Ministers We must
patiently tarry for the reaping of our heavenly reward, urged from Gods patience
toward us. 582. 37 Gods patience, waiting for the amendment of our lives set
dowe by sundry degrees. 583. 20 Mischeifes, into which we run unto unless we
patiently expect god for our reward. 584. 22 Reasons why Paul did write the
epistle to the Galatians with his own hand. 607. 38 Paul subscribed all his
epistles with his own hand. 608. 16 Paul's conversion how wrought? 50. What was
gods preventing grace in Paul's conversion? 50. 10 Whether Paul was an agent or
Patient in his conversion? 51. 26 Whether violence was offered to his will in
conversion. 52. 2 The dignity of Paul above the other Apostles. 5. 28 Two
causes why Paul writes his epistles in the name, and with the consent of the
brethren. 6. 4 The true sign of every of Paul's epistles discovered, and the
false removed. 608. 27. and 609. 20 Why Paul would not take wages of the
church of Corinth and some others, four reasons. 536. 25 Peace outward or
inward. 644. 12 Peace with the creatures which be of four sorts. ibid. 14
Peace of conscience double, with god with our selves. ibid. 33 Peace with our
selves, threefould. ibid. 34. Of peace of conscience. ibid. 35 What peace is
and what be the parts of it? 10. 16 Peace without grace is no peace. 12. 6. How
we must have peace with all men? 408. 17 Peace is threefould. 408. 35 Three
rules for the maintaining of Church peace. 408. 36 For the enforcing of the
duties of peace there be seven special reasons. 410. 35 What peace is for the
maintenance whereof observed two rules. 444. 34. 37. The people punished for
Achans sin how it may stand? 526. 15 There is a double perfection. 188. 36.
Hatred of Gods grace in men is the beginning of al persecution. 362. 12.
Persecution what? 42. 30 Of the wicked persecuting the good 361. 33.
Perseverance crowns all our good works. 585. 31 Person and nature
distinguished. 279. 32. What a person is? 279. 33 Of Peter's supremacy. 94. 11
Pharisisme what it is and the principal doctrine thereof? 41. 17 Philosophy
not condemned. 434. 21. The errors of Philosophy. 4^4 26 There is lawful
pilgrimage. 59. 32 Popish pilgrimage condemned for two causes. 59. 39 Polygamie
not approved but tolerated for two reasons. 342. 9 Reasons for Polygamie
answered. 342. 29. What poor to be releiued? 98. 17 Pastors care of the poor
wherein it consists. 98. 25 Postscripts no part of canonical Scripture. 655.
20 Reasons why we must provide for the poor. 100. 35 The Gospel must be
preached though all men be offended. 396. 15. Preaching contains four
ministerial actions. 54. 17 Effectual and powerful preaching of the word
stands in two things. 160. 39. Preaching must be plain. 160. 11 Necessary for
all men. 165. 20 The word must be dispensed in the infirmity of man's flesh for
diverse causes. 323. 7 The benefits of preaching. 326. 27 Prayer to Saints and
Angels is carnal prayer. 299. 29 Pray only to God. ibid. 300. 14 The right
manner of seeking the praise of men. 455. 1 Primacie is 2 of order of power.
60. 18. Authority of the Church no principle. 433. 39. External and bodily
priueledges are of no moment in the kingdom of Christ. 382. 1 Gods promises
lie as void till the particular time of their accomplishment. 204. 20 The
promise made to Abraham is a covenant or testament and how? 211. 30. Christ is
the foundation of all the promises of god partly by merit, partly by efficacy.
313. 2 Why believers are called children of promise? 360. 8 Prouerbiall
sentences, are not at all times true and in every particular. 550. 36. Gods
providence uses evil things well. 348. 22 Subjection to punishment has three
parts. 365. 13 There are several degrees of punishments in hell. 555. and 556
R
The works of redemption exceed the works of creation. 14. 19 Of the
redemption of man from under the law. 288. 19. etc. Christ the only redeemer.
311. 9 Three marks of regeneration. 241. 40. The gift of regeneration is never
utterly extinguished. 262. 29 What true regeneration is? 377. 35 The works of
the regenerate are mixed with sin, and in the rigor of justice deserve
damnation, objections removed. 419. 9. 15. Of the rejoicing of the Church.
vide Church. Two grounds of rejoicing. vide glorying. Rejoice signifying to
glory 517. 11 Objection against reioicing in ones self. vide glorying. What
rules are to be observed in the rejoicing in the testimony of a good
conscience. vide glorying. False rejoicing wherein it confisteth. 519. 13
Reioycers are of four sorts. 519. 16 To rejoice in a man's self what? 517. 18.
The chief principle in religion what? 433. 24 Whether it be lawful to compel
men to embrace religion? 614. 5. The Magistrate may compel obstinate recusants
to profess true religion. ibid. 8. Objections to the contrary answered. ibid.
25 Paul's manner in reproouing. 18. 8 Liberty in reproouing with three caueats.
103. 13 Why we use not in preaching personal reproves as John Baptist did?
393. 16 The manner of reproof. vide Restore. He that is iniuried is fitter to
reprove him that offered the injury then any other. 474. 39 Reproves must
not be deferred. 460. 22. No wonder that sinners be loath to be reproved. 460.
37 A treatise of Christian reproof. 469. 31. Who are to be reproved? ib. 35
Reproof belongs not to those that are out of the visible Church. 470. The
greatest Princes are subject to reproof. 471. 15 Only open skorners and
persecuters of the word are not to be reproved. 472. 10 Men are to be
reproved for any sin known. ibid. 10 And for wrongs offered us. 474. 20
Objection against reproves answered. 47^. 12 Who are reproved? 477. 1. 37. In
five cases we are not bound to reprove others offending. 478. 13. In what
manner are men to be reproved set down in ten rules. 579. 37. The bitterness
of reproof is to be allaied four ways. 483. 17 A man may reprove another
four ways. 484. 8 In fitting our reproof to the offense committed we must
put a difference betwixt sin and finne. 484. 28. In three cases we are not
privately to reprove, but publicly to detect offenders. 487. 15 The Pastor
ought to be resident with his Hocke for two causes. 337. 10. Restitution. vide
Satisfaction. As often as our brother falls we must restore him. 461. 5 Who are
to be restored? ibid. 17 Spiritual men are more for to restore those that are
fallen then any other. 463. 3 The manner how we must restore? 464. 28.
Revelation is of two sorts. 36. 11. Extraordinary revelation is four ways.
36. 15 The revelation which Paul had is extraordinary. 36. 22 Revolt what, and
the kinds thereof. 18. 29 Remedies against revenge. 445. 8 Reward is double,
of honor and of debt. 569. 37 Reward presupposes not always debt. 571. 14
God gives rewards four ways. 571. 29. The phrases of speech of rewarding
double, or seven fold, what they signify in the Scripture. 552. 31. Paul's rule
what it is. 641. 33 The Papists rules, Lesbian rules. 642. 20. Monkish rules
vain and wicked. 642. 28. We must be runners in the race of God. 386. 19 We
must run well, and to the end. 387. 7. 22.
S
Of the institution of the Sabbath. 315. 9, 20. Sacraments confer not grace
by the work wrought. 254. 21 whether there be now in the church of God any
sacrifice or oblation of Christ? 161. 29 Whether the Saints may fall away
totally and finally? 586. 20 There is but one way of salvation. 22. 5.
Preuision of faith and good works no cause of salvation. 47. 20 The salvation
of believers is most sure. 47. 27 The manner and way of our salvation. 229. 21
The sanctification of the name of God has two parts. 72. 10 There is a double
sanctification. 193. 21. Satisfaction must be made for wrongs done. 98. 39 Who
must satisfy? 99. 21 To whom? 99. 28 What? 99. 38 When? 100. 9 In what order
and manner? 100. 15. Schism and heresy differ. vide Heresy. The Papists
schismatikes and not we. 437. 21 For the avoiding of schism and sedition two
rules. ibid. 29 Slanders use to be raised upon every light and unjust occasion.
395. 18. Scripture is both the gloss and the text. 352. 36. 434. 3 Scripture
has sundry senses according to the Papists. 345. 35 When the Scriptures
speaks figuratively and when properly? 346. 30. The Scriptures by themselves
are sufficient to salvation. 24. 24 The Scriptures are as certain as if they had
been written by God. 27. 5. The authority of the Scripture dependes not upon
the testimony of the Church. 27. 20 It is necessary that men should be
assured that the Scriptures are of God. 31. 30 The testimonies whereby this
assurance may be obtained. 31. 35 In Scriptures there is divine and infallible
authority. 353. 15. The means to decide controversies. 356. 29 Books of
Scripture in the new testament have a threefold difference. 608. 9 Books of
Scripture why called (...), as also Kethubim by the Jews? 659. 25 The
Scriptures why called Canonical? 641. 38 Seditions what? 435. 15 The
separation of Paul from the womb what it is? 46. 35 To make a fair show in
the flesh signifies four things. 610. 33 Simulation what, and the sorts? 105.
36. Sin where it takes place gives a man no rest till it has brought him to
a height of wickedness. 43. 39. What a sin of infirmity is? 108. 32. Sins
be of two sorts. 224. 27 Difference between the godly and ungodly in sinning.
443. 3 Original sin has two parts. 365. 5. A common fashion to extenuate
sin. 389. 56 We must resist every particular sin. 390. 25. It is the nature
of sin to set all things out of order. 460. 4 God rewards sins in the
same manner according to the nature of sin. 557. and 558. Sin drives men
beside themselves. 460. 8. Sinners must not delay their repentance. ibid. 21
Sins committed after a man's conversion are pardonable. 462. 4. 5. In every
known sin we are wro^ged. 473. 33 Sin a burden to whom? vide Burden.
Sin a spiritual burden. 528. 27 How we may be cased of the burden of sin?
529. 36 How sin is finite and how infinite? 554. 2, 3, 4. Solitary and
Monastic life against the light of nature. 643. 13 Why the second person is
called Son? 280. 1 Whether the Son be God? 280. 14. Two kinds of sorrow.
137. 39 A point of great skill to bring a soul in order and frame again. 460.
29. Three things to be considered in the soul, the substance, the faculties,
and the qualities. 637. 10 What is meant by what soever a man sowes that shall
he reap? 550. 10. Sowing what it signifies in the scripture? 550. 20
Objections against this prouerbiall speech; whatsoever a man sowes that shall
he reap. 550. 551. The distinction of sowing to the flesh, and to our flesh.
553. 36 By sowing to the flesh what is meant? 564. 1. 10. To sow to the spirit
what it is? ibid. 20. The Spirit has five properties. 418. 38. What is the
spirit? a treatise. 411. 21. 35. All exercises of Christian religion are to be
in the spirit. 381. 29 The operation of the spirit is threefold. 146. What the
Spirit signifies? 163. 35 what is meant by the giving or sending of the spirit?
204. 35 In what order the spirit is given? 205. 3. we receive the spirit for
six ends. ibid. 20. why the holy Ghost is called the spirit of the son?
293. 39 The manner how the holy Ghost is sent. 294. 35 Four works in the
spirit in causing believers to cry, Abba, father. 295. 32. The spirit of grace
in Christians is more excellent then that of creation in two respects. 412. 27
Of the operation of the spirit. 412. 39. The whole work of the spirit may be
reduced to factions. 413. 8 The spirit makes us change and renew our actions in
three respects. 413. 21. The lust of the spirit has two actions 416. 32 The
office of the spirit is first to regenerate, secondly to guide the regenerate.
421. 14. 16 In this guidance there are four actions of the spirit. ibid.
Subjection to the work of Gods spirit has two parts. 422. 1 The property of
the works of the spirit: a treatise. 442. 33 The efficacy of the spirit. 443.
6 What it is to live and walk in the spirit? 452. and 453 A sign whereby to
know whether a man has in his heart the spirit of God or no. 454 4 Spiritual
men opposed to carnal are of two sorts. 463. 24 Spiritual men are more fit
to restore those that are fallen then any other. 463. 31 Diverse good and evil
things are termed by the name of spirit. 466. 5. Two kinds of spyings. 85. 6
Of standing fast in liberty, the manner and time of it. 372. 17 Two kinds of
subjection. 269. 11 Subjection to the spirit has two parts. vide Spirit.
Succession is of three sorts. 35. 3 The successors of the first preachers had
an ordinary calling. 35. 17. Five uses of our sufferings. 170. 10
T
A property of false teachers is, to urge earnestly their own ceremonies upon
others. 617. 20 A property of false teachers to teach false doctrine for
avoiding of persecution. 618. 26 The essential difference between true and
false teachers. 619. 24 Another property of false teachers to compel others
to observe that which they themselves will not observe. 622. 18 Another note of
false teachers to pretend religion to cloak their wickedness. 623. 36 The
property of false teachers is to set a fair show upon the matter. 611. 14.
Temperance what? four rules for the practicing of it. 448. 3 By what law
Te^ths are due. 232. 3, 10 Of what value the testimony of the Church is. 33. 4
There must be a christian toleration one of another, for the maintenance of
church peace. 409. 16 In what it stands? ibid. 17 To what end it serves? 409.
32 Whether there may not be a tolleration for Popery? 409. 37 Unwritten
Traditions tendered as a part of gods word are abominations. 24. 29 The church
is troubled three ways. 391. 33. Reasons to move men to speak and deal
truly. 447. 26 The time of all events determined by God. 49. 2 Due time how it
may be understood. 582. 13 We must make a holy, and profitable use of time.
598. 1 We must redeem the time lost, in three respects. ibid. 37 Observations
of times which be forbidden. 600. 6 The kinds of unlawful observation of
time, either Jewish or Heathnish, and wherein they consist? 600. 11 Lawful
observation of time twofold, divine or humane. 601. 4 Humane observation of
time threefold. 601. 5
V
What the desire of vain glory is? 454. 33 Excuses hereof taken away. ibid.
38 They that have received good gifts of God are many times most vaineglorious.
455. 38 Remedies of pride and vaineglorie. 456. 20. What uncleanness is? 425. 21
Of our union with Christ. 145. 23 264. 39. Substantial and spiritual. 264. 30
In what respect they are said to be one with Christ? 265. 1 Unity is not an
infallible and inseparable mark of the church. 407. 18 Though men were not
commanded to vow, yet the matter and form of vows was commanded. 60. 5
W
What wantonness is? 425. 28 Reasons both in general and special that make men
weary of well doing, 576. 38 How far forth the will works in the receiving
of grace? 11. 16 The absolute will of God cannot be resisted. 360. 36 The
determination of man's will by the will of god does not abolish all freedom of
will. 361. 4 Man has no freedom of will in good duties before his conversion.
417. 13 What witchcrafteis? a treatise of the ground and kinds of it. 429. 16
What is a witch? 430. 38 Signs that serve to discover a witch. 431. 29. False
and uncertain signs. 342. 1 Wives among the Jews of two sorts. 343. 23 The
word is the cause and object of our faith. 6. 32 The word of God is the matter
of the ministry, and how it is to be taught and heard? 29. 30 35 It depends
not upon the authority of the church. 56. 11 But upon it self. 77. 18 The
word must be dispensed in the infirmity of man's flesh for diverse causes. vide
preach. Laborers in the word may lawfully take wages though they have
sufficient of their own to maintain themselves. 543. 18 There be no
meritorious works to preparemen to their justification. 11. 13. How our works
are said to please God? 191. 19 The works of the regenerate are mixed and
sinful and in the rigor of justice deserve damnation: ergo no justification
by works. 515. 9. The benefit of approouing of our works. 515. 9 How we may
aprooue our works three rules. 515. 16 Whether we may not approve our works
or actions to men, and if we may how far forth. 515. 29 Infants have no good
works. 553. 8. Gods reward shall be according to the quantity and quality of
the works, and what may be gathered from thence. 555. 25 How Lazarus and the
theife on the cross had good works? 553. 27 Works and labors of men may
differ three ways, and what they be? 556. 37 Uses that God rewards men
according to their works. 559. 560 561. 562. Works though they be seeds yet
are they no causes of eternal life. 564. 565. 31. That works are seeds of
eternal life it is gods mercy, and not the merit of the works. 565. 35
Works of the flesh perfectly evil and why? 566. 5 Good works perfect as they
are of god, imperfect as they are of me^. 566. 12. Reasons why the works of
the spirit are not the cause of eternal life as well as badd works are the
cause of eternal destruction. 566. tota page Objections of the Papists to
prove works the causes of eternal life answered. Beginning at page 561 line
31. vsque ad page 572. Works no cause of our reward but the measure. 568. 2
Good works make a man known to be just but faith m(...) him just. 567. 32
Good works are causes of eternal life not as meriting, but as the kings high
way. 568. 25 How life eternal is promised to good works, how not? 569. 6 The
promise of reward upon condition of performing the work, makes not a
meritorious work 569. 29. Reward not due to works of regeneration upon
compacte and promise, the reasons why? 569. 20. Good works merit not eternal
life though it be a reward of them. page 569. in fine, and page 570. 571. How
life eternal is called a reward of good works? 570. 11. 571. 5 That we may
incite our selves to the doing of good works from the consideration of our
heavenly reward sundry reasons. 579. 29. In doing good works we may respect
the reward, but not only nor principally. 581. 31 What should most of all
move us to do good works? 581. 32 The love of the world and of the truth
cannot stand together. 619 33. What is meant by the world and what it is to be
taken out of the world? 13. 37
Y
Two kinds of yielding. 87. 18
Z
Zeal what it is? 45. 20
FINIS.

