A CLOVD OF FAITHFVLL WITNESSES, LEADING TO THE HEAVENLY CANAAN: Or A
Commentary upon the 11. Chapter to the Hebrews, preached in Cambridge by that
Godly, and judicious Divine, M. William Perkins: Long expected and desired; and
therefore published at the request of his Executours, by Will. Crashawe, and
Tho. Pierson, Preachers of Gods Word: who heard him preach it, and wrote it
from his mouth.

PHIL. 3.17. Look on them that so walk, as ye have us for an example.

HEB. 13.8. Whose faith follow, considering what has been the end of their
conversation.

AT LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Leo. Green. 1607.

To the Noble, and virtuous Gentlemen, Sir John Sheaffield, Knight; and M.
Oliver S. John: Sons and Heirs to the Right Honorable Edmond Lord
Sheaffield, Lord President of the North, and Oliver Lord S. John, Baron of
Bletsho: grace, and peace.
THe gracious promises of God (Honorable and most worthy Gentlemen) made to
the holy Patriarchs, touching the Land of Canaan, were singular comfort to the
believing Israelites, in their bondage of Egypt. And the renewing of the same by
the hand of Moses (whose words God confirmed by so many miracles) must needs
augment their joy abundantly, although their bonds at that time increased.
But, the pledge of Gods presence in the cloudie pillar, whereby he led them in
the wilderness both night and day, did so far exceed all his promises for
matter of consolation, that even Moses himself desired rather to be detained
from the promised Land, than deprived of the comfort of that his presence in
the way: Exodus 33.15. 1. Cor. 10.6
If thy presence (says he) go not before us, bid us not depart hence. Now,
these things being ensamples unto us, and evident types of our estate who live
under the Gospel, show apparently, that howsoever Believers be greatly cheered
in their spiritual travel, by the gracious promises which God in Christ has
made unto them; yet, this their joy is much increased, by the view of those
that have gone before them in the way of faith; who are unto them as a Cloud
of Witnesses, or a cloudie Pillar. For, howsoever the truth of God be the only
ground of sound consolation: yet, because we are akin to Thomas, and will not
believe unless we see, and feel; therefore it is, that by the example of
Believers (wherein is some sensible evidence of the comfort of Gods truth) we
are far more cheered, than by the promise it self alone.

Here then behold what great cause we have to cast our eyes upon this Cloud
of Witnesses; which the ho-Ghost has erected as a pledge of his presence, and
a direction to all those that shall follow their steps in the practice of
faith, til the worlds end. Shall Moses affect that Cloud so much, which led
them only the way to a temporal inheritance: and shall not we much more be
ravished with delight in this Cloud, which leads us to the kingdom of
heaven? Heb. 10.38 2. Cor. 5.7
In all estates the Just must live by faith: For, We walk by faith, and not by
sight. And what is the hope and happiness of a Christian man, but to receive
at last the salvation of our souls, 1. Pet. 1.9
which is the end of our faith, and period of this walk. But any faith will
not support us herein: some begin in the Spirit, Gal. 3.3
who end in the Flesh, going out with Paul for a while; but at length return
with Demas to the world, 2. Tim. 4.10
neither can they do otherwise: for, Apostasy is the Catastrophe of
Hypocrisy. He that would deceive in his profession is usually deceived of his
salvation.

Wherefore this shall be our wisdom, to see to our souls that our faith (as the
beloved Apostle said of love) be not in word, and tongue; but in deed, and in
truth. 1. Ioh. 3.^^
And for our better direction in trying the truth of our faith, we have here
many notable precedents in this Cloud of Witnesses, consisting of most worthy
Believers in all ages before CHRIST'S incarnation: all which showed the life of
faith by their works; and we in them may see how to put our faith in practice.
Now, the rather must we attend hereunto, because in all estates we must
practice faith. For, Without faith it is impossible to please God. And what
estate of life ca^ possible befall us, Heb. 6.
wherein we have not a lively pattern and forerunner leading us the way to
Heaven, within the compass of this Cloud? Art thou a King or Magistrate?
behold DAVID, HEZECHIAS, and the Judges: art thou a Courtier? Look on MOSES:
art thou a Martiall-man? Behold SAMSON, DAVID, IOSVAH. Here is ENOCH, NOE,
and the Prophets for Ministers: the Patriarchs for Fathers: SARA and the
Shunamite for mothers: ISAAC and JOSEPH for children: Here is ABEL for
Shepherds, and RAHAB for victuallers: Here are some that lived in honor, in
peace, and plenty, some in want, and some in sickness: but most of all in
persecution; because therein is the greatest trial of faith. 1. Pet. 1.7
So that, which way soever we turn us, if we walk by faith, we have here
some faithful witness to go before us. And to clear their steps the better
to our sight, that so we may follow hard toward the mark without wandering,
Phil. 5.14.
we have here a notable light in this learned Commentary; which, we must
confess, is much obscured, for lack of the refining hand of the godly Author
himself: but now, seeing that shining light is quenched, use this our Lamp;
it is fed with such oil as we received in the Lords Sanctuary, from that
Olive Tree, whence many a one did fill his vessel. And, being importuned to
expose the same for the Common good, we have presumed to place it under the
shelter of your Honorable names; beseeching God it may help to guide your
feet in the way of peace. Luke 1.79.


The religious precedents of your Honorable Parents (Right Noble and hopeful
Gentlemen) must persuade you much to be sound, and constant in the faith: for,
declining in religion brings Ier. 22.15 etc. to the end.
stain of honor, and decay 1. King. 11.11
even of temporal portion. But, labor you to increase in grace, and trust the
Lord with your outward greatness. Honor him, and he will honor you: delight
in him, 1. Sam. 2.30. Psalm. 37.4.
and he will give you your holy hearts desire; his faithfulness will be your
shield, to the grief of those that envy your happiness. But, beware of bad
example, and evil counsel, which are the bane and poison of younger years.
Walk with God like Enoch: use the world as Abraham did, Heb. 11.5.
and follow Moses in the matters of delight, Verse 10.
forsaking them when they become the pleasures of sin. Verse 24. etc.
So shall you obtain good report, Heb. 12.39
and your memories shall be blessed with your Posterities, like these faithful
Witnesses. NOVEMBER. 10. 1607.

Yours in the LORD to be commanded, WILLIAM CRASHAVV, THO. PIERSON.

A Commentary upon the 11. Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
VERSE 1. Now Faith is the ground of things which are hoped for: and the
evidence of things not seen.


COncerning Faith, 2. points are necessary to be known of every Christian; the
doctrine and the practice of it: the whole doctrine of faith (being grounded
and gathered out of the word of God) is comprised in the Creed, commonly
called the Apostles Creed: which being already by us expounded* it follows
in order (next after the doctrine) to lay down also the practice of faith: for
which purpose we have chosen this 11. chapter to the Hebrews as being a
portion of Scripture, wherein the said practice of faith is most excellently
and at large set down.

This chapter depends on the former, thus: The Coherence.
We may read in the former chapter, that many Jews having received the faith,
and given their names to Christ, did afterward fall away: therefore toward the
end of the chapter, there is added a notable exhortation tending to persuade
the Hebrews, to persevere in faith unto the end, as also to suffer patiently
what ever shall befall them in the profession of it: and to urge the
exhortation, there are diverse reasons, not needful to be alleged; for they
concern not the present purpose.

Now, in this chapter he continues the same exhortation: and the whole chapter
(as I take it) is nothing else in substance, but one reason to urge the former
exhortation to perseverance in faith; and the reason is drawn from the
excellency of faith: for this chapter does diverse ways set down what an
excellent gift of God faith is: his whole scope therefore is manifest to be
nothing else, but to urge the^ to persevere and continue in that faith, proved
at large to be so excellent a thing: and indeed he could not bring a better
argument to move them to love and hold fast their faith, then by persuading
them of the excellency of it. For common reason bids us not only choose, but
hold fast that that is excellent.

Out of this coherence we may learn in a word, that perseverance in faith is a
matter not of ordinary necessity nor of mean excellency, to the urging whereof
the author of this epistle uses so large and so forcible an exhortation; in so
much as, whereas ordinary exhortations occupy the room of one or some few
verses, this is continued through diverse chapters.

The parts of this whole chapter are two:

1. A general description of Faith from the first verse to the fourth.

2. An illustration or declaration of that description, by a large rehearsal
of manifold examples of ancient and worthy men in the old testament: from the
4. verse to the end.

Of these two in order.

The description of Faith consists of three actions or effects of faith, set
down in three several verses.

The first effect in the first verse, Faith makes things which are not (but
only are hoped for) after a sort to subsist and to be present with the believer.

The 2. is in the 2. v: Faith makes a believer approved of God.

The 3. in the 3. verse: Faith makes a man understand and believe things
incredible to sense and reason.

Of these effects in order.

Now Faith is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the evidence of
things which are not seen. Verse 1.


This first verse contains the first effect in the description of faith,
wherein first let us see the true meaning of the words: Secondly, what
instructions they do naturally yield unto us. For the meaning, we must examine
the words severally. Now faith

Faith in the word of God is specially of three sorts Historical, Miraculous,
Justifying or saving faith.


1. Historical faith, is not only a knowledge of the word, but an assent of
the heart to the truth of it: and this faith is general not only to all men,
good and bad, but even to the devils themselves: James. 2.19. Thou beleeuest
there is one God, thou do well: the devils also believe it and tremble. Now
he that will believe out of the Scripture there is one God, he will believe
historically any thing in the Scriptures.

2. Miraculous, or the faith of miracles: which is, An inward persuasion of the
heart, wrought by some special instinct of the holy Ghost in some man, whereby
he is truly persuaded, that God will use him as an instrument for the working
of some miracles: this also is general, both to elect and reprobate, Judas had
it with the rest of the Apostles.

3. Saving (commonly called Justifying) faith: which is, A special persuasion,
wrought by the holy Ghost in the heart of those that are effectually called,
concerning their reconciliation and salvation by Christ.

Of these three sorts of faith, the third is principally meant, in this place.
And although in the description, and over all the chapter, there are some
things that agree to other faith then it; yet I say the general scope in this
chapter, is principally of that faith that saues a man. It becomes us therefore
to learn carefully the instructions that concern the practice of this faith,
for it is no less then a saving faith.

Secondly, it is said; This faith is the ground or substance* for the word
signifies both. The meaning is: things hoped for, as yet are not, and so have
no being nor substance. Now faith that believes the promises, and applies
them, that faith gives to these things which yet are not (after a sort) a
substance or subsistence in the heart of the believer: so that that thing which
never had, nor yet has a being in it self, by this faith has a being in the
heart of the believer; this I take to be the true meaning.

Thirdly, it follows of what things* this faith is the ground or substance:
namely, of things hoped for, and things not seen. And these be of two sorts:
either in regard of the Fathers of the old testament alone, or of them and us
both.

Of the first sort were these two: 1. The incarnation of Christ. 2. The
publishing of the Gospel, both to Jew and Gentile in a glorious manner: both
these were hoped for of them, but we have seen them: to them they had a being
only in faith: to us a being in themselves.

Now unto the fathers of the old testament, their faith gave these two things
a being in their hearts and souls, though they came not to pass many hundredth
years after.

There are other things which we hope for as well as they, which are to come,
and not seen in respect of us both: and they be six.

1. Justification, standing in the remission of sins. 2. Sanctification in
this life. 3. The perfection and accomplishment of our sanctification after
this life. 4. The Resurrection of the body, and reuniting it with the soul. 5.
Glorification of body and soul. 6. Life everlasting, and glory with God in
heaven.
These they saw not with the eye of the body, neither do we: yet they hoped for
them, and so do we: they had no being in themselves to them, neither have they
as yet to us: but this true saving faith gave to them, gives to us, and will
give to every believer, whilst the world lasts, such a certain assurance of
them, that they seem present to us, and we seem presently to enjoy them: we
cannot enjoy any of them fully; but saving Faith has this power, to give them
all a present being in our hearts, and us such a real possession of them, as
greatly delights a Christian soul: insomuch, as the feeling of the
sweetness of this glory, though it be to come, ouerwhelmeth the feeling of a
worldly misery, though it be present.

Fourthly, it is added, And the evidence

This word signifies and teaches us two things concerning faith.

1. Faith is an evidence, etc. That is, Faith so conuinceth the mind,
understanding, and judgment, as that it cannot but must needs, yea it
compels it, by force of reasons unanswerable, to believe the promises of God
certainly.

2. It is an evidence: that is, whereas life everlasting and all other things
hoped for are invisible, and were never seen of any believer since the world
began: this saving faith has this power and property, to take that thing in it
self invisible, and never yet seen, and so lively to represent it to the
heart of the believer, and to the eye of his mind, as that after a sort he
presently sees and enjoys that invisible thing, and rejoices in that sight,
and enjoying of it: and so the iudg^ment is not only convinced, that such a
thing shall come to pass, though it be yet to come: but the mind (as far as
Gods word has reueald, and as it is able) conceiues of that thing, as being
really present to the view of it.

Let one example serve for all: life everlasting is a thing hoped for: Now
Faith, not only by infallible arguments grounded upon the word and promise of
God, conuinceth a man's judgment, that it shall come to pass (insomuch as he
dare say; that he knows as certainly, there is a life everlasting, as that he
lives and moves) but this Faith also (as much as Gods word has reueald, and
as far forth as the mind of man is able to conceive of it) so represents
this life everlasting to the eye of the soul, as that the soul seems to
apprehend and enjoy this life everlasting; yea, and often in such measure, as
that he contemns the world, and all the present felicity of it, in comparison
of that measure of the joys thereof, which faith represents to his soul: and
thus faith makes that present which is absent: and makes that manifest and
visible, which in it self is invisible: invisible to the eyes of the body, it
makes visible to the eye of the soul; the sight of which eye is both given,
and continued, and daily sharpened by saving faith. And thus faith is a most
excellent evidence of things not seen. So then the whole su^me of this first
effect, is briefly thus much; Whereas things to be believed, as perfection of
sanctification, resurrection, glorification, etc. are not yet seen, neither
can be, in that they are not yet come to pass; yet if a man have grace
certainly to believe the promises of God, these things shall have a being to
his soul: in that both his judgment knows assuredly they shall come to
pass; and his soul, in most lively and joyful representations, seems to
enjoy them.

Hitherto of the meaning of the first effect.

Now in the second place, let us see what instructions this first effect thus
unfolded does minister unto us.

First, whereas faith gives a substance, and being to things that are not, we
learn that the Fathers in the old Testament that lived before the incarnation
of Christ, were truly partakers of the body and blood of Christ.

If any allege that this is strange, considering that Christ had the^ no body
and blood, neither had he any until the Incarnation: and how the^ could they
receive that, which the^ was not?

I grant it is true, they the^ had no being, and yet the Fathers received the^:
but how can this be? I answer by the wonderful power of saving faith, which
makes things that are not in nature, to have in some sort a being and
subsistence: and so was Christ (though he was to come) present to the believers
of the old time. For, Apoc. 13.8. Christ is a Lamb slain from the beginning
of the world: That is, slain as well then as now: and that not only in ye
counsel and decree of God, whereby he is borne and slain in all times and
places: nor only in regard of the eternal power, efficacy, and merit of his
death: but also even in respect of the heart of the believer, whose faith makes
that, that is locally absent, after a sort truly and really present: even so
also is Christ a Lamb slain even from the beginning of the world.

See a plain demonstration hereof in Ioh. 8.5.6. Abraham saw me (says Christ)
and reioiced: How could this be, when as Christ was not borne of 1000. years
after? Ans. This could not be in reason, but it was indeed to Abraham's faith:
whereby he saw Christ more lively, and more to his joy and consolation, so many
100. years before he was; the^ many which lived in Christ's time, and saw him,
and heard him, and conuer^ed with him: for they living with him, yet were as
good as absent from him, because they believed not in him: And Abraham though
Christ was so far from him, yet by his faith was present with him. Again, 1.
Cor. 10.3. the ancient believing Israelites ate the same spiritual bread, and
drank the same spiritual rock, and that rock was Christ: How could they
eat and drink Christ, so long before he was? I answer, they did it by reason
of that wonderful power of faith, which makes a thing absent, present to the
believer: By that faith they received Christ, as lively, as effectually, as
much to their profit and comfort, as we do since his coming.

If any man ask how could their faith apprehend that, that then was not. I
answer by giving them interest and title to it: and so the Fathers are said by
faith to have received Christ, because their faith gave them right and title in
Christ, and in their hearts they felt the efficacy of his death and
resurrection, whereby they died to sin, and were renewed in holiness, as well
as we are now by the same efficacy.

Secondly, whereas faith makes things absent, present;

Here they are confuted that teach that the Lords supper is no Sacrament,
unless the body and blood of Christ be either truly turned into the bread and
wine, or at least be in or about the bread; and that so he is locally present,
and must locally and substantially be received: and this (say they) is the most
comfortable receiving of Christ: for what comfort is it to receive one absent?
but these men know not this notable prerogative of true faith, Faith gives
being to things which are not, and makes things present which are absent: they
therefore that will have Christ locally present, they take this noble
prerogative from faith: for here is nothing absent, which faith should make
present: we need not go in this Sacrament, to require a corporal presence:
it is sufficient if we have true faith; for that makes him present much more
comfortably, then it might be his bodily presence would be unto us.

If any man ask how this can be? I answer, The faith of the receiver knows
best; and yet reason can say something in this case: for suppose a man look
earnestly upon a star, there are many thousand of miles betwixt his eye and
the star; yet the star and his eye are so united together, as that the star
is after a sort present to his eye. So if we regard local distance, we are as
far from Christ as earth is from heaven: but if we regard the nature of
Faith, which is to reach it self to Christ, where ever he be, in that regard
Christ is present: and why should not this be so? for if the bodily eye, so
feeble and weak, can reach so far as to a star, and join it to it self,
and so make it present; why should not much more the piercing eye of the soul
reach up to Christ, and make him present to the comfortable feeling of it self?

Thirdly, here we learn how to behave our selves in a strange temptation,
whereby God uses to exercise his children. The Lord, after that he has
received his children into his favor, continues not always to manifest that
favor unto them; but often times pulls back the feeling of it for a time; that
afterward, he may show it again in more comfortable manner unto them, and
that they may afterward more sensibly feel it, and more earnestly love it, and
more carefully labor to keep it, when they have it.

Now for the time of this eclipse of the favor of God, he not only darkeneth
his love, but makes them feel also such a measure of his wrath, as that they
will often think themselves castawayes from the favor of God. David and Io^
were often exercised with this temptation, as appears by their most
lamentable and bitter complaints: yea, David doubts not, Psalm. 77.9, to
challenge the Lord, that he has forgotten to be gracious, and has shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure. And Job, chap. 13.26, complains to the Lord,
that He writes bitter things against him, and makes him to possess the sins
of his youth; words, as it may seem, of men forsaken of God: and indeed so for
that time they thought of themselves. If it please the Lord thus to deal with
us, so as we feel nothing else but his wrath wrestling with our consciences,
neither can think otherwise by present feeling, but that God has forsaken us;
what should we do in this pitiful case? should we despair, as reason would
bid us? no, but take this course: Call to mind Gods merciful promises, and his
ancient former love; and cast thy self upon that love, though thou can not
feel it: When thou have most cause to despair, then labor against it: When
thou have no reason to believe, then believe with all thy power. For, remember
the power and prerogative of thy faith: It believes not things that are, and
manifestly appear, so much as such things that are not, and have no being. So
then, when Gods favor seems to be lost, and to have no being to thee, then is
Gods favor a fit object for thy faith, which believes those things that are
not. Let all the devils in hell set themselves against thy poor soul, and if
thou hold fast this faith, they cannot all make thee sink under it: for
when the devil says, Thou have lost Gods favor; by faith a man answers,
though Gods favor be lost unto my feeling, yet to my faith it is not: My faith
gives it a being, and so long (say what thou will) I will never fear that it
is lost. When God pulls back his favor, and fights against thee with his wrath;
do as Jacob did, Genesis 32.27.29, Wrestle with God, though thou have but one
leg: that is, though thou have but one little spark of faith, fight with
that little faith, lay hold by it on God, and let him not go until he has
blessed thee, in turning again unto thee his favorable countenance: and say
with Job, 13. even in the very heat of thy temptation: O Lord, though thou kill
this body and flesh of mine, yet will I trust in thee for everlasting life:
yea, and though Gods anger should seem to increase, yet for all that take
faster hold, and faint not; for faith will never fail thee: it will restore
Gods love when it seems lost: it will set it before thine eyes, when it seems
to be hid. For, mark well but this one reason; if faith will give life
everlasting a being, and make it present to thy soul, which indeed yet never
had being to thee: how much more can it give a being to Gods favor, and make
it present to thy soul, which once had, and indeed has still a being, and was
never lost indeed, but only to a man's feeling? Thus, true faith is able to
answer this temptaation, whether it come, in life, or in the pangs of death.

Fourthly, whereas faith is called an evidence: hence we learn, that the
nature of faith stands not in doubting, but in certainty and assurance. The
Romish doubting of the essence of faith, is as contrary to true faith, as
darkness to light: for faith is an evidence of things hoped for, that is, it
co^uinceth the judgment by infallible arguments; knowing as certainly the
truth of the promises, and of the things hoped for, as that God is God. But
Rome will needs ioin faith and doubting, which in deed fight like fire and
water, and can never agree together in every respect; but one will in the end
destroy the other.

Objection. But it seems, doubting is a part, or at least a companion of
faith, for we doubt as well as believe: and who is so faithful that doubts
not? Answer. We do so: but what then? we should not; for God commands us to
believe, and not to doubt: therefore to believe, because it is commanded of
God, is a virtue: and if it be a virtue, then to doubt is a vice; faith and
doubting are both in a good man, but faith is a work of grace and of the
spirit. Doubting is a work of the flesh, and a piece of the corruption of the
old man.

Fifthly, if faith be a substance of things hoped for, much more is it a
substance to the believer: if it give those things a being which a^e out of
him, much more does it give a permanent being unto the believer himself,
strengthening him to stand and continue in all assaults. So, Heb. 3.14, Faith is
that, whereby a believer is sustained and vpholden: so that indeed we may fitly
say; Faith is the spiritual substance, and the spiritual strength of a
Christian man: and according to the measure of his faith, such is the measure
of his spiritual strength.

This consideration has diverse comfortable uses: but especially two: 1. When
any of us are out of the reach of a temptation, so long are we confident of our
own strength. But when we are assaulted by the devil, the world, and our own
flesh: then we shall find, that to resist is a harder matter then we dreamed of:
for, as possible as it is for water to burn, or fire to put out it self: so
possible is it for us of our selves to resist sin; insomuch, as it is a
thousand to one, but that at every assault our nature yields. Now if it be so
hard to rule over one sin, how shall we do against that sea of temptations, that
ouerwhelmeth a Christian life? this doctrine teaches thee how: namely, to
stick to thy faith, and it will do it for thee: for if it be the substance of
the things thou hopest for, which yet never were: much more will it yield unto
thee spiritual strength and substance, to make thee stand in all temptations.
When thou art tempted, then call to mind Gods promises, believe them, that is,
apply them to thy self, and be resolved that they were made, and shall be
performed even to thee: the^ though thou have no more power of thy self, then
fire has to cease to burn; yet whilst thou do thus, thou shall feel thy
soul spiritually strengthened against all temptations: and, feeling the
experience of this, deny the^ thine own strength, and magnify the power that
God has given unto true faith.

Again, though now we are most of us quiet under our own vines and figtrees:
yet we know not how soon the hand of the Lord may be upon any of us, in
poverty, sickness, imprisonment, banishment, losses, famines, or how it
pleases him: how shall a poor Christian stand and buckle himself to bear
these? I answer, true saving faith resting on the word of God, and believing
the promises, not formally but truly, will put such substantial spiritual
strength into him, as that at first, though he bow under it; yet shall he be
able to recover himself again, and buckle himself to go forward in his
profession, and shall follow Christ manfully with this his cross: This
wonderful power has God given to saving faith, both to resist temptations, and
to undergo all crosses.

And thus much of the first action or effect of faith: the second follows.

VERSE 2. For, by it our Elders were well reported of.


THis verse contains the second effect of saving faith* which is, that faith
is a means whereby a believer is approved of God. This verse has special
relation to the fifth verse: For that, that is said here of all the Elders in
general, is there affirmed specially of Enoch; namely, that he was reported
of to have pleased God.

Let us first search the true meaning of the words.

Elders.] That is, all such men as living under the old testament, believed in
Christ: amongst which (though all be understood) yet some were more excellent
in faith and obedience then others, and so more honorable, and of higher
estimation with God and men: and of them it is specially understood.

Now concerning these Elders, it is further said that they were well reported
of: hereby are meant three things.

1. That God approved, and allowed of them. 2. That God did approve of them,
because of their faith in the Messiah. 3. That God gave a testimony, and
declared that he approved of them.
For the 1. it may be asked, How were they approved of God?

Ans. Christ the son of God is he, in whom the Father is well pleased. Math.
3.17.
Now they believing in Christ, their sins were laid on him; and made his by
imputation: and contrariwise his holiness, obedience, and satisfaction, were
imputed to them, and by the same imputation made theirs: Now that being theirs,
God being so well pleased with Christ, could not but also for Christ's sake
approve of them. If this seem hard unto any, I make it plain by this
comparison. Look as Jacob a younger brother, puts on Esaus garment, the elder
brother, and in it was taken for Esau, and obtained his fathers blessing and
patrimony, which by himself he could not have got: even so we are as younger
brethren, Christ is our elder brother, we have no right nor title to our
fathers blessing, nor to the kingdom of heaven: we must put on the robe of
perfect righteousness, which is the garment of Christ, our elder brother: we,
standing clothed with (...), purchase our fathers favor, and with his favor
his ble^^^ng, and his blessing is the right and title to everlasting life. And
thus by Christ they were approved.

Secondly, for what were they approved? The text says. By faith; not because
faith is an action of a sanctified mind and a good grace of God: for so are
humility, love, fear of God (al which are graces of the sanctifying spirit, as
faith is): but because it is a worthy instrument in the heart of the believer,
which apprehends, and applies to the soul that righteousness of Christ, by
which he is justified; thus, it being the hand and instrument of their
justification, by it (it is said) they were approved.

3. The text adds, that God did not only approve of them, but that he
testified and made it manifest to all the world that he did so.

And this testimony God gave of them 1. In his word. 2. In their own
consciences.


The truth of the first is manifest, in that not only in this chapter, but
often also in the old testament, God has m^de such honorable mention, and
given such honorable titles unto many of these Elders: calling Abraham the
friend of God, 2. Chron. 20.7. And David, a man after Gods own heart, ^. Sam.
13.14. and them all, his anointed and dear chosen children, Psalm. 105.15.
Thus God has testified of them in his word.

2. God testified it to their own consciences, in that he gave them his
spirit, inwardly to assure their consciences that he did accept them in the
Messiah to come: and thus these elders received a testimony both outward to
all the world, and inward to their consciences, that God in Christ approved and
loved them: so the sense is plain, the use hereof manifold.

1. In that it is said these Elders were approved by faith: here we learn
what is the old and ancient way, the right and straight way (that has no
by-ways) to life everlasting: namely, this only, To rely on the mercy of God
in Christ for pardon of sin: this is the way wherein all the ancient Elders
walked to heaven: this is the way that God has opened and made unto his Court:
it is the Kings high way, the beaten way, common to every one that knows how
to walk in it: and deceived none that ever went in it; and beside which, there
is no other. Seeing then, God has consecrated it, and our Elders have trod
this way before us, let us follow them; that so we may attain that kingdom
whereto it has brought them.

If any yet doubt whether this be the way or no: the spirit of God puts it out
of doubt, Esaias, 30.21; First, affirming peremptorily This is the way: Secondly,
bidding us therefore walk in the same: This is the way, walk in it. Our
Elders obayed this commandment of the spirit: and, walking in this way, found
the end of it, everlasting life. If we would attain the same end of the
journey, we must walk the same way.

But the world will say, this is a needless exhortation; for we walk this
way, we deny our selves, and look to be approved of God only by Christ: but
it is strange to see how men deceive themselves. Can a man walk in a way, and
not leave marks and steps behind him? even so he that walks in this way, follow
him, and you shall see steps of his continual dying unto sin, and living unto
holiness; insomuch that a man that follows him, and marketh the course of
his life in this way, may evidently say: See where he has cast off, and left
behind him this and that sin: see where he has taken up, and carried with him
these and those virtues and graces of God: Mark, here is a print of his faith,
here is a print of his hope, here are prints of his love. And thus may a child
of God be followed and traced all the way to heaven, even until he come to his
death, which is the gate of heaven. How mightily the^ are they deceived, which
think they have walked all their lives in this way, and yet there is not one
step to be seen: for assuredly this way is so beat^n and trodden, that no man
ever trod in it since the world began; but he left behind him manifest and
visible steps, that all men that would look at him, might see he had gone that
way. As therefore we all desire to come to heaven, and as we profess we walk in
the way thither: so let us be as careful to leave behind us our steps; namely,
tokens and prints of our faith, our hope, and love: which if we do, then mark
the excellent use of those steps. 1. They testify unto all that see them, that
we walked the right way to heaven: and secondly, they will serve for marks and
directions for the^ that shall walk in the same way after us. By the 1. we shall
leave an honorable testimony of our selves behind us: by the 2. we shall move
other to magnify gods name, to who^ our steps have bin marks and directions,
helps, and furtherances in the way to heaven.

Secondly, for what were these Elders approved? for their faith: for nothing
else. Amongst these Elders Sampson was wonderful in strength: Solomon in
wisdom: Joshua in courage: Moses in learning: many of them, in the honor and
pomp of the world, in beauty, riches, and other external gifts, and the most
of them all in long life: yet not for one or all of these are any of them said
to be regarded of God: but it is plainly said, that for their faith God did
approve them. Here then learn what is the thing amongst all things that must
make us acceptable unto God: even this, To deny our selves, and to rest upon
the mercy of God in Christ; this will do it and nothing else. Have thou
strength? so had Golias as well as Sampson: have thou beauty? so had Absalom as
well or more the^ David: have thou wisdom? so had Achitophel (though not like
Solomon, yet) above ordinary men: have thou riches? Esau was richer the^ Jacob:
have thou lived long? so did Cain; and Ismael as well as Isaak: have thou many
children? so had Ahab as well as Gedeon: have thou learning (the glory of
nature)? so had the Egyptians as well as Moses: for there Moses learned it. All
these thou may have, and yet be a vile person in the sight of God: so far
from being approved of God, as that he will not vouchsafe (unless it be in his
anger) once to regard or look at thee: have thou therefore any of those
outward gifts? it is not to be contemned, it has his use; thank God for it,
and and use it well: and use it so as by it thou may be approved amongst men:
but stand not to it before God: for though it be wisdom, or learning, or
never so excellent a gift; it cannot purchase the favor and acceptance of
God: but true faith is able to please God both in this life, and especially at
the day of Judgment.

This doctrine first confuteth the error of some gross Papists, who hold and
write that many Philosophers for their good use of the light of Nature, for
their deepenesse of learning, and for their civil lives, are now Saints in
heaven: a most manifest and shameful untruth, and here as manifestly confuted:
for was Solomon not accepted, for all his wisdom, and shall Socrates? was
Moses not accepted for all his learning, how then should Aristotle? if faith
made all of them accepted, and nothing but faith; how is it possible they
should be accepted, which never heard of faith? nay I say more: If many a man
that lives in the Church, as deep (it may be) in humane learning as they, and
of great knowledge also in the whole doctrine of Religion (which they never
knew) and yet could not, nor ever shall be accepted of God only for want of
this saving faith; How absurd is it (...) imagine salvation for them, which
neither had spark of faith nor knowledge of Christ? Let us the^ hold, that as
there is no name whereby to be saved, but only the name of Christ: so no
means to be saved by that Christ, Acts. 4.12.
but only faith, even that faith, for which these Elders were accepted of God.

Secondly, this excellency of faith above all other gifts, shows the vanity
of the world; so careful and earnest in seeking honor, riches, credit,
wisdom, learning (all which can but make them esteemed and approved to the
world) and so careless and negligent in getting true faith, which will both
approve a man unto the world, and make him honorable in the eyes of the Lord
God.

Thirdly, by this doctrine the Popish doctrine is justly condemned, which
teaches that a man is justified by his works, and that faith is not the most
excellent of Gods graces. Here we are taught other divinity: for, that for
which a man is accepted, by that he is justified. But for their faith only
were they accepted: therefore justification is only by faith. Again, that which
makes a man accepted of God, that must needs be the most excellent thing of
all. For God which is goodness it self, regards that that is the best: but
God esteemed the^ only for their faith: therefore it is the chief of all graces
of God, in regard of making a man accepted of God.

Fourthly, here is a pattern and president for Gods children, how to bestow
and measure out their love and estimation in the world. God loved Solomon more
for his faith, then for all his glory and wisdom; and esteemed more of Moses
for his faith, the^ for all his learning. So deal thou with thy wife, thy
child, thy servant, thy friend, and with all men. Have thou a wife never so
beautiful, loving, honest, and thrifty; never so toward and obedient a child;
a most wise and trusty servant; a friend for faithfulness like thine own
soul? These are indeed much to be esteemed; yet think not thy self in a
paradise, when thou have such: for there is a greater matter behind, then all
these. Look therefore further: Is thy wife, thy child, thy servant, thy friend
endued with saving faith? that is worth more then all the rest: that is it
which makes them beloved of God. Let that therefore make them best beloved of
thee: and that which makes them so honorable before God, let that make them
most honorable, and most esteemed of thee: So in all men, love that in a man
best which God loves; and so thou shall be sure not to lose thy love. Esteem
of a man, not as the world esteems, not according to his strength, beauty,
high place, or outward gifts: but as God esteems him, namely, according to
the measure of saving faith, which thou see in him: for is not that worthy of
thy love, which has purchased the love of the Lord God himself?

Fifthly, here is comfort for all such servants of God, as having true faith,
yet are in base estimation for worldly respects: some are poor, some in base
callings, some deformed in body: some of mean gifts: many in great distress
and misery, all their lives: most of them some way or other contemptible in the
world: Yet let not this discomfort any child of God: But let them consider what
it is that makes them approved of God: not beauty, strength, riches, wisdom,
learning (all these may perish in the using) but true faith: if then thou have
that, thou have more then all the rest. If thou had all them, they could but
make thee esteemed in the world: but having true faith, thou art esteemed of
God; and what matter then who esteems thee, and who not? This crosses the
corrupt censure of the world, who more esteem a man for his outward gifts, and
glory of riches or learning, then for saving graces. Let Gods children when
they are ^based; contemned, mocked, and kept from all place and preferment in
the world: Let them, I say, appeal from this unjust judgment to the judgment
of God; and be comforted in this, that though they want all things (without
them) that should make them esteemed in the world: yet they have that (within
them) for which God will esteem, approve, and acknowledge them both in this
world, and in the world to come. And they have that that will stand by them,
when strength and beauty are vanished, when learning, and riches, and honor,
are all ended with the world.

Thus much of the second doctrine.

3. In that our Elders by faith obtained a good report: Here we learn the
readiest and surest way to get a good name. A good name is a good gift of God;
Eccles. 7.3. It is a precious ointment* it is a thing that all men would have:
These Elders had it, and they have laid us down a platform how to get it,
and it is this; 1. Get into favor with God, please him, that is, confess thy
sins, bewail them, get pardon, set the promises of God in Christ before thee,
believe the^, apply them to thy self as thine own, be persuaded in thy
conscience that Christ did all for thee, and that he has purchased thy
acceptance with God.

Thus, when thou art assured that God approues of thee, God can easily give
thee a comfortable testimony in thine own conscience, and he can move the
hearts of all men to think well, and open their mouths to speak well of thee:
for he has the hearts of all men in his hand. And therefore those that are in
his favor, he can bend the hearts of all men, to approve the^; yet this must be
understood with some cautions.

1. God will not procure his children a good name amongst all men: for then they
should be cursed: for, Luke 6.26, Cursed are ye when all men speak well of
you: But the Lord means, that they shall be accepted, and have a good name
with the most and with the best. For indeed, a good name (as all other graces
of God) cannot be perfect in this life: but they shall have such a good name, as
in this world shall continue and increase, and in the world to come be without
all blot: for sin is the disgrace of a man; therefore when sin is abolished,
good name is perfect.

2. God will not procure all his children a good name, nor always: for, a good
name is of the same nature with other external gifts of God: sometime they are
good to a man, sometime hurtful: to some men good, to others hurtful. Every
one therefore that has true faith, may not absolutely assure himself of a
good name: but as far forth as God shall see it best for his own glory, and
his good.

3. The good name that God will give his children, stands not so much in outward
commendation, and speaking well of a man: as in the inward approbation of the
consciences of men. They must therefore be content sometime to be abused, mocked,
slandered; and yet notwithstanding they have a good name in the chief respect:
for they whose mouths do abuse and condemn the^, their very consciences do
approve them.

Out of all these the point is manifest, that God will procure his children a
good name in this world, as far forth as it is a blessing, and not a curse: and
that because they are approved of him, and by faith justified in his sight: for
so to be is the only way to get a good name. For in reason it stands thus:
that those who are in estimation, and good name with the Lord himself; much
more will God make them esteemed, and give them a good name with men like
themselves. Hence we learn, first, that the common course of the world to get
a good name, is fond, and wicked, and to no purpose: They labor for riches,
preferments, honor, wisdom, and learning; by them to get estimation in the
world: yea, many abuse these blessings in vain ostentation, to increase their
credit and name with men. And in the mean time saving faith is never
remembered, which must procure them a good name with God. This is a wrong
course: first, we must labor to be approved of God; and then after the good
name with God, follows the good name in the world. He therefore that labors
for favor with men, and neglects the favor of God; he may get a good name,
but it shall prove a rotten name in the end. Prou. 10.7. The memorial of the
just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. The good name of
the wicked is rotten: 1. Because it is loathsome and stinking in the face of
God, though it be never so glorious in the world. 2. Because it will not last
the wearing out, but in the end vanishes and comes to nothing, unless (as a
rotting thing leaves some corruption behind it, so) their good name in the end
being vanished, leaves infamy behind it. And this is the name which commonly is
gotten in the world, because men first seek not a good name with God: but that
good name which is obtained by faith, will stand and continue all a man's life,
and at his death leave behind it a sweet perfume, and abides for ever in the
world to come.

Secondly, this maintains the excellency of our religion against Atheists,
and all enemies of it, which esteem and call it a base and conte^ptible
religion, and of which ca^ follow no credit nor estimation. But see, their
malice is here controlled: our religion is a most glorious and excellent
profession, it is the high way to get true credit and estimation: it makes a
man honorable in the sight of God and men: for by it our Elders obtained a good
report, which continues fresh to this day.

In the fourth place, Were they well reported of for their faith? therefore
their faith was not hid in their hearts; but manifested in their lives: for,
the world cannot see nor commend them for their faith; but for the practice of
faith. Here it is plain, that men must not be content to keep their faith
close in their hearts, but they must exercise the fruits of it in the world;
and then both these together will make a man truly commendable. Thy faith
approues thee unto God: but the practice of it is that that honors thee and
thy profession, in the world.

Lastly, in that faith was that which approved our Elders unto God; here is a
storehouse of comforts, for all true professors of this faith.

Art thou poor? thy faith does make thee rich in God.

Art thou simple, and of mean reach? thy faith is true wisdom before God.

Art thou any way deformed? faith makes thee beautiful unto God.

Art thou weak, feeble, or sick? thy faith does make thee strong in God.

Art thou base in the world, and of no account? thy faith makes thee honorable
in the sight of God and his holy Angels. Thus thou art poor, and foolish, and
deformed, and sick, and base in the world; but mark how God has recompensed
thee: he has given thee faith, whereby thou art rich, and beautiful, and
wise, and strong, and honorable in heaven with God: say therefore with David,
the lot is fallen unto thee in a fair ground, and thou have a goodly heritage:
Namely, Psalm. 16.6.
thy faith, which thou would not change for all the glory of the world.
Faith is the true riches, the sound strength, the lasting beauty, the true
wisdom, the true honor of a Christian man: therefore take thy self 10000.
times more beholden unto God, then if he had given thee the uncertain riches,
the crafty (and yet foolish) wisdom, the decaying strength, the vanishing
beauty, the transitory honor of this world.

If thou have true faith, thou art sure to have many enemies: 1. The wicked of
the world will never brook thee, but openly or privily hate and hurt thee.
The^ the devil is thy sworn enemy: how can thou deal with so powerful an
enemy, and all his wicked instruments? Here is sound comfort: if thou have
faith, thou have God thy friend: labor therefore for this true faith, and then
care not for the devil, and all his power. Night and day, sleeping and waking,
by land and sea, thou art safe and secure, the devil cannot hurt thee, thy
faith makes thee accepted of God, and brings thee within the compass of his
protection. That same little spark of faith, which is in so narrow a compass
as thy heart, is stronger the^ all the power and malice of satan. As for the
malice which his instruments, wicked me^ in this world, show against thee in
mocks and abuses, much less care for them; for their nature is to speak
evil, and cannot do otherwise: look not therefore at them, but look up into
heaven by the eye of thy soul, where thy faith makes thee beloved and approved
of God himself, and honorable in the presence of his holy Angels.

And thus much of the second action or effect of faith, the third follows.

VERSE. 3. Through faith we understand that the world was ordained by the word
of God, so that the things which we see, are not made of things which did
appear.


IN this verse is contained the third action or effect of faith, namely this;
Faith makes a man to understand things beyond the reach of man's reason. This
third effect is set out in these words, by the instance of a notable exsample:
namely, of the Creation of the world; 1. By the word of God. 2. Of nothing:
both which, that we may the better understand, let us consider of the words as
they lie in order.

Through faith. 1. By faith, in this place (as I take it) is not meant that
saving faith, which iustifies a man before God: but a general faith, whereby a
man imbraceth Christian religion: or whereby a man believes the word of God in
the doctrine of the law, and the Gospel, to be true. My reason is, because a
man that never had justifying and saving faith, and is no member of the
catholic Church, nor child of God, may have this gift, To believe that God by
his word made the world of nothing. Therefore, I think that this is an action
of a general, and not of saving faith.

We understand That is: Whereas there are many things beyond the reach of
reason, and therefore by reason cannot be apprehended or understood, yet by
virtue of this faith a man is brought to understand them, and to believe them
to be true.

Now then whereas general faith brings understanding of many things which
reason cannot reach unto; here, such as be students in humane learning, and
which labor to attain to the deepenesse and perfection of it, are taught, with
their travel in humane studies, to have care to join faith and knowledge of
religion. For there are many things which our understanding by reason cannot
conceive; and many truths which Philosophy cannot reach unto: nay, many also
which it denies: but faith is able to persuade and demonstrate them all, and it
inlightens the mind, and rectifies the judgment, when as Philosophy has left
the mind in darkness, and the judgment in error. Now, in whom sound knowledge
in Philosophy, and this faith in religion do concur together, he is a man of
a most rectified judgment, and of a deep reach in the greatest matters: but,
separate faith from humane knowledge, and he will stumble at many truths,
though he had the wit of all the Philosophers in his own head: For exsample,
that God should make the world of nothing: that it should have beginning and
ending; that God should be eternal, and not the world: that man's soul being
created, is immortal; These and many other truths, reason cannot see, and
therefore Philosophy will not admit: but ioin faith to it, and then that crooked
understanding is rectified and made to believe it. It is therefore good counsel,
to ioyn both these together. Religion hinders not humane learning, as some
fondly think; but is a furtherance and help, or rather the perfection of
humane learning: persuading, and proving, and conuincing that, which humane
learning cannot. And thus we see how faith makes us to understand.

But, what does it make us to understand? the text says, That the world was
ordained, etc. Amongst many Expositions we may most safely set down and
approve this; God by his word or commandment has ordained, that is, made in
good order: the ages, that is, the world and all in it; and all this he did by
his word, and (which is more strange then that) made them all of nothing. That
is a wonderful thing: reason co^ceiues it not, but disputes against it:
Philosophy grants it not, but writes against it: but mark the privilege of
this faith; it makes a man believe it, and shows him also how it is.

Now for our better perceiving the excellency of this power of faith; here are
4. points set down: 1. What was created? The worlds. 2. In what manner?
Ordained. 3. By what means? By Gods word. 4. Of what matter? Of nothing.


Of these in order.

The first point is, what was made? The text answers; The worlds.

The word signifies, in the original, ages: and so it is also taken, Heb.
1.2. God made the worlds or ages by Christ.

By this word then he means these two things: First, times and seasons,
which are ordinary creatures of God, as well as other: for amongst other
creatures (Genesis 1.) are recorded also times and seasons to be Gods creatures.
Secondly, he understands the world also, and all in it: and so it is truly
translated. For with good reason may the word ages signify the world, because
the world and all in it had their beginning in time, have their continuance in
time, and shall have their end in time again. Time begun them, time continues
them, and time shall end them: and so the world is every way measured by the
compass of time: and therefore it pleases the holy Ghost to term the world,
and all in it, Ages, or times.

Now whereas it is said, Ages, that is, times and seasons were ordained of God;
we learn, that if time be a creature or an ordinance of God (created for so
great purposes, as to be the measure of all things) Take heed then of abusing
so excellent an ordinance: if thou have spent it well, spend it still better.
Time is so good a thing, it cannot be spent well enough. But have thou misspent
time (that is to abuse it) Take S. Paul's counsel, Ephesians. 5.16. Redeem the time:
that is, seeing what is past cannot be recalled; then recompense the loss of
it, by the well bestowing of time to come. Spend every hour well: and that
thou may do so, be always either doing good to other, or receiving good from
other: do either, and time is well spent. And take heed thou be not of the
number of those that often say, they cannot tell how to drive away time: and
therefore they devise many toys, and co^ceits, and vain pleasures; yea, many
wicked and unlawful delights: and all to shift off (as they say) and deceive
the time. It is wonderful to see, that the wicked, whose time of joy is only
in this world, should seek to hasten it, and make it seem shorter; yet so it
is, the devil blinding them: but howeuer it is, seem it shorter or longer,
that same one sin of misspending their time, shall condemn them if they had
no more: for if account must be given for every idle word, Math. 12.36.
a fearful account remains to be made for so many idle hours. Let us then
be very careful in the use of this good ordinance of God, and never devise how
to pass away time: for there is no man that is a profitable member in the
place where he is, that can find one hour so idle, that he knows not how to
employ it, either in receiving or doing some good.

Were ordained. The second point, in this example, is the manner. Did God make
a perfect or an imperfect world? The text answers, it was ordained. The word
signifies thus much; God framed the Ages, that is, all creatures, visible and
invisible, in a most excellent, perfect, and absolute order. As in a camp
every man keeps his rank and order, and no man goes out of his standing
appointed him: So every creature had his due place, and his proper use assigned
him of God: so that the workmanship of the world in every creature, and in
every respect was absolute: and thus ( ordained) is as much as perfectly made.
And the whole world was as the perfect body of a man, where every member, bone,
joint, vein, and sinew is in his proper place, and nothing out of square.

Ob. Was every thing created in his order and due place? Whence then com so
many disorders in the world? The devil has His kingdom, authority, laws,
and subjects: he rules in the wicked. Now ca^ there be any order in Satan's
kingdom? Again, whence are so many alterations and subuersions of kingdoms?
so many wars, so much effusion of blood? The Gospel is transported from Country
to Country; civil dissensions in Cities and private families; betwixt man and
man; betwixt man and some creatures: betwixt creature and creatures; yea,
hatred often unto the death: yea, often hatred betwixt creatures of the same
kind. All these being so, where then is that excellent order wherein they were
created?

I answer: the state of all creatures is changed, from that wherein they were
created, by the fall of our first parents. God made no disorder, He saw every
thing that he had made, and lo it was very good: Genesis 1.31.
therefore it was in a most perfect order: For, orderly comeliness is a part of
the goodness of a thing: but disorder is the effect of sin: it entered with
sin; and it is both a companion and a reward of sin. Had we continued in
our innocence, all creatures had continued in their excellent order: But when
we had broken the perfect order that God had appointed us, immediately all
creatures broke that order, wherein they were before, both toward us, and one
amongst another. Whilst we obayed God, all creatures obayed us: but when we
shook off the yoke of obedience unto God, and rebelled against him, then they
became disobedient unto us. Whilst we loved God, al creatures loved and
reverenced us: but when we fell to hate the Lord, then began they to hate us
and not before. If therefore thou see any disobedience and hatred in the
creatures toward thee, any disorder and vanity amongst themselves, thank thy
self for it, thou broughtst it into the world with thy sin.

This being so, we are hence taught when we see any disorder in any creature,
not to blame the Lord nor the creature, but to turn back to our selves, to
take notice of our own sins and corruptions, and to acknowledge this was not
so at the first, but our sin was the cause of it; and therefore be humbled and
ashamed of our selves, that we should destroy and confound that excellent order
which God made, and all creatures (but for us) would have kept till this day:
but the common practice is contrary, as I will prove in particulars.

God made man's body pure and holy and therefore it had no need to be couerd: but
with sin came shame, Genesis 2.25. and 3.21.
and thence came it that God gave us apparel to cover that shame that sin had
brought upon us: so often therefore as a man puts on his apparel, he should be
humbled and ashamed by it: and think thus with himself* This was not so at the
first; Adams body was glorious: whence came this ignominy and shame, which we
must cover with apparel? it came from my sin; therefore so often as a man puts
it on, so often should he be quite ashamed of himself, which has brought this
shame upon himself: so as now he must needs have a cloak to cover his shame.
But do me^ make this end of their apparel? nay, rather they make it a banner to
display their pride and vanity: and so far are many from being ashamed of it,
as that they are contrariwise proud of it. But this is as abominable, and
cursed, and senseless a pride, as if the prisoner should be proud of his bolts
and fetters, which are signs of his misdemeanour: for, what is thy apparel
(make the best of it)? it is but a beautiful cloak of thy filthy shame: then,
as bolts and fetters are burdenous, and shameful, though they be of gold: so
is the cloak of thy shame, thy apparel, though it be silk, silver or gold: for
we should not be ashamed only of ordinary aparel, or base: but eue^ of the most
gorgeous; knowing that once, we had a glory of our own, far above all the
glory of apparel: and the Ignominy that sin has brought upon us, is greater
then this glory of apparel can take away.

Here I deny not the use of gorgeous apparel, to those to whom it belongs: But
I say to rich men (who, by their ability) to men in authority, who (by their
place and calling) may wear costly apparel: yea, and to Princes, who may
lawfully wear silk, silver, gold, and the most excellent ornaments of
precious stones, or whatsoever: to all the^, I say, God has granted you the
use of these; but withal, be not proud of them, for you once had a glory
greater then these, but lost it by sin: and sin brought a shame, which those
cannot hide. For, though thy apparel hide it from the world, yet can it not
from God: only faith can cover it from God: therefore glory in nothing but thy
faith, be ashamed of thy apparel; yea, of thy robes and costly ornaments. And
know further, that whereas thy body by sin is become so vile, a meaner cover and
baser apparel were fit for it. And therefore know, that whereas God has given
thee use of costly apparel, and precious ornaments; he gives them not to
honor thy body, but the place thou art in: and to adorn that part of his own
Image, which he has set in thee by thy calling. And know lastly, that if thou
had kept that order, wherein God at thy creation (as this text says)
ordained thee: thy natural glory would more have adorned thee and the place
thou bear, then all this accidental and artificial glory can: and therefore
glory not so much for the one, as be ashamed for the loss of the other; and
let thy apparel teach thee this lesson.

Thirdly, many men take much delight in some kind of meat: some in variety of
meats, and some so love their belly, as they care not how many creatures, or
kinds of creatures do dye, for their belly sake: this is to be considered. For
I take it a great fault, for men either to be too lavish and careless, how
many creatures they cause to die, or (though they eat but one kind) to do it
without all use or further consideration. For, mark whence comes this, that
man cannot now live, or not so well; but his life must be the death of other
creatures, his nourishment and preservation, the destruction of other
creatures. At the beginning before sin was, this was not so: no creature did
either serve to cloathe or feed Adam: but this came with sin; sin brought this
vanity upon creatures, to die for the feeding and clothing of man: and had we
stood without sin, no creature should have lost his life to be our meat. I
take it therefore the duty of a man to make great use of his meat in this
regard. And first, for the meat that he loves best, let him be humbled for his
sin: knowing that if he had not sinned, he should have had much more
sweetness in other meat, which notwithstanding should not have cost any
creature his life. And secondly, for variety be not too lavish, nor too
riotous: consider, every dish is the death of a creature of Gods creation:
consider again whence comes this, that creatures must die to feed thee; not
from the creation, creatures were not made to that end: Innocence would have
preserved all creatures to more excellent ends.

Sin it was, and thy sin that destroys so many creatures for the belly of
man: it is a vanity come upon creatures for man's sin, that they must die for
man's meat. The death therefore of every creature, should be a corsiue to a
man's heart: when he sees it, it should touch him to the quick, and make him
say, This creature dies not for it self, but for me: not for it own fault,
but for mine. Miserable sinner that I am, if I had right I should rather die
then it. God made it once for a better end, but my sin has brought it to
this corruption. If this consideration took place, men would not eat their
ordinary fare with so little use: nor at extraordinary occasions be so
careless how much they spend, and how many creatures they cause to die.

But you will say, God has given us liberty in meats: differences of meats
are taken away in Christ, and God has given us use of his creatures, not only
for necessity, but more liberal use even for greater delight and comfort. I
answer: I grant all this and more too, to a man that has faith. I grant,
feasts and bankets are lawful for some men on some occasions. I take not away
any man's liberty in meats: God has granted it, and man ought not to take it
away. I only wish that when we eat, we also would make this use of it: and
that we would not too riotously abuse that liberty that God has given us for
diversity of meats: faith gives us leave and liberty to eat; yet faith denies
not a man to make a holy use of his eating, for his own humiliation, but
rather commands it.

Fourthly, we see in the world, that creatures not only dye for man's feeding,
but one creature feeds on another, and one destroys another to eat him. The
Hawke preyeth on diverse kinds of birds: the Fox feeds on tame birds: the
Wolf on the Lamb: greater fishes devour the less: Dogs will eat diverse
kinds of creatures, if they can come by them. These things are manifest, and
some of them be common sports in the world.

Now whence comes this fearful disorder in nature, that one creature should
devour another? came it from the creation? was the world ordained in this
state, that one creature should eat up another? the greater feed upon the
less? no: but sin brought this confusion, our sin caused this pitiful massacre
of all creatures one by another. Let us therefore at these sights be humbled for
our sin, which caused so fearful a disorder: when thou see thy Hawke fly
so fiercely and so cruelly murder a seely bird: thy Hound, the Heart, Hare, or
Connie; then, as God has given thee leave in good order, measure, and manner,
thus to deal with the creatures, and therefore thou may take delight in it:
so, withal make this use of it; Whence comes this? it was not so from the
beginning: When sin was not in the world, these would all have lodged in one
cage and cabin, and one never have offered to have eaten another: my sin
caused this jar, and this disorder betwixt these two creatures. This should
humble a man, because of his sin: and restrain his life from too much
liberty; and his affection from too much delight in these kind of pastimes.

Again, when we see the cruelty of the Fox, the Wolf, the Bear, toward the
sheep and other creatures; Blame not too much the cruelty of the beasts: for
this was not in them at their creation; but thy sin made them thus cruel one
against another. Turn then into thy self, and be ashamed of it: and blame not
so much the cruelty in them, as thine own sin which caused it in them.

Again, some creatures are imperfect, some in parts of their body, some in
some senses: and some are loathsome and ugly to behold: and some are venomous,
and hurtful to the world. When thou see it, consider whence is this. They
were not thus created: for God ( ordained) that is, made all creatures in
perfect order: But this comes from thy sin: enter into thy self, and
acknowledge this, and be humbled for it: and do not so much contemn this
creature for his imperfection: nor loath him for his deformity: nor hate him
for his venom; as contemn, and loathe, and hate thine own sins which were
the cause of all these.

Lastly, some take great delight in fair buildings, and make no use of them
but for delight and pleasure: but if they consider well, they have no such
cause: it was not so at the creation. Adam in his innocence had a more
sumptuous Palace ordained for him; namely, the Paradise of heaven and earth:
and yet trees were not cut in pieces, nor the earth had her stones rent out of
her bowels, for the building of it. Thy sin it was that destroyed this
Palace; and sin has caused the necessity of these buildings: How then can
thou glory in thy buildings? will thou glory in thy shame? Can thou be proud
of these, when thy sin bereft thee of a better? As therefore thy house is a
comfort, strength, security, and delight unto thee: so add this one use also:
let it in this consideration be a cause to humble thee for thy sin.

The disorder that sin has brought into the world, might be showed in more
particulars: but these may suffice, being those of whom we have most common
use, and therefore do most commonly abuse.

To conclude this point, I say unto all men: Do thou see what disorder is
now in the world, in thy apparel, meat, recreations, buildings? See thou
the confusion, vanity, corruption of all creatures: the variance, dissension,
and hatred of creatures amongst themselves? Can thou see all this, and either
not regard it at all, or else take delight in it? This is a cursed and
abominable delight. If a rich man should consume all his wealth, or throw it
all on heaps, and then desperately set his house on fire, has he any cause of
joy to see this? If he sit still at this, you will say he is senseless: but if
he laugh at it, he is mad: So God created man rich in all blessings, put him
into the Palace of the world: garnished this house of the world with exceeding
beauty: his meat, his apparel, his recreation, his house were all excellent
and glorious: he made all other creatures, amongst which there was nothing but
concord, love, agreement, uniformity, comeliness, and good order. Now man by
sin fell; and by his fall, not only spent all his riches (that is, defaced
the glory of his own estate): but also set his house (that is the world) on
fire: that is, defaced the beauty of heaven and earth: brought confusion,
corruption, vanity, deformity, imperfection, and monstrous disorder on all
creatures; set all the world together by the ears, and one creature at
variance and deadly hate with other: so that one creature does fight, tear,
wound, destroy, and eat up another. O cursed and damnable sin of man, that
has so shamefully disordered that heavenly order, wherein God created all
things at the beginning^ and miserable men are we, which can sit still and see
this, and not be moved: but if we rejoice and delight in it; certainly, then a
spiritual madness has bewitched our souls. Let us therefore stir up our
selves, and look about us: and seeing all the world on a fire about us,
namely, flaming in contention, hatred, and all disorder: let us for our parts
seek to quench it: which because we cannot, therefore lament and bewail it:
but much more lament and be humbled for our sin, which kindled this fire of
disorder in the world.

Hitherto of the manner of the Creation.

By the word of God. The third point is, by what means? The Text answers: the
world was ordained in that excellent order, by the word of God. By this word is
meant, 1. Not any vocal word, as if the Lord should speak unto the creatures:
Nor secondly, the substantial word of the Father, the second person: although
I confess that by him were made all things. John. 1.3.
Yet I take it, it is not so meant in this place: but rather as Moses does,
Genesis 1. when he says that in the creation God said: It is in both places a
comparison taken from a Prince, who bids his servants do this, and they do it
presently. The Lord in this place is like a Prince, he has his word whereby he
commanded the world to be made. That word, I take it, is his will: for, Gods
willing of any thing is an effectual commanding of it to be done: yea, it is
the doing of it: for his willing of a thing to be, is more then all the
commandments of all men in the world. For if he do but will it, the thing is
done what ever it be: whereas all the world may command, and yet it is no
nearer. From hence, I take it this is manifest to be the surest sense for this
place; God willed the being of all creatures, and according as he willed, they
presently were: and that his will was his word here mentioned.

Here then first mark a special point, that sets out the glory of this
Creator: he used no labor, no motion, no pains, no servants, no instrument,
no means as men do. He only spoke the word, and they were made; he commanded,
and they were created. Psalm. 148.5. This shows how glorious a God he is, and
his power how omnipotent it is: who at his own will and word produced such a
glorious frame of heaven and earth: so many 1000. sorts and kinds of creatures
in their order and due place. David most seriously considered of this, when he
made the 104. Psalm, as appears if we read it. We ought also so deeply to
meditate of this his glorious power manifested in this miraculous creation, as
that we (seeing it) may acknowledge with the Psalmist, Psalm. 115.3. Our God
sits in heaven, and does whatsoever he will.

2. Did the Lord make all things by his word? learn we then for our
instruction thus much; Ever when we see what is Gods will concerning our selves
in any cross or affliction whatsoever: let us subject our selves to it and
bear it: because it comes from so mighty a God, as whom there is no resisting.
For see, he that commanded all the world to be, and it presently was so, and
nothing could disobay: then if he command any cross to seize upon thee, will thou resist him? Nay, rather take Saint Peter's holy counsel. 1. Pet. 5.5.
Humble thy self under this so mighty hand of God, that he may exalt thee in
due time. If thou then see his cross coming toward thee, meet it, receive
it with both hands, bear it with both shoulders: if he will humble thee,
resist not thou: for when again he pleases to exalt thee; all the devils in
hell are not able to resist him. It follows;

So that the things which we see, are not made of things which did appear.

The fourth and last point is the matter, whereof the world was made: the Text
says: The things that we see, that is, all the world, were made of things
never seen: that is, of a flat nothing, which here is said not to be seen, or
not to appear; because how can that appear or be seen, which is not? So the
meaning is, when there was nothing in the world, then God made the world to be:
This is the strangest thing of all in this fourth effect: For it is not so
strange that the world should be created in excellent order; or that God should
make it by his word: as that he should make it of nothing. Reason denies it,
Phylosophie disputes against it as absurd, and never will yield unto it: but
here is the power of faith manifest, for it makes us believe and know it is so.

Hence we learn

1. If he created the world and us of nothing, then he can preserve us also by
nothing, that is, without means, or by weak means, or contrary to means: he
that did the one can do the other, for the same reason is of both. This is a
special point of our religion, Not to tie Gods providence unto means. Men use
never to acknowledge it but with means: but that is no work of faith. But we
ought not only to see Gods providence, when we see no means: but even when
other means are against us, then to see it, is a point of faith: and that is
our duty, though it be hard. Give men health, wealth, liberty, peace, let them
be guarded about with Gods blessings: then they will magnify the providence of
God: but take these away, and lay upon them penury, sickness, or any cross,
then they rage, and rail, and distrust, yea blaspheme, and say, No providence,
no God. And thus God is beholden to the means, for else men would flatly deny
him. But this argues the want of faith. For had we that faith in us, whereby we
believed steadfastly, that God made all the world without means, that faith
would also persuade us that he can preserve us being made, though means be
wanting, or though they be against us. This we may make use of, whether we be
in necessity, and would be relieved: or in any peril, and would be succored:
or in what extremity soever, when means do fail us.

Secondly, if he made all things of nothing: then he is able also, in respect
of his promises made in Christ, To call such things that are not, as though
they were, Romans 4.17. As, a man by nature is the child of wrath, and of the
devil: he is able to make him a servant of God, and child of grace.

This may teach us, 1. Not to despair of any man's salvation, though he seem
almost past all grace: for God can make any thing of nothing, and therefore can
put grace into that heart wherein before was none.

And 2. this is a comfort to all them which through weakness of faith, cannot
persuade themselves of their election. For, suppose thou be full of wants and
imperfections, and have a rebellious and froward heart: What then? Remember God
made thee once a creature, of nothing; he can now again make thee a new
creature, of nothing: he created thee without means; he can save thee, though
never so many means do seem to be against thee.

And thus much of these three effects of faith; and consequently

Of the first part of this Chapter, containing a description of faith in
general.

Abels Faith.
VERSE 4. By Faith, Abell offered unto God a greater sacrifice then Cain: by
which he obtained witness that he was righteous; God testifying of his gifts:
By which faith he also being dead yet speaks.


THe second part of the Chapter, contains an illustration and proof of the
former description, by a rehearsal of the most excellent patterns and
exsamples of faith, which flourished in the Church of the old Testament.

These exsamples be of two sorts: 1. Such as are set down severally one by
one, from the 4. verse to the 32. 2. Such as are set down jointly many
together, from thence to the end.


The exsamples set down severally are of two sorts: 1. Such as were natural
Israelites, and borne members of the Church visible. 2. Such as were not
naturally members, but strangers from the Church of God, till they were called
extraordinarily.


Exsamples of such as were members of ye visible church, are also of 2. sorts:
1. Such as lived about the flood: or 2. After the flood.


First, of such as lived before, or about the time of the flood, there be three
faithful men, whose faith is here recorded: 1. Abell. before. and 2. Enoch.
before. 3. Noe, both before and after.


All these three in order.

These excellent and most worthy exsamples, are all grounded on some place of
the old testament, and are continued from the beginning of the world almost to
Christ's incarnation: for he begins with Abell, which is so near the
beginning, that he was the second good man that lived in the world: yea, and
the first of all that had this true faith, as the only means of his
salvation. For, as for Adam, he before his fall had not this faith, neither
should it have saved him: but when the first means failed him, then came this
faith as the second and more effectual means of his salvation: But Abell was
never in possibility to be saved by any thing, but by this faith. And therefore
Abels faith has the first place of commendation: and that in this verse.

Abels faith is here commended for three things: 1. In that he offered by it a
greater sacrifice then Cain. 2. By it he obtained testimony with God. 3. By it
dead Abell yet speaks.
The 1. effect of Abels faith, is thus set down by the H. Ghost.

By faith, Abel offered unto God a greater sacrifice then Cain.

The ordinary Exposition of those words, is this: that Cain and Abell coming
to offer, there was no difference in the matter of their sacrifice, but only
in the manner of offering: in that Abell offered by faith, and so did not Cain.

This Exposition though it be good, yet it fits not the scope of this place,
nor the fourth of Genesis The right sense therefore seems to be this; Abell
having faith, this faith moved him to testify his thankful heart to God. This
he did by offering unto God the best and costliest sacrifice that he could:
namely, the first fruits and fattest of his sheep; Whereas unbelieving Cain,
having no love to testify unto God, brought only of the fruit of his ground:
not of the best as Abel did: but whatsoever came first to hand. This being the
true meaning of the whole* let us come to the particular points laid down in
this effect, and they are three.

1. That Cain and Abell offered, that is, served God. 2. That they offered
Sacrifices. 3. That Abell offered a better then Cain.
The first point contains their service in general: the second, their service
in particular: the third, the difference of their service* wherein especially
will appear the excellency of Abels faith.

First, Abell and Cain, the two first brethren in the world, offered sacrifice
to the true God. How learned they this? for they had no Scripture, it was
penned many years after: namely, by Moses first of all. I answer; When their
Parents Adam and Eve had fallen, God gave them (of his infinite goodness) a
covenant of grace, that the seed of the woman should break the serpents head:
Genes. 3.15. We doubt not but our first Parents received this covenant, and
believed the promise: and this their faith, taught them how to worship the true
God aright.

You will say: thus Adam and Eve learned of God; but how came this to Cain and
Abell. I answer: When they had been thus instructed of God, Adam as a
faithful servant of God, taught the same religion, and delivered the same
doctrine to his children: and by it they were taught, what, to whom, and in
what manner to offer sacrifice. And thus they did it neither by Scripture, nor
revelation, nor their own invention, but by the instruction of their Parents.

Hence let all Parents learn a lesson of Adam, the first parent that was in
the world: namely, to procure the good of their children: he nourtered his
children excellently: 1. He provided for them til they came to age. 2. Then he
left them not, but appointed them their callings: For one was a husbandman, and
the other a Shepherd. 3. Not thus only, but he taught them to worship the
true God, both in their callings, and in the practice of religion: and
therefore he taught them to offer sacrifice in way of thankfulness unto God:
all this did Adam.

So must thou do with the children which God has given thee. 1. Provide for
them carefully till they be of age, take ^eed they miscarie not any way for
want of things needful. 2. So bring them up, as that they may be apt to live
in some godly calling whereby to serve God, and to do good in his Church: and
that calling thou must appoint him, according to the fitness of his gifts.
Adam appointed them not both one calling but diverse callings, according to the
diversity of their gifts: and thou must see it be a lawful and honest calling;
for so are both these. Then 3. (the greatest matter of all these) teach them
religion, and the true manner of fearing and worshipping God; that as by the
two first, thy child may live well in this world, so by this he may be made an
heir of the kingdom of heaven.

Adam was the first father, and father of us all; let all then follow him in
this practice: and if we follow him in one, follow him in both. Diverse will be
as careful for their bodies and for their callings as Adam was: but how few are
as careful to teach them religion for the preferme^t of their souls to life
eternal? But parents must have care of both these: else they shall answer for
their child at the day of judgment: and though he perish in his own sin, yet
his blood will God require at the Fathers hands. For God made him a father in
his room, and he discharged not the duty of a father unto their child.

Secondly, in that Cain offered as well as Abell; Hence we learn diverse
instructions.

1. It is a common opinion, that if a man walk duly and truly in his calling,
doing no man harm, but giving every man his own, and so do all his life
long, God will receive him, and save his soul: but the truth is this; If men
do thus it is good and commendable, and they must be exhorted to continue: but
if they stand upon this for salvation, they cast away their souls: For mark
here, Cain was a man that walked in an honest calling: and more then that, he
took pains, and labored in it (which all men do not which have honest
callings): And more then all these, when Abell offered, he came and worshipped
God also; and he did outwardly in such sort, as no man could blame him, but
only God that saw his heart: And for all this, yet is he a wicked Cain, and
that is all that the word of God gives him, 1. John. 3.12. Then it is manifest,
that to walk in a man's calling justly and uprightly, doing no man harm, will
not serve the turn. Cain did it, and yet was cursed: we must then go further
then Cain, else we shall go with Cain to the place where he is.

Reason not with thy self, I work hard and follow my calling, I hurt no man:
thus could Cain reason, and yet but cursed Cain. Thou must then beside these,
get that that Cain did not; Learn in thy conscience to see and feel thy
sin, to be grieved for it, so as thou may say: My sickness, my poverty, my
crosses grieve me: but nothing so much as my own sins, these trouble me
above all, and this grief swalloweth up all the rest. And there is another
thing which I seek above all: not gold, silver, or promotion; but
reconciliation with my God, and his favor in Jesus Christ: If thou have these
two, then thou go beyond Cain, then shall thou stand before God with Abell,
and be accepted. Remember these two; humiliation for sin, and desire of
reconciliation: these two is the sum of religion. If thou have these, thou
art blessed with Abell; if not, cursed with Cain, howsoever thou live in the
world. If thou say Cain killed his brother, and so would not I do for all the
world, I will do no man hurt in body or goods; This will not serve: for it is
said that God had no respect to Cain before he killed his brother, even when he
offered his sacrifice: and therefore this duty is most necessary, and there is
no shifting it off.

2. Cain offered as well as Abell: yea, Cain offered before Abell, as it is
manifest in Genesis, 4.3. And yet Abels sacrifice was better when it came to
the proof, and was accepted, and not Cains which came first. Hence we learn,
that a man may be more forward then many other in many outward duties of
religion, and yet not be accepted of God: Another may be not so forward to the
duty, and yet when he comes, be better accepted. Whence comes this? what? is
forwardness in good duties a fault? Nothing less: but hence it is, he that
outwardly is most forward, may come in hypocrisy and without faith; the want
whereof makes his forwardness nothing worth. Many such have we in our Church:
great frequenters of places and exercises of religion; and yet they come but as
Cain did, or it may be in worse intents. Thy forwardness is to be commended,
but take this with thee also; Care not so much to be first at the Sermon, or to
be there oftener the^ other, as to go with true faith, repentance and a heart
hung^ing for grace: if not, boast not in thy forwardnes: Cain offered before
Abell, and yet not accepted: and so there may com an Abell after thee, and
bring faith with him, and be accepted when thou with thy hypocritical
forwardnes shall be rejected as Cain was.

Thirdly, did Cain offer as well as Abel? Hence we learn that the Church
militant is a mixed and co^pounded company of men: not of one sort; but true
believers and hypocrites mingled together: as here in the very infancy of the
Church, here was a Cain worshipping in show, as well as Abell that worshipped in
truth. So was it in the infancy, so in her perpetual growth, and so shall it be
in the last age of the church: the good shall never be quite separated from the
bad, until Christ himself do it at the last judgment. Goats shall always be
mingled amongst the sheep, till Christ the great shepherd do separate them
himself, Math. 25.34. And he that imagines a perfect separation till then,
imagines a fancy in his brain, and such a Church, as cannot be found upon the
earth.

This being so, let no man therefore be afraid to join himself to the visible
Church: neither let any that are in it go out of it, because the bad are
mingled with the good; for so it has been always, and ever will be: he then
that will go out of a Church, because there be hypocrites in it, must go out of
the world, for such a Church is not found, but triu^phant in heaven.

Fourthly, (...) that Cain and Abel offered, hence we learn, that the Church of
God, which truly professes his name, has been ever since the beginning of the
world. For this Church was in the household of Ada^, when there was no more but
it in the world: for sacrifice to God is a sign of the Church: yea, and beside
the sacrifice, they had a place appointed where Adam and his family came
together to worship God. For, so much Cain intimates, Genesis 4.14. and 16. Cain
went out from the presence of the Lord, that is, not only out of his favor
and protection, but from the place of his solemn service, and where he wonted
to manifest his special presence to his children serving him: and therefore
Cain, as being excomunicate, complains (verse 14) because he must leave it.
Thus the Church has been from the beginning, and therefore is truly called
Catholic.

The Papists abuse this place notoriously: for whereas the Church has been so
ancient, they argue therefore it is above the Scripture: yea, and that we could
not know it to be Scripture, but by the ancient testimony of the Church.

We must know the Scripture is two ways to be considered. 1. As it was written
and penned by holy men, and so it is later then the Church: for Moses was the
first penman of Scripture: but secondly, as it is the word of God, the
substance, sense, and truth thereof is much more ancient the^ the Church: yea,
without the word of God, there can be no Church: For, without faith is no
Church (because the Church is a company of believers) and without the word it
is no faith: therefore no word, no faith: no faith, no Church. So then the
Scripture was before the Church, but penned after.

Thus we see that Cain and Abell offered.

Now secondly, what offered they? sacrifices. Sacrifices were used in the
worship of God for two ends. 1. When a sacrifice was offered, especially of
beasts, when a man saw the blood of the beasts poured out it put him in mind of
his own sins, and the desert of them, and taught him to say thus: Eve as this
creature is here slain, and his blood distills and drops away* so my sins
deserve that my blood should be s^^ed* and my soul be drenched in hell for
ever. This creature can die but one death, for it sins not; but my sins
deserve both the 1. and 2. death.

Secondly, sacrifices served to put the^^ in mind of the Messiah to come: and
the slaying of the beasts showed them how the Messiah should shed his blood,
and give his life for the ^ir^s of the people* These are the 2. principal ends
of sacrifices, and for these 2. ends did Cain and Abel offer; Cain in
hypocrisy and for fashion sake: Abell in truth, conscience, and sincerity.

As it was in the old sacrifices, so is it in our Sacraments of the new
Testament: whereof, the sacrifices were all types: 1. In baptism, sprinkling
of the water, serves to show us how filthily we are defiled with our own
sins.

2. It signifies the sprinkling of the blood of Christ upon the heart of a
sinner, for his sanctification from sin.

2. In the supper, the breaking of the bread signifies, 1. how we should be
broken in humiliation for our sin: and the pouring out of the wine, how our
blood and life should be shed, and poured out for our sins, if we had that
that we deserve. And secondly, they represent unto us how the body of Christ
was broken, and his blood poured out for our sins, which he was content to
suffer under the wrath of his Father, for our sakes: so that we see, both the
sacrifices and sacraments of the old, as also of the new Testament, all aimed
at these two ends; to show us our sins, and our misery by sin: and to
foretell or represent our reconciliation by Christ. Which being so, our lesson
is this.

We have all received those two Sacraments: the first once, the second often.
Now if they have been duly received of us, they ought to have this double use
unto us: 1. To cause us to make a search of our own sins, and of our misery
by sin: and seeing it, to be cast down and humbled, considering how corrupt
our hearts are, and how wicked our lives. And secondly, when this is so, then
to make us seek for reconciliation with God by faith in Christ, to make us
desire it, love it, and pray for it above all things in the world. Abell not
only offered, but offered so, as that it put him ^n mind of his sin, and of his
redemption, by the death of the Messiah to come. So, we must not only
outwardly receive the Sacraments; but so receive, as that we may see and be
humbled for our sin: and seek to be reconciled to God in Christ.

Such use also ought we to make of hearing the word, and not to be content with
bare hearing of it, or to get a general knowledge out of it: but it must give
us a special sight of our own estate by sin: and urge us forward to seek
the favor of God in Christ. Religion stands not in hearing the word, and
receiving the Sacraments with the congregation: though it be done never so
often, and never so formally: But so to hear and so to receive, as that they
may work in us those two things: and that is the pith and life of religion.
And whosoever he be that professes religion, and shows not the fruit of it
in these two, that man's profession is in vain, and it will go for no payment at
the day of judgment.

Thus we see they offered, and what they offered.

It follows; A greater sacrifice then Cain.

The third and last point, is the difference of these sacrifices. For although
Cain offered as well as Abell: and offered sacrifice as well as Abell: yet was
there a difference in their sacrifices: for Abels was better then Cains. This
is the chief point: for this sets down what was that excellency of his faith,
for which he is here commended. Abell is not commended for offering, by his
faith: for so did Cain that had no faith: nor for offering sacrifice, by his
faith: for so did Cain that had no faith: but because that by his faith he
offered a better sacrifice then Cain could.

The holy Ghost calls Abels a better or greater sacrifice: because Abell
brought the best and fattest of his sheep, and so bestowed the most cost he
could; as signifying that he would have bestowed more cost, had he known how
to have done it. For, he that gives as he has, would give more if he had it.
And he that does the best he can in any thing, it is certain he would do
better if he could. Cain contrariwise brought not the best of his fruits, but
either the worst, or whatsoever came first to hand; as thinking that whatsoever
he brought, was good enough: therefore worthily is Abell said to have offered
a better sacrifice then Cain.

And further, this holy practice of Abell, came to be a law written, even one
of the commandments of the Ceremonial law; namely, that the first borne
should be offered to God, Exodus 34.19. And the first fruits of the corn,
Leuit. 23.10. etc. And that nothing that was lame, blind, maimed, or had any
blemish in it, should be offered to the Lord. Deuteronomy. 15.21. Abell here did even
that which these laws commanded: and these laws commanded the same that he
did. Thus God vouchsafed to honor his servant Abell, for his obedient and
honest heart; even to make his practice the ground and beginning of one of his
own laws: that so the Israelites in all their generations, might in their
daily practices, remember this worthy deed of holy Abell to his perpetual
honor.

Now for us the truth is, this law binds us not: for it was a ceremony, and
is ended in Christ. Yet the equity and use of it reaches even to us: namely it
teaches us when we will give any thing unto God, to give the best we have.
This is the equity of all those laws ceremonial, which commanded them to
give to the Lord their first borne, and their first fruits, and the fattest of
their cattle: and so much of them do still bind us. Now, from this rule, are
taught diverse duties:

1. To the Parent. Have thou many children, and wilt give some to the Lord?
namely, to serve him in the ministry? The practice of the world, is to make
the eldest a Gentleman, the next a Lawyer, the next a Merchant: he that is
youngest, or least regarded, or that has some infirmity in wit, or deformity
in body, set him to school, let him be a Minister. But Abels sacrifice
controlles this profane course of the world. Learn therefore by him,
whomsoever of all thy children thou find fittest in gifts and graces of body
and mind; whom thou love best, and most esteemest, he is fittest for the
Lord, and the Lord is most worthy of him: consecrate him to the Lord, for his
service in the ministry.

2. To the young man. He being in the strength and ripeness of wit, senses,
memory, capacity, and in the best of his age: he says, I will take my pleasure
now I am fittest for it: I will repent at the end of my days, and that is a
fitter time. This is a vile policy of the devil, to dishonor God, and to
cast away their souls. What a grief is it to give the devil his young
years, the strength of his body and wit, and to bring his withered old age
unto God? nay, be sure, God will not accept thy rotten sacrifice of old age,
but rather give thee up to the devil, that he may have thee altogether which
has had the best: then follow rather Salomons counsel, Eccles. 12.1. Who bids
thee remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: Remember Abels sacrifice,
it was of the best. So, thou have no sacrifice but thy self to offer: offer
then the best: thy young years is the best time, give them unto God.

3. To all Christians. Abell offered the best: it teaches us all, if we will
profess and serve God, not to do it by the halfes; or for show and fashion
sake, or negligently as not caring how. Thus to do, is but to offer the
sacrifice of Cain, and that makes the most professors go away with their
service vnaccepted as Cains was: for God will have all or none, he is worthy to
have no partner: he must be served with all the heart, with soul and body, so
that a man must consecrate himself wholly unto him. 2. Kings. 23.25, It is the
special commendation of good King Josias, That he turned unto the Lord with
all his heart, and soul, and might: and for that, he is preferred before all
Kings before or after him: not that Josias could fulfill the law perfectly, as
it required; but it is meant of the endeavor of his heart and life, by which he
straue with all his might to serve God as well as he could: his exsample is
ours.

We profess religion, we must look that our hearts affect it: we profess a
turning from sin, we must take heed it be not formal, and from the lips, but
from the heart. So, when we practice any duty of religion, whether we pray or
hear the word, or receive the Sacrament (this is the sacrifice that we can
offer) we must not do them coldly and carelessly; but with zealous affection
and resolution from the heart. Otherwise, if we serve God for fashion sake, and
our hearts are on the world, and our own lusts: we offer the sacrifice of
cursed Cain, and we with our formal religion shall go to him. But let us
offer the sacrifice of Abell: that is, though it be never so little; yet let it
be the best we can, and all we can, and God will accept us as he did Abell.
And thus the Parent should give God his best child: the young man his best
years: every man his best part, which is his heart. And thus we follow the
steps of holy Abell, who offered to God the best sacrifice he had. This was the
fruit of his faith: even so that Parent, that young man, that professor that
has true faith, will do so likewise.

Hitherto of the first effect of Abels faith: It follows;

By the which he obtained witness that he was righteous.

This is the second effect of Abels faith, whereby it is commended. 1. For the
meaning. By faith he means saving faith, which makes a man just before God,
and no other. For, whereas he had said before, that by faith our Elders had
obtained a good report: He proves that general, by this exsample of Abell;
therefore that saving faith which was meant there, is also meant here.

These words set down two benefits which Abell had by his saving faith:
First, he was just by it. Secondly, God testified that he was so.


For the first: Abels faith made him just and righteous, not because his faith
was an excellent quality of that virtue in it self, as to make him just; but
because it was an instrument whereby he apprehended and applied to himself the
righteousness of the Messiah to come, whereby he might stand just before God.
This was his righteousness, which he had by faith: for he trusted not to any
holiness of his own, though (it is out of question) he knew he was the son
of that man who once was perfectly righteous: but the trust and confidence of
his heart was in the righteousness of that blessed seed, which, God had
promised, should break the serpents head. This Promise he knowing, believed
it, applied it to himself, and this faith made him righteous.

Here we learn a worthy lesson of Christianity; namely, that the true and the
undoubted way to heaven, is a holy and lively faith in Jesus Christ: for, this
faith makes a man righteous, and that righteousness opens him the gate of
heaven. To this end (says the Apostle) Being justified by faith, we have peace
with God: but by who^? through our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 5.1.


For the use of this doctrine, we must renew our former exhortation, which
indeed cannot be too often presled to the conscience. There is none of us so
vile, none so profane, but we desire salvation. If we do, then we must tread
the beaten way to it. For, we are not borne heirs of it; neither can we come
thither by chance: but there is a way that must be taken, and that way is but
one: all other are misleading by-waies. Again, that way must be taken in this
life; else, it is too late. Now, this way is to be a just and righteous man.
With this, never man failed: and without this, never man attained to salvation;
for, Apoc. 21.27.
No unclean thing can come into the kingdom of heaven. Never was man
justified there, which was not just before: and that must be here begun, which
in heaven is to be perfected. In this life therefore, we must seek to be
just. Now, our own good works will not serve to make us just: for, they are
all unable to endure the trial of Gods justice. And if we stand to them, and
they prove not able to satisfy Gods justice; then, in stead of saving us, they
will condemn us. Therefore, with Abell, let us go out of our selves, deny our
selves, and cleave only to Christ's righteousness, in life and death: this is
the way that never will deceive us.

But some will say, We walk in this way. I answer; He, that walks in a way,
may be traced by his steps: so then, show your steps of holiness, of devotion,
of charity, etc. these must show your faith: leave these steps behind you, and
then your faith is good. Thus did holy Abell: believe thou it, acknowledge it,
and follow thou after him: and renounce all by paths which the Papists, or thy
own brain imagines. Let this one doctrine sink into thy heart in stead of
many, and let not the devil struck it out. For, if thou walk in this way, my
soul for thine it will bring thee to heaven: if not, at the last day this
doctrine will condemn thee, because it showed thee this way, and thou would
not walk in it.

Secondly, observe: He says, Abell was approved and accepted of God. How
proves he that? Because his works pleased God: as who say, his works cannot
please God, unless his person do: therefore in that his works do, thence he
concludes that his person did: it is the reason of the holy Ghost, and
therefore infallible.

In the framing of this reason, the holy Ghost teaches us a great point of our
religion: namely, that first a man's person must please God before his actions
can: And after the person, then the actions. This is plain in these words: for
it is said, he first obtained witness that he was righteous himself, and
then God testified of his gifts: So likewise more plainly, Genesis 4. 4, God
had respect first to Abell, and then to his offering: So that the truth is
manifest, No work pleases God before the worker do. This, being so, has
excellent uses.

First, it overthrows a maine pillar of Romish religion: Justification by
works: For how can a man be justified by his works, when he himself must be
just before the works can be? Unless he be just, his works be wicked: if they
be wicked before his person be just, how can they then justify him. And if the
person be once just, what needs it then to be again justified by works? Good
works make not a man good: but a good man makes a work good? and shall that
work that a man made good, return again and make the man good? 1. That is
absurd in reason: And 2. It is needless. For, the man is good already: else
the work could not have been good. We may therefore say, works are rather
justified by the person of a man, then his person by the works: and it is a
most vain thing to look for Justification from that which thou thy self must
first justify before it be just: if we had no other reasons against
justification by works but this, this were sufficient.

Secondly, hence we learn, that till a man be called, and his person
justified and sanctified, all that ever he does is sin. 1. His common
actions, his eating, drinking, sleeping, walking, talking, are all sins. Yea
2. The works of his calling, and his labor in the same, though never so just,
equal, and upright. 3. Further, his civil actions, namely the practice of
civil virtues: his outward gravity, meekness, sobriety, temperance,
quietness, uprightness, and all outward conformity, are all sins. Yea more
then all this, his best actions, namely his practicing of the parts of Gods
worship, or his deeds of charity, his prayer, his hearing the word, his
receiving the sacraments, his giving of alms; they are all sins unto him, if
he have not a believing and penitent heart: yea such sins as shall condemn
him, if he had no other. Object. This should seem strange divinity, that the
most holy actions, as prayer, etc. should be damnable sins. I answer, they
are in themselves holy and good, and as far forth as God has commanded them;
yet in the doer they are sins, because he does them from a foul and unholy
heart: for the same action may be holy in it self and in regard of God the
author of it, and yet a sin in him that is the doer of it. As clear water,
pure in the fountain, is corrupted or poisoned by running through a filthy and
polluted channel; so are even the best actions, sins: as even the preaching
of the word to a minister, whose heart is not cleansed by faith, and his person
accepted of God; it is a sin unto him, and (if he repent not) shall be his
condemnation. Cain sinned not only in hating and murdering his brother, in
lying and dissembling with God; but Cain sinned also even in offering
sacrifice. And Abels sacrifice had been a damnable sin, but that his person
was justified before God. And the reason of all this is good: for nothing in
the work is able to make an action acceptable to God, but only the
acceptance of the person by Christ. This being so, it stands us every one in
hand to look to our selves; and to labor above all things for faith and
repentance: that so our persons may be accepted righteous before God, and
thereby our actions accepted also. If it be a miserable thing, that all thy
actions, even holy actions should be sins, then labor to be justified; for
that only can make thy works accepted: if not, then though thou labor never
so much to be approved in the world, and set never so glorious a show upon thy
works to the eyes of men, they are all abominable sins in the sight of God:
and at the day of judgment they shall go for no better. Preach, and teach all
thy life long; nay, give thy life to die for religion: Give all thy goods to
the poor, deprive thy flesh of all delights: build Churches, Colleges,
Bridges, Highways, etc. and there may come a poor shepherd, and for his
keeping of his sheep be accepted, when thou with all this pomp of outward
holiness, may be rejected. And why this? only because he had faith, and thou
have none; his person was justified before God, and thine is not. Therefore let
this be my counsel, from Abell: Labor not so much to work glorious works;
as that which thou do, do it in faith. Faith makes the meanest work
accepted; and want of faith makes the most glorious work rejected: for so
faith the Text. Abell must be accepted, else his sacrifice is not. Thus we see
Abell was just, and God so accounted him. The second point is, That God gave
testimony he was so: In these words.

God giving testimony What testimony it was that God gave of Abell and his
gift, it is not expressed in the word; and so it is not certain: but it is
very likely* that when he and Cain offered, God in special mercy sent fire from
heaven, and burnt up Abels sacrifice, but not Cains: for so it pleased the Lord
often afterward when he would show that he accepted any man, or his work, he
answered them by fire from heaven. So he burnt up the first sacrifice that
Aaron offered* Leuit. 9.24. So he answered Solomon, 2. Chron. 7.1. And so Elias.
2. Kings, 18.28. And so it is likely that he gave this testimony that he
accepted Abell and his offering. This was a great prerogative that Abell and the
Fathers in the old testament had. We have not this, but we have a greater; for
we have that that is the substance, and truth, and body of this: For we have
also the fire of God, that is, his spirit comes down into our hearts every
day: not visibly, but spiritually, and burns up, in the heart of a believer
his sins and corruptions, and lights the light of true faith, that shall
never be put out.

The use hereof is this; As no sacrifice in the old law pleased God, but such
as was burnt by fire from heaven, sent down either then or before: so our
sacrifices of the new Testament (that is, our invocation of Gods name, our
sacrifice of praise, our duties of religion, our works of mercy and love)
never please God, unless they proceed from a heart purged by the fire of Gods
spirit, that is from a believing and repentant heart: both which are kindled
and lighted, and daily continued by that fire of Gods spirit. Therefore it is,
that Paul says, 1. Tim. 1.4, That love must come out of a pure heart, and good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. The duties of religion, and works of love
coming from this purged heart, ascend into the presence of God, as a smoke of
most acceptable sacrifices, and are as a sweet perfume in the nosethrils of the
Lord.

Now, of what did God thus testify? Of his gift.

It may here be asked at the first: how can Abell give a gift to God: has the
Lord need of any thing? and are not all things his? I answer. God is
sovereign Lord of heaven and earth, and all creatures: yet has he so given
his creatures unto man to use, as that they become man's own, and so he may
esteem and use them: and being man's, a man may in token of his thankfulness
return them again to God; especially seeing God accepts them, being so offered,
as most free gifts.

This shows us, first, the wonderful mercy of God, that whereas we can offer
him nothing but his own, he vouchsafes to accept a gift offered of his own,
even as though we had of our own to offer.

2. See here a difference betwixt the sacrifices of the old, and Sacraments of
the new Testament. In their sacrifices they gave something to God, and
therefore they are called gifts: in our Sacraments we receive daily grace from
God.

3. In that the sacrifices of the old Law are called gifts, we must know that
it is typical, and has excellent significations unto us.

1. It signifies, that the Messiah should be given of God freely, for the
salvation of his elect: and that Christ the Messiah should willingly give
himself to be a redeemer.

2. It signifies, that every man that looks for salvation by Christ, must
give himself to God, and all that is in him. So Paul exhorts, Romans 6.13.
Give your selves unto God, and your members weapons of righteousness. When we
give any thing to a man, we make him Lord of it. If we then give our souls and
bodies to the Lord, we must give them so, as that they may obey and serve him,
and be ruled by him, and serve for his glory, howsoever he shall use them. We
profess religion, and make great shows; but to give our selves in obedience
to God, is the life of religion: But contrary is the course of the world. For,
most professers are given up to sin and satan: their bodies given to drinking,
gaming, uncleanness, injustice: their souls to envying, hatred, malice,
revenge, lust, pride, self-love: God has nothing except it be a face: but
that will not serve the turn: he will have all, body and soul: for he made
all, and he has redeemed all. We go against equity. Christ gave his body and
soul for us: why should not we give ours again to him? Again, this gift is
not as other gifts; for here all the profit redounds to the giver: the glory
indeed is his; but the gain and profit is our own. Why then should we
withhold our selves from God? it argues, we know nor feel not, what Christ
has given us: for if we did, if we had 10000. lives, we would think them all
too little for him.

And thus much of the first and second effect of Abels faith; the third
follows.

By which Abell being dead, yet speaks. The 3. effect, whereby Abels faith is
commended, is laid down in these words. Concerning the meaning whereof there
is some difference, which is briefly to be examined. Some think the words
should be thus translated: By which also Abell being dead, is yet spoke of;
making the meaning to be, that by his faith he obtained a good name to all
posterities: but it seems this cannot stand, for two causes: First, because
that is already affirmed of Abell and all the rest, in the second verse, that
through faith they had obtained a good report: which therefore might seem
needless so soon to be repeated again. Secondly, for that afterward Christ's
blood and Abels being compared together, Chap. 12.24*
it is not said that Christ's blood is better spoken of then Abels: but that it
speaks better things the^ Abels did. Therefore the words are rightly
translated.

Now for the true sense of them, it is likely the holy Ghost here has relation
to the story whence it is taken; where, Genes, 4.10.
upon Cains murder, God says to him, The voice of thy brothers blood cries to
me from the earth: and why cries it? Namely for vengeance against so monstrous
a murder; and cries to all men to behold it, and to abhor the like: and so
after a sort he continues to speak, to this day. So that the words, in the
true and full sense of them, do import these two points; 1. That Abell spoke
when he was dead. 2. That in a sort Abell still speaks.


For the first: Abell spoke and cried when he was dead: but how? not with a
vocal speech: but the phrase is figurative, and imports thus much, as if the
Lord had said to Cain: thou have killed thy brother closely, and it may be have
hid him in the sand, or buried him, and think no man knows of it: but thou
must know, Cain, this thy fact is as evident to me, as if Abell had told me: I
know thou killed him: and if thou wonder how I know, I tell thee his blood
told me; for it cried in my ears, and yet it cries out against thee: for
though Abell be dead, his blood yet speaks. As this is true of Abels, so of
all men's blood: and as of blood, so of all other oppressions, though done by
never so great men. Murders, oppressions, and all wrongs done to Gods children,
they cry to God against the oppressors, though the poor oppressed men dare
scarce name them: they need not, for their blood does, yea even their very
tears cannot be shed, but God takes them up, Psalm. 56.8.
and puts them in his bottle, and will know who shed them. Thus blood cries
against them that shed it, yea tears cry against them that cause them. This
affords us a double instruction. First here it is apparent that God sees and
knows the sins of men, though the men be never so mighty, or their sins
never so secret. For though men convey them never so closely, and labor to
hide them with all the means that wit of man can devise: yet the very dead
creatures cry out, and do proclaim the sins and sinners in the ears of God,
as fully as the voices of living men, can discover any thing unto men. Privy
oppressions, and goods gotten by deep deceit, lie hid to the world: But the
stone out of the wall shall cry, Habbak. 2.11.
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it; Woe be to him that builds
his house with blood, and erects a City by iniquity: as though he had said,
God knows every stone and every piece of timber in their stately houses,
which they have gotten by deceit or oppressing of the poor. Privy
conspiracies, and plots of treason are laid against Princes and Magistrates;
and often in so secret manner, as in man's reason is not possible to be
discovered. But God has many ways to find them out, and they never escape his
privy search: and therefore the holy Ghost advises; Eccles. 10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, nor the great ones in thy
bedchamber: for the foul of the heaven shall carry thy voice, and that which
has wings shall declare the matter. So that whatsoever is plotted never so
privily, or conspired in the secret closets of ungodly men, God knows it, and
has means enough to disclose it to the world. And in our daily experience God
magnifieth himself mightily in revealing murders. For, bring the murderer
before the dead corpse, and usually it bleedeth, or gives some other
testimony, whereby it speaks even as Abels blood did, This is the murderer.
Nay more: for, Abels blood spoke to God, but here even to men also.

And of this its hard to give any reason at all, but the secret and immediate
hand of God, thereby showing himself to know all secret sins, and to be able
to disclose them by strange means.

The use of this doctrine is, to fear all men from sinning, though they think
it possible to conceal their sins from the world: for this is one of the
strongest and commonest encouragements that men take, to live in a sin, If
they think it likely to be concealed. But here they see how false a ground
that is. For if they can conceal it from men, yet can they not from God: and
if God know it, then can he reveal it to the world when it pleases him.

Again, whereas Abels blood cried when he was dead; It teaches us, that God
had a care of Abell both living and dead: for it were nothing to say his blood
cried, if God heard not that cry. But its apparent he heard it, for he revenged
it, and punished Cain when Abell was dead, and could not revenge it himself.
And this care God has not over Abell alone, but over all his children: and as
the Psalmist says, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints: Psalm. 116.115.
that which is vile, and of no regard in the world, is precious with God.
Tyrants make havoc of the Church, and kill them up by heaps; but God records
up every one, and will not fail to revenge it, when they are dead: For if God
have bottles for the tears of his servants, surely much more has he bottles
for their blood.

The use whereof is to teach us in all extremities of danger or distress; to
learn patience: yea, though we be sure to die, yet (as Christ says) To
possess our souls with patience: For we have one, Luke. 21.19.
will hear the cause, and revenge our quarrel when we are gone: So that if we
be patient we loose nothing; but if we be impatient we get nothing. Let us
therefore hold our tongues: for, the wrong done to us cries loud enough to
God for revenge, who will hear it as assuredly as he did Abels. And thus we
see how Abell spoke then, even after he was dead.

The second point is, He speaks also yet: and that three ways.

First, his faith yet speaks, because it admonishes all men every where, who
either hear or read this story, to become such as Abell was, namely, true
worshippers of the true God: for, in Abels example, it prouokes all men to be
like him, because it assures them of the same regard and reward with God that
Abell had: and so Abels faith is a never dying Preacher to all Ages of the
Church.

Here we learn, that the holy Examples of Gods children are real teaching,
and loud preaching to other men.

For there is a double teaching, namely, in word or deed.


It belongs to the Minister to teach in word; and to all men to teach by their
deeds, and good examples. And if the Minister teach not thus also, it is the
worse both for him and his hearers.

It suffices not for him to teach by vocal Sermons, that is, by good
doctrine* but withal by real Sermons, that is, by good life: His faith, his
zeal, his patience, his mercy and all other his virtues must speak, and cry,
and call to other men to be like unto him: which if he practice carefully in
his life as Abell did, then shall his virtues speak for him to all posterities
when he is dead.

Again, Abell though dead, may be said to speak, because howsoever his body
be dead, yet in soul and spirit he lives with God in heaven. And thus the
word speaks may be understood, because it is here opposed to death: by which
he being dead, yet speaks: that is, being dead in body, yet lives in soul:
which life with God, was obtained unto by his true and saving faith.

Thirdly, he may be said to speak yet, as all other Gods Martyrs are said to
cry in the Revelation, Reu. 6.10.
from under the altar, How long Lord holy and true do thou not avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth! As this is true of all Martyrs, so
specially of Abell the first Martyr of all: which words are not spoken, neither
by him nor them vocally with vttrance of voice: but it is so said, to signify
what fervent desire the servants of God have in heaven, of the full
manifestation of Gods glory in their bodies, and of an utter abolishment of
sin in the whole world. Which their desire, they doubtless utter to God in a
more excellent manner, then in this world we can utter any thing with our
voice: and thus Abell speaks yet, and shall speak till the worlds end.

Hitherto of the first Example, the Example of Abell.

The second is of Henoch: in these words; 2. Example, Henoch.
By faith Henoch was translated, that he should not see death, Verse 5.
neither was he found, for God took him away: for, before he was translated,
he was reported of that he had pleased God, etc.
THe second example of faith, is taken also out of the old world, before the
flood; and it is of Henoch the seventh from Adam: to whom, strange and
miraculous things befell, by reason of his faith.

Let the meaning of the words be first examined.

By Faith. That is, by his confidence in the Messiah or his saving faith, he
was taken away.

Taken away: That is, from earth to heaven, not by an ordinary work, but
miraculously; as is evident by the next words, That he should not see death.

That is, that he should not feel death, nor any dissolution of soul and
body: and therefore his taking away was miraculous. For, to be taken away by
death is an ordinary work: but to be taken away, and yet not die, that is
miraculous and extraordinary: and such was Henochs.

So then the substance of these words is thus much; Henoch having this grace
from God, to believe steadfastly in the Messiah to come, was likewise honored
with this high prerogative, To be taken into heaven, without tasting of death,
and further was taken away to the end that he might not die. Thus we have the
meaning.

Now concerning this translation of Henochs: there are two opinions.

Some think he was translated in soul only, and not in body: and they say
he died in the translation, so as his soul only was taken up into heaven, and
his body slept in the earth. Though this appears false at the first sight, yet
let us see their reasons, and what they can say for themselves.

Their first reason is this; No mortal body unglorified can enter into heaven:
but there is no mention of his glorification: therefore his body could not come
in heaven.

Answer. It is certain it was glorified ere it came in heaven. If they reply,
it is not mentioned: I answer it follows not, that therefore it was not: for
every circumstance of every action is not mentioned. For, many circumstances of
actions must necessarily be supposed, and such a one was this. Again, the
glorification of his body is here plainly enough implied where it is said he
was translated, that he should not see death. Now, if his body saw not death,
it was made immortal, which is a special part of glorification.

Their second reason. Christ was the first that ever entered into heaven both in
body and soul* and for proof thereof, they bring S. Paul, where he says, 1.
Cor. 15.20.
Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep.

Answer. True indeed of them that sleep, that is, of all that die; for Christ
entered into heaven both in body and soul, first of all them: but Henoch never
died; as the Text here avouches: therefore that place hinders not, but Henoch
might be in heaven in his body, before Christ's humane flesh ascended thither.

Thirdly, they argue out of Saint John: No man has ascended into heaven, but
he that descended; the son of man, which is in heaven. But say they, this
son of man is not Henoch, but Christ: therefore none but Christ ascended
bodily into heaven.

Answer. That place is not meant of corporal ascending, but of understanding
mystical and heavenly things: no man ascends to the full knowledge of
heavenly Mysteries, but Christ alone, who descended from heaven from the bosom
of his Father.

And thus we see, this opinion has no strength of Argument to rest upon: but
we may safely hold (notwithstanding any thing that can be said against it)
that Henoch was translated both in body and soul. And if any man yet doubt,
how he could be taken up in body before he was glorified; We are to know,
though he died not, yet his body was changed, as those men shall be, 1. Cor.
15.20.
which shall be found alive at the last day.

The second opinion is, that Henoch was taken up in soul and body into
Paradise (some say, the heavenly, but the most the earthly Paradise) and there
lives in his mortal and corruptible body, and must before the last day come
again in his body with Elias, and fight against Antichrist: and when by their
doctrine they have overcome him, he shall by violence kill them, and so they
shall die Martyrs: And this is the general received opinion of the most
Papists. But it is a mere conceit, and a dream, and there is no ground for
it: but, good argument against it.

For first, as for the Earthly Paradise, it was defaced by the flood; nor do
we read that ever man was in it but Adam. And some of their own fables tell us
that Seth went to the gates of Paradise, when his father Adam was sick, to get
some Physic out of Paradise for his father, but he could not get in: Nor do
we find any mention of it afterward. So that it is likely in all reason, that
it was defaced by the universal flood.

And if they mean, he was translated into the Heavenly Paradise; I answer,
thither can no unclean thing come: but a mortal body is unclean: and
themselves say, he was taken away in his mortal body, and in it shall come
again and die. Therefore Henoch having a mortal and unglorified body, cannot
be in the highest heavens; into which nothing can enter which is not glorified
and made immortal.

If they allege Ecclesiasticus 44.16. Enoch pleased God and was translated
into Paradise, etc.

I answer, we need not call in question the authority of the book, nor
answer that it is not in the Canon of faith. For the text is corrupted wilfully
by some that showed themselves in the Latin too bold with the text, both there
and elsewhere: for in the Greek original, there is no such matter as
Paradise, but the words are these: Enoch pleased God, and was translated for an
example of repentance to the generations. And thus we see, this opinion is
every way erroneous, and has no shadow of reason in it, nor for it.

Seeing therefore both these opinions are to be refused, let us in few words
set down the true and Orthodoxall judgment of the Church, out of the
Scriptures in the old and new testament. And it is this: That this holy man,
by Gods special favor to him, was assumed into heaven both body and soul; his
soul being perfectly sanctified, and his body glorified in the instant of his
translation: and there he remains in glory, expecting the general
resurrection, and the full glorification of all Gods elect.

Out of this translation of Henoch, we may learn:

First, that there is a life everlasting prepared of God for his children,
wherein they shall live for ever both in soul and body; for hereof has God
given us most evident testimonies, both here in Enoch, and afterward in Elias:
Elias a Jew, 2. Kings.
Enoch none: Enoch in the first world, Elias in the second: Enoch before the
flood, Elias after: Enoch uncircumcised, Elias circumcised: Enoch married,
Elias unmarried: and both were assumed into heaven in soul and body, and are
there to this day, and tarry for us till the end of the world; assuring us
that our souls live for ever: and that our bodies, though they die, shall rise
again to life. Here therefore we have a notable ground for that last (but not
the least) article of our faith, where we profess to believe life everlasting.

Secondly, in this example we learn, that God is not tied to the order of
Nature. The order which God established and set down concerning all men after
Adams fall is this: Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return. Genes. 3.19.
By virtue of this decree, all men are to die, as sure as they once live; and
when that time appointed by God is come, all the world cannot save one man, but
accordingly die he must. But here notwithstanding we see, God that tied man to
this order, is not tied himself. Enoch and Elias are exempted, they die not,
their bodies never turned to dust; such is the power of God over the order of
Nature, in all natural actions.

Thirdly, whereas the Papists hold, that all the Fathers who died before
Christ, were in Limbus (a place out of heaven) and came not in heaven till
Christ fetched them thence, and carried them with him at his ascension; Here we
learn it is most false and forged. For here we see, Henoch, and afterward
Elias were in heaven both in body and soul, many hundred years before Christ's
Incarnation: whereby (as also by many other evidences that might be brought) it
is apparent, that Limbus Patrum is nothing but a devise of that heretical
Church of Rome.

Hitherto has the holy Ghost avouched the translation of Henoch. Now he
proves substantially, that he was taken away.

Neither was he found, for God had taken him away.

And for his proof, he first lays down his ground: then he thereupon
frames his argument, consisting of diverse degrees of demonstration.

The ground is, the plain and evident testimony of the old Testament in
Genesis; where the words are these: Henoch was not found, Genesis 5.24.
or not seen, for God took him away. Against this ground, being the very
words of the old Testament, no man can take exception. And here in a word,
let us all mark the high and sovereign authority of Gods word, which even
the holy Ghost himself vouchsafes to allege for the confirmation of his own
words. It had been sufficient that the holy Ghost here affirmed Enoch to be
taken away: but we see he proves it out of the old Testament, so also did the
Apostles and Christ himself all their doctrine.

Let this teach all men to give due reverence to the holy Scriptures: let
teachers allege them; let hearers receive them far above all humane
testimonies, seeing the holy Ghost himself vouchsafes to confirm his own
words, by the authority thereof.

Secondly, having laid this ground, the holy Ghost frames his argument, to
prove that Henoch was taken away by faith: and it consists of many degrees of
evidence.

For before he was taken away, he was reported of that he had pleased God.

Verse 6:
But without faith, it is impossible to please God.

The degrees of the argument are these; 1. God himself took Henoch away. 2.
Before he was taken away, he pleased God. 3. But without faith no man can
please God.


Therefore Henoch by faith was taken away.

The first degree, That Henoch was taken away, and was not found any more in
this world, has been sufficiently spoken of already.

The second degree is, that before he was taken away, he pleased God: which is
not barely affirmed, but it is further added, that he was reported of, or he
received testimony, Genes. 5.22.
that he pleased God.

Now, this report or testimony is taken out of the story of Genesis, where it
is affirmed of Enoch, that he walked with God: which walking with God, is an
assured testimony that he pleased God; Amos 3.3.
for (as the Prophet Amos says) Can two walk together unless they be agreed:
therefore in as much as Henoch walked with God, it is proof sufficient, that
he pleased God: and because he pleased God, therefore God took him away. So
that here are two distinct points in this second degree; First, that Henoch
pleased God: Secondly, that there is a report or a testimony given of him,
that he did please God.

In the first, let us observe three special points of instruction.

First, in that Henoch, before he was taken away, pleased God: let us learn,
that whosoever looks to have his soul translated into heaven at his death,
and both body and soul at the resurrection; must before hand in this life
learn to please God: they must seek to please God, not when the time of the
translation is come; but before, as here it is said Henoch did.

If any man demand, How shall I please God? My answer is this; Adam pleased
GOD by keeping the Law: but now that is past, that power is lost: we must
now please God by direction from the Gospel; namely, by faith in Christ and
true repentance, together with a holy life (which must necessarily accompany
true faith and repentance) thus God is pleased. And this must we not defer
till our death; but do it in our lives: nor can we look to be inheritours of
the kingdom of glory as now Henoch is: unless before hand we be in the
kingdom of grace, by pleasing God as Henoch did. It is lamentable, to see men
not care for salvation til death, and then they begin to please God: but alas,
God will not be so pleased. They begin to learn how to please God, when they
have so long displeased him, as there is then fear they can never please him:
but that man lives and dies with comfort, of whom it may be said as here of
Henoch, before he was taken away he pleased God.

Again, whereas he came not in heaven till he pleased God; this discouers
the madness of sinful men, who will look for heaven, and yet will leave no
sin, but flatter themselves therein. But, let all impenitent men here take
knowledge that they come not in heaven till they please God: let them therefore
cease pleasing themselves and their corruptions, by living in sin, and learn
to please God by a holy life.

And further: In this point mark how nothing brought Henoch to heaven, but his
pleasing of God. He was rich, for he was one of the greatest on the earth:
he was royally descended, for he was the seventh from Adam in the blessed
line: he was learned, for he had the six first Patriarchs to teach him, six
such Tutors as never man had: and it is likely he had a comely, strong, and
active body. But see, all these brought him not to heaven: no, he pleased God.
and was therefore taken away.

Let this teach us not to rest in wealth, beauty, strength, honor, humane
learning, nor all these put together without the fear of God: for some of them
may please thy self, and some may please other men; but God must be pleased
before thou come in heaven, if thou were as good as Henoch. Therefore unto all
thy outward blessings add this, To please God by faith and repentance. Then as
thy pleasing of men may make thee happy in this world: so thy pleasing of God,
shall translate thee from earth to heaven.

Thus we see, Henoch before he was translated pleased God.

Secondly, as he pleased God, and else could not have been translated; so it
is added, he was so reported of, or there was such a testimony of him. That
proof or testimony is here concealed; but it is recorded in the story of
Genesis, where it is said Henoch walked with God: which, as we heard before,
was an assured testimony that God was well pleased with him.

But what is this, he walked with God: how can a man ^e said to walk with
God? The meaning is, That Henoch lived a godly, righteous, and innocent life in
this world: ^or to live in holiness and righteousness, is to walk with God.
And further, his heart was possessed of two persuasions or resolutions, which
were the inducements drawing him to this holy life:

First, that he was always in Gods presence, and that God is always ready
to dispose of all things to his good.

Again, that God did see, try, and discern all his words and deeds, yea
his cogitations and thoughts, and the whole course of his life. These were the
holy resolutions of Henoch, and these made him lead a holy life.

This lesson is worth learning, and this example worthy to be followed of us
all: our duty is with Henoch, to walk with God in this life if we purpose to
live with God in heaven: and we walk with God by leading holy and unblameable
lives, in holiness toward God, and righteousness toward man. But if we
think this hard to do, we must labor to be resolved on these grounds:
First, that God and his providence is ever present with us, to dispose of us
always to his glory, and of all other things to our good.

Secondly, that as we are in Gods presence; so God sees us, and all our
thoughts, words and works, b^rgaines and dealings, and will judge them all.

When these two persuasions possess our hearts, it cannot be, but we shall
live godly, and fear to offend God: for, as a child is dutiful and obedient
in his Fathers presence; so when a man is persuaded, he is in Gods presence, it
cannot but make him dutiful. When a man is persuaded that God sees him, he
will take heed what he does; and that God hears him, he will temper his
tongue; and that God beholds all his dealings in the world, he will take
heed how he borrows, lends, buieth, or sells, and what he does in all
his actions: and the very cause of all carelessness in these and all other
duties in the world, is, because men are persuaded God sees them not.

To urge us therefore to this excellent duty; we have, First, Gods
Commandment: Walk before me and be upright (says God) to Abraham, Genesis
17.1.
and in him to all the children of his faith.

Again, we have the examples of Gods children, who are renowned for the
obedience of this Commandment; Henoch here, after him Abraham, and after him
David, who testifies of himself, I will walk before God in the land of the
living. Psalm. 116.9.


Thirdly, as it is both commanded by precept, and practiced by exsample: so
the proof of it is most comfortable to all that practice it; for it will make
them prosper in all they go about. For, as he that is always in the Kings
presence and company, cannot but be in his favor, and therefore cannot but
succeed well in all his affairs: so he that walks with God, cannot but
prosper in whatsoever he sets his heart and hand unto. Blessed Abraham found
this most true, when he assured his servant whom he sent to provide Isaac a
wife, in a long, and doubtful, and dangerous journey; The Lord, before whom I
walk, will send his Angel with thee, and prosper thy journey: Genes. 24.40.
and even so may every child of God say with confidence: The Lord, before whom
I walk, will send his Angel with me, and prosper me in my proceedings.

Fourthly, this walking with God is a good means to make a man bear the
cross with patience: For if he be persuaded that God sees how wrongfully he
is persecuted or oppressed, and that Gods providence is always present, so as
no affliction can com unto him, but by his appointment: and again, that his
providence disposes of all things to his good, how can he but receive with
patience that portion of afflictions which God shall lay upon him? For as he
that walks with the King, who dare offer him wrong? so he that walks with
God, what evil can touch him? This is Joseph's argument to his brethren, when
they were discomforted, and feared he would punish them after their Fathers
death: Fear not (says he) for am not I under God? as though he had said, Do
not I walk in Gods presence? Genes. 50.20.
and acknowledge my self under his power? and that God, when you thought evil
against me, disposed it to good: where the ground of Joseph's reason is, that he
walking with God, his affliction turned to his good.

Lastly, this is a means to bring a man to make conscience of all sin, in
thought, word, and deed, and in all his dealings, when he persuades himself
to walk in the presence of God.

When Joseph was allured to sin by his Mistress, his answer was, How shall
I commit this great wickedness, and so sin against God? The bridle that
restrained him, Genes. 39.9.
was the fear of that God in whose presence he walked: And because he walked
with God, he would not walk with her in her wicked way: and because he kept a
holy company with God, therefore he would not keep her company, nor be allured
by her temptations.

So then seeing this way of walking with God, is every way so excellent and so
profitable, let us learn it not in judgment and knowledge only, to be able
to talk of it (which is soon learned): but in conscience and practice (as
dutiful children do before their parents, so) let us in a heavenly awe and a
child-like reverence walk before God, laboring for a true persuasion of his
presence and providence, to be always over us and our whole lives. The want
hereof is the cause of all sin: And if we do thus walk with God, and so
please him, as Henoch here did, then shall we be sure (though not after the
same manner that Henoch was, yet) in soul first, and afterward in soul and
body both, to be translated into eternal life. But if we will not walk this
way with Henoch in this life, let us never look to live in heaven with him;
but assure our selves, that as the way of holiness is the way to glory, so the
way of wickedness is the way to eternal perdition. And thus much of the
second degree.

But without faith it is impossible to please God. These words contain the
third degree, or the third part of the reason. And this degree consists of a
general Maxim or Canon of Divinity: and the holy Ghost first lays it
down; and then, because it is one of the waightiest principles in religion, he
proves it substantially, in the words following. In the Canon it self let us
first examine the meaning, and then unfold the manifold use of it.

Without faith. By faith, is meant here the same faith as before: namely, true
saving faith in the Messiah. And without this saving faith, It is impossible to
please God.

Impossible how? not in regard of the absolute, infinite, and indeterminable
power of God, which has no limits, but his own will: but in regard of that
order of the causes and means of salvation set down by God in his word: which
is this;

1. Man by sin has displeased God.

2. God must be pleased again, else a man cannot be saved.

3. He that will please God, must please him in Christ the Mediator, else he
cannot: therefore he that will please God, and be saved, must needs believe in
Christ. And thus by this order it is impossible. We deny not, but in regard of
Gods absolute power, he could save a man without faith; as he can lighten the
world without the sun. But as (if he keep that order of nature, which his
own wisdom has appointed) it is impossible to give light to the world
without the sun: so (if he keep that order for salvation, which his own
Justice has appointed) it is impossible to please God without faith in Christ.
So then the meaning is laid down: and now appears the strength and force of
the holy Ghosts argument;

He, that will be saved and come to heaven, must first please God: But without
faith it is impossible to please God. Therefore without faith no man can be
saved nor come in heaven: and by consequent, therefore Henoch being taken into
heaven, must needs be taken away by faith.

Now the use of this Canon, rightly understood, is manifold and of great profit.

First, here we learn that faith is simply and absolutely necessary to
salvation, and most necessary of all other gifts and graces of God whatsoever.
And though many be required, yet amongst all holy graces this is the
principal, and more necessary in some respects, then any other. For howsoever
hope, and love, and zeal, and many other graces of God are required, to make
the state of a Christian complete; and though they all have their several
commendations in the word: Yet, of none of them all is it said in the whole
Scripture, as it is here said of faith, that without it, it is impossible to
please God: And no marvel, for it is the root and ground of all other
graces, and gives them their life and being: for therefore does a man fear
God, therefore does he love God, therefore is he zealous for Gods glory,
because he believes that God loves him in Christ the redeemer.

Now then if faith be thus necessary, then it follows that those that live in
ignorance, and so have no sound faith, but a foolish presumption, are in a
miserable case: for how-euer they may flatter themselves with conceits of
their devotions, and good meanings, and good intents; it is faith, with which
they must please God, and nothing can without it. It stands them therefore in
hand to lay-off ignorance and presumption, and labor for a sound and saving
faith, and that will bring them to the favor of God.

And again, as for such as have received grace to believe, seeing faith is of
such necessity, and that they having faith must needs have knowledge, they
therefore must look and examine by their knowledge, whether their faith be a
sound faith or no: for herein many that have knowledge deceive themselves, and
think they have true faith when they have not. Now if any man would know
whether his faith be sound, and saving, or no; It is known by this. If it
purify the heart: for so says S. Peter, That God by faith did purify the
hearts of the profane and filthy Gentiles. Acts. 15.9.
If then thy faith do not purify thy heart, and cleanse thy life, and cause
thee to abound in good works, it is no sound nor saving faith, it is but a
general faith, it is but an historical knowledge, and cannot save the soul:
he therefore that, upon examination of his heart and life, finds his faith
to be such, let him not content himself, but turn his general faith into a
saving faith, which in this world will purify his heart, and at the last day
will save his soul. And this must every man the rather do, because what
knowledge, or what other gifts of God soever any many has, without faith in
Christ all are nothing: for it is faith that seasoneth them all, and makes both
them and the person himself to please God.

Secondly, if it be impossible without faith to please God, then here we see
the fond and foolish hypocrisy of the world, who will please God by other
means: some think if they be glorious in the world, either for their wealth,
or their wit, or their honor, or their authority, or their learning, they
presently bring themselves into a fools Paradise; and because the world makes
account of them, and they please themselves, therefore they think it certain,
they must needs please God. But alas, though all the world admire them, and
they be never so far in love with themselves, He that sits in heaven,
laugheth them to scorn. For, Psalm. 2.
not all the pomp and glory, nor all the millions and mountains of gold in
the world, can please the Lord for one of the least of their many thousand
sins, wherewith they have provoked him. Let these men ask Nabuchadnezzer if
his pompous pride: or Achitophel if his active head, and crafty wit: or Absalom
if his golden locks: or Iezabell if her painted face and courtly attire: or
Naball if his flocks of sheep: or the Philosophers, if their natural
learning: if all of these, or any of these did ever please God: Nay alas, they
all have found and felt, that without faith it is impossible to please God.

Thirdly, it is the opinion not of the Turk alone in his Alcaron, but of many
other as ill, that every man shall be saved by his own religion, if he be
devout therein; be he Turk, Jew, or Christian, Papist or Protestant. But
this is a ground and rule of Atheism, and appears here to be most false; for,
no salvation without pleasing of God, and without faith it is impossible to
please God: therefore no religion can save a man, but that which teaches a man
rightly to believe in Christ, and consequently to please God. But every
religion teaches not to believe in Christ, some not at all; and some not
aright, and therefore it is impossible for such a religion to save a man.
Again, be a man what he can be, unless he be within the covenant of grace,
he cannot be saved: But he cannot be within the covenant, but by faith:
therefore no man can be saved by any means, but by true faith; nor in any
religion, but that which teaches true faith.

Here therefore not only Turks and Jews are excluded: but this also shows
many Papists, and many carnal Gospellers in our Church, how short they come of
that religion which must save their souls. For this is the conceit of the
most men, that if they do some good works, which carry a fair show to the
world, as liberality to learning, or charity to the poor; straight they think
they have leave to live as they list, and God is bound to forgive their sins,
and to give them heaven: and this they imagine, though they know not what it
is to believe in Christ, or to repent of their sins. One of this religion
came to the Prophet Micha in his days, and asked him this question (vttring
that plainly which all such men think in their hearts) Wherewithal shall I
come before the Lord, Micha. 6.7.8.
and bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him with thousands
of Rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil? (He makes the question, and would
feign make answer himself: nay, he goes further, and offers more) Shall I
give my first borne for my transgression, and the fruit of my body for the
sin of my soul? But the Prophet answers him, showing him his folly, and how
little God regards such works without a contrite heart; He has showed thee O
man what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee: Surely to do justly, to
love mercy, to humble thy self, and walk with thy God. Mark how that
answer fits this example of Henoch. He pleased God, he walked with God, and
was taken away: So, answers the Prophet, if thou would please thy God, and
come to heaven by his favor; never stand upon thousands of Rams, and Rivers of
oil, upon thy gay and glorious works: but humble thy self and walk with thy
God. No walking with God (says Micha) no pleasing of God: what is it but all
one, as if he had said, Without faith it is impossible to please God? Here
then is no disallowance of good works, but of works without faith and true
repentance: which though they be never so fair and flourishing; yet is it
impossible, that without faith they should please God.

Hereby it is also manifest, that all the virtues of the heathen, and the
works of such men as either know not Christ: or, knowing him, acknowledge him
not their only Savior: or, acknowledging him, do not truly believe in him
with such a faith as purifieth their hearts; are nothing else, but as the
Fathers called them splendida peccata, gilded and glittering dross, and
beautiful deformities. And how-euer this seems harsh, yet it must needs be
true; seeing without faith it is impossible to please God.

And here also the vanity of some Popish Writers appears, who presumptuously
make some Philosophers Saints: whereas they should first have showed that they
believed in Christ; and then we would believe and teach it as willingly as
they: but else, if they had had all the learning, and all the moral virtues in
the world; this must stand for a truth, Without faith it is impossible to
please God.

Lastly, here we learn, that the word of God registered in the holy
Scriptures, does contain in it sufficient direction for all the actions and
duties of a man's life: for without faith no man can please God. And if no man,
then no man's actions can please God which are not of faith: for whatsoever is
not of faith, is sin, Romans, Chapter 14. verse 23.

If therefore men's actions must proceed from faith, then consequently must
they have their ground and warrant from the word: for faith and the word are
relatiues, and the one dependes upon the other; No faith, no word to bind: no
word, no faith to believe. But all actions that please God, must be done in
faith; therefore all actions that please God, have some ground and direction in
the word of God, without which word of God there can be no faith. And this is
true, not only in holy actions, but even in the common actions of men's lives
and lawful callings. This is a principle, which we must firmly believe and
receive. And beside this argument here, It is also proved by the evident
testimonies of the holy Ghost. 2. Timoth. 3.16.17.
S. Paul to Timothy; All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable to teach, improve, correct, and instruct in righteousness, that the
man of God may be absolute, and made perfect unto all good works. How can the
sufficiency of Scripture be more sufficiently in words expressed? Again,
Every creature and ordinance of God, 1. Timoth. 4.4.5.
is good, etc. For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. Now if the
Scripture make a Christian perfect in all good works, how can it be, but it
gives him sufficient directions for all his works? And if every action be
sanctified by the word; how can that be, but the word has warranty and
direction for every action and duty, which may fall out in the course of a
Christian life? And upon these grounds we have good reason to be resolved of
this truth.

But now if any man ask how this can be, for the Scriptures were written long
ago, and the stories are of particular men, nations, and times, and the
Commandments are known to be but ten; how then can the Scriptures yield
sufficient directions, for every man's particular actions? I answer, the
Scripture gives directions for all actions 2. ways. Either by Rules, or by
Examples: Rules are of two sorts, General or particular. Particular rules for
particular callings are many: for Kings they must read Gods book, and not
have many wives, Deuteronomy. 17.17, 18.19. Psalm. 2.
nor gather too much silver and gold: They must be wise and learned: and kiss
the son of God Christ Jesus, and many other: for Ministers they must be apt
to teach, watching, sober, not young scholars, and many other: and so
consequently the most of the callings that are in the common wealth, 1. Timoth.
3.2, etc.
have their particular directions in plain rules.

Exodus 20.
General rules are first the ten Commandments, which are directions for
all sorts and callings of men in all times, what to be done, what not to be
done in all actions toward God and men: and besides, in the new Testament
there are some few rules which are general directions for all men in all
ages: As, Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do you the same
unto them. Again, Math. 7.12.
Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of
God. 1. Cor* 10.31.
Again, Let all things be done to edification, and without offense of thy
brother. Again, Let all your works be done in love. 1. Cor. 14.26.
Lastly, Let no man seek his own (alone) but every man another wealth. Now
there is no action in the world, 1. Cor. 10.24.
nor any duty to be done of a Christian man, be he a public or private person,
be it a public or a private action, be it toward God or man; but if he have
not a particular direction, yet it falls within the compass of some of these
rules: and by the tenor of some of these, he may frame his work in such
manner, as shall be pleasing to God, and comfortable to himself.

Secondly, besides rules there are Examples, which are special directions: and
they are either of God or good men. Extraordinary examples of God, namely such
as he did in extraordinary times, or upon extraordinary occasions, they
concern us not: for these he did by the power and prerogative of the Godhead:
as, bidding of Abraham sacrifice his son, bidding the Israelites spoil the
Egyptians, Genesis 22.
and such like. Exodus 11.2.
But the ordinary works of Gods wisdom in his creatures, of his justice
toward sinners, of his mercy toward his children, of his care and providence
toward all, are excellent rules of direction for us. Hence we have these
rules: Be ye holy for I am holy: Be ye merciful as your Father in heaven is
merciful, Luke 6.36.

So for the actions of Christ, who was God and man: the miraculous actions of
his power, which argued his God^ead, as his walking upon the water, and such
like, are no directions for us. Nor again, his actions and works ^lone as he
was Mediator, as his fasting forty days, his passion and his merits, these
are no directions for us to do the like: But, as the first give us instruction;
So these procure us justification.

But the third sort of his actions done by him as a man, or as a Jew borne,
they are both our instruction and imitation, and they are good directions for
our actions: as, his obedience, his zeal, his patience, his humility, and all
other virtues: Concerning all which he says himself to us, Learn of me,
Math. 11.29.
for I am humble and lowely. And again, when he had washed his Apostles feet,
he bad them learn of him to love one another: John. 13.13.14, 15.
For (says he) I have given you example that you should do even as I have done
to you. These his examples are rules of direction to all men in the like case.

Now as for the examples of men, as the examples of wicked men are every way to
be eschewed, so good men's are to be followed: for, whatsoever is written, is
written for our learning, Romans 15.4. And for them we are to know that their
examples or actions, contrary to the word, are therefore to be avoided, because
they be contrary: as, Noah's drunkenness, Lots Incest, David's Adultery, and
many other his infirmities, and such like. Such as are directly agreeable with
the word of God, are to be embraced and received as directions for our lives,
not for their own sake, but because they are agreeable to the word. But as for
such as are neither commanded nor forbidden; and being done, were neither
allowed nor disallowed: these being done by godly men, and such who for their
faith were approved of God, and against which no exception can be taken in the
word, they be as rules and directions for us in the like cases. Now there is no
action that can fall out in the life of a Christian man, for which he has not
out of the Scripture either a rule general or particular, or else some example
to follow, which is as good as a rule unto him. And thus we see how the
Scripture affoords directions for all our actions. In the demonstration
whereof, we have stood the longer, because it is a principle of great moment.
The use hereof is double. First, we must therefore in all the actions of our
lives and callings, take consultation with the word of God: and for our
direction therein, we must search for either general or particular rules, or
at least for examples of godly me^ in like cases. And without the warrant and
direction of some of these, we are by no means to enter into any thing, or to
do any work. If we do, then we cannot clear our selves from sin in so
doing: for we sin, because we please not God in doing that action: we please
not God, because we have no faith for the doing of it: we have no faith,
because we have no warrant nor ground in the word for it. Therefore what-euer a
man presumes to do without some warrant in the word for his direction, he
sins in so doing.

Secondly, ^ere Ministers must learn their duty: for if no action can possibly
please God, that is done without faith, nor can be done in faith without
warrant from the word, then must they be Gods mouth unto the people, to be able
to tell them what is lawful, what is unlawful by the word; that so their
people may perform their actions in faith, and consequently please God.

Now having laid down this Rule; because it is a principle of so great moment,
the holy Ghost in the next words proceeds to the proof of it.

For he, that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him.

These words are a proof of the former rule, and the reason stands thus:

He that comes to God, must needs believe: But He that pleases God, comes
to God. Therefore He that pleases God, must needs believe: and so, without
faith it is impossible to please God.

He that comes to God To come to God in the Scriptures, but especially in
this Example, is to labor to have fellowship with God in Christ: as is
manifest in three places more. In the fourth Chapter, we are bid to go boldly
to the throne of grace: Heb. 4.16. and 7.25. and 10.22.
and in the seventh, Christ is said to be able perfectly to save them that
come unto God by him. And in the tenth, we are called to draw near with a true
heart in assurance of faith. Out of all which places it appears, that to come
to God, is to have fellowship with God by Christ. And the reason why that
phrase is so often used to the Hebrews, is, for that many of them having
received the profession of Christ, afterward forsook him again, and fell from
his religion, and by renouncing Christ, fell away from God. Therefore he
exhorts them to take heed least there be in any of them an evil heart, and
unfaithful to depart from the living God, Chap. 3.12. Now, by the contrary, I^
to renounce Christ be to fall or go away from God; then we may gather, that to
come to God, is to cleave to Christ, and to God by Christ. So then the meaning
is, He that will have any fellowship with God in Christ, He must believe.

What must He believe? Two things;

1. That God is. 2. That he is a rewarder of them that seek him.

He must first believe that God is.

That is, not so much that there is a God; for that we are taught by the very
light of Nature: But that this God, whom in Christ he labors to know, and come
near, is the true and only God.

This is a notable point in Christian religion, to believe, that God is God
indeed: not a fiction, a shadow, or imaginary God, but God indeed. For it is
the scope of the first commandment, that God gave mankind. If any man
object, There is no man that knows God, but confesses God to be God, no man
was so mad as ever to think otherwise:

I answer, to believe the true God to be God indeed, is a matter of great
difficulty. For, though a man by nature think there is a God, yet do we not
by nature think the true God to be God. Nay, by nature every man is an
Atheist, and denies in his heart the true God to be God, and does impugn the
first commandment above all other. And this may truly and safely be affirmed
of all men that ever came of Adam (Christ alone excepted) that by nature they
are Atheists, and it may be proved thus.

By nature, though we know and believe there is a God, yet the corruption of
our nature is such, as we frame and feign him to ourselves to be such a one as
we please; for, we deny in our hearts his power, his presence, and his
justice. But to take away these three from him, is to deny the true God to be
God indeed.

First, men by nature deny Gods presence. For men would be ashamed to do many
things in the presence of any man, even the basest in the world: which when
they are out of men's sights, and yet in Gods presence, they commit carelessly
and boldly. I speak not of natural actions, which are lawful; and yet in
many whereof there is none so great shame, as men naturally refuse to do them
before others: But I mean sinful actions, which not for any natural
unseemliness, but even for their foulness and ugliness, because they are
heinous sins, men would fear to do, if any man were present. Seeing then
men fear not, nor shame not to do them, though they be in Gods presence; It
follows, that therefore they naturally imagine, that God is not present: for,
if they were so persuaded, they would not commit them, though they esteemed God
no better then a man.

Secondly, men by nature deny Gods power, thus: When a man offendes a
Magistrate by breaking any law which may deserve death, or some great
punishment, he is sore afraid; and all his care is, how he may escape his
punishing hand. But, let a man offend God never so much, by breaking carelessly
all his holy commandments, he never fears at all, nor trembles at the
punishment belonging unto them. How can this be? but that howsoever he graunts
there is a God, yet he is not persuaded that God has power to revenge the
contempt of his laws, and therefore he never fears nor shrinks at the
remembrance of him, nor flies at all from his revenging hand, but ploddeth on
in sin without fear.

Thirdly, man by nature denies Gods justice: for the justice of God is to
wink at sin in no man, but to condemn and punish it, wheresoever he finds
it, by inflicting the curses of the law upon it. But man denies this justice;
for though he sin against Gods law, and his conscience tell him of it; yet
he persuades himself, there is no curse nor punishment due for it, at least
that he shall escape it: nay though he see never so many before him punished
for the same sin, yet (our nature is so blind and so corrupt) he thinks,
for all that, it shall not light on him. And it is lamentable, yet most true,
that the God of the ignorant men is a mere Idol, a God made all of mercy, and
which has no justice in him at all, and their sins they carelessly lay all on
Christ, and say God is merciful: and in this conceit they care not how
ignorantly, how loosely, how profanely they live; and their hearts never have a
reverent and awefull thought of the justice of God.

These are the pitiful imaginations, that all men by Nature have of God. All
these may be proved by evident Scriptures: The first; in the Psalm, where
David brings in the wicked, saying to themselves. God has forgotten, he hides
his face, Psalm. 10.11.12 13.
he will not see, he will not regard. The second, by the blasphemy of Rabsakeh,
who vttred with his tongue that which all men's hearts think by nature, Esaias
36.18.19 etc.
What God can deliver you out of my hand? The third, Esaias proves apparently,
where he tells us that the wicked say; We have made a covenant with death,
Esaias 28.15.
and with hell are we at agreement, though a scourge run over and pass
through, it shall not come at us.

Thus both Scripture and plain demonstrations prove this to be true, That
every man by nature denies Gods presence, power, and justice; and therefore is
by nature a plain Atheist, not believing that God is God ind^ede. Now
furthermore, there are 4. sorts of people that put in practice this Atheism.

First, such as are not ashamed to say openly, Is there a God or no? and dare
dispute the question, and at last avouch there is none; but that all matters
concerning God and his worship, are nothing but devises of politic men, to
keep simple men in awe, and to make fools feign: but these themselves are
fools of all fools, and the devil devised that impious conceit, to keep
them in miserable blindness. There have been such fools in all ages: yet in
old time, as David says, These fools did but say in their hearts; Psalm. 14.1.
But now the fools of these last and rotten ages, are ripe in their folly, and
they dare say with their mouths: There is no God. These are Monsters in
nature, and devils incarnate, worse then the devil himself, for he in
judgment never was an Atheist. These are to be marked, and hated worse then
Toads and Adders* and if such a one can be convicted by any lawful evidence, if
ever Heretic or Traitor deserved death, such a one deserves ten deaths; as
being a Traitor to God, to mankind, and to Nature her self. And though these
wretches say there is no God: yet make they a God of themselves, sacrificing
all their affections to their pleasure, and their profit.

The second sort are such, as acknowledge and worship a God, but a false God.
These have been in all Countries, and in most ages, as Histories do show:
some worshipping the sun, some the moon, some stars, some beasts, birds,
fishes; some, dead Idols of wood, or stone, or metal. And of this sort and no
better are some in these Churches, where the true God is worshipped: for the
Apostle says, Covetousness is idolatry; for, if a man's heart be set wholly on
riches, then the wedge of gold is his God. And to other, whose affections are
all on pleasure, their belly is their God. Let these men hold in judgment as
they can, their practice I am sure proclaims Atheism.

The third sort are such as worship the true God, but in a false manner: and of
these there are 3. principal sorts; First, Turks: Secondly, Jews; who hold
the true God, but deny the Trinity of persons, and the deity of Christ.
Thirdly, the true Papist holds in word one God and the Trinity of persons as
we do: but look at their doctrine, and (if their words have any natural
meaning) they deny it: for, if the second person be true Christ, then has he
two natures, Godhead and Manhood: but by their fained Transubstantiation, they
quite take away the truth of the Manhood. And again, Christ has three
offices; he is the True King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church: and if he be
not so, he is not Christ: But the Papists doctrine in plain words, and
necessary consequence denies them all, as has been often proved unto their
shame, and published to the world: and they never yet to this day could or
durst answer it: for if they do, they shall soon either hear of us again,
or else we will recant it. But till then, it appears, that their God is by
their doctrine not the true God, but an Idol: for, he that denies the Son,
denies the Father also, 1. John 2.23.
as says S. John.

The fourth sort of Atheists, are such, as acknowledge and worship the true
God, and worship him in true manner, for the outward worship; but in their
lives and deeds deny him. And these are not to be sought for in Turkey, or
Jury, or Italy: for all Churches are full of such Protestant Atheists. Italy
may have more Atheists in judgment then we: but these hypocrites and Atheists
in life, are here also; those tares we have amongst our corn. Of these speaks
the Apostle, that they profess to know God, but deny him in their works. Let
this seem no wonder, Tit. 1.16.
that such men be called Atheists: for, the Apostle says plainly; He that
cares not for his family, 1. Timoth. 5.8.
is worse then an Infidel. Whereby it appears, a man may be a professor of
the Gospel, or a Christian in profession; and an Infidel or Atheist in his
practice: and it is certain, let any man profess what he will, if his life be
naught, his religion is a false religion in him.

Now then, to shut up this point with the use thereof: If this be true, that
there are so many sorts of Atheists, that almost the world is full, and that we
are all so by nature: then, first let us see how hard a matter it is to believe
in God aright, and if no man come to God, but he that believes God aright,
then we see its no marvel, though so few come to God. Let us therefore go to
God by earnest prayer, to give us his spirit to work true faith in our hearts,
and to make us of a true belief. And secondly, seeing men may be Christians in
profession, and Atheists in practice; let us all look narrowly to our selves,
and join, with our profession, Conscience and obedience: for else the more we
know God, the worse we are. It may please God after to give us better minds;
but as yet we are no better then deniers of God: and though we come near God
in profession and in his outward service, yet indeed we are far from him,
because we want that true faith, which must profess God, not in judgment
alone, but in practice; and that will bring us near unto God: for he that
comes to God, must believe that God is. And thus much for the first thing to
be believed, by him that will come to God and please him.

The second is, And that He is a rewarder of them that seek him.

It is a notable sentence, and one of the most comfortable in the book of God:
and contains the second thing to be believed. The parts are naturally two: 1.
How a man does seek God. 2. How God rewards them that seek him.


For the first: A man truly seeks God, by doing four actions.

First, a man must forsake himself, go out of himself, and as it were loose
himself in his own judgment, when he intends to seek God. If any ask how
that may be? I answer; Thus: A man must labor to see his sins fully and
distinctly, and in sight thereof be cast down in himself, as a man is, when
he sees his debts: then let him look into himself, and see if he can find
in himself any ability to pay those debts, or any means in the world to
satisfy Gods justice, and purchase pardon. And if upon due examination he
find none at all, no not the least, nor any thing in himself, but an
accusing, and raging conscience: Let him then fall out of all love with
himself, nay hate and abhor himself and his own baseness: and lastly, let
him despair of his own salvation in or from himself: and thus doing, he
forsakes himself, denies himself, and even loses himself. And thus
necessarily must he do to himself, that will set his heart to seek the Lord.
For, God will be found of none that hope to find help at any hand but his:
they therefore that seek God, but will seek themselves too, do justly loose
both God and themselves.

Secondly, he that will seek God aright (when he has lost himself) must
hunger in his heart and soul, not after wealth and honors, ease, or
pleasures; but after the favor and mercy of God in Christ, for the
forgiveness of his sins: and one drop of Christ's blood, to wash away the
guilt and stain of his defiled and sinful soul, must be dearer to him then
all the pomp and glory of ten worlds. Look how a hungry soul hungers after
meat, and a faintie soul thirsts after drink; so must his soul hunger
after Gods mercy, and thirst for Christ's blood: and these are necessary. For,
as a man that undertakes a long journey, must be provided of meat and drink;
so he that undertakes the journey to go seek the Lord, must have this
provision for the diet of his poor soul, Gods mercies and Christ's merits:
and he that seeks, without a soul hungring after these, may seek long and
find nothing.

Thirdly, if he will truly seek God, he must not go in every path; but take
the true and living way, which Christ has consecrated by his blood: nor take
any guide, but trust to Christ's spirit alone to be his guide: nor make many
mediators or messengers to God, but make Christ alone to God the Father. We
must therefore go to him, and yield up our selves to be taught and guided by
him, and leave our suit to be preferred by him; we must not look to come to
God, by running on pilgrimages to this or that Saints picture, or bones: or to
our Lady of Loreto. Many have sought God in these, but who ever found him? Nay,
alas thou may lodge in her forged tabernacle at Loreto all thy life, and lie
in hell for all that when thou art dead; and may kiss all the Saints
pictures, and bones, and hair, and all their relics in Spain and Italy, and
all cannot get thee one sight of Gods favorable countenance. Nor again must
we look to come to God by our good works, though we are to do them: they are
good marks in the way, and good evidences of a right way; but they cannot open
heaven, and let thee in. And therefore when thou have done all thou can, thou
must forsake them all in matter of justification and coming to God. Only thou
must go to God by Christ, and cleave to him alone; he is the door, the way,
the truth, the life: and certainly never man found God, that sought him not in
Christ alone. And when Popish devises and distinctions have done all they can,
men will be found liers, and Christ to speak, truth, saying: No man comes to
the Father, but by me.

Lastly, when all these are done, then must thou believe that God is become thy
merciful Father in Christ, and is reconciled unto thee in him: for there is no
fear, but if thou seek God in Christ, thou shall find him: and when thou
have done the three former things, thou may safely and assuredly believe,
that thou have truly sought God. And after all these, if thou have not firm
and lively faith, thou do not secke God. For, as it is impossible without
faith to please God* so is it impossible without faith to find God. Thus if a
man lose himself, long after Gods mercy, take Christ alone for his guide and
mediator, and steadfastly believe his reconciliation with God by Christ, then he
seeks God aright: and to this seeking, belongs a reward and blessing. Now then
if this be to seek God, here is some light given to a great question, Whether
the Church of Rome be a true Church, and their doctrine truly catholic, or
erroneous and failing in fundamental points? For answer; Can that be a true
Church, which does not bring her children to seek God? or that, catholic
doctrine, which teaches not her children to seek God, the right way? but
sends them into 1000. by-ways? Surely if this be to seek God, then search all
the Popish Doctors, and almost all their Writers, and see whether a man be not
taught to seek God quite in another walk. Which way of theirs, whether is
ordinarily bring the seekers to God or no, we leave to Gods merciful
judgment. But for our selves, as we see we have the true and living way, the
sure and infallible way, by Christ to God, by the Son to the Father: let us
rejoice in the comfort of so rich a mercy, and be thankful to the Lord for
revealing himself unto us, and opening unto us the true way to him, and to his
glory. And thus much for the first point, How we must seek God.

The second is: How he is a rewarder of them that seek him. I answer: God
rewards them that seek him,

First, by offering himself graciously to be found of them that seek him: for
he never hides himself, nor turns away from the soul that seeks him; but
rather turns to him, and meets him that comes to him: he is that good
Father, which saw the prodigal Son afar off, and met him and received him,
Luke 16. Yea, rather is it true, that He is found of them that sought him not,
then ever sought by any that found him not. And hereby God much magnifieth his
grace and mercy to mankind, in being so assuredly found, when men seek him.
For in this world it is not so. All men seek the face of the Prince, says
Solomon: true, but all men find it not. No. Access to great men is not so
easy: they and their favor are so enclosed, that men may long seek before
they find either them or it: but God here is not so enclosed, as he will not
be seen nor spoke to, he is found of them that seek him. And as hereby he
honors himself, so he highly rewards his servants: for there is no
greater contentment to a subject, then to perceive his service pleases his
Prince; nor greater joy then to find his gracious favor when they seek it.

Let then this practice of the great God of heaven, First of all, teach the
great ones of this world to be willing to be found when they are sought unto:
thereby shall they honor themselves* and cheer up the hearts of their people,
who seek unto them. And again, it may be a rich comfort to the poor ones of
this earth: who, when they see they must long look, and wait, and pray, and
pay, and seek the face and favor of great men, and cannot find; may then
remember, yet they have a God, who will not shut the door upon them, will not
turn away, will not keep secret, will not fear them away with a rough
answer, or a sower look, but has this honorable and princely grace, He will
be found of them that seek him.

Secondly, he rewards them that seek him, by bestowing his love and favor
on them: not only he, but his favor shall be found of all that seek him. It
is Gods favor that Gods children seek, and his favor they shall be sure to
find. This is no small reward unto them: for in this world a man thinks he
has enough if he have the Princes favor. And therefore it was the common
phrase in old time: Let me find grace or favor in the eyes of my Lord the
King. So speak Gods children unto the Lord. It is not wealth nor honors we
seeke-for at Gods hand; but let us find favor in the eyes of the Lord our
God: and so they do, what-euer they find in this world.

Thirdly, he rewards them not with his naked favor, but with the most
gracious testimonies thereof that can be: which are two; Forgiveness of their
sins: and eternal life and glory with himself. This is all a Prince can do
to his subject, who has offended him; To forgive him the fault, and remit the
punishment* and to advance him to honor. This does the Lord to all that seek
him: he forgiues them the debt they owe him, whereby life, and soul, and all
was forfaited to him, and gives them also life everlasting: So plentiful a
reward is given them from that God, under whose wings they are come to trust.

Fourthly, he rewards them with the beginnings of heaven and happiness even
in this world. A good conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost: the comfort
whereof is more, even in the bitterest affliction, then all the pleasures and
contentments in the world.

Lastly, with the appurtenances of heaven, and of eternal life: namely, the
good blessings of this life, a competent portion whereof God gives his
children in this world, as tokens of his favor, and as rewards of their
service, and seeking him.

Now as this place does aim at all these rewards; so principally and directly
the holy Ghost means eternal life: as though he had said: He that comes
to God, must steadfastly believe that God is able, and most willing to reward
all that come to him with a better reward then this world can yield, even with
eternal life and glory for his sons sake.

But then will some object; God rewards us, therefore we merit; therefore
good works deserve.

I answer, this place indeed is grossly abused by the Papists for that
purpose: but we are to know, the truth is far otherwise; for God rewards
men for two causes: First, for his promise sake, and that is for his own sake,
for it was his own goodness that made him promise, and no former debt he owed
to man. Again, he rewards our good works, not for our merits (for they are
nothing, but of death and curses) but for Christ and his merits: for their
worthiness, are our good works rewarded. So then here are two causes of Gods
rewarding, and yet man's merits are neither of both: and so the argument is
naught, That God rewards, therefore we merit: for God does it for other
causes. Thus these spiders gather poison out of this flower, but let us suck
the honey: for this notable sentence has excellent use.

First, if God be a rewarder of them that seek him, then not of them that
seek him not. Who seek not God? wicked and ungodly men, seek him not, but
rather seek to avoid him, and his service: this sentence therefore is heavy
against them. For, when they hear it, their conscience answers, But we
seek not God; Therefore we can look for no reward from him. Do thou seek
the world? then must the world be thy rewarder: Do thou seek to please thy
self? then must thou reward thy self. And if thou will please the devil by
living in sin, then must he be thy paymaister: alas! pitiful and fearful
will these rewards be.

Again, if God reward none but them that seek him: here appears the reason
why so many Papists die in our religion, and (with us) cleave to Christ's
merits alone, when they come to die; because their conscience then tells them,
that by their pilgrimages, relics, will-worships, and many more of their
courses (ordinary in Popery) they did never seek God, but themselves and
their own honor, gain, and credit; and full well knew they that there is no
reward due for such service: and therefore by their practice they make it a
true saying, that It is good living a Papist, but dying a Protestant.

Secondly, if God be a rewarder of them that seek him: Then we see, it is
most true which the Apostle says; It is not in vain to serve God, 1. Cor.
15.58. for God is a rewarder of them that seek and serve him. Therefore the
Atheist and profane men of this world (who say; Malach. 3.14.
It is in vain to serve God (and what profit is there that we have kept his
Commandments?) are here convinced to be liers against the truth.

Then seeing it is so, let this admonish us all to seek and serve God, in all
truth and sincerity, knowing we serve him who will reward it. Nothing more
encourages a man to serve his Lord and King, then to see that his pains are
regarded, and his service rewarded; nor more discourageth a man then the
contrary. If therefore God did ever forget any that served him; let us
bestow service elsewhere, and think him unworthy to be sought to: but if,
contrariwise, he never forgot, nor deceived, nor disappointed any that served
him; then is he most worthy to have the service both of our souls and
bodies. David indeed once said; In vain have I cleansed my heart, and washed
my hands in innocence. Psalm. 73.13, etc
But he was then in a strong temptation, as himself there confesses: but
afterward when he went into the sanctuary of God, and searched the truth of
the matter, Verse 17.
he confesses he was deceived: And therefore as in the first verse he had
acknowledged, Verse 1.
that God was good to Israel: Verse. 28.
so in the last he concludes, that it is good for him to draw near unto God:
and so though the temptation was very vehement, yet as faith appeared in the
beginning, so it had victory in the end, and testified, that God is good to all
that seek him. Another time also (for he was a man of many sorrows and
temptations) being in some extreme distress, his corruption so prevailed,
Psalm. 116.11.
that he said All men are liers: Whatsoever Samuel, or God, or Nathan, and
other Prophets have told me of Gods love, and mercy, and of his promises, and
providence, and fatherly care; I see it is all false, and nothing so. Now
surely if David or all the Kings in the world can prove this, then God is not
worthy to be sought after: but great men think they may say any thing,
especially when they are moved, as David here was. But, when David entered into
himself, and considered the words he had so presumptuously vttred; upon better
advise he confesses, and writes it up for all posterities to Gods glory and
his own shame, that it was in passion, I said in my fear all men are liers:
Verse 11.
This he said in his haste or in his fear: but upon advise, in the next verse,
he confesses Gods benefits were so many, and so great to him, Verse 12.
as he cannot tell what to render to the Lord for them: And in another place,
he cries out in admiration; Psalm. 31.19.
O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
and put their trust in thee, even before the sons of men!

We see then, that merciful promise of Christ is ever made good, Seek and ye
shall find, Math. 6. None ever sought God, but found: We may seek our own
pleasures, and live loosely, and be deceived, and hear that fearful
question, What profit have ye now of these things? Romans 6. What reward, but
shame and sorrow? but if we seek God aright, we never loose our labor. Let us
therefore seek God, let the hand of our hearts knock at Gods mercy gate in
Christ, and we shall not go away without a reward. The prodigal child fled
from his Father, spent all, and lost his favor: but he no sooner said, I will
return and humble my self to my Father; but he found him, and wan his Fathers
favor again. Luke. 16.
So, let us but offer our selves to seek God ( God understands our thoughts
long before) he will meet us, and receive us, Psalm. 139.
and give us a reward.

Thirdly, as God rewards them that seek him, so all that seek him: None
miss him, all find that seek. Great ones have not access, and the poor
kept out; but all received as they come: no difference; but the more carefully
any seek, the more welcome are they. Here let Princes and Great men learn
their duties at God, by whose grace and permission they are what they are.

First, let them think it unbeseeming their greatness, to let any serve them
without a reward: and a stain to their honor, not to let well deserving
subjects find their favor. Let them not daunt their hearts by not regarding
them and their pains: but let them encourage them to serve them, by looking at
them, by good countenances, and good speeches, and by rewarding every one
according to his worth. All great men should esteem this, as one of the
pearls of their Crowns, to have it said of them, Such a one is a rewarder of
them that serve him.

Again, let them learn to dispense their favor, according to reason, and not
affection only. God is indifferent and equal to all that seek him, so let
Princes be: for that is true honor and justice to reward each one as he
deserves. And that he may find the best, who does best, this will make every
one strive, who should be first, and forwardest, in all serviceable duties.

Further, this must teach them not to despise them that are under them in this
world: for, howsoever the state of this world requires that difference of
persons, else it cannot stand; it is nothing so with God, nor in the world to
come. For there the subject, the servant, the poor man, may challenge his part
in Gods favor as well as the best: nay, whosoever seeks the most carefully,
shall find the best reward.

Moreover, here is a comfort to the poor, and the meaner sort of men, who are
appointed by God to be underlings in this world: Seek they favor here and
find it not? work they here and do their duties, and are not rewarded? Let
them learn to seek God, who will assuredly both regard what they do, and
abundantly reward it.

Fourthly, seeing God is a rewarder of them that seek him: here is a
comfortable encouragement against two great impediments, which hinder many a
man from serving God.

First, to seek God is but a matter of mockery to profane men: for, let a man
set his face to Jerusalem, there are presently Samaritanes, which for that
cause will hate and mock him: Let a man set his heart to seek God, by hearing
the word more carefully, praying to God, instructing his family, or keeping the
Sabbath more carefully then before, and forthwith he is the laughing stock,
and the byword to profane men: but lo, here is comfort; The God whom thou
seek will reward thee, and that so richly, that thou will think thy self
well recompensed, both for thy service and their mockes. In this world men care
not who think or speak evil of them, so the Prince like them: and shall it
not encourage us to seek God, though the world mock us? seeing so doing we
please God, and so far do please him as he will highly reward us? Those
therefore, that fall from religion for those mockers, it appears they seek
not to please God, but men.

Secondly, for a man that is a Magistrate or a Minister, to do his duty
carefully, is the high way to undergo a burden of contempt and hatred.
Insomuch as many good men are afraid to be either Magistrates or Ministers:
for, first, wicked men must needs hate them, because the one is to rebuke, and
the other to punish their faults. And again, even good men are too
respectlesse of them that are in these places, and for the most part neither
yield them that reverence, nor reward, that is due unto them; but often times a
man for all his pains and care taken for Church or commonwealth, is
recompensed with hatred, envy, grudges, evil words, and slanderous reports.
In this case, the comfort is this, that though a man be in the world neither
regarded, nor rewarded, as his desert is, yet the Lord sees what he does, and
is a plentiful rewarder of all that seek and serve him: and therefore
especially of them, who not only themselves serve him in his chief places of
service, but also do win many other to seek and serve God.

Fifthly, if God be a rewarder of them that seek him, then doubtless he is a
revenger of them that hate him: for he, that can mightily reward his followers,
can also mightily be revenged of his enemies. These two are the two parts of a
Kings power, To be able highly to advance his friends, and mightily to punish
his enemies: therefore principally this belongs to the King of Kings. This
sentence therefore is a thunderbolt of a most fearful threatening against all
impenitent sinners; assuring them, that if they persist to profane Gods holy
name by their careless sinning against him, they shall be sure to find and
feel him a powerful revenger of them that hate him. Thus he promises,
himself, Deuter. ^2.40.41.42: I lift up my hand to heaven, and I say, I live
for ever. If I whet my glittering sword, and my hand take hold on judgment, I
will execute vengeance on my enemies, and reward them that hate me. Where also
note how the same phrase is used: for as here the Apostle says, God is a
rewarder of them that seek him: So in Deuteronomie; A rewarder of them that
hate him. If any object how these two can stand together; for a man had as good
hate him as seek him, if the same reward belong to both: I answer; A reward,
but not the same reward belongs unto them. Thieves and murderers are justly
rewarded, when they die for their facts: and the King rewards a good servant,
when he aduanceth him to honor, They that seek God, are rewarded with
mercies and favors above their desert: they that hate God, are rewarded with
vengeance and torments, according to their desert: and this shall all wicked
men, and enemies of God, be as sure to find, as ever any that sought God,
obtained mercy.

But worldly men will say, we hate not God, we are no Jews nor Turks, we are
christened, and come to the Church, according to the law, as good subjects
should do. I answer; neither do Turks nor Jews hate God, if this be all:
for, they deny not the Godhead, but acknowledge it, and are circumcised, and
live more strictly in their devotions then most Christians. Here is therefore
more required, or else we shall make them also good friends with God: But a man
may hate God, and be neither Turk nor Jew; he may acknowledge Christ and the
Trinity, and yet hate God. For, as Christ says, He that is not with me is
against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters: So is it here;
He, that seeks not, serves not, and loves not God, hates God: for, there
is no man can know God, but he must needs either for his mercies love him, or
else hate him for his justice against sin and sinners. Again, Christ bids
us, If you love me, keep my Commandments. If then to keep Gods
commandments, be a sign of one that loves God, it is a sign that one loves not
God, when he has no care to keep them. By which two places, it appears,
that whosoever makes not conscience of sin, is Gods enemy, and that God so
reputes him: therefore let this fear every man from living carelessly in his
sin, and drive him to true repentance: for else let him assure himself, God
is not so plentiful a rewarder of them that seek him, but he is as powerful
a revenger upon those that hate him.

Lastly, if God be a rewarder of them that seek him, we learn the great
difference betwixt Gods service and the devils. The devils servants are fed
with fair words, but get nothing, the devil is able to give them nothing: but
Gods servants (as we see here) are plentifully rewarded. God is a rewarder of
them that seek him: but the devil is a deceiuer of them that serve him. But
will some say, There is none so mad to be the devils servants. I answer: He
that does any man's work, is either his servant or his slave: but every sinful
wicked man does the devils work, for sin is the devils work; therefore all
impenitent sinners are the devils servants. It is Christ's argument to the
Jews: You are of your Father the devil, John 8.41, 44.
for the works of your Father you will do: murders and lies are his works,
you live in these sins, and do these works; therefore you are his servants.

Again, the holy Ghost teaches us, Romans 6.20.
that whosoever commits sin (and lives therein without repentance) the
same is the servant of sin. Now sin is but the bawd or broker to the
devil: they that are the servants of sin, sin preferres them to the devil,
and so they become his servants: therefore whosoever is the servant of sin,
is by that means the slave and servant of the devil also. Which if it be
true, it will fall out upon the reckoning, that the devil has more servants
in the world then God has: which is so much the more lamentable, in as much as
he deludeth all his servants, and is not able to reward them, nor to give them
any good thing.

But will some say, this is nothing so: for contrariwise, who have the honors,
pleasures, and wealth of this life, who have hearts ease and the world at will,
but such men? I answer: True, it is commonly so; but have they those from
Satan? No, not the least of them all, but all from God: for every man is Gods
child by creation, and some by grace, to every one of his children he ordaines
and gives a portion: but to his children by grace a double portion; both here,
and in heaven. The wicked men, they will not fear nor serve him; therefore
they have no part nor portion in heaven, but here they have it: So says David;
there are some men, which are men of this world, and have their portion in this
life: Psalm. 17.14.
these men's bellies God fills with his hidden treasures, they and their
children have enough, and leave the rest for their children after them: Where
it is manifest, that wicked men have their parts and portions of Gods blessings
in this world, and that all their wealth and pleasures are granted them by and
from God, as their portion; reserving ye principal part of the portion of his
children for a better life. Therefore all the good things of this life, which
Dives received, and all wicked men do receive in this life, Luke 16.25.
are not any rewards of Satan, but gifts of God; so unworthy a Master is the
devil to serve. Indeed he will promise his poor slaves any thing, but can
perform nothing, but will lie unto them and deceive them. He told Christ
confidently, when he let him see the glory and greatness of this world; All
this is mine, and I give it to whom I will: Luke 4.6.7.
but he was a lier from the beginning, John 8.44. Genesis 3.4.5.
and so he is here. He lied to the first Adam, and no marvel, that dare avouch
so fond and loud a lie in the presence of the second Adam, Jesus Christ. He
promised the first Adam, to make him God, and here the second Adam to make him
King, and Lord of all the world, and the glory of it: but he performed both
alike, he deceived the first, and so had the second also, if he had trusted
him. Nor did ever any trust him, but he deceived him (I mean even for the base
things of this life): witness else all his witches (his most devoted and
professed servants of all other) if ever he made any one of them wealthy: all
ages are not able to show one. Whereas, on the other side, there was never man
that served God, but had a competent measure of comforts for this life (and
some, abundance) and yet all that but the first fruits and beginnings of that
reward, which is laid up for them in another world. Which being true, is it not
a strange and lamentable case, to see men (for all this) debase themselves to
this base and slavish service of Satan, and to refuse this high and honorable
service of almighty God? A common servant in this world has more wit: he, if
he ca^ hear of a better service, a Master who gives better wages, and who
better preferres his servants, will leave his old Master, and make means to
get the other. And shall not we be as wise for both soul and body, as they for
the body alone? Shall they leave a man for a man, and shall not we leave the
devil for God?

Let us therefore abandon the base service of Satan, who neither can, nor will
reward them that serve him; put away so ill a Master, who has not so much as
meat and drink to give us (for we have even that from God: but of his own,
he has nothing to give us, save in this world sorrow and shame, and an ill
conscience; and in the world to come, the torments of hell with himself): And
let us all seek the blessed service of God. If we know not how to attain it,
go to Christ by hearty confession of thy sins, and earnest prayer, and he
will prefer thee to God his Father: for never was any denied, that, with a
good and true heart, offered himself to Gods service. Then shall we feel and
find what a blessed thing it is to be Gods servant: of whom, it was ever true,
which the holy Ghost here says, and is, and ever shall be, that He is an
honorable rewarder of them that seek him.

And thus we have (in some part) the meaning and use of this notable sentence:
wherein we have stood the longer, because it is one of the most excellent
principles of all Practical Divinity.

Now put all together, and we shall see how it proves Henoch to be taken away
by faith; which is the first ground, and the maine matter of all this exsample,
and of these two verses.

God is a rewarder of all his children that seek him by faith: therefore it is
faith by which Gods children please God: and therefore holy Henoch, who was
taken up by God from earth to heaven, both pleased God by faith, and by faith
was taken away.

And thus much for the commendation of Henochs faith, and consequently the
exsamples of such, as lived in the first world before the flood.

Now follows the exsample of Noah, who lived in both worlds, both before and
after the flood.

Noah's Faith.
HEBREWS. 11.7. By Faith, Noah being warned of God of the things which were
as yet not seen, moved with reverence, prepared the Arc to the saving of his
household: through the which Arc he condemned the world, and was made heir of
the righteousness, which is by faith.


IN this verse is contained the third exsample, 3. Exsample of Noah.
and the last in order of those who lived before the flood, in the first and
old world; namely, of the renowned Patriarch Noah, the tenth from Adam.

Of whom and whose faith, great and glorious things are spoken in this verse;
and that in a high and excellent style, full of majesty, and divine eloquence.

Concerning Noah's faith, two points are laid down; first, the ground of his
faith: secondly, the commendation of it.

The ground of his faith was a special revelation from God, in these words;
Noah being warned of God. The things revealed, whereof God warned him, are laid
down two ways: first, generally, to be things as yet not seen; then
particularly three in number.

1. Gods Judgment upon the sinful world, that he was purposed to destroy it
by water.

2. Gods mercy on Noah, that he would save him, and his family.

3. That he would save him by an Arc, and therefore he must make one* and
these be the things whereof Noah was warned of God.

His faith is commended by three worthy effects or operations in him:

1. It moved in him a reverence, or a reverent regard of the warning sent him
from God.

2. It made him prepare the Arc: of which Arc there are set down two ends.

1. It saved his household. 2. It condemned the world.
3. It made him heir of the righteousness, which is by faith.

This, I take it, is the true resolution of these words: and they contain
many excellent things concerning his faith.

By faith Noah being warned of God, of the things which were as yet not seen:

By faith, that is, by a general and historical Faith, and also by a true and
saving faith in the Messiah to come, Noah (being warned of God of the just
Judgment he purposed to bring upon the world, by an universal flood; and of
his merciful providence, to him and his family, that he would save them by an
Arc (all which things were then to come, and therefore unseen) he believed
these forewarnings of God: and therefore, in reverence to this message from
God, he prepared the Arc, and thereby saved his household, and condemned the
wicked world. And so his faith by all these appearing to be a true and lively
faith, did make him a just and righteous man in Gods sight. This is the sum
and substance of Noah's exsample: let us speak of the several parts in order.

The first point is the Ground of his faith, A warning or an answer from God.
For, he being a righteous man in that wicked age, wherein all the world weltred
in wickedness, and walking before God in great holiness, when no man cared
for religion, he had this special favor from God, that when he purposed to
destroy the world for their sin, he first of all revealed to righteous Noah
that purpose of his. So that these words have reference to the revelation which
Noah had from God, in the 6. of Genesis. For, this message came not from God by
any Prophet (for we know none in those evil days, except Noah himself) but
either by the Ministry of an Angel, or else by immediate revelation from God
himself: and this favor he received from God, not for any cause in the world,
but because he was a holy and righteous man.

From hence, we may learn diverse excellent instructions.

First, whereas God makes choice of Noah, to reveal unto him his counsel,
and his judgments to come; we learn that this is a prerogative which God
bestows on such as fear him, he reuealeth his counsels to them in a special
manner, whether they be purposes of Judgments upon his enemies, or of mercies
unto his Church. Thus dealt he with Abraham, Genesis 18.19. Shall I (says God)
hide from Abraham the thing that I will do? which thing was, the destruction
of Sodom, and her sisters. And so when the Sodomites lived in wanton
carelessness, and put far from them the evil day, then Abraham knew from God
their destruction was at hand. And as in that, for is it generally true in all
his great works: that the Lord God will do nothing, but he reueales his
secrets to his servants the Prophets. Amos 3.7. Now this is not a prerogative
of Prophets alone, or of such as were extraordinary men as Abraham was: but the
secrets of the Lord are amongst such as fear him, Psalm 25.14. All that fear
the holy name of God; are Gods friends, and of his Counsel: and therefore not
Abraham only is called the friend of God, James 2.23: But of all true
believers, says Christ, John 15.14.15; You are my friends, If you do what I
command you: henceforth I call you not servants, but friends, for the servant
knows not what his Master does* but all things that I have heard of my
Father, have I made known unto you* As if he had said, I will communicate and
impart my secrets unto you, as one friend does unto another, as far as shall
be fit for you to know. And the Apostle says, 1. Corinthians. 2.15. A faithful
and a holy man discerns into the deep counsels of God; which are revealed
unto them as much as concerns their saluations, and sometimes more; as here,
unto Noah, who was forewarned of God, of things then not seen.

This prerogative of Gods children, is to be understood with some cautions.

First, that this is more proper to Prophets, and holy Ministers of God, then
to ordinary Christians.

Secondly, that it was more ordinary in the old testament, then now in the
days of the Gospel. If any object, Then the state of the Church before Christ,
was better then it is now under Christ;

I answer: Not so; for first, we are recompensed by having the Scriptures
perfect, and complete, which they had not: and by having the substance of their
shadows, and the performance of their promises: in which respects our state is
far more excellent then theirs. And secondly, for this particular, I answer,
they indeed had more ordinary revelation of matters personal and private,
and not directly touching salvation: but of such things as are general, and
do necessarily concern salvation; we in the time of the new Testament, have
more evident demonstration, and more full revelation, then they had before
Christ. For exsample, particular mercies to some faithful men, or particular
judgments on Gods enemies, whether particular men or whole kingdoms, were
after revealed to godly men, in those days (as here to Noah): but salvation by
the Messiah, and the manner how the Messiah should save his Church, is more
fully and plainly revealed now then in those days.

Out of which consideration arises the third caution: which is, that
revelations of Gods will, to be expected now under the Gospel, are ordinarily
nothing else, but these; the true meaning of Scripture, and a discerning of
true Scripture from forged, of true Sacraments from supposed, of true doctrine
from false, of true Pastors from false Prophets. These and such like, as far
forth as they are necessary to salvation, all true and faithful believers
(which out of an humbled heart, by devout prayer do seek it at Gods hand)
are sure to have revealed unto them from God. But as for other purposes of God,
of personal and particular matters, or what shall be his blessings, or what
his judgments to these and these men, families, Cities, or Kingdoms; or when,
or how he will change States, or translate kingdoms: Or by what extraordinary
means he will have his Gospel propagated, or a declining Church or State
vpholden; these we are not to expect, nor easily to believe any that shall say,
such things are revealed unto them. And yet we tie not the Lord in such
strait bonds, but that he may sometime extraordinarily reveal his purpose
therein, to some his selected servants: yet provided, that that revelation be
examined and allowed of the Church. But as for such things as concern
immediately the salvation of our souls, Gods spirit does most comfortably
reveal them unto us, in our prayers, in his word, and in his Sacraments: of
all which, it is most true, that the secrets of God are amongst them that fear
him.

The use of this doctrine is double; for instruction, and for exhortation. For
our instruction, here we learn how to answer the Church of Rome: they ask
us, how do we know true religion from erroneous; or true Scripture, or
Sacraments from forged? We answer, first, by it self, by sight and sense of
the excellency thereof; as we know gold from brass, or silver from lead. But
what if the brass or tin be gilded over? I then answer secondly, we can
know gold from brass, and silver from tin by the sound and smell, and
hardness to endure, and by the operation: so there is a spiritual sound of
the Scriptures in the ears of a Christian, a spiritual comfort and taste in
true religion, a spiritual operation (in holy men's hearts) of the true
Sacraments. But what if false Prophets come in sheep clothing, and by lying
wonders, seem to give the same sound, taste, smell, virtue, and operation unto
their forgeries, or at least challenge it, and say, that theirs is true? I
answer lastly; Then we know true Religion, true Scripture* true Sacraments,
true Prophets, true Doctrines from false, by a holy and supernatural
revelation from Gods spirit; which, by evident and powerful demonstration,
assures us, what is true and what is false, for the substance of salvation.
And this spirit is given to all, that in true humility do seek it, in holy
prayer, and in a holy and frequent use of Gods word and Sacraments; and to none
else. And surely if the Papists were as well acquainted with the spirit of God,
as they are with their own forged revelations, they would never deny it. By
force of this testimony a Christian man knows, as assuredly as that God is
God, that the Pope, as now he is, and as he exercises his place and power,
cannot be the true Vicar of Christ; And that Popery, as it is now established
by the Council of Trent, and taught by the most learned of their side, cannot
be the true religion, nor the safest way to heaven. And when question is, what
is the meaning of this place, there is one God and one Mediator betwixt God
and man, the man Christ Jesus; If all the world should say the contrary, a
Christian man will know and believe there are no more Mediators to God but
Christ: or of that place, that Christ was offered for our sins once for all;
that there is no sacrifice can purchase us pardon, but his; let Papists color
the matter by unsound distinctions as much as they can: and the same might be
showed in diverse other points and places. And if any ask how this can be: I
answer; Noah was warned of God of things not seen: So Gods children are
warned and assured of God, of such things as concern their salvation, though
they be things beyond sense and reason, Gods secrets do belong unto them.

The use of exhortation is, that if God warn his children of his Will, and
reveal his secrets to them, this should move and excite us to become truly and
indeed Gods servants: for we serve not a Lord that is strange and austere unto
us; that will not give us a good look, or a fair word: nay, he is so far
from that, that he calls us to his holy Counsel, and makes us know his
secrets, and communicates his own self unto us by his blessed Spirit; and by
that Spirit reuealeth unto us many excellent mysteries of salvation, which the
carnal and profane men of the world never dream of.

In the second place: let us observe, that Noah being thus warned of God in
this particular matter (as he had been formerly warned and taught of salvation
by a Messiah to come) believes not only the general promise of salvation,
but also this particular promise of his preservation and deliverance. Out of
which his practice, we may learn two things;

First, that faith is a supernatural work of God in those men's hearts that
have it. That it is a work of God, it appears in that it always
acknowledges and believes Gods word: that it is supernatural, it appears
in that it apprehends and believes whatsoever Gods word delivers, be it
never so incredible to reason or sense. But how does God work this faith? By
his word: for as God is the author and worker of faith, so God has appointed a
means whereby he works it, and that is his Word; which word of God is the
only ordinary outward means to work faith. And that word of God is two
ways to be considered: either as revealed by God himself (as to Noah here);
or else, being written by God, is either preached by his Ministers, or read by
a man's self in want of preaching: and these are all one, and are all means
ordained of God to work faith; and that not only to begin it where it is
wanting, but to augment it where it is begun.

Which being so, it must teach us all, not only with special care and
reverence to hear the word, by whomsoever it is preached; but also to hear it
read: yea, to read it our selves with all diligence. So doing, it will work
out, and make perfect in us that holy faith, which will make us blessed in our
selves, and accepted of God, as it did Noah in this place.

Secondly, here we learn what is the whole Object of faith, or what is all
that that faith believes: namely, nothing but Gods word, and all and every
word of God. So that faith has two objects, differing not in nature, but in
degree, principal and inferior. The principal object of true faith, is the
promise of salvation by Christ. The inferior object thereof, are all other
particular promises, of safety, deliverance, providence, help, assistance,
comfort, or what other benefit soever is made either to the whole Church, and
so inclusiuely to any particular man; or which are personally made unto him.
For, saving faith believes not only the graund promise of salvation, but all
other promises either of spiritual or corporal blessings, which are
subordinate to the great Promise, and do depend of it, and are therefore
apprehended by the same faith. So, Noah here had already apprehended the
maine Promise of salvation by the Messiah, and had hid it in his heart: and
afterward when this particular promise of his deliverance was made, by the same
faith he laid hold on it also. And it is good reason that faith should do so:
for if it apprehend the greater promise, then no marvel though it take hold of
all other inferior promises, which are but dependances upon the principal.

By this that has been said, it appears, that we are wrongfully charged
by them, who say, we teach that saving faith believes only salvation by
Christ, or apprehends only the promise of salvation in Christ: for, we say
and teach, It apprehends also other particular promises, and even ye promises
of outward and temporal blessings; as appears in this exsample of Noah.

Lastly, in that Noah a faithful man, is here warned of God of the dangers
ensuing, that so he may avoid them; we may learn the loving care that God has
over them, who have a care to fear and serve him. Thus dealt he with his
children in all ages, for their comfort and preservation, to encourage all men
to serve God in truth and uprightness, as here Noah did: for, so doing, they
may assure themselves of Gods care and providence over them, even then, when
his wrath smokes against the sins of the world: and that furthermore in all
exigents and extremities, he will ^each them, either from his word, or by the
counsel of some others of his children, or else by his own secret
inspiration, what they are to do, and what course to take, for their safety
and deliverance.

How often shall a Christian man find in the course of his life, that God put
into his mind, to answer thus or thus, or to foresee this or that; by which
his so doing, he escaped some great danger: so that (though not in the same
manner as Noah was) all faithful men do daily find, that they are warned by
God of such things as do concern them.

But what were those things whereof Noah was warned from God? The text says:
Of the things which were as yet not seen.

This has not relation to the time, when the holy Ghost wrote these words, but
when God gave the warning to Noah; for then they were not seen, but were to
come: for they were not performed for many years after, as shall appear in
the particulars.

Particularly they were these three: First, the great and just wrath, which God
had conceived against the sinful world, for the universal corruption and
general sinfulness thereof. Noah was a Preacher of righteousness to that
wicked age; and as S. Peter says (1. Epistle 3.11.) The very spirit of Christ
preached in him: but they contemned both him, and the spirit by which he
spoke, and made a mock of him, and all his holy admonitions, and solaced
themselves in all their sinful pleasures, without fear or respect of God or
man, pleasing themselves in their own defiled ways, and promising to
themselves, safety and security. But behold, This Noah, whom they esteemed a
base and contemptible man, unworthy of their company; to him is revealed, how
short their time is, and that they must be cut off in the midst of their
iollity. Gods children, whom wicked men do think and speak of with great
contempt, do know full well the miserable state of such men, and the fearful
dangers hanging over them; when the wicked men themselves are far from
thinking of any such matter.

The second thing, which God revealed to Noah, was, that he would save him and
his family from perishing by the waters, which he would bring upon the world.
His faith was not in vain: God rewarded it with a singular preservation. Thus
dealt he always with his children; delivering Lot out of Sodom, Genesis 19.
Rahab out of Hierico: Joshua 6.22. The Kenits from the Amalekits, 1. Sam. 15.
and here Noah out of that general destruction. And this, God aforehand
reueales unto him, for his greater comfort and security: that when signs and
strange tokens did foretell and show, that still the destruction was nearer and
nearer; still Noah might comfort himself in the assurance of that merciful
promise which God had made him of his deliverance, and of his family also for
his sake.

The third thing revealed to him, was the means whereby he should be saved
from the universal flood: namely, by an Arc, which for his more assurance he
is bid to make himself; that so at every stroke he gave, he might remember
this merciful promise of his God unto him. For as every stroke in the making
of the Arc, was a loud sounding Sermon unto that sinful generation, to call
them to repentance: so was it also an assurance unto Noah of his deliverance.
Of which Ark, and of Noah's obedience in making it, we shall hereafter speak at
large. And thus much concerning the ground of Noah's faith, which was a warning
or revelation from God.

Now follows a second point: namely, the commendation of his faith, or a
description of the excellency thereof, by diverse and singular effects; Moved
with reverence,

The first effect of his faith is, It moved in him a reverence, or a reverent
fear of that God that spoke to him, and of his justice toward sin and
sinners, and of his mercy toward him.

In this effect we are to consider two points: 1. The ground of this reverence.
2. The occasions or motives of it.


The ground whence this reverence sprang, was his true and saving faith: for
the holy Ghost first tells us of Noah's faith, and afterward of this reverent
fear he had of God, and his great works.

Where we learn, that whosoever is endued with saving faith, is also touched
with fear and reverence at the consideration of God, and his glorious works;
whether they be works of his power, his wisdom, his mercy, or his justice, or
of all together.

For the first: David could not see the works of Gods power in the creation,
Psalm. 8. But when he looked up and beheld the heavens, the works of Gods
hands, the moon and the stars which he had ordained; he forthwith fell into
a reverence and admiration of Gods mercy to man, for whom and whose use he made
them all.

For the second, the same David could not enter into consideration of Gods
wisdom, in the admirable frame of man's body, Psalm. 139.13. etc. but he
presently falls into a reverence and admiration thereof in most excellent and
passionate words: Thou possessest my reins, thou coueredst me in my mothers
womb: I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Marvelous
are thy works, and that my soul knows right well: My bones are not hid from
thee, though I was made in a secret place, yet thy eyes did see my substance
when I was without form, and in thy book were all my members written, which
in continuance were fashioned, though there were none of them before. How dear
therefore are thy counsels to me, O God! Thus we see how this holy King,
cannot content himself with any terms, to express his religious and reverent
conceit of Gods Majesty.

For the third, Gods merciful works to his Church and children, have always
been considered-of by good men with great reverence: And, What shall I give
unto the Lord, says David, for all his benefits poured on me? (Psalm 116.12.)

But especially, the Judgments of God have been always entertained of Gods
children with much reverence and admiration. Blessed David says, My flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments, Psalm. 119.120.
How would this noble King have trembled and been afraid, if he had been a
private man? And how glorious is God, and his works of judgments, whereat
even Kings themselves do tremble? And the Prophet Habbacuk says, that when
he but hea^d of Gods judgments to come, his belly trembled, his lips shook,
rottenness entered into his bones, Habba. 3.16. And thus Noah here, hearing of
Gods just wrath against the sinful world, and of his purpose to overthrow all
living flesh by water, was moved with great fear and reverence at this mighty
work of God: and from the view of this his great and just judgment, his faith
made him arise to a more earnest consideration of the Majesty of God. By all
which, it is more then apparent, that true faith (wheresoever it is) works a
holy fear and reverent estimation of God, and of his works, and of God in and
by his works: whereby on the contrary side, it follows, that therefore to
think basely or ordinarily of God, to think scornefully of his works, or to
deny his power and his hand, in the great works, either of mercy or
judgment done in the world, is an argument of a profane heart, and wanting
true faith.

The use of this doctrine discouers the profaneness, and the great want of
faith that ordinarily is in the world. And that appears by two evidences: the
first, is to men's own consciences; the other, is to the view and sight of all
the world.

First, men may see in themselves a profane heart, and void of faith, by this
evidence* For, does a man in his heart think basely of God, his power, his
justice, or his mercies? Does he either doubt of them? or* granting them, does
he think of them without fear and am^zement? Then assuredly his heart is
void of true faith, and far from the life and power of religion. For,
assuredly, where God is known and believed, there that man's heart (though he
be a King) cannot once think of God, without a reverence of his Majesty, and
an admiration at his greatness, and his own baseness: therefore the want of
this, argues a want of true religion and true faith, in men's hearts.

Secondly, this profaneness discouers it self to the world, by want of
reverence to Gods works. Let the Lord send unseasonable weather, or famines,
or plagues, or any strange signs in heaven or in earth; forthwith they are but
fools that cry out, Behold the finger of God, the hand of God: No, this is
nature, and is produced by natural causes. Ill weather comes from the stars:
famines from ill weather, and men's covetousness: Plagues from famines, or from
ill aires, or else by apparent infection from another place. But cannot Nature
and natural means have their place, unless they have Gods place? God
overthrows not them: why should they overthrow God? Yet thus it is in the
world, and thus God is robbed of his glory: and he is but a simple fellow,
which is moved with reverence at sight of such things, or begins to magnify
Gods power and justice in them. This is too apparent to be denied: for, have
we not now as great causes of fear as can be? Noah heard of water; and we
hear that fire is to destroy the world: and ye^ where is he that is moved
with reverence, as Noah was? and yet Noah could say, The flood shall not be,
these 120. years: but who can say and prove that this world shall not be
destroyed by fire within these 120. years? And till the flood came, they had
doubtless many other plagues, which were forerunners of the general
destruction; all which as they came, Moved Noah unto reverence: and so we, in
this age, do see the great works of Gods Judgments, upon men, upon families,
upon towns, upon countries, and whole kingdoms, and we feel his heavy hand
in many sharp strokes; but who and where are they whose hearts fear God the
more, and do tremble in the consideration of his Judgments. Nay, alas,
amongst many it is but a matter of mockery so to do. This is not the fault of
our religion, but the want of it: for if men truly knew and believed in God,
they could not think nor speak of God, nor look at his works, but with
fear and reverence. For as our fear of God is, so is our faith: little fear
of God, little faith: and no fear at all, no faith at all. Let therefore all
men show their religion by their fear of God, and let every Christian
acknowledge God in his works. England has been faulty herein in one point
especially. We have had great plagues, which have taken away many thousands in
short time; wherein God has showed himself mighty against our sins: But
Gods hand would not be seen nor acknowledged, but only nature and natural
causes. But let England take heed, that God send not a plague so general and
so grievous, that even the most profane men, even the sorcerers of Egypt (if
they were here) do acknowledge that it is the finger of God; and so give God
that due reverence, which in his ordinary visitations he has not. Thus we see
the ground whence this reverence in Noah sprang; namely, his faith.

Now let us see the occasions or considerations in Noah's heart, that made him
fear. The ground whereupon he feared, was true faith; for else he had not been
capable of any fear or reverence of God: but the occasions which stirred up
this fear in him, were some things else.

Now if we look to humane reasons, Noah had no cause at all to fear as he
did. For first, the Judgment was far off; 120. years after: and common
reason says, its folly to fear any thing so far off; but its time enough to
fear, when it is near at hand. Again, he was one single man, and the world
was full of wise and mighty men: they all heard of it, yet none of them feared;
therefore their exsample might prevail with him, to keep him from fear, and
to make him secure and careles^e with the rest: for exsamples are strong,
especially when they are so general.

Thirdly, the strangeness of the Judgment threatened, was such, as might drive
any man (in reason) from fearing it at all. For first, who would ever believe,
that God would drown all the world with water? such a thing never had been,
and therefore how could it be? And again, If all should be drowned, who would
think that Noah should escape, and none but he?

These three considerations, being wayed in the balance of man's reason, would
have kept Noah from fearing, or believing this word of God. But, behold the
power of faith: it goes beyond all humane reach, fixes it self fast on Gods
word: and therefore he not only believes it, but has furthermore his heart
possessed with a great reverence of Gods Majesty upon this message. And there
were three motives stirring him up unto this Reverence.

First, the consideration of Gods strange Judgment upon the sinful world; to
see that his wrath was so provoked, that he should bring so unwonted a plague:
so strange both for the nature of it; a flood of water to drown men: whereas
generally all men can avoid the violence of that element; and for the measure
of it, so great, as it should drown all the world, and destroy all men.

Now, that which this Judgment of God wrought in Noah, the same effect should
Gods Judgments work in us; namely, they should move us with reverence. For,
as Christ says, Our days are like Noah's: As it was in the days of Noah; so
shall the days be before the coming of Christ (Matthew 24.37). These days are
as wicked, men are as covetous, as cruel, as malicious, as voluptuous, and yet
as secure, as they then were; as full of sin, and yet as dead in sin as
they were then. Therefore Noah looked for a flood 120. years after: and who
can tell whether our world shall last so long a time or no? At least we may
safely say (whatsoever the world does) there is no man lives, but within far
less time then 120. years, is assured to be thrown to hell by a flood of
Gods wrath at his death, unless in the mean time he repent: and yet alas
where is he that is moved with reverence at consideration hereof? The wicked
man may escape the water of a flood: but he cannot escape the fire of hell, he
cannot escape death, he cannot escape the last Judgment. These are to come,
yet they are sure: why then do not men fear as Noah did? he feared, 120.
years before it came. We can indeed tremble a little at a present Judgment:
as, when fire breaks out, when waters ouerflowe, when the plague destroys,
or when famine consumes: but to tremble at a Judgment threatened, though it be
afar off, this is the work of true faith. This was in Noah, and wrought in
him a reverence: and so would it in us, if it were in us. When men cry fire,
fire; we stir, we run, we tremble: but God cries in his word, the fire
of hell, the fire of his wrath; and we care not, we stir not, we leave not
our sins, we are not moved with reverence, as Noah was: therefore it is more
then manifest, that holy faith is wanting in the world, which Noah had.

The second motive, stirring up this reverence in him, was the consideration of
Gods wonderful mercy to him and his family, in saving them. This mercy seemed
so wonderful to him, both for that he knew it was undeserved (knowing
himself a sinful man, and therefore not able to merit Gods favor, and being
privy to himself of his own manifold imperfections) and also unexpected, for
he never thought to have been spared alone in an universal destruction:
therefore he wondered with reverence at so great a mercy. Thus Gods mercies do
not only win a man's heart to love God, but even to fear him with much
reverence: this David proves (Psalm 130.4) There is mercy with thee, O Lord,
that thou may be feared: as though he had said; thy great mercies to thy
children, O Lord, do make them conceive a reverent estimation of thee. This
made David cry out in a holy passion: How excellent are thy mercies, O Lord!
Psalm.

And as Gods children wonder at the excellencies of Gods mercies unto them, so
also at their own baseness and unworthiness. Thus does holy David, 2. Sam.
7.18. (who as he was a man of much faith, so was he full of excellent
meditations, and reverent speeches of God, which are the true effects of faith)
when God had set him in his kingdom, he says, Who am I, O Lord, and what is
my house that thou have brought me hither? And 1. Chron. 29.14. But who am I,
says he, and what is my people, that we should offer thus unto the Lord? And
doubtless even so said Noah's blessed soul often unto the Lord, and to it
self, Who am I, O Lord, and what is my family, that we should be chosen out of
so many thousands, and be saved when all the world perishes?

Let us apply this to our Church and State. If any Nation have cause to say
thus, it is England. God has delivered us out of the thraldom of spiritual
Egypt, and led us out: not by a Moses, but first by a child, then by a woman,
and given us his Gospel, more fully, and freely, and quietly, then any kingdom
so great in the world; and still delivers us from the cursed plots of the
Pope, and tyrannous invasions of the Spaniard, who thought to have marked us in
the foreheads with the brand of infamy, and to have done to us as they have
done to other nations whom they have conquered: but God from heaven fought for
us, and overthrew them in their own devises: yea, the Lord put his hook in
his nosethrils, and his bridle in his lips, and carried him back again with
shame and reproach. We are unworthy of such a mercy, if our souls do not
often say unto God: O Lord what are we, and what is our people, that thou
should be so wonderful in thy mercies unto us?

And particularly this must teach every Christian to be a careful obseruer of
the favors and mercies that God vouchsafes to his soul or body, to him or
his: and the consideration of them, must make him daily be moved with
reverence, and reverent thoughts of Gods Majesty; and still as the Lord is
more and more merciful unto him, to bear still the more fear and reverence
unto him for the same.

The last motive of this Reverence in Noah, was, the consideration of Gods
power and wisdom, both in the Judgment upon the world, and in the mercy upon
him: for first, in the Judgment it was wonderful, that God would choose so
weak an element as water to destroy and vanquish the huge Giants of those
days: but therein appeared first Gods power, that by so weak means can cast
down his enemies: And again, his wisdom; that as an universal wickedness
had polluted the whole world, so a flood of water should wash the whole world.
Secondly, the mercy was also wonderful, that God should choose to save Noah by
so strange a mean; as an Arc, which should swim on the waters. For Noah
thought, if the Lord will save me, he will either take me up into heaven (as
he did Henoch a little before) or else make me build a house upon the top of
the highest mountain. But, the Lord will save him by no such means, but by an
Arc: wherein appeared, first Gods power that would save him by so weak a
means, as might seem rather to destroy him. For Noah must lie and swim in the
midst of the waters, and yet be saved from the waters: and the Arc m^st save
him; which, in all reason, if the Tempests had cast it against the hard rocks
and mountains, or upon the strong Castles and houses of the mighty Giants,
would have been broken in pieces: and so it had, but that God himself was the
Master and Pilot in that voyage.

And secondly, Gods wisdom shone clearly in this means; because God would have
him saved not in such sort, as the world might not see it (as it would have
been, if he had been taken up into heaven, or into the air): but would have
him saved in an Arc; that so al^ the wicked men, as they ^ere a dying in the
water, or expecting death upon the tops of the hills, might see him live, and
be saved, to their more torment, and to their greater shame, who would not
believe Gods word, as he did. For, as the wicked in hell are more tormented to
see the godly in the joys of heaven: so doubtless were the wicked of that
age, to see Noah saved before their eyes. The view of this power and wisdom of
God herein, made Noah give great reverence to Gods Majesty.

And no les^e ought it to work in the hearts of all true hear^ed English men,
and faithful Christians. For, did not the Lord restore and establish the
Gospel to our nation, by a child and by a woman; and in her time when all
other Princes were against her (contrary to the rules of policy)? and did not
God in our late deliverance, overthrow our enemies, not so much by the power of
man, as by his own hand? Did not he fight from heaven? Did not the stars and
the winds in their courses sight against that Sisera of Spain? Let us
therefore with blessed Noah stand amazed to see Gods mercies, and with
reverence and fear magnify his great and glorious name.

And thus we have the three motives that moved in Noah this Reverence of God:
the consideration first of his great Judgment on the sinful world: 2. Of his
great mercy in saving him: 3. Of his admirable power and wisdom, showed both
in the Judgment and the mercy.

Hitherto of the first effect. It follows; Prepared the Arc.

The 2. effect of Noah's faith, whereby it is commended, is, that he upon a
commandment received from God (as we heard before) does make and build an Ark,
wherein to save himself and his family. Concerning this Ark, much might be
spoken out of ye book of Gen: but it is not to our purpose: which is no more in
this Chapter, but to show the obedience and practice of faith, and therein the
excellency of it. Now the point here to be spoken of, is not the matter, nor
the measure, nor the proportion, nor the fashion, nor the uses of the Arc; all
which in the 6. Chapter of Genesis, are fully described: but the action and
obedience of Noah in preparing it, as God bad him: whereof the holy Ghost (in
Genesis 6.22.) says, Noah did according to all that God had commanded him,
even so did he.

Now in this action of Noah's faith, diverse points of great moment are to be
considered.

First, why did God bid Noah make an Arc, 120. years before the flood, when
he might have built it in three or four years?

The answer is, God did so for diverse causes: some respecting the sinful
world, as that they might have longer time, and more warnings to repent; every
stroke of the Arc, during these 120. years, being a loud Sermon of
repentance unto them. Again, that they might be without excuse, if they
amended not: and lastly, that their iniquities might be full, and their sins
ripe for vengeance. But of all these, we will not speak, because they concern
not Noah, of whose faith we are only to speak: let us therefore touch only
those causes which concern Noah. And in regard of him, the Lord did thus, that
he might try his faith and patience, and exercise other graces of holiness in
him. Thus God deals with his servants always: he exercises them many and
strange ways in this world. He led the Israelites in the deserts of Arabia
forty years; whereas a man may travel from Rameses in Egypt to any part of
Canaan in forty days: and this God did to humble them, and try them, and to
know what was in their heart (Deuteronomy. 8.2.)

God promised Abraham a son, in whom all the nations of the earth should be
blessed (Genesis 12.3): But he performed it not of 30. years after (Genesis 21.2).
He gave David the kingdom of Israel, and anointed him by Samuel, 1. Sam.
16.13. But he attained it not of many years after; and in the mean time, was
persecuted and hunted by Saul, as a flea in a man's bosom, or as a Partridge in
the mountains, 1. Sam. 24.15. and 26.20. And thus God exercised him both in
that and other his promises: as he says, Psalm. 40.1. In waiting I waited on
the Lord: and Psalm. 119.82, Mine eyes fail for waiting for thy promise! O when
will thou comfort me? Thus God dealt with them, and thus in some measure he
deals with all his children, to humble and to try them, and to know what is in
their hearts; for that, in these cases, men do always show themselves, and
their dispositions. When men enjoy all things at their will and wish; who
cannot make a fair profession? but where men are long deferred, and kept from
that is promised and they expect, and are so long crossed in their
expectations, then they appear in their own colors.

And as God dealt with them, so will he one way or other do with us: if we be
his servants, he will at some time of our life or other, lay some such
affliction upon us, as may try us, and our faith, and our patience, and our
humility. For if we be hypocrites, and have no true graces, but only a show;
this will discover it: and if we have true and sound faith, and patience; this
will make them shine like orient pearls in their true and perfect beauty.

Secondly, as God bad Noah build an Arc so long time before any need of it;
so he did, without denying or gainesaying. So says the story (in Genesis): He
did according to all that God commanded him. And thus the holy Ghost says
here, He being warned of God, by faith prepared the Arc: Where we learn, That
where true faith is, there follows true obedience to every commandment of
God: insomuch as a godly believing man no sooner hears any duty to be
commanded of God, but he thinks his soul and conscience is tied to
obedience: and this is the nature of true faith. And it is as impossible to be
otherwise, as it is for fire having fuel not to burn. Acts 15.9. Faith
purifieth the heart; namely, from careless disobedience to Gods word: for if
from any corruption at all, then from it especially, because it is most
contrary to the pureness of true faith.

This being so, shows us, not any fault in our religion (as the Papists
slander us) but the want of our religion, and the want of true faith in the
world: for there is almost no obedience to Gods commandments. For first,
Turks and Jews acknowledge not the Scriptures: and the Papists have set aside
Gods commandments to set up their own. And few Protestants have the feeling
of the power of true religion, and nothing indeed but a bare profession: but it
must be a feeling of the power of it, which produces due obedience. And alas,
we see men obey not Gods commandments. God says, Commandments 3. and 4.
Swear not by my name vainly, keep my Sabbath. Where is there a man of many
that fears to break these? Alas, there are more mockers of such as would
keep them, then careful and conscionable keepers of them. How truly said
Christ, When the son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? It
is likely, therefore, these be the days, wherein we may wait for the coming of
Christ: for the general want of obedience, shows the general want of faith.

But this obedience of Noah is better to be considered of: for it was very
excellent and extraordinary; there being many hindrances that might have
stopped him in the course of his obedience, and have persuaded him never to
have gone about the making of the Arc.

As first, the great quantity of the Ark, amounting to many thousands Cubits; a
work of huge labor and great charge.

Again, the length of his labor, to last 120. years. It is a tedious thing,
and troublesome to man's nature, to be ever in doing, and never to have done.

Thirdly, the building of it was a matter of much mockery to the world: for, it
signified; 1. the destroying of the whole world: 2. the saving of him and his.
These things were taunted at by the worldly wise men of that sinful age, and he
was loudly laughed at by many a man, to think all the world should perish; but
much more, if all perished, to imagine that he and his should be delivered.

Lastly, the building of the Arc was a harsh thing to nature, and natural
reason, in many respects: for,

First, that all the world should be destroyed, seemed not possible to be,
because it never had been.

Secondly, it seemed not likely that Gods mercy should be so wholly swallowed
up of his justice.

Thirdly, they must live in the Arc, as in a close prison, without comfort of
light or fresh air, and amongst beasts of all sorts, and that for a long time,
he knew not how long. Now reason would tell him, he had better die with men,
then live with beasts; and better die a free man and at liberty, then live a
prisoner; and better die with company, then live alone: And that if God had
purposed to save him, he could have used other means, and more easy, more
direct, and more safe then this; that therefore his deliverance was to be
doubted of. And lastly, reason would say: I may make my self a gazing and
mocking stock to the world for 120. years; and it may be then Gods purpose
will be altered, and no flood will come: or if it come, and I go into the Arc,
and it chance to break against the mountains, so that I perish with the rest,
then am I worst of all, who perish notwithstanding all my labor; therefore I
had better let it alone, and take my venture with the rest of the world.

These, doubtless, and many such natural considerations came into his mind,
and stood up as so many impediments of his faith. But, behold the power of true
faith, in the heart of a holy man: It ouergoeth all doubts, it breaks through
all difficulties, to obey the will and word of God. Yea, it g^ues a man wings,
with which to fly over all carnal objections. Thus we see it here in Nooh,
and afterward shall as clearly see it in Abraham, and other holy men.

The use of this doctrine discovers the weakness of many men's faith: for if
the doctrine of the Gospel go curra^t with our natural affections, or seem
plausible to our natures, we do formally obey it. But if it cross our
affections, or go beyond our reason, or control our natural dispositions,
then we spurn against it, we call it into question, we are offended at it,
and deny our obedience. Here wants the faith of Noah, which carried him beyond
the compass of nature, and reach of reason, and made him believe and do that
which neither nature could allow, nor reason like of, and which would be
displeasing to his natural affections. Let us therefore learn to practice true
faith, by believing forthwith what God shall say unto us, without asking advise,
or hearing the objections of flesh and blood. God threatened in times past the
overthrow of the great Monarchies of the Assyrians, Chaldeans, Persians,
Grecians, Romans: reason did make doubts how it could be, but faith believed
it, and it is done. God in later times threatened the fall of Abbeys, and
dispersing of Monks, for their wickedness. It seemed impossible to reason:
yet faith in some believed it, and it came to pass.

God now threatens the ruin of Babylon, and the full revelation of
Antichrist, and the overthrow of the new found Hierarchy of the Jesuits,
which glitter so in worldly glory, and in outward strength: this seems hard
to bring to pass; but let faith believe it, for it is Gods word, and shall be
fulfilled in his season. God has said, that our bodies shall rise again, even
these bodies which are burned to ashes, or eaten of beasts, or fishes, or
turned to dust in the earth. This is a wonder to nature, an amazement to
reason: but faith will believe it, and shall find it true, for God has said
it.

God says, Christ is in the Sacrament truly and really present to the soul of
a Christian. Carnal senses deny this, and natural reason knows not how,
but ask with the Capernaits, How can he give us his flesh to eat? But faith
believes it, and knows how; though to outward sense it cannot be expressed.
And it was a holy and divine speech used by holy Martyrs, who being asked how
Christ could be eaten in the Sacrament, and not with the teeth, answered; My
faith knows how. God says, Wicked men though they flourish never so, are
miserable; and good men are blessed above all other. Reason and worldly
experience say this is false: but true faith belieues it, and finds it true;
for never did any child of God desire to change his estate with the mightiest
or wealthiest wicked man in the world. God says, He that will follow Christ,
must deny himself, and his own desires, and follow Christ, in bitterness and
affliction. Nature says, This is a hard lesson: who can bear it? But faith
believes it, yields to it, and endeavors the practice of it, because God has
so commanded. Such is the power and excellency of true faith.

Fourthly and lastly, out of this action and obedience of Noah, mark a
special lesson. God had revealed to him, that he would save him and his
family, and assured him he should not perish. Yet for all this, he makes an
Arc: whereupon it follows, that Noah, though he knew God would save him, yet
was persuaded he must use the means, or else should not be saved. He might
have said to himself, God has said, and bound himself by covenant, he will
save me; now if I make not the Arc, yet his word is his word, and he will
stand to it. His will cannot be altered: though I be false he will be true;
though I do not that I should do, yet he will do what belongs to him:
therefore I will spare my labor and cost of making the Arc; especially seeing
it is a matter of so much mockery, and so ridiculous to reason. But Noah is of
another mind: he will not sever Gods word from his means, he depends on
Gods word for his safety, but not on his bare word without the means.

Whence we learn, that though a man be certain of his salvation, yet he is to
use the means of salvation: and that not only, though he be certain in the
certainty of faith, but though he could be assured, from God himself by
immediate revelation. For, if God should say to a man by his name, thou shall
be saved; It is no more, then here was said to Noah for his deliverance. For to
him said God, I will destroy all flesh: but with thee I will make my covenant,
and thou shall be delivered: yet, for all that, Noah judges, that if he use
not the means, if he make not an Arc, he is to look for no deliverance: this
was Noah's divinity;

Contrary both to the divinity and practice of some in this age: who say, If I
shall be saved, I may live as I list: and though I live as I list, yet if in
the end I can say, Lord have mercy on me, I am safe enough. But Noah would not
trust his body on such conditions, though they be so presumptuous as to trust
their souls. Let such men be assured, God in his decree has tied the end and
the means together. Let not therefore man separate what God has joined
together: he that does, let him look for no more salvation if he use not the
means, then Noah would have done for safety, if he had made no Arc. And thus
we see the second effect of his faith. It follows; To the saving of his
household.

Now this second effect of preparing, is further enlarged by a particular
enumeration of the Ends or purposes, why the Arc was made; namely, both of
Gods commandment, and his obedience in making it.

1. By it he saved his household. 2. Hereby he condemned the world.
The first end which both God had in commanding, and Noah in making the Arc,
was the saving of his household: that is, himself, and all that belonged to him;
which were his wife, his three sons, and their wives, Genesis 7.7.

But first of all, it may seem wonderful, how this Arc should save him and
his household in this general destruction. For it was a great and huge vessel
resembling a ship: yet so far unlike, as it is rather called an Arc. It must
flote above the water, it must be laden with a heavy burden; and yet without
Anchor to stay her, without mast to poise her, without stern to guide and move
her, without Master to govern her. For Noah was partly a husbandman, and
partly a Preacher: and though he had much learning, yet the use of sailing was
not then found out: and therefore in all reason this Arc would be carried on
hills and rocks, by the violence of the Tempests, and so slit in pieces. Yet,
for all this, it saved him, even when heaven and earth seemed to run together
(so vehement was the rain) even then it saved him and his. How came this to
pass? Even because Gods providence and his hand was with it: He was the
Master, and the Steres-man. For as God himself shut the door of the Arc
upon him, when he was in, and made it fast after him, that no water might enter
(which was impossible for Noah himself to have done) Genesis 7.16: So doubtless
the same God that had vouchsafed to be his Porter, was also his keeper and
preserver, and the Master of the Arc during that voyage. And from hence came
it to pass, that the Arc saved him: which otherwise in reason it could never
have done.

Here we learn, first, the special and extraordinary presence, and
providence of God over his children in great distresses and extremities. His
providence is over all his works, for he forgets nothing that he made: but the
special eye of his providence watches over his children; as a Master of a
family has an eye over his meanest servants, yea over his very cattle: but
his care night and day is for his children. And as God ouerlooketh all his
children always: so principally his providence shows it self, when they are
in the deepest dangers, or in the greatest want of natural helps. When Daniel
was cast into the Lions den, God was there with him, and shut their mouths,
Daniel 6.22. When the three children were cast into the fiery furnace, God was
with them, and took away the natural force from the fire: Daniel 3.27. When
the Israelites were to pass through the sea, or else die (a hard shift) God
was with them, and made the sea give place to his children, and stand like two
walls on either side them, Exodus 14.22. When they were to wander through the
wide wilderness, through so many dangers and discomforts as Deserts do
afford, Christ was with them, and waited upon them with his continual comfort
and assistance, Corinth. 10.4. And so when Noah was to go into the Arc, and
(being in) must have the door shut, and closed upon him; his ca^e pitiful.
For, do it himself he could not; it both being so bi^ge, that Elephants and
Camels must en^er in at it: and though he could have pulled it to; yet being
within, he could never have sufficiently closed it from the water: Nor would
any other of that wicked world do it for him: they did not owe him so much
love or service, but rather mocked him, and laughed at him: as first, for making
the Arc; so now for entering in, when he knew not how to have it closed. How
should he do? himself could not, others would not. God himself with his own
hand shut it for him. And after, when he was in, and was in danger to be
thrown upon the rocks, and to be split in pieces on the hills, and had no
Anchor, no stern, no Pilot, no Master; God himself was with him, and was all
in all unto him. The eye of his love, and the hand of his power was over him,
and so the Arc saved him and his household. Such is the providence of God over
his, when they are in the deepest distresses, and most destitute of all worldly
comforts.

The use of this doctrine ministers comfort unto Gods children: who as they
are sure of strange calamities to fall upon them; so are they sure also of a
special care of God over them, even in their greatest extremities. And this
may Gods children (who serve him in ye true obedience of faith) ever assure
themselves of, that the Lord does never forget, nor forsake them in any of
their troubles: but will be ever ready with his merciful hand, to defend them
from dangers, to provide for them in necessities, and to comfort them in
distresses, when they know not in the world how to do. Elisha had an army of
men sent against him, to take him: How should one man escape from a whole
army? 1. Kings. 6.15.16.
His man cried, Alas Master how shall we do? He answered his man, and bad
him, Fear not, there were more for him then against him; that is, more Angels
(though they were unseen) for him, then there were men in the Army against
him. And so when no man would shut the door for Noah, there were Angels enough
ready sent from God to do it for him: and when all wicked men wished he might
perish with the Arc he had made, and assured themselves he would perish,
having no such helps as ships require; then the holy Angels, or rather God
himself, supplied all such wants unto him: and so when themselves perished,
they saw him and his household saved by that Arc. And no less care has God
over his Church and children to this day. And though he works not visible
miracles for them, yet they feel and find that he is oftentimes mighty, and
wonderful in preserving them, in providing for them, in assisting them, and in
comforting them, when else without that providence of his, they know they had
miscarried.

Again, whereas God himself vouchsafes in Noah's danger, to be the Master and
Pilot of this Arc, that so it may save him and his household; we learn the
auntientie and dignity of the trade of Mariners, Sailors, and Masters of
ships. The auntientie: For we see it is as old as Noah, as old as this second
world, even 4000. years old. The dignity is great; for God himself was both
the first author, and the first practicer of it. The author and first deviser:
For Noah made not this Arc of his own head, but (as we heard before) he was
warned of God to do it. And he was the first practicer; for God himself
performed all those services unto Noah in the Arc: else it had never saved him.

This being so, It is the more grief to see that worthy calling so abused, and
debased as it is; the most of them that practice it being profane, ungodly and
dissolute men. Such men should remember, God made the first ship, and God was
the first Master, and the first Mariner, the first Pilot, the first governor
of a ship: and they should labor to be like him. This is one of those few
callings, which may say, God himself was the first deviser and practicer of
it. All callings cannot say so: why then should they so far forgette whom
they succeed? Indeed upon the seas and in distresses, they will make some
profession of religion: but let them come ashore; what swearing, what whoring,
what drunkenness amongst them? But let them be afraid to be so profane, which
hold the place, which once God himself held: or else let them know they are
unworthy of so good a calling.

And thus we see the reason, and the means how the Ark could save him and his
household; namely, because God did govern it.

In the next place, observe the end and use of the Arc. It was to save this
holy man and his household. Learn here that Gods servants in common calamities
have safety: For, God himself gives them security, and provides deliverance.
Thus was it ever. When God proceeds in judgment against Jerusalem, for the
sins thereof: he marketh the godly in their foreheads; namely, such as
mourn and cry for the abominations which are done against God, Ezech. 9.4.

When Sodom must be destroyed, righteous Lot and his family, must be drawn
out; nay, the Angel can do nothing till he be safe, Genesis, 19.16.22. When
the destroying Angel went over the land of Egypt, and destroyed the first
borne in every house of the Egyptians (the Israelites dwelling amongst them)
he past over all the Israelites, whose doors were sprinkled with the blood of
the Paschall Lamb, Exodus, 12.13: And even so he whose heart and soul is
sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ the Lamb of God, no calamity can do
him hurt; nay, when others are smitten he shall be delivered.

The use of this doctrine is to our Church and State: We have by Gods mercy
long enjoyed Peace and the Gospel; and both, under a gracious government: and
with these, many other blessings. Yet speak truth, and the sins of our
times call for a flood, as in Noah's time: and sure a flood of tribulation must
come one way or other. For this was always the state of Gods Church; now
peace, now persecution. Peace abused, causes trouble, and calamities.
Therefore as we have so long had peace and ease; so assuredly look for a
flood: what it will be or when, knows no man; only he who will send it, the
righteous and almighty God. How then shall we do, when the flood of
tribulation is upon us? There is no way but one. Believe in Christ Jesus;
settle thy heart in true faith; repent of thy sins; get Gods favor and
forgiveness: and then when the flood comes, Gods providence shall afford thee
(one way or other) an Arc of safety and deliverance. Sprinkle thy soul now
with Christ's blood by faith and true repentance: and the destroying Angel of
Gods wrath, shall pass over thee and thy household.

Thirdly, observe the largeness of Gods bounty. Not only Noah shall be
saved, but with him his household also. Why the Lord did so, there be diverse
reasons:

First, for the Propagation and multiplication of the world after the flood. If
any object, Noah and his wife might have served for that end: I answer, they
were old; for he was 600. years old, when the flood came: and though he
lived 300. years after the flood (Genesis, 9.28); Yet read we not of any
children that he had. If any further object; The first world was begun, and
multiplied by two alone, Adam and Eve, and no more: why then should there be so
many for the beginning of the second world? I answer: God did so in the
beginning, to show that all mankind came of one blood (Acts. 17.26); and that
in regard of body or birth, there is no difference originally betwixt man and
man: which also was observed even in the second beginning For, though the world
was multiplied by three brethren, Shem, Cham, and Iapheth: Yet those three were
not strangers, but all sons to one man Noah: so that as at first by Adam and
Eve; so after, from Noah and his wife came all men in the world. But in the
beginning of the second world, there must needs be more lines then one;
because now the blessed seed was promised, whose line and kindred must needs
be kept distinct from all other, until his incarnation. Again, there was more
cause now why the world should be speedily replenished then at the beginning.
For, first the earth had some glory and beauty left it after the first curse;
so that it was still a most pleasant and delightful habitation to Adam and
Eve. But now by the second curse in the flood, all her beauty was gone, she
and all her glory was ouerrunne, spoiled, and defaced; so that it had been a
miserable habitation for Noah and his wife, if they had been without company.
Secondly, the earth being much defaced, and the virtue of it almost quite
perished by the flood, had now more need to be recovered, by the hands and
help of many men's labors. And to this purpose, the Scripture says, Genesis
9.19. and 10.32. that the earth was divided amongst the three sons of Noah.
And they lived not all together, but ouerspread the earth. And least the
beasts, which then were many, should ouergrowe the world, therefore God would
have the earth speedily replenished, and to that end Noah and his wife: had
never a servant in ye Ark, but only such as should have children; their 3.
sons and their wives. And thus the multiplication of mankind is the first
cause, why God saved Noah's children.

The second cause: It is likely that as himself was a righteous man, so they
of his family were more orderly and religious, then others of that wicked Age;
for, good men make conscience of teaching their families: as, Abraham, Genesis
18.18. And seeing Noah is commended for a just and good man, doubtless, he did
carefully instruct his household: and therefore it is to be supposed, that all,
or the most of them, were holy and righteous persons, fearing God.

Thirdly, though all of them were not righteous, yet they were all of the
family of righteous Noah: and therefore for his sake they were saved; all being
his children, or his childrens wives. For, the righteous man procures
blessings not on himself alone, but on all that belong unto him, dwell with him,
or are in his company. At Abraham's request had there bin but 10. righteous men
in Sodom; all had been spared for their sakes, (Genesis 18.32). When Joseph
dwelt in Egypt, all Putiphars house, and all in it (though he were a heathen
man) were blessed for Joseph's sake: (Genesis 39.5). When Lot was delivered out of
Sodomes destruction, the Angels asked him, Have thou any sons in law? that
they might have been saved for his sake (Genesis 19.12). When Paul and 276.
souls with him suffered shipwreck, and were all in present danger of drowning,
God saved Paul, and for his sake all the rest. God gave him the lives of all
that were with him in the ship, Acts 27.24. And so here Noah's children, and
their wives, are spared for Noah's sake.

Let this encourage all men to serve God in truth and uprightness; seeing
thereby they shall not make themselves alone bles^ed, but bring down Gods
blessing even on their houses, children, and posterities: yea, the very places
where, and the people with whom they dwell, shall fare the better for them. And
thus we see the causes and reasons, why not Noah alone, but even his household
were also saved.

In the fourth place, let us observe how the holy Ghost says, that Noah built
the Arc; not for the saving of himself, but of his household: and it is so
said for two causes:

First, to show that Noah, though he were the head and governor, yet was one
of the household; for, in the word household himself is comprehended. Masters
and Fathers, though they be governors, yet must think themselves members of
the household; so will they have more care thereof, when they esteem themselves
members of the body, and parts of the whole.

Secondly, to teach us what care Noah had for his family; even so great, as he
prepared the Arc to save them withal. Here is an example of a worthy Master
of a household; and yet all this was but for a temporal deliverance. Now, if
he was so careful for their bodily safety, how much more was he to save them
from hell and damnation, which he knew to be an eternal destruction of both
soul and body. Therefore doubtless as he was a diligent Preacher of
righteousness to that sinful world: so principal^y a diligent Preacher and
Prayer, and Catechiser of his own family; that so he might make them Gods
servants, and deliver them from the eternal fire of hell.

Noah's example is to be a pattern to all Parents and Fathers of families to
teach them care not only for the bodies, and bodily welfare of their families,
but especially for their souls and spiritual welfare. And if they be bound by
all bonds of nature and religion, to provide for the bodies of their children;
let reason judge, how much more straightly they are tied to look to their
souls. But S. Paul says, He that provides not temporal things necessary for
his family, is worse then an Infidel, 1. Timo* 5.8. Then what is he who
provides nothing for their souls? Surely, his case is extremely fearful.
Therefore when thou have provided meat, apparel, a calling, and marriage, house
and living for thy child: think not thou have done, and so may turn them
off. The world may take them thus: But God will not take them so at thy hands.
No, the greater duty remains behind; thou must provide for their souls, that
they may know God, and fear his name. Thou must with Abraham (Genesis 18.19.)
Teach thy family, that they may walk in the ways of God: I know Abraham,
says God, that he will do it. And surely God will know all such as do so. By
doing thus, men shall make their houses Churches of God, as here Noah's was: and
it would be far better with our Church and State, if men did so: Ministers in
the Church, and Justices in the Country should have much less to do, if
Masters of families would do their duties.

But to go further: let us see more particularly what this household was, that
was thus saved by the Arc.

First, it was a family of four men and four women: not men or women alone*
but both, and consisting of as many women as men. Thus God would have one sex
to love another, and one to think themselves beholden to the other* the
beginning of the first world was by one man and one woman. Of the second, by
four men, and four women; but alwai^^ equal. And here also God would teach
men not to contemn the other, though the weaker sex: for God saved as many of
them from the universal flood, as he did men.

Secondly, how many were they in all? but eight persons. Of the whole world no
more were saved: A miserable spectacle. See what sin can do. It can bring
many Millions to eight persons in a short time. See what it is to offend God.
Let us not then glory in our multitudes, but glory in this, that we know and
serve God: for otherwise, if our sins cry out to him against us, he can
easily make us few enough.

Thirdly, what were these eight persons? not one servant amongst them all:
there were none but Noah and his wife, his three sons, and their wives. It is
marvelous, that here were none of Noah's servants. Some think he had none, and
that the simplicity of those days required no attendance, but that each one
was servant to him self. And they seem to gather it out of Gen* 7.1. where God
bids Noah, Enter thou and all thine house into the Arc: And when they
entered, they are recounted in the seventh verse, to be none but himself, his
wife, and his children: therefore say they, in Noah's house, there were no
servants. But why might not Noah have servants, as well as Abraham and Lot had?
doubtless he had. But, behold a wonderful matter: Noah's own servants would
not believe his preaching, but chose rather to live loosely with the world, and
perish with it, then to live godly with their Master, and be saved with him.
This was and will be true in all Ages, that in a wicked age, or in a wicked
town, a Master shall not be able to govern his own servants; but the stream
of common wickedness, and ill examples of other men does draw them from the
obedience of their Masters. They can readily allege for themselves, we will
not be used more hardly then other men's are, we will not be tied to our hours,
and bound to so many exercises, we will do as others do. Thus would Noah's
servants do, and perished with the world. So hard a thing is it for a good man
to have good servants in such times or places where wickedness reigns.

And thus we have seen in some sort, How the Arc saved Noah and his
household, and what this household of his was.

Now besides this end and use of the Arc, we are further to know; that whereas
this saving of them was but a corporal deliverance from a temporal death,
this Arc has also a spiritual use, which we may not omit: for as many of
Noah's family as were true believers, it was a means to save them another way,
even to save their souls: for it taught them many things.

First, it was an assurance of Gods love unto their souls: for if he was so
careful to save their bodies from the flood, they thereby assured themselves,
he would be as good unto their souls; which they knew to be far more
precious and excellent.

Secondly, it showed them how to be saved. For, as they saw no safety, nothing
but present death out of the Arc: So it taught them, that out of Gods Church,
and out of Gods favor, no salvation could be expected; and so it taught them
to labor to be in Gods favor and members of his true Church.

Thirdly, they saw they were saved from the flood, by faith and obedience. For
first, Noah believed Gods word, that the flood should come; then he obayed Gods
commandment, and made the Arc, as he was commanded. And thus he and his,
by believing and obaying, were saved through the Arc: and without these, the
Arc could not have saved them. This taught them more particularly how to be
saved; namely, by believing God, and obaying God, and else no salvation. For,
when they saw their bodies could not be saved without them; It assured them,
much less could their souls be saved without faith and obedience.

Lastly, this deliverance by the Arc was a pawn unto them from God, assuring
them of salvation, if they believed in the Messiah. For, seeing God so fully
performed his promise unto them for their bodily deliverance upon their
believing: they thereby might assure themselves, he would perform his promise
of salvation unto them, upon their faith and true obedience. Moreover, it
strengthened their faith. For, when ever after any promise of God was made unto
them, or any word of God came unto them, they then remembered Gods mercy and
faithfulness unto them in their deliverance by the Arc: and therefore
believed.

Unto these and many other spiritual uses, did the Arc serve unto Noah, and
to his household, as many of them as were believers.

But what is this to us? Indeed, the Arc served them for a temporal
deliverance, it saved their lives; therefore they also had reason to make
spiritual use of it: But it saved not us, it served us to no use corporal;
therefore how can we make any spiritual use of it.

I answer; though we had no corporal use of the Arc, yet there arises an
excellent spiritual use out of the consideration of it.

The Arc of Noah and our baptism, are figures correspondent one to the other:
that, that Noah's Arc was to them, Baptism is to us. Thus teaches S. Peter,
1.3.20.21. To the Arc of Noah the figure which now saves us, even Baptism
agrees. The same that S. Paul here ascribes to the Arc, S. Peter ascribes
to Baptism. The Arc saved them, Baptism saves us. Now the resembla^ce
betwixt these two figures, has two branches.

First, as it was necessary for them that should be saved in the flood, to be
in the Arc; and out of the Arc no possibility to escape: So is it for them
that will have their souls saved, to be in Christ, and of his Church; they
must be mystical members of Christ, and visible members of his Church: and out
of Christ and his Church, no possibility of salvation. That this is true (for
Christ) S. Peter proves apparently, Acts 4.12. Among men there is no name
given under heaven, whereby to be saved, but the name of Jesus Christ; neither
is there salvation in any other.

And that this is true, for the Church, he proves, Acts, 2.47. The Lord added
to the Church daily such as should be saved: See how such as are to be saved
must join themselves to the Church, when they see where it is: and all this is
signified and taught in Baptism. For the outward use of Baptism makes us
members of the visible Church, and the inward and powerful use of Baptism
makes us members of Christ himself.

The use and consideration hereof, should make us all more careful to be true
members of Christ, and of his Church, by making not only a bare profession of
religion; but by seeking to be incorporate into Christ by faith and true
repentance: for this must save us, when nothing else can. As they that were out
of the Arc, no gold nor silver could buy out their safety, no lands nor
livings, no houses nor buildings, no hills nor mountains, nothing in the
world, nor the whole world it self could save them; but being out of the Arc
they perished: So if a man be out of Christ, and out of his Church, no gold nor
silver, no honor nor glory, no wit nor policy, no estimation nor authority,
no friend^ nor favor, no wisdom nor learning, no hills of happiness, nor
mountains of gold can save his soul; but he must perish in the flood of Gods
eternal wrath. For as it proved folly in them that trusted to their high
houses, or caught hold on the hills, if they were out of the Arc; so will it
prove much greater folly to them that shall trust to any means of salvation,
if they be out of Christ. And contrariwise, as they that were in the Arc were
sure to be saved, do the waters, winds and weathers, storms and tempests
all they could; so that still, the more the waters rose, the Arc rose also,
and was ever higher than they; and the higher it was carried by the violence of
the waters, the safer it was from the danger of hills and rocks: and so in the
midst of danger they were out of danger, and were saved in the midst of the
water: So, he that is once truly in Christ, is sure of salvation, nothing can
hinder it; floods of calamities may assault him and humble him, but they hurt
not his salvation; he is in the Arc, he is in Christ; nay the gates of hell
shall not overthrow him: but through all the waves of the devils malice, and
through all tempests of temptations, the blessed Arc of Christ's love and
merits shall carry him up, and at last convey him to salvation: this is the
blessed assurance of all them that are truly baptized into Christ. But as for
such, as out of their profaneness, either care not to be in Christ, or
contemn Baptism; let the^ assure themselves, they be out of the Arc, and
they perish certainly. This is the 1. part of the resemblance.

The second is this: Noah's body going into the Arc, he seemed therein a dead
man, going into a grave or a tomb to be buried; for he was buried in the Arc,
and the Arc in the waters, and he deprived of the fresh air^ and gladsome
light: yet by Gods appointment, it was the means to save Noah, which in all
reason seemed to be his grave; and if Noah will be saved he must go into this
grave. So they that will escape hell and damnation by Christ, the true Arc of
holiness, must be buried and mortified in their flesh, and fleshly lusts; and
there is no way to come to life everlasting but this. For thy soul cannot
live, whilst thy sins, the old man, that is, thy corruptions do live; but
they must die, and be buried, and then thy soul lives: and whilst they live,
thy soul is dead, and far from the life of grace, which is in Christ Jesus.
All this is affirmed at large, in Romans 6.3.4. Where we may see apparently
that we must by baptism die with Christ and be buried with him, else we cannot
be saved by him: our corruptions, our sins, which are the old man, must die
and be buried; that the new man, that is, the grace and holiness of Christ, may
live in us, and our souls by it: and he that thus dies not, never lives; and
he that thus is not buried, never rises to true life. Thus, mortification of
sin is the way to heaven, and death the way of life eternal: and he that is
not thus mortified in his corruption; let him never look to be quickened to
grace or glory.

If this be so, we may then see what a miserable world we now live in, wherein
mortification of sin is a thing unknown; not a man of many that can tell what
it is: nay, grace is dead, and holiness is mortified, and I fear buried also:
but the old man reigns. Corruption lives, and sin flourishes. Mortifying of
Christ by our sins is common: but mortifying of sin is sildome seen. For,
Christ is betrayed, crucified, and killed in a sort by the sins of men. What
a fearful change is this? Christ should live in us, and we endeavor to
crucify him again: sin should be crucified, but it lives in us. But if we
will have Christ to save us, then must we mortify the body of our sin. For,
he that will live when he is dead, must die while he is alive. And he that will
be saved by his baptism, must look that baptism work this effect in him, To
make him die, and be buried with Christ, that afterward he may rise and
reign with Christ. And then shall Baptism save us, as the Arc saved
faithful Noah, and his household. And thus much for the first end and use of
the Arc: the second followed.

By the which he condemned the world. Here is the second end, why Noah prepared
the Arc; To the condemnation of the world that then was. For, by it (not by
his faith, as some would read it) he condemned that wicked generation, both to
a temporal destruction of their bodies, and to an eternal Judgment in hell.

In the words, there are two points to be considered.

1. Who are condemned? The world. 2. Whereby? By Noah's Arc.
For the first, it may be asked, what is meant by the world? S. Peter answers
(2. Ep. 2.5) The world of the ungodly; that is, that generation of sinful men,
who lived in the days of Noah, whom also in the 1. Epistle, 3.20. he calls
disobedient: and their more particular sins are disclosed and recorded by
Moses, Genesis 6.45. to be, monstrous abuse of holy marriage, unnatural lusts,
cruelties, and oppressions: an utter neglect of Gods service, and Sabbath; and
an extreme profaneness, and dissoluteness in every kind. And this
corruption was not private, or personal; but universal, through all estates,
sexes, and ages. This world of the ungodly, this whole race of wicked and
disobedient men were condemned. But how was that world condemned by Noah? Thus:
God vouchsafed them 120. years to repent in, and appointed Noah to preach unto
them, during that time, to call them to repentance. But they believed not God,
nor Noah, but continued in their disobedience, and grew in their ungodliness:
therefore, when that time was expired, God performed his word spoken by Noah,
brought the flood upon them, destroyed them all, and condemned in hell as many
of them as died in impenitencie and unbelief. And thus that wicked world was
condemned, according as Noah in his Ministry had foretold them.

Here we may learn;

First, what the world of this age is to look for, unless there be
repentance. For, to speak but of our selves in this Nation; Have not we had
the Gospel 30. years and more? and with it peace, and much prosperity? Have
not we had a goodly time given us to repent? What is our duty, but with
reverence to see and acknowledge this goodness of God, to take hold of this
merciful opportunity, this time of grace, and this day of salvation? If we do
not, and make no account of the Gospel, what can we look for, but to be
condemned, as that world was? Look at the means and opportunities, which
these days afford; and they be as golden days, as ever were since Christ's,
or as ever can be expected, till his coming again. But look at the
profaneness, and carnality, and security of this age (even over all
Christendom) and this is the Iron age, these be the evil days; and so evil,
as nothing can be expected, but a river of brimstone, and a flood of fire to
purge it.

The days of the coming of the son of Man (which I take to be these days)
shall be like (says Christ, Math. 24.37). unto the days of Noah: And surely
in security and profaneness, they are like; and therefore in all reason they
must be like in punishment. We must therefore take warning by them, and shake
off this security, which possesses all men's hearts, and wait for the Lord in
watching and prayer, and think every day may be the last day of this world; at
least, the last day of our lives: and let us prepare for it, and live in the
expectation of it. Otherwise, if our sinfulness grow on a little further;
nothing can we look for, but to be condemned in an universal judgment, as
that world was. Let us therefore be take our selves to a more serious serving
of God: that the Lord when he comes, may find us so doing.

Secondly, in that the whole world that then was, was thus destroyed and
condemned, and (as we heard before) only Noah and his household saved; we
learn that it is not good, nor safe to follow the multitude. Noah was here a
man alone, he held and believed against all the world, and yet his judgment,
and his belief was true, and all the worlds false: and (accordingly) he saved,
when they were all condemned.

It is marvel therefore the Church of Rome should so much stand upon numbers
and multitude, for the gracing of of their religion: For, it ever was, and ever
will be a weak argument. If multitudes might ever have been alleged; then
unto Noah especially, to whom it might have been said, Who art thou that
pretendest to be wiser then all men? and to know more then all the world? Thou
that have a faith by thy self, and have no man to bear thee company; think
not that all Adams posterity, all the children of holy Henoch, and Methusalem
are all deceived, but thy self alone? Would not these and such like
objections, have discouraged any man? Yet behold the force of faith. Noah had
Gods word for it, and therefore believes against all the world, and is
commended to all ages for this faith. It is therefore but a vain flourish of
the Papists, to press us so much with their multitudes, and universality, and
consent, and unity, and succession, and continuance. For, all this is worth
nothing, as long as they first prove not, that that doctrine or opinion which
these multitudes hold, has his ground from Gods word: till then, all the other
is vanity. For, it is better with Noah, to have Gods plain word of his side,
then to believe otherwise with all the world; which was here deceived and
condemned, when Noah alone believed Gods word, and was saved.

And thus we see who were condemned: the world. To end this point, one question
may not unprofitably be here moved:

Whether was all the world, that is, all the men in that world condemned or no?
The words seem to imply that all but Noah were: and yet it may seem strange,
that of so many Millions none should repent but he: and if they repented, why
were they not saved? I answer, The world of that wicked age was condemned two
ways:

First, with a corporal destruction, and so they were all condemned without
exception. No high houses, no hills, no devises of man could save them. For,
the waters rose 15. cubits above the tops of the highest mountains under
heaven, Genesis 7.20. And so though till then, diverse of them lived by flying to
the hills: yet that being their last refuge, and being thus taken from them,
then all flesh perished that moved upon the earth, and every man, and every
thing that drew the breath of life. For, so says the Story, Genesis 7.21.22.
And it is but vain to imagine, that any of them could be saved upon that Arc:
for, first it was so made with a ridge in the top (as is most probably thought)
that no man could stand upon it, much less make any stay, in that violent
tossing by tempests. Again, if they could, yet could they not have lived so
long for want of food; the waters being (almost) a year upon the earth. And
thus it is most certain, they all without exception, were destroyed with
bodily destruction.

But secondly, they were condemned to an eternal destruction in hell: and
therefore S. Peter, 1.3.18. says, Their spirits are now in prison, who were
disobedient in the days of Noah. Now all the question is, whether were they
all condemned, or no. I answer: For, ought that we certainly know out of the
scripture, they were all condemned. Yet in the judgment of charity, we are
not so to think: and the rather, because there are many probable conjectures,
that some of them repented. For, howsoever many of them believed not Noah,
judging that he spoke of his own head: yet it is more then likely, that when
they saw it begin to rain extraordinarily, at least when they saw themselves
driven to the tops of the hills, and there looked hourly for death; that then
diverse of the posterity of Henoch, and Methusalem, and Lamech, were ashamed of
their former unbelief, and then turned to God in faith and in repentance. And
doubtless, that is the only or the principal cause, why God brought the
flood in forty days, which he could have done in four hours; that so men
might have time to repent. Genesis 7.

But it will be said: If any repented, why then were they not saved? I answer;
because they repented not in time, when they were called, by Noah's preaching.
Repentance is never too late, to save the soul from hell: but it may be too
late to save the body from a temporal judgment. And this, I take it is, that
that we may safely hold: for it seems too hard to condemn all the posterity
of Methusalem, Henoch, Lamech, and other holy Patriarks (who, as the Text
says, begat sons and daughters) and to think, that none of them repented,
when they saw the flood come indeed, as Noah had said. It cannot be, but they
heard their Fathers preach: and why might not that preaching work upon their
hearts, when the Judgment came, though before it did not? But why then did not
God record in the Scripture, neither their repentance, nor salvation, but has
left it so doubtful?

I answer; for the very same, for which he would not record Adams nor
Salomons* All for this cause, that he might teach all men to the worlds end,
what a fearful thing it is to disobay his commandment, as Adam did: or to
defer repentance when they are called by Gods word, as these men did. Therefore
to fear us from the like, though afterward they repented; it pleased God not
to record it, but to leave it doubtful.

This question being thus discussed, yields us two strong motives to repentance.

First, for if we repent not betime, our state then is fearful and doubtful,
though not desperate; as we see here the salvation even of Methushelas
children is doubtful: for they repented not when they were called, but
deferred it, till the judgment came. So, if we defer our repentance till our
deaths, there is great question of our salvation: but let us repent, when we
are called by Gods word: and then it is out of question, then there is no doubt
of our salvation.

Secondly, if we repent betime, we shall escape the temporal Judgment which
God sends upon the world for sin. If not, but defer repentance till the
Judgment come, we may then by it save our souls, but our bodies shall perish
in the universal Judgment. If the children of Henoch and Methushelah, which
were near a-kinne unto Noah, had repented at Noah's preaching, they had been
saved with Noah: they did not. But when the flood came indeed, then doubtless
they believed with Noah, and wished themselves in the Arc with him: but it was
too late, they saved their souls, but were drowned with the rest. So
assuredly, when God threatens any Judgment on our Church or Nation, they that
believe and repent betime, shall escape it. But they that will live in
wantonness with the world, and not repent, till God begin to strike: If then
they do, when the flood is come (though salvation cannot be denied to
repentance whenever) yet let them assure themselves, they shall bear their
part with the world in the punishment, as they did partake with them in their
sins. Let then these two considerations move us all to turn to God by timely
repentance: then shall we be sure to escape both the eternal and temporal
Judgment; and not be condemned, as here this world of the ungodly was.

And thus we see who were condemned.

The world The second point is, whereby were they condemned? the Text says
only, by which he condemned, etc. Whereupon some would understand faith, and
read it thus; by which faith he condemned the world. Which though it be true
(for the faith of holy men condemns the unbelieving and misbeleeuing world)
yet is it not proper in this place, where the Arc is described by the uses of
it: which are two, whereof this is one; And (besides, that the Greek
construction does well bear it) the Judgment of almost all Interpreters
referres it to the Arc. And further in all reason; that that saved him and his
household, condemned the world also: but the Arc is said to have saved them:
therefore, by it he condemned the world. Neither is this any derogation but a
commendation of faith: for by faith he made that Arc, which Arc condemned the
world. Now, by the Arc Noah condemned the world two ways: 1. By his obedience
in building it. 2. By his preaching in building it.


For the first, God bad Noah build an Arc so great, and to such an use, as in
all reason no man would have done it. Yet Noah by the power of his faith
believed Gods word, and obayed, and therefore builded the Arc. This faith and
this obedience of Noah to this Commandment of God, condemned the unbelieving
and disobedient world, and made them without excuse. So says Christ: The
Ninevites, who believed at the preaching of Jonas, shall rise in Judgment
against the Jews, and condemn them, because they repented not at Christ's
preaching. And the Queen of Saba, who came so far to hear Solomon, shall
condemn them, who then would not hear Christ, Math. 12.42.43.

Even so, Noah's obedience shall condemn them. For, Noah being told of a
miraculous thing, and believing it, and being commanded so unreasonable a
thing, as the making of the Arc, and obaying, shall condemn that wicked
world, who would not believe Gods ordinary promises; nor obey his ordinary
and most holy commandments. And as the Saints are said to condemn the world,
1. Corinthians. 6.2. by being witnesses against them, and approuers of Gods just
sentence: So Noah's fact and faith condemned that world. And thus we see it is
apparent, that the obedience, and godly examples of good men, do condemn the
ungodly.

The use whereof, is to encourage us all to embrace Christian religion, and not
be daunted by the scorns, or other evil behauiours of profane men, which
cannot abide the Gospel. For, he that walks in the way of holiness, and
keeps good conscience in the midst of a wicked generation; if his godliness
do not overcome their evil, and convert them, it shall more demonstrate their
wickedness, and condemn them. Our Church is full of mockers, and they
discourage many from Christ and religion: but let them know, this will be the
end of it, their obedience whom they contemn and laugh at, will be their
condemnation. And thus Noah by his obedience in building the Ark, condemned the
world.

Secondly, so did he also by his preaching, as he builded it. For, the building
of the Arc, was a part of his prophetical ministry.

The Prophets preached two ways, in word, and in action.


For, beside their Verbal preaching, and delivering of Gods word, they
preached in their lives and actions; especially in such actions as were
extraordinary. And such was Noah's building of the Arc: it was an actual
preaching; yea, every stroke upon the Arc, was a loud Sermon, to the eyes and
ears of that wicked world. For, by making it, he signified some should be
saved, and the rest drowned: namely, all that would believe and repent, should
be saved in it; and all that would not, should (out of it) be drowned: and
because they believed not this, therefore by it he condemned them. From this
ground we may learn^:

First, that a man may be a true and sincere Minister, lawfully called by God
and his Church, and yet not turn many unto God, nor by his Ministry bring
many to repentance. For here Noah a Prophet called immediately, yet in 120.
years preaching both in word and action, he cannot turn one to faith and
repentance. A most fearful thing, if we well consider it, that both by
preaching and making the Arc, he should not turn one of the sons of
Lamech, Methushelah, or Henoch, to believe him: but that they should all rather
choose to be misled in the general vanity of that wicked world, then to serve
God with Noah. This was a most discomfortable thing unto him as could be, yet
this has been the case and lot of many holy Prophets: Esaias must go and
preach unto them, and yet his doctrine must harden their hearts, that they may
not be saved, Esaias 6.10. And Ezekiel must go and speak, and yet is told
aforehand, they will not hear him, nor repent, Ezekiel. 3.4.7. And when S. Paul
himself preached unto the Jews at Rome, some believed not, Acts 28.24. There
is nothing will more discourage a man, and cast down his heart, then to see
that his labors are not only in vain, but do take a contrary effect; that
whereas they were bestowed to have saved them, they are means of their deeper
condemnation. Therefore as when their labors bring men to God, they may
greatly rejoice, and account those people, as S. Paul did the Thessalonians,
his crown, his joy and glory: 1 Thessalonians. 2.20.21.
So when they do no good (as Noah here) but that men are worse and worse; this
must humble and abase them in themselves, and let them know the power and
virtue is not in them, but God. So says S. Paul to the ungodly and impenitent
amongst the Corinthians: I fear, says he, when I come, 2. Cor. 12* 2 1.
my God abase me amongst you, and I shall bewail many of them which have
sinned* and not repented. And surely, this or nothing will abase a Minister, and
minister matter of great bewailing; Yet not so, but as still there is matter of
true comfort and co^te^tment, unto all godly and faithful teachers. For,
whether thy labor be the savor of life unto life, 2. Cor. 2.15.16.
or of death unto death, to thy hearers; It is to God a sweet savor in Christ.

Again, we may here learn, that those who are condemned before God, have
their condemnation by the preaching of the word. The secrets of all the world,
says the Apostle, shall be judged by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel:
and here the preaching of Noah, and his actual preaching by preparing the
Arc, condemns the world. Such is the power and might of the Ministry of
Gods word, upon all them that resist it.

Which being so, should teach all men, when they come to hear Gods word, to
submit themselves to the power of it, to obey it, and become penitent: for,
otherwise so many Sermons as a man hears, so many inditements are presented
to God against him. And if at the last day there were no devils to accuse;
those bills of inditements, would both accuse and condemn him. And this
Judgment is begun in this life, as their consciences do often tell them, and
is accomplished at the last day: for there is no dallying with God^ word: if it
cannot save* it ki^ls. It is the fire, which if it cannot soften, it hardens.
Let then all impenitent men, make conscience to obey Gods word: for if now they
abuse it, it will be even with them, both here and in another world. For, as
the very same Arc, which saved Noah and his household, condemned the world: so
the same word of God, which believed and obayed by godly men, is their
salvation; disobayed, and refused by ungodly men, shall be their condemnation.

And thus much for the two ends, why Noah prepared the Arc: and consequently,
of the second effect of Noah's faith.

It follows: And was made heir of the righteousness, which i^ by faith.

Here is the third and last effect, whereby the excellency of Noah's faith is
commended. It made him an heir, and that not of the world: (for so he was
besides) but of that that the world could not yield; of righteousness, and
that of the best of all, even of that righteosnesse, which is by faith. These
words have relation to that testimony, which God gave of Noah in Genesis, 6.9.
Noah was a just and upright man, and walked with God. Now that which is spoken
there more generally, is here particularly opened and unfolded; he was just or
righteous: how? he was righteous by the righteousness of faith: so that these
words are a commentary unto the other.

But because that, that is here affirmed of Noah, is a most glorious thing; his
faith made him an heir (that is, made him that was heir of all the earth, a
better heir) therefore these words are to be well waighed. For their full
opening, three points are to be considered: 1. What is the righteousness here
spoken of. 2. Why it is called the righteousness of faith, or by faith. 3. How
Noah was made Heir of it by his faith.


For the first, That righteousness by which Noah and all holy men, are to
stand righteous before God, is not a righteousness of any nature but such a
one as is appointed of God for that purpose. That we may know it the more
distinctly, we must examine the several kinds thereof.

Righteousness is of two sorts: Created. Uncreated.


Uncreated* is that which is in God, and has no beginning nor ending, no
means, nor measure. Of this speaks the Prophet, Psalm. 119.137. Righteous
art thou, O Lord. This cannot make any man righteous; for two reasons.

First; for the Godhead and it are all one, It is in God essentially. A man is
one thing, and his righteousness is another. But God and his righteousness
are all one: And therefore it is as impossible for any man to have this
righteousness* as it is to be God.

Secondly, it is infinite, and man's soul a finite creature, and therefore not
capable of any thing that is infinite; and consequently, not of the
unmeasurable righteousness which is in the godhead. Therefore this we must leave
unto God, as proper to the Deity.

Created righteousness, is that, which God frames in the reasonable creature,
Men and Angels. Of Angels we are not to speak, though theirs and man's differd
not much in nature at their creations.

Created righteousness of man, is of 2. sorts, Legal, or Evangelical.


Legal righteousness is that which the Moral law prescribes.

Evangelical, that which the Gospel has revealed.

Of legal righteousness, I find there are three sorts spoken of; 1. One that
is a perfect righteousness. 2. One that is a civil righteousness. 3. One
that is an inward righteousness.


Perfect righteousness Legal, is the perfect fulfilling of the law in a man's
own self. And by this shall no man living be justified before God; for, no
man, since the fall of Adam, is able perfectly to fulfill the Law. If any can,
then shall he be righteous by it: but none did, nor ever can; therefore, no man
shall stand righteous by perfect legal righteousness in himself. Some will
object: But a regenerate man may: for he is restored by grace; therefore though
by Adams fall a man is disabled, yet by regeneration he is enabled to fulfill
the law perfectly.

I answer; It were so, if they were perfectly sanctified in their
regeneration: but they are sanctified but in part, and it is not perfect until
death: Object. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. We are sanctified throughout, spirit, soul, and
body. If all those, what then remains unsanctified? therefore our
sanctification is perfect. I answer: It is perfect in parts, but not in
measure nor degree. As a child is a perfect man in all the parts of a man, but
not in the quantity of any part: So a child of God is perfectly sanctified
in all parts, but not in the measure of any part, until flesh, and mortality,
and corruption have an end.

Secondly, some may object: The virgin Mary sinned not: I answer: so teaches
indeed the Church of Rome, that she never sinned, that her life was free from
sin ^ctuall, and her conception from sin original. But so taught neither
the Scripture nor Gods Church: but, contrariwise, it is more then manifest,
she was a sinner. For first, she confesses her soul reioiced in God her
Savior: but if she were no sinner, she stood in need of no Savior. Again,
she died: but if she had not sinned, she should in Justice not have died. For
death entered by sin: and where no sin is, there death is not due. Thus no
man can be righteous by the perfect righteousness of the law, in himself.

Secondly, there is a civil righteousness: and that is, when a man in his
outward actions, is conformable to the law, especially to the Commandments of
the second Table. For example; he is free from the outward actions of murder,
adultery, or theeuery, and such like: or he can refrain his anger, and
overcome his passions, that they shall not break out into open violence to the
view of the world: and for the first Table; he comes to the Church, and
professes religion. All this is a civil righteousness, and by this can no
man be justified, nor made righteous. For first, it is not a perfect, but a
most imperfect righteousness, and therefore cannot justify. It is so
imperfect, that it is as good as none at all in Gods sight: for it is but an
outward, and constrained, and dissembled obedience, and wants the inward and
true obedience of the heart and soul.

Secondly, it cannot make a man righteous: for wicked men have it, which are
unrighteous, and cannot be saved. Haman hated Mordecay in his heart: yea, his
heart boiled in malice against him: yet the Story says; That nevertheless he
refrained himself till he came home, Ester 5.10. And therefore Christ says,
that except our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, we cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, Math. 5.20. Now what
was theirs but an outward civil righteousness, whereby they kept the law,
only in outward actions? as appears, in that Christ, afterward in the same
Chapter, expounding the law, does reduce it to the inward, which is to his full
and proper sense: So then, yet we have not found that righteousness, which
may make a man righteous.

Thirdly, there is a righteousness, called the inward righteousness of a
Christian man, which is this; A man having repented, and his sins being
forgiven, he is by the holy Ghost sanctified inwardly in his soul, and all
the parts and powers of it. This sanctification is called inward
righteousness. Now the Church of Rome says, A man may be justified by this.
But it is not so, as appears by these reasons: First, this righteousness is
in this life imperfect: and that is proved by the Apostle, where he says, We
do here know but in part, 1. Corinthians. 13.12. Therefore, our understanding is
but in part regenerate: and as it, so consequently all other parts or powers of
our soul, are but in part regenerate; and in them all, we are partly spirit,
and partly flesh, Galath. 5.17. Therefore if our sanctification be imperfect,
it cannot justify us. Again, this righteousness is mingled with sin, and
unrighteousness: and from this mixture, comes the combat betwixt the flesh and
the Spirit (spoken of, Galath. 8.17). For these two are contrary one to the
other.

If it be mingled with sin, then it cannot make us righteous: no, nor the
works of grace that come from it, though God in mercy reward them. And though
as S. James says, They justify our faith, and make us just before men, James,
2.21: Yet can they not justify us before Gods Justice; nor, at the bar of
the last Judgment, will they pass for payment. S. Paul says, 1. Corinthians.
4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified; that is, I
have so walked in my calling, since I was an Apostle, and Minister of the
Gospel; as I am not privy, nor guilty to my self of any negligence therein.
If he dare not stand to that, to be justified by i^, who dare take hold, when
he refuses. Again, no man can do any perfect good works, unless he be
perfectly just: For, how can perfection come out of imperfection? But no man
can be perfectly just in this sinful body: as is proved in the first reason;
therefore his works here in this life cannot be such, as may make him righteous.

But it may be objected: Though our works have some defects in them, yet Gods
mercy accepts them for righteous and just; and therefore they may justify us.
I answer: As Gods mercy accepts them, so must his Justice be satisfied also;
but they being imperfect, cannot satisfy his Justice: for Gods infinite
Justice requires perfect satisfaction. But as for our best works, as they are
done by us, weigh them in the balance of Gods Justice, and they are so light,
as they deserve damnation: yet in Gods mercy in Christ, their defects are
covered, and they are reputed good works, and are rewarded; but we incroach
upon Gods mercy, and abuse his Justice, if therefore we imagine, they should
deserve Gods mercy, or be able to justify us in his sight. Thus then seeing
Legal righteousness fails us, let us come to Evangelical.

Evangelical righteousness, is that that is revealed in the Gospel, and
should never have been revealed, if that of the Law could have saved us. But
when it (not by defect in it, but default in our selves) could not, then God in
mercy affords us another in the Gospel.

Evangelical righteousness is that that is in Christ Jesus; his it is, that
must make a man righteous before God: But this Christ was an extraordinary
person, consisting of two natures, Godhead, Manhood.


And accordingly, he has a double righteousness in his holy person.

First, as he is God, he has in his nature the righteousness of God, and that
is uncreated, and infinite; and therefore incommunicable: and so none is, nor
can be righteous by it.

Secondly, there is in Christ a righteousness of his humanity: and this though
it be finite and created, yet is it beyond measure, in comparison of the
righteousness of man or Angel: So says S. John 3. God gives not him the
Spirit by measure.

This righteousness of Christ, as man or Mediator, consists in two things;
1. In the purity of his nature. 2. In the perfection of his obedience.


The first branch of our Mediators righteousness, is the holiness of his
humanity; which was perfectly sanctified in his conception, by the powerful
operation of the Godhead: and this was done at the first instant of his
conception in the virgins womb. From this purity of nature, proceeded his
obedience, which was as perfect, as his nature was pure: and so pure a nature
made a plain way to perfect obedience. And therefore as his conception was
free from sin original: so was his whole life from the least sin actual.

Now the Mediators obedience was double; Active, and Passive.


And both these he performed in his own person*

His Passive obedience was his passion, or suffering of whatsoever the Justice
of God had inflicted on man for sin, whether for soul or body.

The Active obedience of the Mediators person, was his perfect fulfilling of
the moral Law, in all duties to God or man, in thought, word, or deed; and
all this for us, in our stead and on our behalf. And here is true
righteousness: for where the nature of any person is perfectly pure, and the
obedience perfect, the righteousness of that person is perfect. And I say,
all this was done by him for us: he suffered all that we should have
suffered, and suffered not: he did that which we should have done, and did
not. And this is that righteousness, by which, a sinner is made righteous
before God. For, seeing legal cannot, it is this that must. And now we have
found that righteousness, by which Noah and all holy men were made, and
counted righteous; namely, that that is resident in the holy person of Jesus
Christ the Mediator.

And yet this is above and beyond all reason, that one should be justified by
another righteousness: and the doctrine, though it be of God, and grounded
never so strongly on Gods word, yet has it enemies, and is mightily oppugned
by the Church of Rome. Therefore let us first prove it: and then answer the
objections to the contrary. We prove it thus;

First, from plain Scripture, 1. Corinthians. 3.24. He that knew no sin, was
made sin for us; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. What
can be said plainer? he was made sin for us, and we righteousness by him.
Therefore as Christ was no sinner in his own person, but our sins were laid
upon him, and so he was made a sinner by our sins: so, though we be not
righteous in our own persons; yet having ^hrists righteousness imputed to us,
we are made righteous by his righteousness.

Again, the righteousness that must save us, must be the righteousness of
man and God: as in the aforenamed place, it is said, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in Christ. But no man's own righteousness can make him
the righteousness of God, nor can Gods righteousness be the righteousness of
man: therefore it remains, that only Christ, being both God and man, has in
him that righteousness, which may make a man the righteousness of God.

Thirdly, the Scripture says, Christ is the end of the Law to all that
believe, Romans 10.3. The end of the Law: that is, not the taker away, or
abrogater of the law, but the fulfiller of it: as the abrogater of the
Ceremonial, so the fulfiller of the Moral law. If he fulfilled the Law, for
whom was it? not for himself. For as the Messiah was not slain for himself,
Dan. 9.26. so he obayed not the Law for himself. For whom then? for all that
believe. Therefore Christ doing it for them, they fulfill the Law in Christ:
and so Christ by doing, and they by believing in him that does it, do fulfill
the Law. Now if it be not amiss to say, We do in Christ fulfill the law: No
more is it to say, We are made righteous by Christ's righteousness; though it
be his, and not ours, but only by faith.

Let us then see (in the second place) what the Church of Rome object against
it. They first object thus:

As a man cannot be wise by another man's wisdom, nor rich by another man's
riches, nor strong by another man's strength: So can he not be righteous by
another man's righteousness.

I answer: The comparison is not alike. For one man has no propriety in
another man's wisdom, strength, or riches: but we have a right and propriety
in Christ's righteousness. Again, the wisdom of one man, cannot be the
wisdom of another; because they are two persons, fully and equally distinct:
but it is not so betwixt Christ and a sinner: for, every believer is
spiritually, and yet truly and really conjoined to Christ, and they make one
mystical body; Christ being the head, and every true believer being a member
of that body: and therefore, that which is his righteousness, may be also
truly ours. His, because it is in him; and ours, because we are knit to him.
For, by reason of this mystical union betwixt him and us, all blessings of
salvation in him, as in the head, are diffused into us, as his members or
branches; and yet are as properly still in him, as is the brain in the head of
a man. And thus, though in sense and reason this cannot be, yet by faith and
Gods spirit, the righteousness of Christ is made ours.

Secondly they object. If this be so, then God justifies wicked men; but God
will not do so: it is against the nature of his holiness and Justice. And
again, he that justifies the wicked, is abominable to God, Prou. 17.15.
therefore God will not do so himself.

We answer: The ground is good, but the collection is untrue. God will not
justify a wicked man, that is true: but that therefore a man cannot be
justified by Christ's righteousness, is false. For, God does not justify him
that lies rotting in his former sins, and weltring in his old corruption;
but him that believes in Christ, and repents of his sins. And that man in
his faith is justified, and in his repentance sanctified, and so he is made a
new man: yea, as S. Paul says, He that is in Christ is a new creature: 2. Corinthians. 5.17. For, as it is in the first conversion, God turns nor saves no
man against his will; but first makes him willing by his own work alone, and
then conuerteth and saves him with his own free will, working together with
Gods grace. So is it in the work of Justification; God justifies no wicked
man: but makes him first just and righteous in and by Christ, and then accounts
him so. But then (will some say) the sinner has no righteousness, but that of
Christ's; and that is in Christ, and not in himself: therefore he has none in
his own person; how then can he be any thing, but a wicked man still? I
answer; that is not true that is first affirmed. The believing sinner has more
righteousness then that that is in Christ. That which justifies him, is in
Christ's person: But the sinner, when he is justified, is also sanctified, by
the mighty work of Gods grace; and so he is made a holy man, and does good and
holy works, because he is in Christ, though his sanctification be imperfect.
To this end, says S. Peter, Acts, 15.9. Faith purifieth a man's heart; for it
is impossible a man should believe, and so be justified, but he must also be
sanctified in his heart and life. Thus a sinner is justified by Christ's
righteousness, inherent in Christ himself; and sanctified by Christ's
righteousness, diffused from Christ into the sinner. And therefore his
Justification is perfect; because, that that justifies him, is still in
Christ: but his sanctification imperfect, because that that sanctifies us, is
in our selves; the one imputed to us, the other infused and inherent.

Again, I answer, that if we take it in the sense of Scripture, It is true,
that God justifies a wicked man. For S. Paul says, Romans 4. To him that
works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted to him for righteousness. See, God justifies the ungodly: but how?
even as we heard before; not him that is ungodly after, but before he be
justified: him that by nature, and in himself is ungodly, God justifies by
working in him faith and repentance; by which, of an ungodly man, he is made a
man justified and sanctified.

Their last objection is, If a sinner be righteous by Christ's righteousness,
then Christ is a sinner by his sins: for there is the same reason of both. But
Christ is no sinner, but the holy of holiest: and S. Paul says, He knew no
sin, 1. Cor. 5. and himself for himself chalengeth his enemies, Which of you
can reprove me of sin? If then our sins cannot make him a sinner, no more can
his righteousness make us righteous.

I answer: Here we grant all, if they speak the words of the Scripture, in
the sense of the Scripture; for Christ was a true and reputed sinner, in the
sight of Gods Justice: as he that becomes surety for another, is a debtor in
his room: or as he that undertakes for a man, body for body, must answer for
him, his own body for his: so in all reason and justice, Christ, though he
had no sins of his own, yet being our surety, and undertaking for us, and
standing in our stead, our sins are justly accounted his. And as for these
places, and many more like, they are all understood of personal sins; from all
which, and the least contagion thereof, he was perfectly free. And therefore
the same place that says, He knew no sin (that is, in and for his own person,
knew not what sin was) says also, that for us and in our stead, he was made
even sin it self, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Thus
Christ, in himself more righteous then all men and Angels, In our stead is a
reputed sinner: and by the same reason, we (most unrighteous in our selves) are
clothed with Christ's righteousness, and thereby are reputed righteous. And as
Christ (though no sinner in himself) by being a sinner in our stead, and
having our sins imputed unto him, became subject to the wrath of God, and
bare it, even to death it self: So we, though not righteous of our selves, yet
having Christ's righteousness imputed to us, are made thereby partakers of Gods
love; and for the worthiness of that righteousness of his, so made ours,
shall be glorified in heaven. And thus, now at last we have found that true,
and that only righteousness, which can make a man as it did Noah, righteous in
Gods sight. Now it remains to make use of it.

First, here we learn how foulely our nature is defiled with sin, and
stained with corruption: the stain whereof cannot be washed away with all the
water in the world; no, nor with the blood of all creatures: no, not covered
with the righteousness of all men and Angels, but only with the
righteousness of God. And that son of God also, if he will apply that
righteousness unto us, and make it effectual, must become man, and live, and
die, and rise again for us. A marvelous thing is it, and ^orthy of our often
consideration, that all the Angels and men in the world, cannot make one sinner
righteous; but that Gods son must needs do it: And that our sins are so
hideous, as nothing can hide the filthiness thereof, from the eyes of Gods
Justice, but only the glorious mercy seat of Christ's righteousness. This may
therefore teach us, how to esteem of our selves, and our own natures.

Furthermore: See here the great goodness of God to man. God put perfect
legal righteousness in Adams heart in his creation: he received it for
himself and us; and lost it for himself and us. God in mercy, purposing to
restore man, thus by himself lost and cast away, gives him another, and a
better righteousness then before. But because he saw man was so ill a keeper
of his own Jewels; he trusts not him with it, but sets that righteousness in
the person of Christ Jesus, and commits it to him to keep. Who, as he truly
knows the full value, and excellency thereof, and as he dearly loves us: So
he will most safely keep it for us, and clothe us with it in his Fathers
presence at the last day. A point of unspeakable comfort to Gods children, to
consider that their salvation is not in their own keeping, where it might
again be lost; but in a safe hand, where they shall be sure to find and have
it, when they have most need of it: and to remember that their righteousness
being in Christ, they cannot lose it. For, though they sin, and so lose often
the comfort of a good conscience for a time; yet they then lose not their
righteousness, which is then in Christ; and to consider, that, when in this
world they sustain losses or injuries, or lose all they have upon the earth:
that yet their righteousness (the riches of their souls) is then in heaven
full safe in Christ's keeping, and shall never be lost. This should make us
learn to know Christ more and more: and to give him the love and affections of
our very hearts, that so we may be able to say with blessed Paul, 2. Timoth.
1.12. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep
that which I have committed unto him against that day.

Lastly, if there be such a communion betwixt Christ and a believer, that our
sins were made his, and his righteousness made ours; This may teach us
patience, and minister us comfort in all outward afflictions, or inward
temptations; because it is certain all our sufferings are his, and he is
touched with all the wrongs done to us. When he was in heaven, he calls to
Saul, Acts 9.4 Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? and at the last day, Math.
25.45. Whatsoever either good or evil was done to any of his children, he
says, was done to himself: and accordingly it shall be rewarded as done to
him.

And thus we have taught that true righteousness, which iustifies a sinner,
and made Noah righteous; and we see the use of that worthy doctrine. And in
this first point we have the longer insisted, because it is one of the
fundamental points of Christian religion.

Hitherto of the first point; namely, what that righteousness is, which is
here spoken of.

The 2. point to be considered in these words, is, that this righteousness is
that righteousness, Which is by Faith.

It is so called, because faith is the proper instrument created in the soul
of man by the holy Ghost, to apprehend that righteousness, which is in the
person of Christ; nor can it be any ways else either apprehended or applied:
and therefore it is worthily called that righteousness, which is by faith;
that is, which by faith is made a man's own, or whereunto a man has title by
his faith. Here therefore two points offer themselves to our observation.

1. That true faith apprehends properly this true righteousness. 2. That only
faith can do it.
For the first, it is proved by apparent evidences of Scripure. S. Paul tells
the Galathians (3.14) They received the promise of the Spirit, by faith. And S.
John says, That as many as received Christ, to them he gave power to be
called the sons of God. And least any man should think that to receive
Christ, is not to believe in Christ; he adds, Even to as many as believe in
his name (John 1.12) And therefore faith is fitly compared to a hand that takes
hold on a garment, and applies it to the body, being naked: or to a beggars
hand that takes or receives a Kings alms: so faith in a man's soul takes hold
on Christ's righteousness (which is the merciful and liberal alms of the King
of heaven) and applies it to the poor and naked soul of the believer.

If any man ask, how can faith apply Christ to the believer? I answer: as a
man, being in his corrupt nature, has nothing to do with Christ: So
contrariwise, when the holy Ghost has wrought faith in his heart by a
supernatural operation; then we are to know, that as faith is the proper
instrument to apprehend Christ: So is Christ and his righteousness the proper
object for faith to work upon. For, though it apprehend and apply all other
promises which God makes to our souls or bodies: yet most properly and
principally, and in the first place, it apprehends the promise of salvation,
and the righteousness of Christ. Now for the particular manner, how faith does
thus; we are to know, that though it be spiritual and invisible, and so not
easily expressed to sense, yet is it done as properly by faith, as a garment is
by the hand taken and applied to the body, or a plaster to a sore.

If any ask further; But when may a man know, whether his faith have
apprehended and applied Christ's righteousness to his soul, or no?

I answer; when he believes particularly, that Christ's righteousness is
his righteousness, and has reconciled him to God, and shall justify him in
Gods presence, then does faith work his true and proper work: for this cannot
be done but by faith: and where faith is, this must needs be done.

The second point is, that faith alone, and no other virtue, nor spiritual
power in man's soul, is able to do this. And this may be proved by comparing
it with all the principal virtues of the soul: for, amongst all, there are
none that may come into comparison with faith, but hope and love: both which,
especially love, have their several and special excellencies: yet have neither
of them, nor both of them this virtue to apprehend and apply Christ's
righteousness. The property of love, is to extend it self, and with it self
to carry many passions or affections of the heart, and to place them upon the
thing that is loved: yet cannot love be said properly to apprehend Christ; for
he must needs be apprehended, before he can be loved. And the proper action of
Hope, is to wait, and expect for a blessing to come: so, hope waits for
salvation, but properly apprehends it not. For, salvation must first be
believed, and then hoped or expected: so says Jeremy, Lament. 3.26, It is
good both to trust and to wait for the salvation of the Lord: To trust, that
is, to believe assuredly it will come (there is the action of faith) and to
wait till it do come (that is the action of Hope). Thus we see the several
natures, and actions, of these two worthy virtues. But the proper action of
faith, is to apprehend and lay hold on Christ, and his righteousness, and to
apply them to a man's own soul: and that being done, then come Love and Hope,
and do their duties: And so, though love last longer then faith does, yet faith
is before love, and makes the way for it.

To conclude this second point; Faith is a hand to take hold on Christ and his
benefits. Love is a hand to give out tokens of faith both to God and man. For
(1. Cor. 13.5) Love seeks not her own, but others good: namely, the good of
them that are loved. Hope is an eye looking out, and waiting for the good
things promised. So, that as faith is the hand of the soul; so love is the
hand, and hope is the eye of faith: Love the hand whereby it works, and Hope
the eye whereby it waits and looks for the performance of such things, as
faith has apprehended and believed. If the Church of Rome think this any
wrong to this holy virtue of love to be the hand of faith: let them know it is
not ours, it is the doctrine of the Apostle, where he says, Faith works by
love. If faith work by it, then surely love is the hand of faith. Thus faith
works by love, waits by hope, but believes by it self.

And for this cause, the righteousness, that makes us righteous before God, is
rather called the righteousness of faith, then of any other Christian virtue,
or grace of the spirit. And for the same cause is it, that so often in S. Paul's
Epistles, it is called by the same name; as, Philipp. 3.9.

The third and last point concerning Noah's faith; is, that, Noah was made heir
of this righteousness.

A special commendation of his faith, It made him heir of true and saving
righteousness: that is, it gave him a true title unto it, and made him heir
apparent of that glory, which it assures every one that apprehends it by this
true faith: and so he was made as certainly, and as truly partaker of it, as
the young Prince is assured of his Crown and Kingdom at his time, or the heir
of his Fathers lands.

Here two most worthy doctrines do offer themselves to our view.

1. The excellency of faith. 2. The excellency of a Christian man's estate.
The excellency of faith appears thus: It makes a holy man assured and
certain of his salvation by Christ Jesus. The Church of Rome says, it is
presumption in any man to think so, unless he have an extraordinary
revelation: but we learn from the Scripture, that if a man have true faith;
that is able to assure him of salvation. For, faith makes him an heir of true
righteousness, and of salvation thereby. Now we know, the heir is most sure
and certain of his inheritance: what-euer he gets or loses, he is sure of
that. But this righteousness and salvation by it, is his inheritance;
therefore he may be, and is by faith assured of it. The Papists therefore do
wrong unto this doctrine, and deroga^e from the dignity of true faith: But
this is their custom, they will extol any thing, rather then that which the
holy Scripture so much extolleth; namely, true faith. For, if they knew what it
is truly to know Christ, and to believe in him by that faith, which works by
love, they would then know, that faith makes a man heir of happiness, and
therefore most assured of it.

Secondly, here we may see the excellency of a Christian man's estate: he is
not naked, nor destitute of comforts; but is heir of a glorious inheritance,
by means of his faith: and a Christian man's inheritance, is Christ's
righteousness. Out of which, we learn,

First, that no man by any good works done by or in himself, can merit true
and justifying righteousness: the Pharisaical Papists teach so; but their
conceit is here overthrown, by the doctrine of the holy Ghost. For, saving
righteousness is his inheritance: which, we know, is always gotten by the
Father, and descends from the Father to the Son, as a free token of his love.
And it were scornful and absurd, to see a Son offer to buy his inheritance
of his Father; it being against the nature of an inheritance, to come any other
ways, but by free gift from the Father to the Son: therefore our
righteousness that must save us, being as we see here our inheritance; let us
resolve of it, we cannot buie nor merit it.

Again, here is sure and solid comfort against all the grie^^s, and crosses,
and losses of this world: Gods children must needs have their portion of
afflictions in this life. But here is their comfort, they may lose their goods,
livings, possessions, their good names, their healths, their lives; but their
inheritance stands sure and firm, and cannot be lost. Let them therefore here
learn, not to grieve out of measure: for a holy man may say thus to himself,
and that most truly; My Father may frown on me for my faults, and chastise me
for my sins: but I am sure he will not disenherite me: for I am heir, by
faith, of Christ's righteousness; and I may lose many things, but I shall not
lose that.

Thirdly and lastly, here must Gods children learn their duties. They are
heirs to a godly and glorious inheritance: and Christ's righteousness is
their inheritance; therefore they must learn to set and settle all their
affections on this inheritance. For, there is nothing in the world more worthy
to be affected, then a fair inheritance.

We must therefore first labor above all worldly things for this inheritance;
namely, to be made partakers of this righteousness. This is that pearl, which
we having found, must sell all we have to buy it. And when we have gotten it,
we must care to keep it, and therefore must lay it up in our very hearts and
souls: and keeping it, we must rejoice and delight in it above the world, and
all the pleasures of it.

This is the glorious portion which our God and Father leaves us as his
children: what should all the care of our hearts be, but to preserve it? Naboth
had a little Vineyard, that came to him from his Father by inheritance: Ahab
the King, would give him money, or a better Vineyard for it. But Naboth would
not: Nay (says he) God forbid I should sell my Fathers inheritance, 1. Kings
21.3. etc. If he made such account of an earthly inheritance, what should we of
the heavenly? if he of a poor Vineyard, what should we of the glory of
heaven? If he denied the King, to sell it for a better, should not we deny
the devil, to leave our part in Christ and his righteousness, for the world,
or any thing that he can promise us? In all such temptations our answer
should be; God forbid I should sell away my inheritance, which my God and
Father gave me. Thus did blessed Paul, who esteemed the world, and all in it
doung and dross, that he might win Christ, and be made partaker of this
righteousness. So must we (if we will be worthy of this inheritance) prize
and value it above this world, and think basely of all the pomp and pleasures
of this world, in comparison of it: and rather be content to lose the world,
then to leave it.

And lastly, when we have it, and are thus careful to preserve it: where
should our content, joy, and delight be, but in this our inheritance? So does
the heir: nothing so rejoices him, as to think of his inheritance. Here
therefore the madness of carnal men is discovered, who rejoice exceedingly,
in the honors, profits, and pleasures of this li^ e (as Swine in their
bellies) and never go further: But alas, this is not their inheritance, if
they look to have their souls saved. Therefore herein they show themselves
void of grace, and of all hope of a better world. For, if they had, they would
rejoice in it, and not in the vain and transitory delights of this world,
which perish in the using, and are lost with more torment and vexa^^on, then
they were kept with delight. We must learn ^hen to use this world, as though
we used it not, 1. Cor. 7.3^* And ^f ^he Lord vouchsafe us any portion of
pleasures in this world, we must take it thankfully, as above our inheritance
(and must therefore use it lawfully and soberly); but have our hearts, and the
joy of them upon our inheritance, which is in heaven, whereof we are made
heirs by faith; and wherein we are fellow heirs with this blessed Noah, who
was made heir of that righteousness, which is of faith.

And thus have we heard the most glorious commendation of Noah's faith: and of
Noah by his faith, and of all the examples before the flood.

Now follow the second sort of Examples; namely, such as lived in the second
world, after the flood.

They are all of two sorts: either such as lived before the giving of the Law,
or after.


Before the giving of the Law, here are many: whereof, as of all the other kinds,
some are men, some women.


The first of those blessed men after the flood, whose faith is here renowned,
is Abraham that great Father: of whom, and whose faith, because he was a Father
of so many faithful, more is spoken then of any one.

Abraham's Faith.
VERSE 8. By faith, Abraham, when he was called, obayed God, to go out into a
place, which he should afterward receive for inheritance: and he went out, not
knowing whether he should go.


COncerning holy Abraham, here are more examples then one recorded, and his
faith is renowned many ways: more verses are spent of him, then of some five
others. And the reason is, because his faith was more excellent then any others
that followed him. In which regard, he is called the Father of the faithful,
oftentimes in the new Testament, especially in the Epistles to the Romans and
Galathians.

The first example of his faith (and the fourth in order of the whole) is of
his leaving his own native Country, and how at Gods commandment he went he
knew not whether; only he knew God called him, and therefore he would go:
wherein appeared a most worthy faith.

Now concerning this his faith and obedience, the Text lays down two points:
1. The cause or ground thereof; which was Gods calling: he was called of God.
2. The fruit or effect of his faith; he harkened and obayed. And this his
obedience is amplified by diverse particulars. 1. The matter of it, he went out
of his country. 2. The end, to take possession of a Country, which he should
not enjoy of a long time. 3. The manner, he went out, not knowing whither he
should go.



The first point, is the cause or ground of Abraham's faith in this action, and
is laid down in the first words.

By faith, Abraham when he was called,

This story is taken out of Genesis the 12. chap. The cause of Abraham's faith, is
Gods calling.

Gods calling is an action of God, whereby he appoints a man to some certain
condition, or state of life, in this world, or after this life. And in this
regard, God is compared to a General in the field, which assigns every
Soldier his standing and duty: so does God appoint every man his place and
duty in the Church.

Concerning these callings, let us see the means how he calls, and the
several states whereto he calls men.

For the means or manner; God calls men 2. ways: immediately, or by means.


Sometime immediately by himself and his own voice: as, the extraordinary
Prophets in the old Testament, and the Apostles in the new. So says S. Paul
of himself, he was called to be an Apostle, not of men, nor by men* but by
Jesus Christ, and God the Father, Galath. 1.1.

Sometime mediatly by men directed by himself, and furnished, or enabled for
that duty: and so were called the ordinary Prophets and Priests of the old;
and the Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors of the new Testament. The first was
extraordinary; this is ordinary: the first is for an unbelieving or a
misbeleeuing people; the second, is for an ordinary and established Church.
Now, of these 2. ways, God called Abraham immediately by himself from heaven.
Genesis 12.1.

Secondly, for ye estates of life whereunto God calls men, they are three:
General, Particular, Personal.


Gods General calling, is, whereby he calls all men to repentance by the
Gospel, and so to life eternal. Of this, speaks the Apostle, Romans 8.30. Whom
God predestined, them also he called: and Rom 11.29. The calling of God, is
without repentance. Hereby he calls men in this life to the state of grace,
and to the state of glory in heaven; and this is to all.

His Particular calling is, when he calls and assigns men to some
particular estate and duty, in Family, Church, or Commonwealth: as, when a man
is called to be a Magistrate, Minister, Master of a family, Lawyer, Physician,
etc.

Thirdly, God calls some men to some private Personal duty, which he
designeth not to others, but to be done by them alone. Such a calling had he
assigned him (Matthew 19.21) that would needs be perfect; Go sell all that
thou have, etc.

Now the calling of Abraham in this place, is to be referred to this third
kind. For, it was a private and personal calling, to leave his Country, his
kindred, his lands, his possessions, and to go seek another: and to be the
Father of the faithful, and to receive the covenant: and this duty belongs to
none, but who shall personally, and by name, be called unto it.

Yet all these three callings may concu^re in one, as here in him. For, he was
called to be a Christian (for the general) and a governor of a great family
(for the particular calling): but that, that is in this place understood, is
this extraordinary and personal calling to leave his Country. And in it we
are to consider three circumstances: 1. Who was called, 2. When, 3. How he was
called.


For the first: Abraham was called, the son of Terah: but neither his father
Terah, nor his brother Nahor were called, but Abraham alone.

But it may worthily be demanded, why God should not call his Father and his
kindred: there can be no answer but this, that the Apostle gives, Romans 9.18.
God has mercy on whom he will, and withholdeth it from whom he will. He
calls Isaak, and refuses Ismael: loves Jacob, and hates Esau: takes
Abell, and leaves Cain: even because he will, and for no cause that we know.
But why then calls he Abraham, and not his kindred? Is not that partiality? I
answer, he is tied to none, he might refuse all: therefore the marvel is,
that he calls any. But why some and not other, why Abraham and not his kindred,
no reason can be given: for Gods Judgments are wonderful. But as that that is
impossible with man, is possible with God: Math. 19.26: So that that is
injustice or partiality with man, is justice with God. And it is extreme folly,
and intolerable presumption for us to weigh Gods actions in the balance of our
shallow reason.

For the second: But when was Abraham called? for the time, there are two
circumstances worth the observation:

First, Abraham was called to this dignity, when he lived in Idolatry with his
Fathers. So says Joshua, 24.2. Thus says the Lord: Your Fathers dwelt beyond
the flood in old time, even Terah the father of Abraham, and served other Gods.
If Abraham was called by God, when he was an Idolater, then it is apparent he
had not purchased Gods favor by his works. Where we learn, that the whole
work of a man's salvation, is to be ascribed to Gods mere mercy: who (as the
Prophet says) was found of them that sought him not, Esaias, 65.1. Abraham never
dreamed of the true God, nor of any new covenant of grace and salvation, when
God called him. And so, when Paul was going armed with bloody fury, and his
fury armed with commissions and authority against the Saints, then God from
heaven called him; and of a persecuter, made him the principal instrument of
his glory, Acts 9.2. etc. Therefore (to apply this to our selves) If God have
vouchsafed us the same grace, and taken us to be his people, and made a
covenant of salvation with us, which in former times have been sinners of the
Gentiles; we must learn here to see whence this favor is, and therefore to
ascribe nothing to our selves, but give all the glory unto God.

And particularly, for every one of us: If God have been so merciful to any of
us, as when we were Popish or superstitious with our Parents, or kindred, to
open our eyes, and bring us home to his holy truth: or, when we weltred in
wickedness and sensuality with the profane world, to touch our hearts, and to
call us to grace and sanctification; let us often remember, and freely
acknowledge this his undeserved mercy, and say with the holy Prophet: Unto
th^e belongs mercy, but unto us open shame.

Secondly, for the time when Abraham was called: It was when he was 75. years
of age, or there-abouts: as is manifest in the Story, Genesis 12.4: therefore
we see that God for a long time let him lie in his blindness, and idolatry
ere he called him. It is more then likely, that Abraham in that mean time
lived ciuilly, and followed learning and other civil courses: and in that
time, it is likely he attained to that measure of knowledge in Astronomy, and
other learning, for which, he is renowned in old Writers: But this was the
first time that he was called to know and serve the true God in his true
service.

Here we learn, that though a man persevere in his sins, for a long time,
and pass his best years in vanity without repentance, and thereby be in a
grievous and fearful estate: yet true believers, and men penitent, must not
therefore judge them cast-awayes. For, Gods mercy calls a man in his old age,
and touches the heart when it pleases him. Christ in the Parable calls some
at the 11. hour, Mat. 20.6: and so God calls men to grace in their old age.
We must therefore spare these sharp and unsavory censures, which some
unadvisedly cast upon such men; for charity thinks not evil, 1. Corinthians. 13,
where it may think or suppose any possibibility of good: But contrariwise,
pray for them, and hope of their conuersions, because we know, that at what
time soever a sinner repents of his sin, God will forgive him, Ezekiel. 18.27.28.

And yet for all this, men must not presume to live carelessly in their sins,
for that is desperately to tempt God: but must follow the holy Counsel of
Solomon, Eccles. 12.1, To remember their Creator in the days of their youth:
and to turn unto God, when they have means, least God take away the means,
and with the means, his favor from them. Abraham was not called, till he was
old; but when he was called, he harkened and obayed: So must thou, when God
calls thee by afflictions, or by his word, then answer and obey as Abraham
did; or else Abraham's calling in his old age, will be little comfort to thee.

Thus much for the time.

Thirdly, for the manner of his calling, it is laid down in the Story of
Genesis, to be in an earnest kind of Counsel, Go out, says God, from thy
kindred, and from thy Fathers house, unto the land that I will show thee: Where
it is to be observed, he says not barely Go, or come forth; but he
amplifieth, and urges it with many words and circumstances.

If any ask why God did so, when he might have given the commandment in one
word? I answer; the reason is, that Abraham might have cause more seriously to
consider of Gods calling, and to imprint it more deeply in his heart; least at
the first brunt he should have obayed, and afterward have shrunk back. For, it
is doubtless, that this calling was harsh to reason, and that Abraham found
many hindrances, and therefore it were dangerous he would have started back
after some trial of these difficulties he must pass through, if he had had but a
bare call, and commandment to go. But when God says to him, Go out of thy
native Country, let it not stay thee, that thou wast borne there; nor hinder
thee, that thy kindred dwells there: but leave all, and come with me: forsake all
and trust me, follow me into the land that I will show thee: I take thee from
one, but I will give thee another: When God, I say, uses all these, and it may
be, many more like words to Abraham, its apparent he would have him furnished
with strength and resolution, to go through with his calling after he had once
made entrance into it.

Out of which practice of God, we learn this Instruction; that God would have
no man enter upon any calling or duty, with a fearful and faint heart, nor
with a doubtful mind; but with a strong and settled resolution to go through
stitch with it, and not to relent and repent in the midst. And for this end,
God would have all men before they enter, seriously to consider the place or
duty they are to undertake: for the Lord had rather a man should refuse at
first; then having entered, to look back again: and it is great folly for
men, hastily and suddenly, or humorously to cast themselves upon any calling,
and then upon trial and experience of the dangers and difficulties thereof, to
be weary, and wish they had never done it. Men in this world are generally
wiser in matters of the world; If a man be to build a house, he will not
forthwith set upon building such a house as his humor desires, but will first
of all sit down and count the cost, and then his own ability, to see if the
one will counteruaile the other, else he never begins it. So says Christ (the
wisdom of God) of the wisdom of this world: and the like also he says for
war, that no Prince will fight with his enemy on unequal terms, but will
know himself able to sustain the encounter. Luke 14.28.31.

So the calling of a Christian, is to profess the Gospel of Christ. As the
Magistrates is to defend it, the Ministers to teach it, so all men's to profess
it: now it is as impossible to build without cost, or to fight without power of
men, as to profess? Christ in any calling, either general or particular,
without crosses. We must therefore consider first what our calling and
profession will cost us: it is sure to cost us a dangering of our credites and
estimation in the world; it may be our goods, our liberties, it may be our
lives themselves. Again, what enemies we have to encounter in this spiritual
warfare, the devil, death, hell, sin, corruption, and the crafty malice of
wicked men: all these we are sure to meet withal. Were it not then folly for
a man to undertake this profession, and not to consider thus much aforehand?
The want of this is cause, why some put their hands to the plough, and after
shrink away, and make themselves ridiculous to their enemies corporal and
spiritual.

And for particular callings, the case even stands so also. Some men think
the calling of a Magistrate, a place of honor: and therefore ambitiously plot
and desire to raise themselves into authority; never remembering the burden, and
trouble they are sure to find. Which when they feel to be too heavy for
their lazy shoulders to bear with ease, they foully fall to plain
carelessness, and neglect all doing good in their places, and wish they had
never bought honor so dear.

So others think the Ministry nothing, but a place of ease, exemption, and
preferment. And in these conceits rush presumptuously and rashly into that
holy State, never thinking aforehand of that great charge of souls they are to
take, nor of that heavy account they are to make for them; nor of the hatred,
and contempt, and extreme disgraces they are sure to find, if they do their
duties with conscience. And therefore (when upon experience they find it so to
be) they either fall to carnal courses with the world, and neglect their
duties (that by these two means they may please the world) or else they
continue in their duties, with much grief and vexation, wishing they had
chosen rather any calling, then the Ministry: and by either of both, do
expose themselves to shame and much rebuke. Whereas contrariwise, he that
aforehand casts his account what it will cost him to be a Minister, what he
must undertake, what he must lose, what he is sure to find, is so settled and
resolved aforehand, as he goes through all dangers and contempts, with
comfort, courage, and contentment. Let us therefore all learn by this practice
of God, when we think to enter upon any such duty, to reason with our selves,
as God did with Abraham, what we are to forsake, and what we are to meet
withal. So shall we not afterward repent us, but go on with much assurance,
as Abraham did.

This point I have the more enlarged, because it is of special use in
Christian life.

Thus much of the Cause of Abraham's faith, Gods calling, and all the
circumstances therein.

The second point, is the excellency and commendation thereof, commended by
the fruit and effect: It made him yield to this calling of God. And this
obedience of his faith, is spoken of two ways: 1. It is laid down generally;
He obayed God. 2. It is further commended by diverse particulars, which we
shall see in their places.


Obayed God. Here is the obedience of Abraham's faith, laid down in one
general word: He obayed; that is, when God called him to leave his Country,
kindred, and friends, he yielded against reason, because God bade him. When
God told him he would carry him into another land, he believed it, and lest a
certain for an uncertain, a possession for an expectation: here was the
power and excellency of his faith appearing in this obedience. From hence we
learn two instructions:

First, seeing Abraham is the Father of the faithful, Romans 4.11: and our glory
is to be children of faithful Abraham;

Therefore we must all learn, as good children to follow our Father, in
framing our lives according to Gods calling: when GOD calls us to any state
of life, then to obey; and when not God, but the world or ou^ own corrupt him
ours call us, then not to obey. For, to obey the first* is the obedience of
faith: but to obey the second, is the obedience of corruption. Therefore
against this practice of holy Abraham, two sorts of men do offend, and thereby
show themselves children unlike their Father Abraham.

First, such men as being called by God to some functions or duties, will not
obey: for examples, we have too many. To some, God says, Leave thy private
care, which is, for none but thy self; be a Magistrate, and undertake the
public care of the commonwealth: but they, as though they were born for
themselves, will not employ themselves in public service.

To some, God says, Leave thy ease, and thy care of worldly credit, and
undertake the teaching of my people, and care not for the contempt of that
calling, so thou may save souls: but their carnal carnal credit and ease,
is more dear unto them, then Abraham's kindred is to him; they will not forsake
them.

These, and all that do so, may make what show they will: but they are not
children of Abraham, seeing they want his faith; and they want in his faith,
because they fail in his obedience: they must therefore learn to yield when
God calls, and not to stand upon such base allegations of wordly matters;
when Abraham left Country and kindred to obey God.

Secondly, such men as respect not Gods calling, but look what the swinge of
their natures, or the course of the wicked world carry them unto, they
presently yield and obey, not regarding whether it be Gods calling or no. Three
sorts of men are most faulty in this kind.

First, such as are content to grow in wealth either by oppression, as usury
or extortion; or by craft and dissembling, or by any other such indirect
course, whereby their brother is hurt, looking only at gain, but not
regarding whence it comes.

Secondly, such as live by dicing, carding, or by plays and Enterludes,
thinking any trade lawful that brings in wealth, or that gets money; never
caring whether God allow the calling or no.

Thirdly, such as live in no calling, but spend their time in eating, drinking,
sleeping, and sporting, because they have livings of their own, and lands left
by their parents.

All these, and all such like, do obey indeed: but whereunto? not unto Gods
calling: for alas, he never called them to these courses, but has often
recalled them from it; therefore this is the obedience not of faith, but of
corruption, and of the world, which is a plain disobedience unto God. For, as
the wisdom of the flesh or the world is foolishness with God, Romans 8: so
obedience to the flesh or the world, is disobedience, and rebellion against God.

All such men, must know that they are not the children of Abraham, because
they are not children of his faith. Nor can they be heirs of his faith,
because they practice not his obedience: for, Gods calling and no other rule
for our lives must Christian men admit. When he calls, they must obey: and
when he calls not, or allows not a course of gayning, or a trade of life
(though all the world allowed it) we must not follow it: this will honor them,
and their profession, before God. Abraham's faith justified him before God, but
his obedience justified his faith: obedience, says Samuel, 1. Sam. 25.22.23.
is better then sacrifice: but disobedience is as the sin of witchcraft.
Therefore let all Christians approve their faith by their obedience, hanging on
Gods mouth, and attending on Gods calling, for directions of their whole life:
and resolve with David, Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and
a light to my paths. When Kings may not live, but by this light of Gods
calling and Gods word; it is shameful presumption, for ordinary men to frame
their lives by lights of their own making.

In the second place out of Ahrahams obedience, let us mark, By what means
obayed he? by faith. Learn here the true nature of true faith: it brings forth
true obedience where ever it is: and therefore Christian obedience is called
the obedience of faith, Romans 1.5. And these two cannot be separated, no more
then light from the sun, or heat from fire. For as the sun naturally, and
necessarily gives light, and the fire heat; no less does true faith yield
true obedience to Gods commandments. Which being so, it teaches us, for the
use,

First, how our Church and doctrine are slaundered by the Papists, who please
themselves in saying, We look to be saved by sole faith, and without works.
For, we teach, that though a man be justified without respect to his works,
yet no man was ever justified, whose faith did not bring forth good and holy
works: and we teach, that none is heir of Abraham's faith, which is not also
of his obedience. Therefore God will reward their lying tongue.

Secondly, this teaches us, that Abraham's faith is rare in these days. Many
make profession of Abraham's religion, but it seems they are as far deceived
as the Jews were, John 8.39. The Jews would be Abraham's children, because
they were of his flesh: and men now will be so, because they are of his
profession; but both are far wide, for we must be children of faithful
Abraham. But if we will be like him in faith, we must be like him in obedience
also: when God calls us to any duty, we must forsake our own natures, and
deny our own affections, and cross our own corruptions, to follow Gods
calling, and to do our duties. So shall we be true children of Abraham, when
we are like our Father in his best virtues. Thus we see his obedience laid
down generally.

Particularly, In his Obedience there are laid down three points: 1. The
matter of his obedience: all which are laid down directly in the Text. 2. The
end of his obedience: all which are laid down directly in the Text. 3. The
manner of his obedience: all which are laid down directly in the Text.


For the matter of his obedience, it follows in these words: To go out into
a place, etc.

The particular matter wherein Abraham's obedience co^sisted, was this; At Gods
commandment he went out of his own Country into another: for one which he
should inherit, he left that which he did inherit.

Here many points of good instruction may be learned.

First, see here the power and strength of true faith; It was a wonderful hard
thing for Abraham to do thus.

For, first, he was well stricken in years, 75. years old. Young men delight
to be stirring; but men grown into years, do love to settle themselves as
birds in their nests: and it is grievous unto them to think of removing, or
taking long iournies.

Secondly, he must leave his own Country, where he was bred, borne, and
brought up; which all men generally do love by nature.

Thirdly, he must leave his goods, and lands, and livings, which no doubt were
great: for, having lived so long in his native Country, and being born as he
was, his estate doubtless was very great.

Fourthly, he must leave his acquaintance, with which he had lived all his
life; yea, his own kindred, and must go live amongst strangers. These four
considerations were so many hindrances to his obedience; and strong
temptations, to make him have looked backward: but such is the power of his
faith, he is commanded of God, therefore he obayeth and goes out.

The use is, to teach us what a faith we have. For, if we measure all Gods
commandments by our natural affections; our faith is but a shadow, and
hypocrisy: But if we consult not with flesh and blood, but rest, and rely on
Gods word, and give absolute obedience to his commandments, then our faith is
such as Abraham's was.

In the next place; Some may marvel, why the Lord should command him so hard
a matter, and lay so stra^te a commandment upon him, as to leave his Country
and living, which seemed unreasonable; and his kindred, which was unnatural.

I answer; the reason is: not that God delights in unreasonable or unnatural
courses, or in laying heavy burdens upon his children. But he did it for good
and holy ends: as,

First, to prove Abraham, and to see what was in him. As a friend is no^ tried
in ordinary, but in great matters: so it is known, who is Gods friend in
matters of difficulty. Hereby, therefore God made the faith and obedience of
his servant, to shine more gloriously.

Again, to break the corruption of his heart: for, our wicked natures love
peace, and ease, and welfare, and hearts desire: but God will cross those
courses, and send us troubles many ways, that so he may pull down the height
of our corruptions, and humble us to his own hand.

The use, is to teach us to make true use of our afflictions, and of those many
hard crosses that must fall upon us in our course of serving God; namely, to
know that they are sent from God, not as a hard-hearted, or cruel Judge; but
as a wise and merciful Father, who wishes our good, and who will so bles^e
unto us the hardest and heauiest crosses, that befall us in our lives (if we
receive them in patience and faith) that we shall say with David, Psalm.
119.72. It is good for us that we have been in trouble, for thereby we have
learned to know God, and our selves better.

Thirdly, whereas Abraham at Gods commandment goes out of his Country into
another; we learn that it is not unlawful for a Christian man, to go out of
his own Country, and travail into another, and there to abide for some, or
for a long time: Provided, his causes be good and just, as namely, these which
follow;

First, if he have a particular commandment of God, as here Abraham had.

Secondly, if he have a lawful calling of the Church or State, whereof he is
a member: as if he be sent to a general Council: or, be sent as Ambassador,
either to stay for a time, or to stay there as Lieger.

Thirdly, if it be for the safety of his life in a good cause. So Moses, Exodus
2.14.15, fled into the land of Midian, and there stayed, when Pharaoh sought
his life: And Christ himself fled with his Father and Mother into Egypt, from
the fury of Herod, Math. 1. The like may be said for them, that to preserve
their liberty, fly from the cruelty of their Creditors, who will not take
honest and reasonable satisfaction, of a surety for another man, or of a child
for the Fathers debts: But in no case for them, who travail in purpose to
defeat their Creditors, or thereby to deliver themselves from payment of their
due debts, being able to pay. Of both these, we have example in David, and his
followers. David himself was feign to fly for his life from Saul^ unjust
cruelty, and therefore went and dwelt amongst the Philistims, 1. Sam. 27.1.2.
And, 1. Sam. 22.2. there came to David such as were in trouble, and in debt, and
these were with him in all his travail, and persecutions. Now doubtless had
they been ungodly men (who had not cared how they came into debt, no^ how they
paid it) David would never have been their Prince; as that Text says he was.

Fourthly, if it be for the maintenance of pure religion, and keeping a good
conscience. This has Christ's warranty, Mat. 10.23. When they persecute you in
one City, fly unto another. For this cause many of our forefathers in the
former age, were feign to fly into Germany, Swwitzerland, and to Geneua. And
for these causes, diverse of other Nations do repair to this Nation, and are
here entertained.

Fifthly, if it be for the getting, or increasing of any good learning, and
lawful knowledge, especially divine knowledge for matter of religion. Thus the
Queen of Saba went ou^ of the inmost parts of Africa, to Jerusalem in Asia, to
see and hear Solomon: 2. Kings 10. and for that cause, she is highly
commended by Christ himself, Math. 12.42. Thus may young men travel for
learning or the tongues, especially such as intend thereby to fit themselves
for public service, so it be with safety of religion, and security of
conscience.

Sixthly, if it be for the practice of a man's lawful calling, as for traffic:
and thus Merchants may, and do lawfully travail into all Nations, and have
their Factors there resident: provided they lose not their souls to gain for
their bodies: their travailing is allowed by Christ in the Parable, where he
says, The Kingdom of heaven is like a Merchant man that seeks good pearls,
Math. 13.45.

Seauenthly, if it be to receive and take possession of any goods or lands,
lawfully descended or fallen unto a man, in another Nation, as sometime it
does; This seems to be allowed by Christ in the Parable, where he says, A
certain noble man went into a far Country, to receive for himself a kingdom,
and so to come again, Luke 19.12.

In a word; if it be upon any good and sufficient cause, allowable in good
reason, and not contrary any part of Gods word. But as for such as leave their
Countries, and travel into other;

Either, upon leuitie, to see strange sights and fashions:

Or, being malefactors, fly from their due punishment:

Or, being in debt, go away to deceive their Creditors:

Or, being vainglorious* to make themselves known:

Or, being at enmity, to fight combats, or to kill their enemy;

All these, and all such like, can have no comfort in their travails: for they
send themselves, God sent them not: they are out of Gods protection, because
they go without his warrant. And as many of them as go away to escape the
hand of the Magistrate; let them be assured they shall not escape the hand of
God.

In the fourth place, here is a comfort for all such as are banished from their
own native Countries, for God and his Gospels sake. For, here Abraham the
Prince of Patriarchs, was a banished man, and lived in a strange Country, the
greater part of all his life. Let such men therefore take patiently what God
lays upon them: for it is not their misery or mishap alone, but has been
common to Gods children in all ages. Again, Christ himself pronounces them
blessed, who suffer persecution for righteousness sake; for, though they be
exiles from their own kingdom, or tossed up and down the kingdoms of the
earth, yet theirs is the kingdom of heaven, Math. 5.10.

Lastly, though this commandment was personally directed to Abraham, and
concerns not us as it did him; yet it has his force and use even to us. For,
though we are not to go out of our Country, and leave our livings and
habitations: yet we must do that that is proportionable hereunto. That which
is commanded to Salomons wife, is to all Christians; Harken O daughter, and
consider, incline thine ear, forget thy own kindred, and thy Fathers house:
so shall the King take pleasure in thy beauty. Psalm. 45.10.11. This wife of
Solomon, is the soul of every Christian, the spouse of Christ the true
Solomon, who by nature is daughter to heathen Pharaoh; that is, to sin,
corruption, and wrath: but, being married to Christ, must forget her own
kindred, and Fathers house; that is, their own nature and natural affections,
and carnal desires: and then shall Christ our King, and spiritual husband,
take pleasure in us, and rejoice to do us good. And this is the chief
travailing of all, and most acceptable to God, when a man goes out of
himself, and denies his own desires, to obey God, and to serve Christ Jesus.

Thus we see the matter of his obedience. Now follows the end: Which he
should after receive for inheritance.

The second particular in his obedience, is the End, why he went out of his
own Country; namely, to inherit another, that is, the land of Canaan, called
elsewhere the land of Promise, because God promised it unto him, and to his
^eed. Now Abraham, at Gods commandment, went out of his own Country into
this place, to inherit it, and to take possession of it.

But it may be objected, He inherited it not; yea furthermore, Stephen says,
Act. 7.4. God brought him in, but gave him no inheritance in it, no, not the
breadth of a foot.

I answer, though Abraham did not inherit it personally himself, yet he may
be said to inherit it two ways: 1. Sacramentally, or Mystically: 2. In his
posterity.


First, Sacramentally thus; The land of Canaan, is to be understood, not only
as a Country of Asia, fruitful and fertile, and plentiful of all good things,
wherein the only visible Church was confirmed till Christ's coming: But
further, as a Type of the heavenly Canaan, where the triumphant Church reigns
in glory with God. And thus Abraham did in his own person inherit it: for he
was translated from this world, after his death, into the glory of heaven. And
in that respect, the glory of heaven is rather called the bosom of Abraham,
Luke 16, then of any other the Patriarchs, both for the excellency of his
faith, as also for that the promise of inheriting the land of Canaan, was first
of all (personally) made to him; which because he enjoyed not, he was
recompensed with the fruition of the true Cannaan.

From hence, we learn a notable doctrine: That God in performing of his
promises, gives not oftentimes the very particular thing promised, but
something equivalent, or proportionable to it, or else better. Thus in the fifth
commandment, obedient children are promised by God long life, as a reward for
honoring their Parents. Now when he takes them away in their best age, as he
did Josias, 2. Kings 22.10. he gives them eternal life, which is not only
proportionable, but far exceeding the thing promised: So here, he promises
Abraham the land of Canaan; but when it comes to the performance, he gives him
a better, even the true Canaan, the kingdom of heaven.

The use hereof, is to teach us wisdom for the true discerning of Gods
merciful performance of his promises: for he performs them not always one
way unto his children: sometime he gives the very particular thing promised,
as unto the children of Israel, their deliverance out of Egypt: unto Hezekiah,
the restoring of his health, and such like. Sometime he gives not it, but
something which shall be as good or better unto his children: as, when they are
in some great danger, and crave deliverance, or in some necessity, and have
promise of supply; God oftentimes delivers them not, but gives them
patience, and feeling of his favor in such sort, as is many degrees more
comfortable unto them. And herein God hears their prayers, and performs his
promise to them, to their full contentation.

Secondly, Abraham inherited Canaan in his posterity. For though God promised
it to himself, when he was 75. years old, Genesis 12.4. and to him and to his
seed, Genesis 15.7: Yet neither he nor his immediate seed enjoyed it, but his
posterity the Israelites, 430. years after the promise, as S. Paul proves,
Galath. 3.17. And so Abraham inherited it in his posterity, which is a part of
him; and they inherited it many hundredth years, even until the coming of
Christ.

As before we learned, that God in the performance of his promises, gives not
always the thing promised: so here let us learn that he does not always
perform them to the same parties, and yet most truly performs them. If
therefore God does not to our selves, nor in our times accomplish his promises,
or prophecies, we must not be impatient, but wait in patience. For, as the
holy Prophet says, The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the last it
shall speak and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it; it shall surely come,
and shall not stay, Habba. 2.3. To this end David also most divinely says,
Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in
heart. See, light and joy belongs unto them: but how? It is sown; that is, it
is in hope and expectation, and not always in fruition. Therefore as the
Husbandman casts his seed into the earth, and is content to stay almost a full
year without it, or any profit of it, and yet is patient all that while,
because he is sure it will come* and bring increase with it. So must we wait
patiently on the Lord, and know that whatsoever he has promised, we or ours
after us, shall be sure to enjoy it. And though we do not, what great matter
is it, if our children do? For, we know, that oftentimes the Father sows,
and dies ere the harvest, and so the son reapeth. So for Gods great and
gracious promises, which are sown unto the Fathers; if themselves do not,
their children are sure to reap the comfortable harvest of performance. And
thus we see how Abraham inherited the land of Canaan; which is called the land
of Promise, because it was so long, and so often promised to so many great
Patriarchs.

In the second place, it is to be observed, when God promised this unto
Abraham; even then when the land of Canaan was possessed by many mighty Kings:
So that it may be here further doubted, how Abraham could take any comfort in
this promise, seeing it was at that day held by almost 40. Kings greater and
less* as we may see in Joshua, Chap. 10.11.12. and further, The people were
many, and strong: the Cities were strong walled, and full of huge Giants, Numb.
13.28.29. Yet for all this, he not only believes and obayeth; but as God
promised, so he went to it, and took possession, and died in this faith, that
God would perform his promise, and that his posterity should inherit it all,
as afterward indeed they did, even from Moses to Christ. If it be asked how
this could be: the answer is, that Abraham knew that God was King of Kings,
and had the world, and Kingdoms of the world in his hand and disposition: and
therefore assured himself, that he could bring to pass what he had promised,
and make good his word, notwithstanding all such impediments to the contrary.
And as he believed, it came to pass; his posterity came to it, entered as
conquerers, upon this gift of God: and, by the power of God, so amazed all
these Kings and their people, as some submitted, as the Gibeonits; and they
that did not, were all slain, and their Countries conquered, as we may read
at large in the book of Joshua: all the Stories whereof are briefly
comprehended by David in few words, where he says, We have heard with our
ears* our Fathers have told us, how thou O Lord drove out the heathen with
thy hand, and planted them in: how thou destroyed the people, and made them
grow, Psalm. 44.1.2.

Out of which, we learn two instructions:

First, that the change of States, and alteration of Kingdoms or
commonwealths, are in Gods hand: and that he can turn them one way or other,
as it pleases him. To this purpose, says David, in the forenamed Psalm,
verse the fourth, They inherited not the land by their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them: but thy right hand and thy arm, and the light of
thy countenance, because thou did favor them.

This must teach us to pray earnestly, in our daily prayers, for the good
estate of this Kingdom, wherein we live; and of that worthy Prince and Queen,
under whose government, we have been so long, and so liberally blessed. For,
the welfare and prosperity, the certainty and security of it and her, is not in
our policy, might, munition, ships* not in the strength of our navy, nor in
the power of our armor, nor in the chivalry of our people, nor in the
wisdom of our Council (though for all these we are a people honored of our
friends, and feared of our enemies): But in the mighty hand of our God, who (as
Daniel says) bears rule over the Kingdoms of the earth, and gives them to
whomsoever he will, Dan. 4.22.

Seeing therefore the King of heaven in the giver and establisher, the remouer
and changer of Kingdoms of the earth; let us assure our selves, that the
prayers of Elisha, are the Horses and Chariots of Israel: 2. Kings, 13.14.

And surely, if Elisha for his prayer was acknowledged by the King himself, to
be his Father; then doubtless, the godly Ministers and such other in our
Church, as pray daily for the peace of our Jerusalem, are worthy to be
accounted good children of our Church, and worthy members of our State.

Secondly, here we learn what is the ruin of Kingdoms, and overthrow of
estates: namely, sin and ungodliness. This is most apparent in the present
example. For, why did God take this land from the Cananites, and give it to
Abraham and his seed? the Stories of the old Testament answer, nothing but
sin. In Deuteronomie, Moses charge the Israelites, that they do not after
the abominations of the heathen Cananites: For, says he, because of their
abominable sins God did cast them out before you, Deuteronomy. 18.9.12. And why did
not God instantly give it to Abraham (to inherit) after the promise? even
because the wickedness of these Amorites was not then full, Genesis 15.16. that
is, their sins were not then ripe. For, we must know, that though God be the
absolute and sovereign Lord of all Kingdoms, and may dispose them as he
will: yet he rather exercises his Justice then his power; and never
ouerturneth any State, but upon cause of their apparent sinfulness. Nor can
the Amorites or Cananites plead herein any hard measure. For, the same God,
dealt afterward in the same Justice with his own people, giving the Kingdom
of Judah to the Chaldeans, and Israel to the Assyrians: and the cause is laid
down most memorably in the Story; When the Israelites sinned against the Lord
their God, and walked after the fashions of the heathen, whom the Lord had cast
out before them, and did secretly things that were wicked, and made Images, and
served Idols: and though God warned them by his Prophets, yet would they not
obey, but hardened their necks, and so finally, left all the commandments of
God; then the Lord was exceeding wroth with Israel, and cast them also out of
his sight, 2. Kings, 17. from the seventh verse to the 19. Thus sin is able
to ouerturne Kingdoms, be they Cananites, Israelites, or whosoever.

Let this teach us all to look to our lives, and make conscience of all sin;
especially great and capital, and crying sins: for the sins of a people are
worms and Cankers, eating out the life and strength of a commonwealth. And
let our State and government learn here to look to the reformation of our
people, especially for great sins. For, open profaneness, or uncleanness,
or oppressions, or injustice, or extortions, or cruelties* and exactions; all
these, or any of these sins, reigning in a State, are able to ouerturne the
best established Kingdom on the earth, and will at last (do power and policy
what they can) make the land spewe out her inhabitants: and in the mean time
(let the wily wits of men, judge as they list) it will prove true, that the
sinful and profane man is the worst, and the godly and conscionable man, the
best friend to a State, and best subject in a Kingdom.

Thus much for the second point in Abraham's obedience; namely, the end of it.

The third and last point, is the manner of his obedience* which follows in
these words: And he went out, not knowing whither he went.

The manner of this his leaving his Country, in man's reason would seem
strange; nay, the world will condemn it for plain foolishness, for a man to
leave a certainty, for an uncertainty. But it may here be doubted, how the
Apostle can here say, that he knew not whither he went* seeing these words are
not in the Story of the old Testament: does not that practice allow
traditions beside Scripture?

I answer first; We refuse no traditions, which are agreeable to the Scripture,
and analogy of faith: but such as are agreeable to one of these, we receive
them, though not as Scripture.

Secondly, if the Apostles in the new Testament do add any thing in any
Story, which is not in the old (as S. Paul does the manner of the Sorcerers of
Egypt, Iannes and Iam^res, 2. Timoth. 3.8) that circumstance by them so added,
is to be holden as Scripture and no tradition; because they (having the same
spirit of God, which the Writers of the old Testament had) have inserted it
into the body of Scripture: even as the three sentences of the heathen Poets,
alleged by Saint Paul (Acts 17.28. 1. Corinthians, 15.33. Titus, 1.12.) have
now a divine truth in them, which they had not before.

But yet will some say, the Apostles had these things from the old Testament
by tradition; seeing they were not written.

I answer: We may safely grant it, and yet our cause loses nothing, though it
may be they had them by inspiration, and not by tradition; that being as
likely, or much more then the other.

Thirdly: but for this particular, I answer, that the Apostle had the words,
or at least the matter out of the Story in Genesis. For thus go the words:
G^d said to Abraham, Go out of thy Country, etc. into the land that I will
show thee: He named none to him, but told him he would show him one. So then
Abraham went out at Gods appointment; and God knew, but he knew not whither he
went: he knew well the land he left, but he knew not the land he should have.

But it may be again objected, that this is not true: for it appears, Genesis
12.5. that Abraham with Sarah his wife, and all their substance, departed to
go into the land of Canaan, and to the land of Canaan they came: therefore he
knew whither he went; namely to that land.

I answer: It is true, he went out, with purpose and assurance, to inherit a
land promised him by God, but not named to him. And whereas it is there said,
He went out to go into the land of Canaan, that is spoken in respect of the
performance when he was come thither, not of the first promise made him at his
departure: or, of the time when Moses wrote it, not of the time when God spoke
it to Abraham. And, that he knew not what land God did mean, until he came
thither, is plain in the seventh verse, where it is said, That when Abraham
had passed through all the Country, and wai come into Canaan, then God appeared
to him, and said, this land will I give unto thy seed: But till then God never
named it unto him; and therefore we read before, that he believed and obayed upon
the general promise: but now when God did particularly specify and show what
land, he then showed his thankfulness to God, and did there build an Altar
unto the God that had appeared unto him.

Thus it is clear, that Abraham went out, not knowing whither he went. Which
being so, it appears that Abraham did that which the world would call, plain
foolishness. To leave known friends for unknown, certain living for
uncertain, is a simple course in man's reason: at least (the world will say) he
might first have demanded of God, what land that was, which he should have,
before he left that which he had: but Abraham makes no such questions, moves no
such doubts, but belieueth and obayeth, and goes out of his certain dwelling
(at Gods calling) though he knew not where to lodge at night.

This practice of faithful Abraham, has profitable use:

First, here we learn, that though Gods Commandments seem foolish, and
unreasonable, yet we must obey them. Christ says; If a man will ever come in
the Kingdom of heaven, he must be borne again, John 3.3. S. Paul says; If
any man among you seem to be wise, let him be a fool that he may be wise: 1. Corinthians. 3.18. Christ says, If any man will be my Disciple, he must deny
himself and follow me, Luk, 9.23.

But how can these commandments be believed or done? how can reason believe
them? how can nature do them? So disputed the woman of Samaria with Christ,
John 4.11. When Christ told her he would give her of the water of life; she
replied, Sir, thou have nothing to draw with* and the Well is deep: whence
then have thou that water of life? Thus we object and reason against God with
carnal objections, and weigh Gods Commandments in the balance of reason:
thus God and his commandments, are much abused by us. And this is the cause
we hear and read Gods word, and profit not by it, because we ponder it in
our reason, and allow nor follow it no further, then it agrees with our
natural affections. As, a man that will needs stand under a Pent-house, has
no water falling on him, though it should rain never so precious water from
heaven: So, when the water of life, out of the word of GOD, should drop upon
our souls, to comfort our consciences, and to wash away our sins: we have
our devices out of wit, and distinctions out of reason, as pent-houses to keep
it from us, that it slides away, and never has any work in us. But
contrariwise, we must remember Abraham the Father of our faith; and when we
hear Gods word, we must with him captiuate our reason, and subdue our
affections to it: measure them by Gods word, and not it by them; and what we
cannot yield to in the obedience of reason, we must obey with the obedience of
faith: and so shall Gods word have a gracious and powerful work in us.

Secondly, here we must learn, that though we see no profit come by obaying
Gods Commandments, yet we must obey them. For, what profit could Abraham see
in leaving a certain living, for an uncertainty? yet he obayed and went, upon
the bare word of God, building upon it, that God being his guide, he could not
go astray. So must we follow God sincerely, and do his Commandments,
though no profit seem can come thereby. But some will say, Shall godly men be
led like blindefolde fools? shall they refuse all means of help, by wit and
policy? this is the way to make them ridiculous, and asses for the wicked
world to ride upon.

I answer: let godly men use all their wit, and look with all their eyes, in
their actions with men of this world. But in the obedience of Gods
commandments, let them do as Abraham did* Follow Gods calling though it
seem to be to no end.

In obedience to God, we must do as blindemen do, who follow their guides,
though it be through woods and rocks, hills, or dales, or dangerous places,
regarding nothing, fearing nothing; only following and trusting their guides,
who have eyes for them, though they have none for themselves. So must we follow
Gods calling, and yield absolute obedience to his Commandments, fearing
nothing; but trusting to the faithfulness of his power, and assuredly
believing, that he being our blessed guide, we shall not be misled: thus to
do is true faith.

But alas, how contrary is the practice of the world! Men deal with God, as we
do with loose Chapmen, whom we will not trust without a good pawn. So we
will not obey Gods Commandments, longer then his religion serves our turn;
nor will we trust and follow God, without the pawnes of profit and pleasure.
Nay, we do worse: most men esteem of God no better, nor use him any better
then they do thieves in their houses. If a man come into our house, that is
given to stealing, we trust him as long as he is in our sight* but if he be
out of our sight, we think ever he is stealing: So, if men see the means of
Gods providence* they will take his word, and trust it; but else God must
excuse them, they may not trust him further then they see him. And if the
Commandments of God sound to their content, and tend to their profit, they
will obey them: but if not, they will cast them behind their back; at least,
they will make a pause at the matter, and take their own time. And if Gods
ways seem pleasant and profitable, they will walk in them: or else they will
leave them, and walk in their own.

And hence is it, that men in distresses, run to Wizards, and Wisemen:
others deal fraudulently, and deceitfully: others work on the Sabbath day:
and thus by indirect and unlawful dealing, they labor to enrich themselves,
and to bring their purposes to pass. And why all this? but because Gods
commandments do not sound to their purpose, nor tend to their profit, and
therefore they will not obey them.

If these men had been in Abraham's case, they would never have gone out, not
knowing whither to go: but they would have argued the matter with God, and
have thought it good wisdom to pause well before they leave a certainty for
an uncertainty. But contrariwise, Abraham thought it foolishness to reason
with God, and therefore performed absolute obedience: and for this cause he
and his faith are renowned to this day; namely, 3000. years after him, and
shall be till the worlds end.

This was the obedience of faith: and this to do, is to be true subjects to
Gods Kingdom. If the King call a man from his own living, to come to himself
and to the Court; who will not leave what he has of his own, and trust his
word? So, who will not leave his own wisdom, and rely on the promise and
word of God; and obey his commandments, though there seem at the first, no
profit can come thereby. Thus shall we be sure, both to have sufficient for
this world: and shall also be true children of faithful Abraham.

Hitherto of the first example of Abraham's Faith.

VERSE 9. By faith, he abode in the land of Promise, as in a strange Country,
as one that dwelt in Tents with Isaak and Jacob, heirs with him of the same
Promise.


HEre is the second example of Abraham's faith, and the fifth in order; and is
concerning Abraham's abiding, or dwelling in that land whereinto God had called
him: and this he also did by faith. As he went out of his own Country, and
came into Canaan, by the power, and leading of his faith: So by the same faith
he abode and dwelt in the same Land.

The parts are two: 1. The Action of Abraham's faith, in the ninth verse. 2. The
Reason of that his so doing, in the tenth.


The action in the ninth verse, is spoken of two ways.

1. It is laid down to be his a biding in the Land of Promise. 2. It is
amplified by two circumstances: 1. The manner how he dwelt there, in two
points: 1. As a Stranger, or in a strange Country. 2. As one that dwelt in
Tents, and not in houses.
2. The persons with whom: with Isaac, and Jacob, Heirs with him of the same
Promise.

The first point in order, is his dwelling in the land of Canaan (called here
the land of Promise).

By faith he abode in the land of Promise. Canaan is now called the land of
Promise, because it was promised in the verse afore-going, as we then heard: so
that the meaning is, he abode in that Land, which was promised him, when he
came out of his own Country. Which Country Abraham knew not by name, when he
left his own, nor till he came thither: but then God told him, This is the Land
I will give thee and thy seed. Genesis 12.7. In this Land thus promised,
Abraham dwelt and remained, the rest of his life, which was a hundredth years.

In this Action of Abraham, are three particular points.

1. He dwelt in Canaan. 2. That Canaan was the Land of Promise. 3. He dwelt
there by faith.
For the first:

Concerning Abraham's dwelling in Canaan, diverse questions may be moved.

First, how it is true, that he abode or dwelt there? seeing it is apparent in
the Story, he dwelt in Egypt, Genesis 12.10. and in Gerar. Genesis 20.1.

I answer: The meaning is not, that he stayed there every day of his life; but
that he lived and died there, and made it the place of his residence and
ordinary habitation, whereunto he always resorted again, if any occasion
drew him abroad.

And further, he went not into Egypt, but upon such special cause, as could
not be otherwise helped, as upon a famine or such like, Genesis 12.10. Then
there came a famine in the Land, therefore Abraham went down into Egypt to
soiourne there. Where it appears: first, that the cause was extraordinary:
secondly, that he went not to make any dwelling, but to soiourne there for a
time, and then to repair home again.

Where we learn, that as a man is not to depart out of that Land, where God
has appointed him to dwell, but upon good and sufficient causes: So, when
those causes cease, which drew him out, he is not to stay longer from home;
but to repair again to the place of his ordinary dwelling. God would have a
man dwell at home: and it is leuitie, and a token of an unconstant mind, and a
running-heade, for a man to desire to be always abroad.

Birds fly abroad, but so as they may come to their neasts at night: So men
should endeavor, as much as may be, to take few occasions of being from their
dwellings: and when they needs must, to let it be for as short a time as may
be. For, as it is a sign of a light woman, Proverbs 7.11, Her feet cannot
abide in her house: So is it of an vnstayde man, Upon every occasion to be
carried from home.

We must therefore follow holy Abraham, who is here commended for abiding, or
dwelling in the Country, which God had given him.

Again, this practice of Abraham's faith, condemns the wandering beggar, to be
an unfaithful and ungracious generation. Our Land (by the abuse of our peace
and plenty) is full of such. Ask them where they dwell: their answer is, They
have small dwelling; but, look into the matter, and they have the largest
dwelling of all: for they dwell every where, and all abroad; they count it
bondage to be tied to one Town, or dwell in one Parish, and think it freedom
and liberty to dwell every where. These are Carerpillers of a Commonwealth,
and the greatest robbers of the poor that are. Common Thieves steal from rich
men: but these steal from the poor; they get that from men, which the true
poor should have. No good comes to Church nor Commonwealth by these men, but
much hurt to both. For, a finger cut off from his place, is of no use: so, a
man living out of his calling, and out of his place, is of no use in the body
politic.

Happy will it be with our Church and State, when we have such laws, and such
execution of them, as that this disorder may be reformed, and every man
confined to his own dwelling, and none suffered to live in our Kingdom, who is
not of some Parish: for let us be assured, so many wandering beggars, so many
blemishes in our government.

Thirdly, Abraham's dwelling in this Land (being a fruit of his faith) teaches
us it is no good token, but an ill sign for a man to be uncertain in his
dwelling. It is the fashion of many men, if they travail, they never lodge at
one place twice: and for their dwelling, it is not certain; but now in the
North, now in the South: now in this Parish, now in that: now in this
jurisdiction, now in another: Sometime in the City, sometime in the Country.
Who be these? But either such as be in debt, and purpose to deal ill with
their Creditors: or that are malefactors, and hereby labor to avoid the
censure of Authority: or else they be Papists, which by this means labor to
lurk unseen, and to escape the law* as many of them do, either by skipping
out of one Parish, Diocese, County, or Province into another, and so avoiding
the authority of all: or else, by lurking in great Cities, and so lying as
Soiourners, and not as Parishioners, unseen or unmarked in so great
multitudes. Let our Authority take the more careful notice of such men, the
more craftily they labor to creep from under it: and let such men know, they
discover themselves the more by this practice, to be unfaithful either to
GOD, or Men, or both; seeing that GOD here commendes Abraham for dwelling or
staying in that place, which GOD had appointed him. And so much for this
question.

Again, it may here be demanded: How Abraham might lawfully dwell in Canaan,
seeing it was then Idolatrous. It may seem, that therefore it is not unlawful
for men to dwell in Popish or Idolatrous Countries.

I answer: Abraham did not so upon any private motion, nor for any worldly
cause, but upon special warrant and calling from God: otherwise his so doing,
had not been justifiable: therefore that practice of his cannot be a warrant
for any to do the like, without the like cause and calling.

But how could Abraham be preserved from the contagion of Idolaters, living
amongst them? I answer:

First, God that called him thither, did there preserve him. Again, Abraham
lived in the Country, but conuersed not with the people at all, but in some
necessary and civil affairs: and by this means he escaped the danger of
infection.

Where we may learn, that if any man would live in such places without hurt to
their conscience, let them first be sure that they have a calling and warrant
from God, to live in those Countries. Secondly, let them converse with
Idolaters warily and sparingly: and so shall they preserve themselves from the
occasions of evil, as Abraham did, who abode in an Idolatrous Country: and so,
though not without danger, yet without hurt to his religion. Thus we see
Abraham dwelt in the Land of Canaan.

Now secondly, this Land is called the Land of Promise: that is, the Land
formerly promised him by GOD, when he called him out of his own Country. And
it is likely that the Apostle does not here first of all call it so: but that
it was known generally amongst the Patriarchs by that name: and that Abraham
himself did first of all so call it; who, when he looked upon it, and
considered the fruitfulness and excellency of it, did evermore remember, and
call to mind, this Land is promised to me, this is mine by promise. And herein
he rested and satisfied himself, though he had not the possession of it.

Here we may see the excellency of true faith: which depends upon the
promises of God, though they be unperformed. A Land of promise contents
Abraham, he leaves the possession to his posterity. It is hard to find such
faith in the world: It is Land in possession which we look for. A Land of
promise cannot content us: but let us labor to practice faith, and to take
comfort in the promises of God, and leave the performance to Gods appointed
time.

Thirdly, he dwelt in this Land by faith. And no marvel. for had it not been
by faith, he would never have dwelt there, where he had not so much as a room
for his Tent to stand in, but he must borrow it; nor to bury his dead in, but
he must buy it. This was against reason, yet by faith he dwelt there, as
before by faith he left his own, which was also against reason. Where still the
power of faith is magnified to be such, as it will carry a man over all
impediments of obedience, and will give him victory not against one, but
against all objections; and power to perform not one, but many things contrary
to carnal wisdom.

We must here learn to examine, whether we have a true and sound faith or
no. If we have, then we must not do some one or few actions in faith, or
die in faith, but we must live by faith, the whole course of our lives. We
must walk by faith, and not by sight, says the Apostle, 2. Corinthians 5.7.
So says he of himself, Galathians 2.20. I live by the faith in the Son of
God: he says not, he hopes to die in that faith, but he lives by it. And in
the former place ^e says not, we must set a step or two, but we must walk
by faith, which argues a continued action: and therefore it is that Saint
Peter says, Gods children are kept by the power of God, through faith unto
salvation, 1. Peter 1.5. In which words two things are spoken of faith: the
first is affirmed; namely, that faith preserves a man to salvation through all
hindrances, either of inward temptations, or outward crosses, which the devil
or the world can lay in his way. This preservation is one of the greatest
works in the world, and therefore it is worthily ascribed to God: the power of
God preserves us, but through faith. The second is employed; that therefore we
must labor to keep that faith evermore with us, which must keep us, and to
cherish and preserve that that must preserve us to salvation. David was an
excellent practicioner hereof: no man was more tried and tossed then he, yet he
ever drew near unto God, Psalm. 73.28. Indeed sometime he said, all men were
liers, but that was in his fear, Psalm. 116.11. And again, I am cast out of
thy sight, but that was in his haste, Psalm. 31.22. that is, when the force of
some passion, or the violence of some temptations did carry him headlong: but
otherwise he ever lived the life of faith.

So must we, not think to live in sensuality, and die in faith: but to live
by faith, in all our actions, from one day to another, meditating daily on Gods
promises, and believing them, and relying on them, and applying the generals
to our own selves, and practicing faith by making conscience of sin, and
inuring our selves to patience and long suffering. Thus doing, we shall be
children of faithful Abraham, who first by faith left his own Country, and
then by faith also dwelt still in the Land of Canaan. And thus much for the
action of his faith: He abode in the Land of Promise. Now follow the
circumstances of the action, which are two: 1. The manner how: 2. The Persons
with who^.


The manner is laid down in two points: 1. As a stranger: 2. As one that dwelt
in tents.


The first point, for the manner, is laid down in these words: As in a
strange Country.

The meaning is: he esteemed it a strange Country to him, and accounted himself
a stranger in it. Against which, it may be objected, that he was familiarly
acquainted with Mamre, Aner, and Eshcol, three great and mighty men of that
Country: then he and they were confederates together, Genesis 14.13. therefore it
seems he lived not like a stranger in the Country.

Some answer, that these three were not Cananites, but near a-kinne to
Abraham, and had other names: but the Text is plain in that place, that Mamre
was an Amorite, and the other two were his brethren. Therefore the answer is,
that in all likelihood they three were Proselites; and that by Abraham's godly
persuasions they had renounced Idolatry, and were come to the knowledge of the
true God, and that they joined with Abraham in the worship of the true God, and
so were his conuerts: whereupon Abraham (as he might lawfully) conuersed with
them as his familiar friends. And hereof there are two Inducements:

First, it is said, Genesis 14.13. that they were confederates with Abraham: and
it appeared so by their deeds; for they joined their powers, and assisted him
in the war against the the Kings (Genesis 14.24).

Secondly, it is said, Genesis 14.13. That Abraham dwelt on the Land of Mamre: he
was his Tenant or Farmour. Now, it is more then likely, Abraham would not have
so far been beholden to them, but that they were true Christians, and of his
own religion.

Therefore this hinders not, but he might be a stranger notwithstanding, unto
the body of the people, and that it is true that Abraham says of himself unto
some of them, Genesis 23.4. I am a stranger and Soiourner amongst you.

But it may be then demanded, Why did Abraham live amongst them as a stranger,
and in that Land as a Soiourner?

I answer; the reasons were diverse: First, he had title given to that Land, but
no possession; he therefore contented himself with that that God gave him, and
challenged not any possession all the days of his life, but bought or borrowed
of Mamre the place where he lived and dwelt (Genesis 14.13) and of the Hittites a
place of burial. Genesis 23.3. etc.

This may teach all men not to be too hasty, in seeking for that, that it may
be, is their right: let not men prescribe their own times, nor be their own
caruers, but leave their affairs to Gods disposing, and enter no further then
they see God goes before them. Abraham must be a stranger in his own land; and
thou sometime must be content for a time to be a stranger to that which is
thine own.

Secondly, they were all of them for the most part heathen Idolaters: amongst
whom Abraham would not converse, but as sparingly as might be. Now if Abraham
would be a stranger in his own Country, rather then live familiarly with
Idolaters; It shows how little faith, and less conscience they have, who can
be content to live in the midst amongst Idolaters, where they have nothing to
do, and can converse with them in all familiarity, without any scruple of
conscience. Abraham made himself a stranger at home to avoid Idolatry; but
they will make themselves at home in a strange Country, to entangle themselves
in Idolatry: these men will hardly prove the children of Abraham.

These reasons Abraham himself had in this his so doing.

There is a third, a more spiritual or mystical reason: and that reason God
had in making Abraham live in Canaan as a stranger; Namely, to teach all
Christian men their duty, to the worlds end.

Abraham is the Father of the faithful, Romans 4.11. And this is our honor to
be the children of Abraham; we must therefore follow our Father in his faith,
and in the practice of it: we must live in this world as Pilgrims and
Strangers, even in the midst of all our peace and prosperity, of all our
liberty, riches, lands, and possessions; yea, of all our friends and worldly
acquaintance. If it seem strange how this can be: I answer, the practice of
it consists in six actions.

First, we must not bathe our selves in the pleasures of this world. Pilgrims
take but little delight in their iourneyes, because they think themselves not
at home. This is S. Peter's argument: Dearly beloved, as strangers and
pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against the soul, 1. Pet.
2.11. For, too much delight in fleshly pleasures, smothers the grace of God in
us, and lets loose all sins, and gives life unto all corruptions.

Secondly, we must use this world as though we used it not; that is, even the
necessary comforts and delights thereof: they be the very words of the Apostle,
1. Cor. 7.31. For, so the Pilgrim, when he passes through a strange Country,
has not his mind troubled with looking or thinking on the goods or
commodities of that Country where he is: but using as much thereof, as is
necessary for him, all his thoughts are on his own Country. So should we, when
we are in our best estates, in our greatest iollity, in the midst of our
wealth, and abundance of pleasures, cast our minds from them, and have our
thoughts even then conuersing in heaven, where is the place of our abode. This
is likewise the Apostles exhortation, Philipp. 3.20. Worldly men make their
belly their God: that is, drown themselves in carnal pleasures, so far; as
they forget any other God, any other heaven. But we must not do so: our
conversation must be in heaven, from whence we look for our Savior Jesus
Christ.

Thirdly, we must have a serious care and endeavor to please God: for, all the
earth is his, and we are but soiourners in his sight; therefore as the Pilgrim
is careful to please the Lord of the Country, by whose leave he travels
through it: so must we be to please the Lord; seeing as God says, Leuit.
25.23. The land is his, and we are but strangers and soiourners with him.

And hereunto add a fourth, which is near a-kinne unto it: We must cast all
our care on God, seeing that he is Lord of the earth, and we are but Pilgrims
and Soiourners. David says, Psalm. 24.1. The earth is the Lords, and all that
therein is: The same David confesses, Psalm. 39.12, He is a stranger before
God, and a soiourner as all his Fathers were, and thereupon desires God to
hear his prayer, hearken to his cry, and not to keep silence at his tears* as
though he had said, Inasmuch as I soiourne with thee, thou art to hear my
complaint. For, as a Soiourner cares, nor looks for nothing, but depends on
them for all things with whom he soiournes: so must we cast all our care on
God; for he cares for us, he is our Landlord, we are his Farmours, and
Tenants, we hold the earth from him, by no lease for years, but at his will,
and it is lent us: let us therefore but have care to please this our Landlord,
and care for nothing.

Fifthly, we must give continual thanks and praise to God for his good
blessings we receive in this world: for all are his, and we are but
strangers. Thus did all Gods Saints in old time; Jacob, He was less then the
least of Gods mercies. But especially there is one memorable example of David,
and the Church in his days, 1. Chronicles 29.13.14.15.16. When he had
prepared abundantly for the building of the Temple, he prostrated himself
before God: and in his own name, and the peoples said thus; Riches and honor
come of thee, therefore our God we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.
But who am I, and what is my people, that we should offer unto thee? for, all
is thine, and of thine own have we given thee: for we are strangers before
thee, and soiourners, as all our Fathers were. Thankfulness beseemes all men,
especially strangers. Therefore, as Pilgrims do thankfully accept the favors
showed them in a strange Country: So must we, all the blessings God gives us in
this world, where we are but strangers.

Sixthly and lastly, we must hasten to the kingdom as a Pilgrim does to his
iourneyes end, or to his own Country; and till he can, is always thinking of
it, and sighing after it* So must we (who are not dwellers but soiourners in
these hou^es of clay) long after heaven* and (as S. Paul says he did) co^et to
remove from hence, and to dwell with the Lord. Strangers ^re not to take such
pleasure in foraine Countries, as to forget their own. So Christians must not
be so in love with this world, as to forget or neglect the world to come. If
they do, ^hey are unworthy of it, and show themselves not strangers, ^s Abraham
here was; but men of this world, who have their ^ortion in this life, Psalm.
17.14.

In performing these six actions, men show themselves ^rangers in this world.
And thus must we do, even in the ^idst of all worldly prosperity, if we
look ^uer to enjoy the glory of a better: And thus doing, we shall be children
of faithful Abraham, who dwelt in the land of Canaan, as in a strange Country.

As one that dwelt in tents. The second point for the manner, how Abraham dwelt
in Canaan, is, that he built himself no houses, nor made Orchards or Gardens,
but dwelt in tents or tabernacles; which were such houses, as now are used in
war, and are yet called by the same name, Tents, or Pauilions: whose matter
is not wood, nor stone, but cloth, stuff, or skins; and are easily reared
and soon taken down: and when a man departs, he may carry his house with
him. That Abraham did thus, appears in the Stories written of him. He came to
Bethell, and there pitched his tent, Genesis 12.8: and Genesis 13.18. he removed his
tent: and 18.1. God appeared unto him, as he sat in his tent door: and 18.9.
being asked where Sarah was, answered, she is within in the tent: and these
tents are called his place, Genesis 18.33: and his house, 24.2. Out of all which
places it is plain, that he dwelt in tents, and that not only at his first
coming, when he had not time to build him an house; but even all the days of
his life, after his coming into the land of Canaan.

But why did Abraham dwell in tents, and not in houses? was it because then
there were no houses? Not so. For there were Cities built even before the flood,
Genesis 4.17* Cain built a City: no marvel therefore if there were many after,
as Sodom and all her sisters. And though it appears not they dug into the
earth for natural stone, yet had they Brick, which they made themselves,
Genesis, 11.3: and surely, the world which built the huge tower of Babell, Genesis
11. would not stick to build themselves houses. Nor can it be said, that those
Cities, Sodom, Gomorrah, and the rest, were nothing but a multitude of Tents
together. For, we read Genes. 19.3. that Lot dwelling in Sodom, received 2.
Angels into his house; and in the 4. verse, that the Sodomites came and
environed his house round about to take them, thinking they had been men: and
when Lot refused to deliver them, that they pressed sore upon the house to have
broken up the door: but all this might have bin spared, if it had bin nothing
but a tent, which a child may cut in pieces with a knife. It is manifest then,
that there were houses in those days. Why then did Abraham build none? was it
because he was poor and could not? Nor so: for contrariwise, Genesis 12.5, He
carried with him from his own country, all the substance he possessed: And
what that was, is particularized, Genesis 13.2. He was very rich in cattle, in
silver, and in gold. His riches were both great, and of the best. So the^ he
could, but would not. But why would he not? Was it upon a proud humor, or in a
conceited singularity, because he would not be like other men, but have a
singular way of his own? No: Abraham was none of those, who allow nothing, but
that that is done of themselves; and who think nothing good, if it be
ordinary: for he was a holy man, and famous for his faith. So then none of
these were the reasons of this his so doing.

The reasons then why Abraham, and other holy Patriarchs, used to dwell in
tents, and not to build them houses, were of two sorts; Civil and Holy.

The Civil or Politic respect that they had, was this:

They holding themselves Gods servants, did depend on his word; and therefore
did submit themselves to go up and down the world, whither soever God did call
the^. Being then to remove, every day (they knew not when nor whither) it was
therefore both the fittest and cheapest to dwell in tents, which were soon
pitched up, and soon taken down. Neither need it to seem strange, that they
could live for cold, in those poor thin tents, all the year long; for the
country and climate there, was always temperate enough for cold: and rather
inclining to too much heat.

The Holy or religious respect was this: They held themselves but strangers
upon earth, and therefore would not build themselves cities or houses; as
looking or caring to live upon earth; but dwelled in tents, as seeming
desirous, to remove from the earth to heaven; the sooner the better. And this
did the Fathers of the old Testament: not that they thought it unlawful to
build cities, or dwell in houses; but that they might testify their religion,
and their expectation of another world, in the midst of that profane age
wherein they lived: wherein there were almost none, that either regarded,
remembered, or acknowledged, a world to come.

And this was not the particular, or singular deed of Abraham alone. All holy
men in those days, lived in tents. Genesis 9.21, It is clear that Noah dwelt in
tents, though then he was king of all the world. And so did Lot also, as long
as he lived with Abraham: Genesis 13.5, Lot h^d sheep, and cattle, and tents.
And thus they did, because (as the Apostle says) they had here no enduring
city, but they sought for one to come. Heb. 13.14. And they thought, they ever
heard that voice sounding in their ears, (Micah. 2.10.) Arise and depart, for
this is not your rest.

Contrariwise, the wicked of the world, because they set up their rest in this
world, and cared for no other; they began presently to build them houses, nay
cities, (as Cain did even in the beginning) Ge. 4.17. And the Sodomites had a
city, even walled (as is likely) for Lot was sitting in the gate of Sodom,
when the two Angels came to him, Genesis 19.1, 2. And the Canaanites had cities
walled exceeding high: (Numb. 13.) But we find not, that ever Gods children
built them cities, until they came to have a settled Church of their own. But
contrariwise, it is worth observing, that God promises his people, that they
shall come and dwell in cities which they built not: namely, which were built
by worldly men to their hand. And thus we see the reasons why Abraham dwelt in
tents. Now let us see the use of it.

First, here we learn frugalitie, out of the civil use of their tents; that
is, to use the blessings and comforts of this life, as soberly and sparingly as
may be: and to bestow as little cost as may be of our selves, in such things
as perish in the using: namely, meat, drink, apparel, and houses. For what
is spent herein, is spent only on our selves: and being spent, is gone;
therefore the less, the better: always provided, there be a discreet care had
of our healths, and of the credit of the places we hold: and of our inabling
to the duties of our calling. Which being sufficiently provided for, it is a
Christian frugality to spare, what further may bespared: And he has the less
to answer for, who spends the least in superfluities.

Again, here we are taught contentation in the state which God has appointed
us, and not to strive too fast to climb to wealth. These holy men can be
content to dwell in tents, and tabernacles, though they might have compassed
much more; for they were great and mighty men. Abraham had 318. men, able to
bear a sword, in his house daiely; and with them, and a little help more, he
ouerthrewe diverse kings, and rescued Lot, (Genesis 14.14). He that durst
encounter, and did overcome such an host; How many inhabitants of the
country, could he have beat out of their houses? And how many tenants could
he have put out of their Livings? And how much of that country could he have
enclosed to himself? Surely, even as much, and as many as he had pleased. Yet
does he no such thing: but contrariwise considering himself to be but a
tenant under God, he is content to let every man sit quietly by him, and
himself to dwell in tents; rather than to incroach one foot further than God
bade him, though he had bin able.

This checketh the pride, or covetousness, or ambition, or all, of such as
join house to house, Land to Land, Lordship to Lordship, Town to Town; and
care not how many men's houses they pull down, to build one of their own: nor
how many men want land and living; so they have their parkes, and pastures,
gardens, and orchards, and all other delights they can devise. These are so
far from Abraham's mind, who desired only so much land, as his tent might
stand on, and might feed his cattle; as they can enclose and make several to
themselves, that which in common should be the living of many souls. But what
can befall such men? but that that Esaias prophecieth to them, (Esaias 5.8.) Woe be
unto them that join house to house, and land to land, till there be no place
for the poor to dwell in.

Thirdly, in that Abraham lived thus, as ready ever to depart into any other
country, when God would call him: It shows, that true faith does never
limit Gods hand, either in the greatness, or length of trialls, but submits
it self wholly to his will; being resolved and content to suffer all trials,
how great soever, and how many soever God pleases to lay upon a man. Reason
would have said, I have left one country at Gods word: if I must leave
another, then I shall never know an end, nor have any thing certain to trust
to. But faith says, As I have left one country at Gods calling, so upon his
word I will leave twenty more: For God has as good reason to bid me the
second time, as the first; and his love cannot fail me: he may still try me,
but can never leave me. Thus spoke Abraham's faith. And not he alone: For Job,
though he cry out of the violence of his temptation, The arrows of the
Almighty are in me, and the venime thereof does drink up my spirits, and the
terrors of God do fight against me (Chap. 6.4.) Yet when faith comes to play
his part, he then protests, that though God kill him, yet he will trust in
him, and he shall be his salvation. (Chap. 13.15.) See, Abraham's faith will
lead him from country to country; and Jobs will carry him through life and
death. And noble David is not behind for his part* for he will lose his
kingdom, if God will have it so: 2. Sam. 15.26. If (says David) God say, I
have no delight in thee, lo here I am, let him do to me (not what I in my
reason could wish, but) what seems good in his eyes. Behold now, in these
holy men the practice and obedience of true faith. It prescribes not God the
measure, (...) there; and thus doing, we have our conversation in heaven,
though we live on the earth. And this we should do the rather, because
generally the world is full of such men; who (as the same place says) do
mind nothing but earthly things. Now it is a hard thing for a man to be unlike
the world, and to resist multitudes, and general examples: but we must still
remember we are Abraham's children, and children must labor to be like their
father, and not the common multitude: and it must more move a good child, what
his father alone does, than what is done by many other.

Thirdly, let us observe, how God promising Abraham only the Land of Canaan,
that is, a temporal inheritance; he looks further, for a City in heaven.
This he did out of his faith; for he knowing that Canaan was but a type of
heaven, therefore in consideration of the earthly Canaan, he arose to a
consideration of the heavenly: and in the promise of the earthly, apprehended
the heavenly. This is the true and Christian use of all Gods blessings, given
in this life; in them to behold better things laid up in heaven, and shadowed
in the other. Men use for their use, spectacles in reading: but they take no
pleasure in looking upon them, but at other things by and through them: So
should Christians, through all temporal blessings, look at spiritual and
eternal, which are promised and shadowed under the temporal. Thus does Christ
himself teach us, in the very order of the Lords prayer: directing us to pray
for temporal blessings first, in the fourth petition; and then for eternal,
in the fifth and sixth: as though that the one were introductions and passages to
the other. And this made the Prophets so ordinarily cover spiritual blessings
under temporal, and put temporal deliverances, for spiritual, and confusedly
oftentimes one for another; because that the holy men of the old Church, did
never rest in view of any temporal promise, or blessing, but ascended to the
contemplation of higher things in them. How pitiful then is the practice of
worldly men? who use Gods blessings so, as they daily abuse and pervert them;
using meat to gluttony, raiment to pride, learning to vainglory, speech to
flattery, wit to deceit, authority to revenge, callings to oppression;
whereas they are all given to be helps in Gods service, and furtherances in
religion, and means to help us toward heaven. These men look at Gods gifts,
with the eye of reason, and no further: but if they looked at them, with the
eye of faith, as Abraham did; it would teach them to make a heavenly and
spiritual use of them, as he did.

Lastly, in the general state of the reason, and of Abraham's practice;
observe, how he having promise of Canaa^, waited for heaven. Now, no man
waits for any thing, but that which he has hope of; nor hops truly and
properly, for any thing, but that which he has assurance of: for hope makes
not ashamed, Romans 5.5. No^ worldly hope, for that has deceived no more than
ever trusted it: But Hope in God, never deceived man; nor went any away
disappointed, that hoped in God. Therefore, here it is apparent, that hope of
heaven, goes with assurance: and this assurance must be particular to the
believer, as the belief and faith is.

But the Papists say, This is true indeed of Abraham, he had not only hope,
but even full assurance; but that came by extraordinary revelation: So that
this is a rare example, and his particular revelation, is no general warrant
to us.

We answer from S. Paul, (Romans 4.11.) that Abraham is the father of the
faithful; and that his faith is a pattern for all Christians to follow: for
else, why does the Apostle so far extol, and set forth that faith of his,
above 1300. years after his death? shall it be only for his commendation, and
not for our imitation also? Therefore every man that will walk in the steps of
holy Abraham, may come with him to that measure of faith, that he may wait for
heaven, with assurance to enjoy it.

Now let us come to the particular description of that heaven, which Abraham
thus waited for.

A City having a foundation, whose maker and builder is God. The description
has three parts: 1. It is said to be a City. 2. That has a foundation. 3.
That God made and built it.


For the first:

Abraham by his faith waited for heaven: But for which? For there are three
heavens, or differences of heaven in the scripture.

The first, that wherein we live and breath, birds fly, and clouds move.

The second, that wherein the stars are.

The third, is that, that is above them both, and is invisible; the seat of
Gods glory, where God reuealeth his Majesty in special manner to men and
Angels. This heaven Abraham waited for. For as for the first, he lived in it:
And for the second, he knew it as well as most men; for it is credibly thought,
he was a notable Astronomer. So that it was the third and highest heaven, he
waited for: which he knew this world could not give him: and therefore
expected it in another.

Now, this heaven which was Abraham's hope, is called a City.

A City, properly is a place for the habitation of men, compassed with walls,
and distinguished by streets and houses. Now properly heaven (or the estate of
holy men in heaven) is not a city; but, as elsewhere in the scripture, it is
called a house, a tabernacle, a temple, an inheritance, a kingdom: so is it
here called a city; namely, for the resemblance it has thereunto, which
consists specially in four points.

1 A City has many houses, greater, less, and for all sorts. So in heaven
also, there are many mansions, Ioh. 14.2. Places of glory for all men: none
need to fear that he shall not have fullness of joy, and perfect happiness.

A City is built, and at first was ordained to this end; that many citizens
might live together in concord and amity. So the kingdom of heaven, is a
heavenly city, where the Saints of God shall live in perfect peace and love,
with fullness of joy every one in himself, and each one in another.

3 The goodness or excellency of a City consists in this; To have good laws,
good Magistrates to execute them, and good people performing subjection and
obedience. Therefore the kingdom of heaven is the most perfect City* wherein
Gods laws are the only laws, and they shall be written in men's hearts: where
each one is a sufficient governor of himself, and yet all subject to God; and
their God unto them all in all.

4 A City is a place, where generally are all necessaries and comforts for man's
life: one part of the country has this commodity, another that; but in the
city are all, either brought into it, or of it self. So in heaven are all
parts of perfection, and all complements of happiness, to make the state of
Gods children there infinitely blessed.

Such a glorious place is the City that was Abraham's hope.

Now for the use hereof.

First, Is heaven such a City? Here is a notable comfort to the poor and
plain countryman, who lives in the simplicity of the country life, tilling
the ground, or keeping cattle; and it may be, never saw, or (at the least)
never tasted of the pleasures and delights of cities: If he serve God, and
keep a good conscience, here is his happiness; he shall be citizen in the
high and heavenly Jerusalem: that City which was the hope of the holy men of
God in all ages.

Secondly, this may teach Citizens, in the great, populous and pompous cities
of this world, to labor also to be Citizens in heaven; for that is a city
also, and the best on earth are but shadows of it. And it may shame them that
are drowned in the pleasures and delicacies of earthly cities, and care not,
nor look after the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem: as it is
called, Heb. 12.22. But alas, it seems they care not for this shame; for where
is security, wantonness, profaneness, oppressions, so common, as in these
great cities? And as in the Apostles times, the country town Berea, was more
zealous and religious, than the rich and stately city of Thessalonica, Acts,
17.11: So is it generally to this day, especially at such places in the
country, where teaching and knowledge is. But let such cities know, that as
they have better means, and more comforts, and their very name should put them
in mind, and make them in love with heaven; so they shall receive greater
damnation.

Lastly, Cities are places of freedom, and all such great places have some
notable privileges; therefore men desire to be free in such places: as is to
be seen in London, Rome, Venice, etc. Even the greatest persons will be
content to be free of them, and many seek it, and pay deer for it; or at
least, work a long time for it.

But heaven is the City of cities, the perfection of beauty and true
happiness: therefore let every one, that desires either honor or happiness,
labor and strive to be a freeman of heaven, and never rest till he know he
be. And let those that live in cities, when they are admitted freemen, (as
daily some are) remember what a bles^ednes it will be, if they can be admitted
freemen of the glorious City which is above; and how little that shall avail
them, if they want this, which was the hope and joy of Abraham, and all holy
men.

To go further: This City which Abraham's faith waited for, is described by
two points: 1. That it has a foundation. 2. That the maker and builder was God.


For the first: Heavenly Jerusalem has a foundation, such a one* as no city in
this world has: and by this phrase, the holy Ghost insinuates unto us, what be
the properties of heaven; which be two: 1. The state of heaven is unchangeable.
2. Everlasting and eternal.


First, the state of the Elect in heaven, and their glory there, is not subject
to corruption, or the least alteration; as appears in that notable and lofty
description of the heavenly Jerusalem, Apoc. 21.14, and from the 10. verse, to
the 21: It has a great wall and high, 12. gates, 12. Angels for Porters: and
the wall had 12. foundations, of 12. sorts of most excellent precious stones:
and the wall it self was Jasper, and the city pure gold, like crystal. The
state of it is shadowed by precious stones, and gold; to signify, as well the
durablenesse, as the excellency thereof. And in the 15. Psalm, verse. 1. it is
called the mountain of Gods holiness: Hills are hardly removed; and therefore
David says, that Mount Zion cannot be removed but remains for ever, Psalm.
125.1. Now, if that be true of Mount Zion, in this world; which must needs be
taken either literally, for the state of the visible Church, which cannot be
utterly overthrown: or mystically, for the state of Gods grace, which in this
world cannot totally and finally be lost: I say, if this Mount Zion stands
fast, and cannot be removed; how much more true i^ it, of the state of glory in
heaven, and of the triumphant Church, and of heavenly Zion; that it is so
unchangeable, so durable, so unremovable that it cannot be shaken, but
stands fast for ever. And in this respect, well may the Apostle say here, It
has a foundation; which the holy Ghost in the Revelation says, to have 12.
foundations.

Secondly, the state of the Elect in heaven, is not only sure, but
everlasting* that is, without end: Psalm. 37.18. the Inheritance of holy men is
perpetual: And therefore S. Peter, 1.1.4, says, that the inheritance reserved
in heaven for us is immortal, and not fading away. It fades not away; there is
the unchangeableness: It is immortal; there is the eternity of it. And this
is meant, by having a foundation: for in this world, so much the longer does
any thing endure, as the foundation is stronger. Therefore, seeing the heavenly
city has such a foundation, no marvel though it endure for ever.

Now put these two together, and they show the perfect excellency of that city,
which is both unchangeable and eternal. Where we learn, the great difference
betwixt the state of that world, and this present world* wherein we live in the
body: For, what is there in this world so excellent, so p^etious, so costly, so
artificial; but is subject both to alteration, and in the end to dissolution?
The longest day has his night; and the longest life ends in death after many
miseries, and tossings* the longest Empires, and mightiest Monarchies, had
their period, after many mutations: the stateliest and strongest cities, ended
in ruin, after many civil broiles, massacres, and other miseries. So that no
glory, no strength, no happiness, nothing at all is there in this world, that
is either constant or perpetual, but subject to utter dissolution in the end;
and in the mean time, to pitiful alterations. So weak a foundation has
this world, and the best things in it. But contrariwise, the glory of heaven
has such a foundation, as it is both unchangeable and eternal.

The consideration of this difference, has manifold and profitable use. First,
we may see how reasonable the counsel of the Apostle is, 1. Tim 6.^7, Charge
them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, and put not
their trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God. For, what a misery and
vanity is it, to trust in that that is uncertain, and therefore will deceive
them? The Apostle tells them what to do: namely, Do good, and be rich in good
works, and be ready to distribute, laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may obtain eternal life: that
is, that they so spend their riches in holiness and charity that they may (...)
the end attain heaven, which is the City that has a foundation: and who
would not spend riches, which are so uncertain; for heaven, which is so
certain a glory?

Secondly, this must teach us to follow the Counsel of Christ Jesus, Math.
6.19.20, Lay not up for your selves treasures on earth, where moth and canker
corrupt, and thieves steal: but in heaven, where is neither canker, moth,
thief, nor any other corruption. Every man naturally must have his treasure,
and that is it whereon he sets his heart: now that is unworthy of a man's
heart, which will be lost we know not how soon. But let us make heaven our
treasure, the glory whereof is both eternal and unchangeable.

Again, seeing nothing here is certain, we must learn to seek sound
comfort, where it may be had. Seek it in this world, and it will fail us; but
seek it in the sincere worship of God, and that will minister such comfort in
this life, and such glory in heaven, as has a foundation, and will never fail
us.

Further, this must put us in mind of the holy Kings advise; which is, to
remember our Creator in the days of our youth, Eccles. 12.1. Seeing this world
is so uncertain, and our life has so weak a foundation, as we are not sure
to live to come to old age: every man therefore, is to hear the conclusion of
all; which is, to fear God, and keep his commandments: and this* the sooner
the better. For else, for a little foolish and vain pleasure, transitory, and
which has no foundation; we shall venture the loosing of that glorious city,
which has a sure foundation.

It follows in the description; Whose maker and builder is God.

The second point in the description of this city is, that God was the maker,
builder, or author of it. These two words are both one, and therefore it is a
needless labor of some that would distinguish betwixt them: for, the meaning
is, God made, that is, prepared the glory of heaven, and he built it; as though
he should say, Heavenly Jerusalem is a glorious city: and no marvel though it
be so, for God made it. And if you will needs, that being a city, it must be
built, be it so; for God is the builder of it.

This doctrine is evident in the Scriptures, Psalm. 136.5. God by his wisdom
made the Heavens. And here is another maine difference betwixt this world, and
the glory of heaven: The Cities of this world were built by man, but Heaven by
God himself. The art and skill of men built the cities of the earth, and
sometime the covetousness, or other corruption of man, as is manifest in the
beginning; for Cain, a covetous, cruel, and ambitious man, built the first
city in the world: but holy and good men, have not the honor to be builders
of this City; No, they are Citizens of it, but God only is the author and
builder of it.

No man may doubt hereof, because this third heaven is invisible: for the
Angels also are invisible, and yet Gods creatures. Besides, our Creed teaches,
that God is Creator of all things visible and invisible.

If we doubt why God made it, seeing he made all things for man, and man in
this world has no sight nor use of it. The answer is, God made it for two ends.

First, to be his own glorious palace (not wherein he would confine his
being, or his presence, but) wherein he would make his glory most apparent;
and wherein his glory should in a sort dwell. In which regards, it is called
his throne, Esaias 66. And in our Lords prayer we say, by Christ's own teaching,
that God our father is in heaven. Therefore as Princes build themselves
palaces, to show their power and puissance, and to magnify themselves, and to
be fit habitations for their greatness; So God made the third heaven to be
the throne of his glory.

Secondly, he had also a respect herein to his creatures; for, he made that
heaven, therein to reveal his majesty and glory to his reasonable creatures,
Angels and M^^: and (by showing them his glory) to glorify them. For in Gods
presence is the fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. vltim. And in this sense is it
true, that God made all things for man, (as man for himself:) namely, all
things, either for his soul, or body, or both; either for his use in this
life, or in the other. And so the third heaven was made for man's use; not in
this life, but in the life to come: for his soul, until the last judgment;
and after that, for both soul and body.

Hence we learn diverse instructions.

First, in that the third heaven, which never was seen with the eye of man, is
here positiuely affirmed to be made by God: We learn, that therefore it is
one of Gods creatures; and not eternal, as some hold, and go about to prove,
thus: God is eternal; but he must be in some place: and heaven is the seat
and place of God; therefore it is coeternall with God. But I answer, from Gods
word; that though heaven be the seat and throne of Gods glory, and where he
manifests, and magnifieth his glory; yet is it not the place of his substance
and being, for that is infinite, and incomprehensible: and it is against the
Christian faith, to imagine the Godhead to be comprehended or contained in any
place. 1. Kings, 8.27, The heavens, yea the heavens of heavens cannot
comprehend thee, O Lord; how much more unable is this house that I have built?

Nor is it material, that we know not on what day it was created; or that it
is not named amongst the works of the creation. For the same is true of the
Angels also: and it pleased Gods wisdom, for special causes, to name no
creatures particularly in the creation, but visible; whereas we know, both
from our Creeds, and Gods word it self, that he is the creator of all things
both visible and invisible. Therefore, though we know not* what day the third
heaven was made; yet is it sufficient, that here is said, It was made and built
by God himself. Whereupon it necessarily follows, it is a creature, and not
coeternall with the Godhead.

Secondly, here appears the weakness of one of the commonest arguments, used
for the defense of the Vbiquitie and Consubstantiation. Christ (say they) is
present bodily in the Eucharist, and they prove it thus: Christ is in heaven,
and he is God: But heaven is every where; for God is every where: and where
God is, there heaven is: (as where the King is, there the Court is.) Therefore
Christ may be in the Sacrament, and yet be in heaven notwithstanding.

I answer, the ground is false: Heaven is not every where; for then it is in
Hell: which to affirm, is absurdity, confusion, and impiety. Indeed Gods
presence is every where; and where his presence is, there is his power: as where
the Kings presence is, there is also his power and authority; and there may be
any seat or course of Justice: and so where he is, the Court is. But if you
take the Court, for some one of his chief houses, then the saying is not true.
But contrariwise, as the Kings power is, wheresoever his presence is; and yet
he may have one house more sumptuous, and magnificent than all the rest, which
may be called his Court, by an excellency above other: and that Court is not
always where the King is, but in some set and certain place, and not
remoueable:

So Gods power and glory is every where; and yet his most glorious Court, the
third heaven, is not every where, but in his limited and appointed place, where
Gods glory shines more than in any other place.

Again, if heaven properly taken, be every where, then it is God himself: for
that that is every where, must needs be deified; and indeed some, to
maintain this opinion, have said little less. But if the holy Ghost may
moderate this disputation, he plainly tells us here, That God is the maker
and builder of it. Therefore, assuredly it is not God, but one of Gods creatures.

Thirdly and lastly, let us observe the description of heaven, included in
these two words, maker and builder. God made it, that is, it is one of his
creatures; he made it as well as the rest: and he builded it; that is, (as the
word signifies) made it with art; or he bestowed skill and wisdom upon it.
For, though we may not imagine any substantial difference betwixt these two
words, for matter; yet in signification they differ: and so far we are to
observe it.

Here then we learn, that the third Heaven is like a piece of work, wherein
an excellent workman has spent his art, and showed his skill; that is, that
the highest heaven is a most glorious place, and surpasses all other creatures
of God in glory and excellency, so far as therein shines the glory, skill,
and wisdom of the Creator, more than in any other creature. In which regard,
it is no marvel though the Holy Ghost say in another place, That the eye has
not seen, nor the ear heard, nor man's heart conceived, what God has there
prepared for them that love him: 1. Corinthians. 2.9. And Saint Paul himself,
though he had the honor to be taken up into this third heaven, and to see and
hear the glory which is there; yet afterward could not he express the glory
he had seen. And this was figured in the Temple of Jerusalem, which was the
mirror, and beauty of the world; for the building whereof, God both chose the
skilfullest men, and endued them also, with extraordinary gifts: namely,
Bezaleel and Aholiab. Now, as thereby that Temple was the most excellent piece
of work that ever was in this world, made by man; so the highest heaven (which
was mystically prefigured in Salomons Temple) is the most excellent of all the
works of God.

The use of this doctrine is not to be omitted.

First, if that be so excellent and glorious a place, we must all labor to
come thither; for above all things, it seems worthy to be sought for. People
come out of all places of the country, to dwell in great towns, and rich
cities; and men labor to be freemen there, and to have their children free in
them: and even the greatest men, will have their houses either in, or near
them; that so, though they will not always dwell in them, yet they may
soiourne in them at their pleasures now and then. And why all this? but
because, first, they are places beautiful, and many ways pleasant to the eye.
Secondly, full, and frequented with the best company. Thirdly, replenished with
abundance of all things needful for man's life, for necessity, comfort, and
delight. Fourthly, they enjoy many privileges and freedoms. And lastly, all
this is most true of such cities, where the King keeps his Court.

If this be so, then how is heaven to be sought for? Behold here a goodly
city, a city of God (whereof, London, Paris, Rome, Venice, nay Jerusalem, are
scarce shadows) the true Jerusalem, the joy of the whole earth; nay the joy of
the world, and the glory of all Gods creatures, made immediately with the hand,
and built with the skill and cunning of God himself. The Princes of the world,
and even of Rome it self, wondered at the beauty, and were amazed at the
magnificence of Ierusalems city and Temple; and yet it was but a type and
figure hereof. For, that had indeed, the glory of the world upon her: But the
new Jerusalem has the glory of God upon her, Reu. 21.4.

Shall we then seek to dwell in the cities of this world, and not labor to
come to heaven? Are they any way excellent, wherein heaven is not much more to
be desired? Are they beautiful, and is not it the beauty of the world? Read
the 21. chapter of the Revelation, and suppose that the beauty of it were but
outward, and worldly, and sensible to humane capacity; yet is it far more
excellent, than ever any was in this world. And is not there the company of the
deity, of Christ's humanity, of the holy Angels, and all good men? And is not
there abundance of whatsoever belongs to perfect happiness? And is not there
freedom from the devil, sin, and death? And is it not the Court of God, the
King of glory? Then why do we not sigh and groan, and long to be freemen of
this glorious city? And though we cannot come to it, as long as we live in
this world; yet why do we not strive to come as near it as may be? In this
world, when a man cannot dwell in the heart of a City, yet he will rather
dwell in the suburbs, than he will not be near it; and being there, he
knows he can soon step into the city. So let us in this life come as near
heaven as we may; let us get into the suburbs and dwell there.

The suburbs of heaven is Gods true Church on earth, where his word is freely
known and preached, and his holy Sacraments administered, and therein God
truly served. Let us associate our selves to this Church, and live according
to the holy laws thereof. This is the suburbs of heaven; so shall we be ready
to enter into the glorious city it self, when the Lord calls us.

And as this is for our selves; so if we love our children, or care for their
advancement, let us make them freemen of that city, whose maker and builder
is God: So shall we be sure to have comfort and joy of them here, and with
them in heaven. But if we will have them freemen in heaven, we must make
them Gods apprentizes on earth: they must serve out their time, else they get
no freedom. This time, is all their life. Men are deceived that let their
children be the devils slaves here, and think to have them free in heaven;
let us then bind our children prentizes to God, that is, make them his
servants here: then assuredly, as in their repentance and regeneration here,
they are borne freemen of heaven; so after this life they shall enjoy the
freedoms and privileges of that heavenly city, which was made and built by
the wisdom of God.

Lastly, here we see how true it is that David teaches, Psalm. 15.4, No vile
person can come in heaven. And no marvel: for if men thus and thus defamed,
cannot be free men in the Cities on earth, built by men; is it likely that
sinners, and profane men, that care not for repentance, and regeneration, (for
they be the vile men) shall be admitted into that city, whose maker and
builder is God? It is the holy city, no unclean thing can enter into it,
Revel. 21. It is Gods holy mountain, how shall ungodliness ascend thither?
Psalm. 15.1. It is the new Jerusalem: how shall the old man, that is,
sinful corruption, get into it? We must therefore cast off the old man,
with his lusts, and be renewed in holiness: We must become penitent sinners
for our lives past, and new men for hereafter; or else let us not look to
have any part in heaven.

And good reason, for God is the maker and builder of it: But he is not the
maker of sin; but the devil, and our selves brought it out: and think we
the devils work shall come in heaven? or that God will build a house for the
devils slaves to dwell in? Let us not be deceived: But contrariwise, grace and
holiness is Gods work: as our souls and bodies were the work of his hands,
so our regeneration is much more the work of his own power and mercy. That
man therefore, who can say, God as once he made me a man, so he has again
made and built me a new man, and a new creature; that man is he, that shall be
an inhabitant in that heavenly city, whose maker and builder is the same God.

In this holy way of faith and repentance, did the holy Fathers walk to this
city; as David says, in the name of them all, Thus I will wait for thee in
holiness, Psalm. And thus doubtless did the noble Patriarch Abraham, who as
he was the father of our faith, so was he also a pattern of repentance and
holy life* and in that holiness he waited for this city that has a foundation,
whose maker and builder is God.

Hitherto we have heard the holy practice of Abraham's faith, in two examples.

There is much more spoken of the excellency of his faith: but by the way, the
holy Ghost interlaceth a worthy example, even of a woman's faith; namely, Sarah,
his wife.

The sixth Example, in the order of the whole, follows in the words of the two
next verses.

Sarahs Faith.
VERSE 11. By faith, even Sarah also received strength to conceive seed, and
was delivered of a child, when she was past age, because she judged him
faithful which had promised.


NExt to Abraham, who is called the father of our faith, or of faithful me^,
follows Sarah, who was also mystically the mother of believers: next to the
husband follows the wife: nay Abraham's faith is commended, both before her,
and after her; and hers enclosed in the midst.

By the way, here observe how God honors holy marriage, and observes the
decorum, and dignity of it: He not only allows, or commends the faith of
Abel, who it may be was unmarried; but as we see, of married men also. And it is
worthy our observation, that of all these whom the holy Ghost here records for
their faith and holiness, they were all married, except Abel; of whom, it is
not certain whether he were, or no.

It appears therefore, that God, as he ordained holy marriage; so he always
honored it, both with his grace on earth, and his glory in heaven; as well, if
not better, than any other state of life. They therefore do spit in the face
of God himself, who any way disgrace it; and they especially, who allow
fornication, or adultery, in any sort of men, rather than it, as some Papists
do. But here we may observe further, how God maintains the dignity and
decorum of it: he places Abraham and Sarah together, and puts none betwixt
them, to show the inseparable unity, that is to be betwixt them; so far, as
that eue^ in story, they are to be set together: and how heinous their
presumption is, that dar^ any way attempt to separate or part that unity.

He places Abraham first, to show the dignity and pre-eminence of the man,
whom, for her sin, God has set over her; not only for her head, but for her
guide and governor: and to teach the man, that he, and his example should be
first, and should be a light unto her; to shame them who come behind their
wives in faith and holiness. He places Abraham both before and after her, and
her in the midst; to teach her, that her glory and honor, every way, is in the
virtue and worthiness of her husband; her head under God: who is to go before
her, to give her good example* and to come after, to ouersee her courses; and
on all sides, to be a shelter and defense unto her.

These things may not unfitly be noted in this contextion: Now let us come to
the words, wherein are these points; 1. Who believed: Even Sarah. 2. What she
believed: Gods promise to bear Isaac. 3. The impediments of that faith: which
were two. 1. Her age. 2. Her barrenness.
4. The effects of this her faith: which were three. 1. Thereby she conceived
seed. 2. Brought forth Isaac. 3. Had a great ^ssue and posterity by him.
5 The ground of her faith: she judged him faithful which had promised.


All these are laid down in this verse, or the next.

The first point is, the person, of whom this story is: Sarah, a woman; even
she believed. We have heard some examples of notable men: but he hold here, a
woman chronicled for her faith, and holy obedience, as well as men.

Where we learn, that saving faith, and consequently salvation it self, is
not proper to one sex but to both; man and woman. The woman indeed was the
first that brought in sin; and being deceived her self by the devil, she
deceived man. In which sense the Apostle says, 1. Tim. 2.14, The man was not
deceived, but the woman; and she was in the transgression. And for that cause,
grievous calamities, and much bitterness, was laid upon that sex* in bearing,
and bringing up children, and in subjection. In which regards, they might
think themselves forsaken of God, for their fault. For the preventing whereof,
the Apostle here, or rather the holy Ghost by him teaches us, that true faith
and salvation by the Messiah, belongs to Sarah, as well as Abraham; to women
as well as to men. And Saint Peter also most plainly (1. Pet. 3.7.) teaches
us, that they are heirs together with their husbands, of the grace of life.

The use whereof, as it discovers the monstrous and unnatural madness of
some men, who have called into question the possibility of their salvation; yea
some, whether they have souls, or no: so it gives encouragement to women, to
serve that God in zeal and sincerity, which has bin so merciful unto their
sin; and who, though he has subjected them in body unto their husdands, yet
has made their souls partakers with them, of the same hope of immortal life.

Yet withal, we may observe, how few the holy Ghost here records; namely,
but one or two women, amongst many men. For so it has been in all ages, those
that have been good, were excellent; but they were few in comparison of men:
which, as it is the more commendation to them that are good, so it must stir
up all women professing religion, to labor in the imitation of the faith of
their grandmother Sarah; that so they may be some of those few.

But let us enter into further, and more particular consideration, who this
Sarah was; especially seeing she is the only woman of the Jews nation, whose
faith is here remembered.

She was the wife of Abraham, the grand Patriarch of the Age betwixt the
Flood, and the giving of the Law. And of her we read this story, amongst
other, Genesis 18.13; God by his Angel appearing to her husband and her, made a
promise, that within the year they should have a son; both heard it, and
both laughed to hear it: Abraham in joy and admiration, and therefore was not
reproved; she in doubtfulnesse, and a conceit of almost impossibility, and
was for it sharply reproved of the Angel. Yet behold, this Sarah, that eue^
now laughed to hear such a promise, as being a fond conceit, and mere
impossible; yet afterward believes, and in so good a measure, as her faith is
here registered to all posterities.

In her example, we may learn a good lesson. It was a bad thing in Sarah, to
laugh at Gods word, though it seemed never so high above her conceit: But it
was good and commendable, that she corrects her fault, and testifies her
amendment, by believing. We all follow Sarahs fault; but few, her
repentance. Many in our Church are mockers of our religion, and of the
Ministers, and professors thereof: and all religion that stands not with
their humors, is no more regarded of them, than toys, or devises; and they
are counted fools, or hypocrites that think otherwise. But alas, these men
know not how vile a sin they commit, while they laugh at Gods word. For, if
her fault was such, who laughed at that, that seemed to her almost impossible,
and yet without any profaneness; what shall become of them, that out of their
carnalitie, and fleshly profaneness do make but a sport at all Gods
ordinances, promises, and commandments; and at all religion, more than serves
their own turn? Let such men be warned, to cease mocking, and lay aside
reuiling of others, and begin in soberly and seriously to believe: else they
will find it sharp kicking against the prick, and dangerous playing with
edge-tooles.

Furthermore, Sarah that laughed in doubting, yet (withal) believes. This
teaches us, that true faith is joined always with doubting in all Gods
children. If any object, that follows not here: for, she first doubted, and
then believed; when she doubted, she believed not, and when she believed, she
doubted not;

I answer: It is not so, but the contrary, as I will prove. For, Sarah was no
Infidel, utterly to deny and gainsay Gods word, when she heard it: but
only finding it in all reason, impossible, she therefore presently yielded
not to it, but laughed at it as a matter past ordinary course, yet withal she
regarded who spoke it: namely God, and therefore forthwith, judged it possible
with God, though impossible in reason, and so at last constantly believed it,
yet still her reason gaine-saying it: so that she never doubted so, but that she
in some part believed it. And when she believed it most steadfastly, yet she
something doubted of it: reason said it could not be, faith said it might be.
Therefore as when reason ouer-ruling, yet she had some sparks of faith: So,
when her faith was predominant, there remained some relics of doubting: for,
as reason cannot overthrow true faith; so the best faith in this world, cannot
fully vanquish reason.

This is the doctrine of Gods word, Mark 9.24. Jesus bidding the father of the
child possessed, to believe, and then his child should be dispossessed: he
answered, crying with tears, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. There is
faith and unbelief in one soul at one time, in one action, upon one object:
and what is unbelief, but doubting or worse?

And Christ often reproves his Disciples, for their doubting, and calls them O
ye of little faith; and yet all know that that they then had true faith: yea,
S. Peter himself, most famous for his faith, is reproved in ye same words: O
thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? He had a little faith,
therefore some faith: a little faith, therefore much doubting* therefore it is
apparent, a man may have in his soul at once, both faith and doubting: yea,
commonly we have a grain of mustard-seede or a mite of faith, and a mountain
of doubting.

The use of ^his doctrine: First, discovers the nakedness of many professing
themselves Christians, who care not how they live, yet say they believe in
Christ, and look to be saved by him. Ask how they know it: they answer, they
know no other: Ask when they began: they say, they did ever so. Ask if they
doubt; they answer, they would be ashamed so to do. But alas, here is
nothing but ignorance and presumption. Our religion can never be disgraced by
such men; for they have it not, they know it not: for, if they did, they would
shame to answer so. These men have no faith at all: for, where it is, doubting
does always show it self. And he that knows he believes, knows also he
doubts: and the more he believes, the more he knows and feels his
doubting: for, where these two are, they are always opposite, and show their
contrary natures: the one is the spirit, the other is flesh and corruption. And
these, says the Apostle, do lust one against another, Galath. 5.17. He
therefore that thinks he is wholly spirit, and has no flesh or ^orruption in
him, is nothing but corruption: and he that imagines, he has perfect faith,
and no doubting, has no faith at all in him, but carnal presumption.

Secondly, here is comfort to all such as have faith and grace, and yet are
daily troubled with temptations: let not such be dismayed, though they find in
themselves much doubting and diffidence. For Sarah believed, and yet she
doubted: yea, notwithstanding all her doubting, she believed so excellently, as
her faith is here made a pattern, to all holy Ma^rones for ever* He therefore
that is even buffeted by Satan, with temptations of doubting, let not him be
dismayed* as though he had no faith: but let him be assured, his doubting does
not bewray it self, but that faith makes the opposition; and therefore let him
strive with tears and prayers to God, and say, Lord I believe, help thou my
unbelief.

Thus we see the person who* Sarah: but what is the action which she did. It is
implied in these words: Through faith Sarah, etc.

Her action is, she believed. This virtue of faith, and this action of
believing, is the matter of all this chapter. These holy men and women had
other holy virtues: but their faith is that alone, which is here commended.

Now particularly for Sarahs faith, here is one notable thing to be ob^erued:
the very same word of God, which she believed, and for believing whereof she is
here registered, at ^he same she also laughed: but behold, her faith is
recorded, her laughing is not: her faith is commended, her fault silenced. In
which holy and merciful practice of God, we learn:

First, that God accepts true faith, though it be attended with many
inf^^mities. As a King is content to give a beggar ^n alms, though he receive
it with a hand shaking with the palsy: So, God is well pleased with our faith,
though diseased with infirmities, and bestows grace on a believing soul,
though shaken with many temptations.

In a word, God accepts soundness of faith, though it be but small, and more
looks at (in his mercy) a man's little faith, then his many faults. He will
not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, Esaias 42 3: When a
man is broken in heart, and dejected in soul, in fight of his many sins and
little grace, God will not break this bruised reed* but will comfort and
strengthen him. And when any life of grace appears in a man (as flax that
smoketh, but will not burn out) God will not quench it, but will rather kindle
it, and give life unto it.

Let this teach us to take in good part, the holy and honest endeavors of our
brethren; though they cannot do so well as they would, or should. Let us not
exact too much, and too hastily upon them, but expect in meekness the working
of Gods grace: and in the mean time, think well of Sarahs faith, though it be
with laughing.

Secondly, here we may learn, that God rather observes and regards good things
in his children, then their faults and imperfections: he writes up Sarahs
faith, he names not her laughing. This is from the goodness of his nature,
being goodness it self, and therefore most easily apprehends, and takes
notice of the least goodness, where-euer he finds it.

Thus should we deal one with another: what good thing we see in any man, we
should observe and commend it: his faults we should not see, but cover and omit
them. But the course is contrary: the common table talk of the world, is
nothing but of men's faults, and to rip up their imperfections: but if they have
never so many good properties, we can bury them all, or pass them over in
silence. This argues the malice and the naughtiness of our nature; which
being evil, does delight in nothing but evil; and being corrupt, feeds, as
does the filthy horse-flie, on nothing but corruption. But let us remember the
practice of God, and learn to conceal faults, and use our tongues to talk of
the good things and virtues in our brethren: So shall we resemble the Lord, who
though Sarah laughed (not in a holy admiration, but in unbelief) yet,
forasmuch as afterward she believed, God has matched her with the notablest
believers, and holiest men that have been in the world.

Thus much for the first point: the person; and her action, she believed. Now
the second is, what she believed? included and necessarily implied in the last
words of the verse: she judged him faithful Which had promised:

The thing she believed, was the word or promise of God; Particularly his
promise that she should bear Isaac in her old age: of which promise, and the
circumstances of it, we may read, Genesis 18.13, etc.

Here the only question is, By what faith she believed this?

And the answer is, by true saving faith: and it is proved thus. Abraham
believed this promise by the faith that justified him, Romans 4.10.11. But
Abraham and Sarah believed it both by one faith: therefore Sarah believed that
promise by the faith that also justified her. Where we learn, that saving
faith apprehends not only the great promise of redemption by Christ, but all
other inferior promises that depend upon it. For, here we see Abraham and
Sarah take hold of the promise of a temporal blessing, by the same faith,
whereby formerly they had laid hold on the promise of eternal salvation by
the Messiah: so that the object of true faith is, 1. Principal: the promise of
salvation by Christ. 2. Secondarie: all inferior promises annexed thereunto.


The maine promise is: So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, to the end, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
eternal life, John 3.16. Now true faith, first of all, directly and plainly
fastneth it self on this: but after and with this, on all other promises that
concern soul or body. In the Lords prayer, we are bid to pray for temporal
blessings, health, peace, competencie of wealth, and all other, under the name
of daily bread: and we are bound to believe, that God will give them, if we
ask in faith. Neither is this faith constrained, but free and voluntary, and
on a good foundation. For, being persuaded that God accepts us in Christ for
salvation, we cannot but withal be persuaded, that God will give us all things
else needful for us.

This we here note again, because we are wrongfully charged by the Papists,
to hold, that faith apprehends the promise of salvation alone. But we pass
it over, for that we have already spoken something of it.

Now follows the third point: namely, the impediments of her faith, in these
words: When she was past age.

The promise was to have a child: She believed it. Now against childbearing,
there are two impediments: 1. Barrenness: 2. Age.

If one be aged, or past the ordinary time, it is hard and unlikely: but if
one be very aged, and far past it, it is impossible she should conceive and
bear a child: thus it stands in reason. Besides, though one be not past age,
yet if she be barren (as some by secret reasons in nature are) it is not to be
expected, she should conceive. Now, both these lay in Sarahs way; for, here it
is said, she was past age: and another place (namely, Genesis 16.1.2). says, she
was barren.

But it may be objected against Sarahs age, that in the old time they had
children, till they were of great age. Eua had her son Sheth at 130. years
old (Genesis 5.3). For, Adam and Eve must needs be both of one age: and after
that, Eve bore many sons and daughters. Therefore, it may seem, that Sarah
was not past age at 90. years old. But we are to know, that they who began
to bear at that age, lived eight or nine hundred years: but Sarah lived after
the flood, when Ages were brought down to 200. and for the most part to 100.
years. Abraham lived but 175. years, and Sarah but 127. She therefore who
lived 127. years, and died an old woman, must needs be past age of
childbearing, at 90. years old.

And besides her age, she was also barren, by her natural constitution (as
many are and have been) and brought Abraham no children. Yet unto this woman
comes a word from God, Sarah shall bear a son. And behold, this aged and
barren woman, does not object desperately these her two hindrances (the one
whereof in reason is sufficient against childe-bearing) but beyond all
impediments, and above reason believes it shall be so, resting and relying
only and wholly on Gods word for it.

The use of which notable and faithful practice (so wonderful in a woman) must
teach us to rest on Gods word and promise, though we have no reason so to do:
for example,

When we see our friends, or childrens bodies, cast into the earth to feed
worms, burnt by fire, or eaten by fishes, reason says, they are gone, they
can never be again. We have Gods word and assured promise, The dead shall
rise: with their bodies shall they rise, Esaias. We must therefore believe it,
if we will be of the faith of Sarah. God said to her; Age and barronnesse shall
have a child: she believed it. He says to us, Dust and rottenness shall live
again: nay, he has often said it; and shall not our faith acknowledge the
voice of our God, and believe it as she did?

But let us come to personal promises, as hers was (for this is general): God
has promised grace and pardon to every penitent and believing soul; yet no
man is partaker of the sweetness hereof, without the bitterness of many
temptations to the contrary, giving him occasions of doubting, and often even
of despairing of Gods favor. What must a man do in this case? even believe,
though he feel no reason why to believe; and hope above hope. Such was
Abraham's and Sarahs faith. And for it, as they were registered in the Story of
Genesis: so both here and in the Romans, Chap. 4. remembered again, and
commended for it. Now, suppose that thou, after thy coming to God by faith and
repentance, fall into temptations of desertion, wherein to thy feeling, Gods
heavy hand and wrath has seized on thee, and the devil lays thy sins to thy
charge, and tells thee thou art a damned wretch, for thou were ever an
hypocrite, and never had faith, and that therefore God is thy enemy; In this
case, wherein, in reason or in feeling, there is not the least hope of
salvation: what must thou do, despair? God forbid. For, that is the downfall
into hell. No, but hope when there is no hope, keep faith when there is no
feeling.

And to strengthen us herein, remember the faith of Job (tried and sifted, so
as few have been) who though the arrows of the almighty stuck in him, and
the venom thereof drunk up his spirits, Job 6.4. Yet even then he believed:
and would not give over, nor let go his hold, and said, Though thou bring me
to dust, yet will I not forsake thee: no, though thou kill me, yet will I trust
in thee. So, in the fury of temptations, when the venom of Gods wrath seems
to drink up our spirits, then must we believe: and in the pangs of death, when
God seems ready to kill us, then must we trust in him. In such cases is the
life of faith to be showed: when reason and feeling say, God is a terrible
Judge, faith must say, he is a merciful Father.

In our health, and welfare, and feeling of Gods favor, this exhortation may
seem tedious: but if we belong to GOD; if it be not past already, the time is
sure to come, when this doctrine will be needful for the best of us all.

Thus we see the excellency of this woman's faith: which is the more commended,
by reason of these two so great hindrances. Now follow the effects of her
faith, which are diverse: some laid down in this verse, and some in the next.

Received strength to conceive seed,
And was delivered of a child.
In these words are two effects:

First, by power of her faith she was enabled to conceive: which before she did
not, though there were the same reasons in nature why she should.

Secondly, she was delivered of a child in her old age, and that child was
Isaac: who is therefore called the promised seed, and the child of the
promise.

Out of the consideration of these two, we may learn diverse good
instructions: for, seeing they are so near akin in their natures, we will
speak of them both jointly together.

First, here we may see, that nothing is so hard or difficult which God has
promised, but faith can compass it, and bring it to performance. Christ b^d
the blind see, the lame to go: he spoke, they believed, and they were healed.
So, here God promises a barren old woman a child, she believes, and lo,
she conceiueth and brings forth a Son.

The use of this doctrine is for two sorts of people:

First, many in our Church, being ignorant; when they are moved to learn
religion, answer: Alas they are simple, or not booke-learned, or they are
dull, and heavy witted, or they be old and weak; and therefore they can
learn nothing; or if they do, they cannot remember it. But here is nothing
but vain excuses: For, they want not wit to learn religion, if they have wit
to buy and sell, to know a fair day from a foul, good meat from ill, dear
from cheap, Winter from Summer. If they have wit to practice the civil
actions of the world, they have wit enough to conceive the grounds of religion,
and to get so much knowledge as may suffice for a ground of that faith, which
will save their souls: So that they want nothing, but grace and diligence to
use the means. To them therefore here is matter of good advice. Let such a man
learn but one promise of God out of the holy Scripture, as this; Seek first
the Kingdom of God, and all things else shall be given unto you, Math. 6.33:
or this; Cast all your care on him, for he cares for you, 1. Pet. 5.7: or
this; He that comes unto me, I cast him not away, John 6.37. or but this:
Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, Math. 7. Let him learn but
one of these, and when they have learned it, believe it, and let their souls
daily feed on that faith; And they shall see what will follow: even a
wonderful blessing upon that poor beginning. This their faith, will so
content and please their hearts, that it will urge them forward to get more,
and will make them both desirous, and capable of more knowledge and grace; and
will make them even hunger and thirst after knowledge and grace: (whereas, he
that knows no promise, nor believes it, contents himself in ignorance and
error). And this shall every one find, that will carefully use the means
that God appoints, and will begin to learn but one lesson at the first. For,
as old barren Sarah, believing Gods promise, conceiues and brings forth: So,
old, simple, plain, dull Countrymen, believing but one promise of Gods word,
shall conceive and bring forth daily more and more blessed fruits of knowledge
and grace.

Secondly, others who have made better proceedings in religion, do see their
sins, and do much bewail them, but they cannot overcome their corruptions:
yea, many there are, to whom their sins, and inward corruptions are more
grievous, and burdensome, then all bodily wants or miseries in the world; yet
see they not how to conquer their corruptions: but (alas) are oftentimes foiled
by them, to their great discomfort.

Let these men know, the want of faith is the cause hereof; for, that they do
not sufficiently ruminate, and consider the promises of God made in that
behalf, nor use the means God has appointed: to the use whereof, he has
annexed his promises of help against sin. Let them therefore lay Gods word
and promises unto their consciences in holy and frequent meditations. Let them
carefully use the means God has appointed, hearing and reading his word,
receiving the holy Communion, earnest and frequent Prayer, craving also the
prayers of others: and let them sharpen these holy exercises, by fasting,
watching, holy conferences with others, visitations of others afflicted like
themselves, often revealing their estate to their godly Pastors* Let them
continue thus doing, and rest confidently on the word and promise of God, with
the steadfast foot of faith, and they shall see, that old Sarah shall have
strength to conceive: that is, that their poor souls shall receive strength
to tread upon Satan, to conquer their corruptions, and to conceive and bring
forth many worthy fruits of holiness, to their joy and comfort in their later
experience; as Isaac was to Sarah, in her elder age.

The next doctrine, we may here learn, is; That whereas Sarah, by her faith in
Gods promise, conceiues and brings forth: therefore, children are the immediate
blessing of the Lord: for, Sarah bare Isaac, not by any ordinary strength or
power of nature, but through faith she received strength to conceive, etc.
Neither is this so in her only (wherein there was a miraculous work of Gods
power) but in all. Some are indeed barren by constitution, and these cannot
conceive, unless by Gods power as Sarah did. But some have no children, who in
all natural reason might conceive. For, as God gave the Law, and thereby a
gift and power to increase and multiply, Genesis 1.22. So, he reserved the
execution of it to himself, and power to alter or dispense, to add, or
diminish as it pleases him. Therefore says the Psalmist, Psalm. 127.3. Lo,
children are the inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his
reward: And speaking of them, Psalm. 128.4, he says, Lo, thus shall he be
blessed that fears the Lord.

The use is, to teach Parents, therefore to bring them up as Gods blessings,
and not only to give them corporal necessities (for so they do their beasts)
but to nurture them in holy Discipline, by sowing the seeds of Religion in
their hearts. If this they want, they have nothing, though you leave them
Earledomes. And herein is the saying true, Better unborn then untaught. The
Law and power to increase and multiply, is given to beasts in their kind,
as well as to us, Genesis 1. verse 22. Therefore unless we do more then
provide for their bodies, we differ little from them: but, make them know GOD,
and so we make them fellows with the Angels. If Parents did thus, it cannot
be expressed what blessings would come thereby to Church and Commonwealth.

Thirdly and lastly, let us here know and learn, that this holy Matron,
Sarah, figureth unto us mystically the spiritual Jerusalem, the Church of
GOD. Allego^ies are charily and sparingly to be taught; else much unsound
Doctrine may cumber men's consciences: but this is sound and sure; for it is
the Apostles, Galath. 4.23, etc. By Agar and Sarah, other things are meant:
for, these two mothers are two Testaments: Agar, she which gendreth unto
bondage. Sarah, Jerusalem, which is free, and from above, and is the mother of
us all. Now, the resemblance betwixt natural Sarah, the wife of Abraham, and
mystical Sarah the spouse of Christ the Church of God, stands in this; that as
she not by power in her self, but by Gods power, and faith in his promise bare
Isaac: So, the Church our mother, brings forth children to God, only by the
power of Gods word and spirit. And therefore as Isaac is called the child of
Promise, and said, to be borne by promise, Galath. 4.23. So, men regenerate and
borne to the Church, are said, not to be borne of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, John 1.13. And S. James says, 1.18.
God, of his own will, begat us with the word of truth. Thus the word of God
and the will, that is, the spirit of God, these two together beget children to
the Church.

The use is, to teach us all to honor the Church as our mother; but to worship
God alone, who is the father of our soul. The Church cannot make her self our
mother, no^ us her children, when she will: but it is God that must speak the
word, and then we are made, he must beget us by the power of his spirit, and
ministry of his word. And further, let us learn here what account we are
to make of Gods holy word, which is the immortal seed of our regeneration,
whereby we are made Gods children, and heirs of immortality.

Thus much of the two first effects of her faith.

The third is laid down in the next verse: which because it is much stood
upon by the holy Ghost, we will put it off till then, being therefore worthy
our deeper consideration.

And now follows in the end of this verse, the fifth and last point, which is,
the Ground of her faith: Because she judged him faithful which had promised.

The foundation, whereon she built this her faith, that she should have a
son, being barren and past age, was not the bare promise of God, so much, as
the conceit or opinion she had of him that promised. For, promises are not of
value, so much by the things promised, though never so great or excellent (for
they may promise much, who can perform nothing: or though they can, yet will
recall their word in lightness and inconstancy) as by the worthiness of the
party promising. We say in this world, we had rather have some men's word, then
other men's bond: and rather have a little promised of some, then much of
others. Now, such was the Judgment that Sarah held of him that promis^^:
namely, GOD: She judged him faithful which had promised.

Faithful: that is, she judged him Able and willing
to accomplish what-euer he promised to her. So that the Grounds of our faith
in God, and all his promises, must be a sure apprehension and knowledge of
these two things in God; 1. His ability, to make good what-euer passes him in
word. 2. His carfulness to do it, when he has said it.


Some will promise any thing, though their abilities stretch not to perform:
others are able enough, but have no care of their word. But both these are in
God; all-sufficient ability, and most careful willingness: So Sarah judged of
God, and therefore she believed against reason: and so must we do, if we
will believe Gods word aright. We may read, and hear, and know Gods word,
and have the points therein swimming in our heads: but if we will constantly
believe, with our hearts, his blessed promises, and in our consciences fear
his threatenings, we must be fully persuaded of these two, to be in him.

So are we taught by Christ (the wisdom of God) in the Lords Prayer (before
we pray for any thing) to be resolved of Gods power and will* to hear and
help us. He is our Father, therefore careful and willing: he is in heaven,
and therefore able to hear us, and to give us all things, Math. 6.9.

And the same commendation here given to Sarah, is also given to Abraham, Romans
4*21. He doubted not, but believed above hope, etc. being fully assured, that
he which had promised, was also able to do it.

The use hereof unto us is double.

First, to advise and guide us for our promises: not to be too recklesse, as
some are, what we promise: but to consider aforehand, and if it be beyond our
power, not to speak the word (for Christian men's words must not be vain) and
if we have promised any thing lawful and in our power, to be careful to
perform it. Thus to do is to be a faithful man, and is a good sign of a
holy man and Gods child: provided this be so,

First of all toward God, that we make conscience of performing the great vow
we made in our baptism, and all other serious and holy purposes of our heart
made to God. For, otherwise, he that breaks his vow to God carelessly, by
living profanely, he may in worldly policy keep ^is word, but he cannot do
it in conscience.

The Church of Rome is foully faulty in this point, making no conscience of
breaking promise and faith with us, or any of our religion; their nakedness
herein is discovered in the face of all Christendom: let them that are wi^e be
warned of it. They make great ostentation of their vows, and of their care to
perform them, above any other religion: but it appears hereby to be vile
hypocrisy. For, if they were conscionably, and not politikely and formally
careful of their vows of chastity, poverty, and others, made to God, they
could not but be likewise careful of their promises made to men: for the one
of these is the fountain and root of the other. But the neglect of the one,
shows the formality and hypocrisy of the other.

Let all that fear God, learn to make conscience of both these, in their
religion and service of God, and in all their dealings with men in the world:
that so the world may judge us faithful men, when we have promised.

Secondly, let us here learn how to help and strengthen our weak faith in
the great promises of God. We have a promise of salvation, Whosoever believes
in Christ, shall not perish, but have life everlasting. Of our resurrection,
Dan. 12. They tha^ sleep i^ the dust, shall rise again. Of our glorification.
Philip. 3.21: The Lord Jesus shall change our vile bodies, and make them like to
his own glorious body. Of a new world, 2. Pet 3.13. We look for new heavens
and a new earth, according to his promise.

These be, as S. Peter calls them, great and precious promises, 2. Pet. 1.4.
And surely it must be a great and precious faith, that can constantly believe
these. No better helps of our faith can there be, then often and seriously to
consider of the mercy and power of him that made them: if he be willing, and
able, what can let the performance of them? Let us therefore often say with
holy Paul, Faithful is he which has promised* who will also do it, 1 Thessalonians. 5: and with Sarah here, We judge him faithful which has promised.

Now follows the last effect, in the next verse.

And therefore sprang there of one, even of one which was as dead, as many as
the stars of the sky, in multitude, and as the sands of the seashore, which
are innumerable. The third and last effect of Sarahs effect, is, that by this
son Isaac, whom she conceived, and brought forth by faith, she had a
wonderful great issue, and a posterity almost without number. This effect
consists not of it self, but depends upon the former. Her faith gave her
strength to conceive Isaac, though she were barren: and to bring him forth,
though she were old and weak; and so her faith brought him out, by whom she
was made the mother of many millions of men.

The matter of this third effect, is the multitude of men, that came of
Abraham, and Sarah, by Isaac.

This posterity or multitude, is described by two arguments: 1. By the
beginning or root of it; One that was as dead. 2. The quantity or greatness,
laid down; 1. Generally to be a multitude and innumerable. 2. Particularly, by
two comparisons: 1. As many as the stars in the sky. 2. As the sands by the
seashore.




The first point, is the root and beginning of this multitude, in these words:
And therefore sprang there of one, even one that was as dead.

One; that is, one woman Sarah: or at the most, one couple, Abraham, and Sarah.
And this one was no better then dead. Not dead properly and fully: for, none
are so dead, whose souls and bodies are not separate: but, as dead, that is,
as good as dead, or half dead; meaning, that they were altogether unfit for
generation of children, the strength of nature being decayed in them; Abraham
being 100. and Sarah 90. years old. And if this be true of Abraham, who was
past age, how much more is it of Sarah, who was both past age, and was also
barren in her best age?

Here we are to note and learn many things:

First, Multitudes came of one. See here the powerful, and yet the ordinary
works of God, to rear up goodly and huge buildings, upon small and weak
foundations. So did he in the beginning, and ever since. Indeed, he made, at
the first, thousands of stars, because they must be no more then at the first
they were; and millions of Angels, intending they shall not multiply; he could
also have made millions of men in a moment: he would not, but only one couple,
Adam and Eve. And of them came the infinite race of mankind: When sin had
made an end of that world, he founded not the second that yet continues, upon
a thousand couples; but by three men and their wives, he multiplied the whole
race of mankind, which since have grown from three, to millions of millions.
And so here of one old man, and a barren old woman, spring innumerable
multitudes.

This, God does to magnify his own power, in the eyes of the sons of men:
and so he did also in matters heavenly. The number of Christians since Christ,
that have grown to millions, began in a poor number at the first. For, when
Christ himself was ascended, the number of known believers, was but 120. Acts
1.15.

The consideration hereof should teach us all these duties;

First, not to measure God by our lengthes: nor to tie him to our rules, but to
esteem of his power and might, as we see it deserves: and to entertain high
and honorable thoughts of him and his Majesty, who can rear up so great
works, upon so poor foundations.

Secondly, not to despair of our selves or our estates, though we think our
selves never so weak, so poor, so sick, either in soul or body: but to
remember him, that of one made multitudes to spring out. Therefore when thou
art brought never so low, either in soul or body, by any miseries either
inward or outward; faint not, but go forward in the strength of the Lord thy
God. Particularly: If God have afflicted thee with poverty, that thou have
almost nothing to begin withal: or for thy soul, is thy knowledge in religion
small, thy means poor, thy feeling of Gods favor but weak? yet faint not,
but lay fast hold on Gods power and promise, use carefully the holy means God
has ordained, remembering and relying on him, who made millions grow out of
one: and assure thy self, that as Job says, Though thy beginnings be small,
yet thy later ends shall greatly increase.

Secondly, observe here how old persons are called half dead, or as good as
dead; and that is true of them many ways.

First, their years and days, limited them* are as good as gone. For, suppose
a man should be as sure to live 100. years; as the sun is to run all the
day long his course, and at night to go down: Yet as when the sun is past
the height, and drawing downward, we say it goes fast down, and the day
hastes away; So, when a man is past his middle age, when the sun of his life
is past the noonsteede, he declineth daily, and draws fast away, and the
night of his life approaches, with have and much horror, unless he prevent
it.

Secondly, their strength and vital powers, by which their life is continued,
and their souls and bodies kept together, are so much weakened, that they are
almost extinguished: whereby it comes to pass, an old man may feel a
manifest defect in all powers of mind and body.

Thirdly, sicknesses or diseases grow upon them in old age: and as their
strength fails, so the force of diseases is redoubled on them: and look what
diseases have lurked in their bodies, which either naturally were bred in them,
or accidentally taken, they now show themselves more sensibly; and the weaker a
man is, the stronger is his sickness. In these three respects, an old man or
woman is as good as dead.

The use hereof is profitable.

First, they must therefore be advised to prepare themselves for death. Every
man is to prepare, I confess: then if every man, especially they that be
old: The young man may die, the old man must die: the youngest cannot live
always, the old man cannot live long; the aged man's grave is as it were made
already, and his one foot is in it. And this is not man's conceit alone, but
Gods own judgment, who as we see here, calls an old man as good as dead: and
that not so much in regard, that he is sure to die, as that he is near it:
Therefore as every man, young or old, is to make ready, because his time is
unknown, and no man is sure, that he shall live to be old, and as the
Psalmist sings, Every man in his best estate is altogether vaenity, Psalm.
39.6: So, especially he to whom God has been so gracious, as to let him see
old age, he should think of nothing but his end, and prepare every day to die
in the Lord. His gray hairs, his wrinkled skin, his withered face, his ill
stomach, his weak memory, his crooked body, and the manifest and most sensible
alteration and decay of his whole state of mind and body, should hourly all
cry in his ears, I am half dead, I will therefore prepare to die in the Lord.

It is therefore a miserable sight to see, that those who of all men should be
most willing to die, are for the most part most desirous to live. And those who
should be most ready to die, are generally, most ignorant, most covetous, and
their hearts most of all wedded to the earth, and earthly things.

Secondly old persons must here learn S. Paul's lesson: 2. Corinthians. 4. That
as the outward man perishes, so the inward man may be renewed daily. The
outward man is the body: the inward man is the soul and the grace of God in
it. They must therefore labor, that as the strength of their bodies decay, so
the grace of GOD in their souls may quicken and revive. But alas, the common
practice is contrary. For old men have generally so misspent their youths,
and in their old age are partly so backward, partly so unfit to learn
religion, that when they come to their deathbeds, they are then to be
Catechized in the very principles of religion: so that when as the body is
half dead, religion has no being in them; and when the body is a dying,
religion and grace scarce begins to live in them: such men cast all upon a
desperate point. But let them that desire a joyful departure, think of these
things aforehand: and as years draw on, and so draw life to his end, and the
body to the grave; so let them weane their hearts from the world, and lift them
up to GOD, and so spend their last days in getting knowledge, and in serving
God: that when their bodies are weakest and fittest for the earth, their souls
may be the holiest, and ripest for heaven. To such men shall it never be
discomfort to see their bodies half dead, when for recompense thereof, they
find their souls half in heaven. Thus we see the root or foundotion of this
posterity, how poor and weak it was. Now let us come to the greatness of it.

Thereof sprang as many in number, etc. This one, old couple, Abraham and
Sarah, are made by Gods power, the father and mother of many nations: and he
and she, of whom the world would have pronounced, they should not have left a
name upon the earth, have now millions of children that sprang out of them.
Here we may learn, That though GOD work ordinarily, according to the course of
Nature, which himself has established; yet that he is not bound to it, nor
will be: he bound it, therefore there is no reason it should bind him. Here
we may see the power and prerogative of Gods Majesty.

As in the beginning he made to be, those things which were not: so still he
calls things that are not as though they were. Romans 4.17: and turns and
altreth the state and nature of his creatures as pleases him. He can take life
from the living man, and leave him dead, he can give life to the dead man, and
make him live again. So has he dealt for the body, and for the soul he has
been no less wonderful.

Saul, of a bloody persecuter, he ca^ make a zealous Preacher, Acts 9, even a
glorious instrument, and a chosen vessel to carry his name unto the Gentiles,
even he who thought to have blotted out the name of Christ, and all that call
on that name from under heaven, Acts 9.14.

Rahab, a harlot, and a common woman, yet by Gods work so far altered, that her
faith is here registered in ye 31. ver. amongst the most excellent believers
that have bin in the world. Let this teach us, when we see our own sins, how
hideous and monstrous they be, yet not to despair. And when we see other men
live in extreme dissolutenes, yet not to judge of them before the time: but
even then, with hope and comfort, remember that God who quickneth the dead, and
calls things that are not as though they were.

And in that hope let us persuade our selves, that he may quicken our dead
hearts, and revive us by his grace. And therefore in that hope, let us raise up
our selves, to use all holy means, of Gods Word, Sacraments, and Prayer: which
if we carefully and continually do, we shall see wonders wrought in us; that
as they said of Paul, This man preaches the faith which before he destroyed,
and therefore glorified God for him, Galath: 1.22.23: So shall men say of us,
This man hates the profaneness that before he lived in, and loves the religion
that before he mocked. Such miracles will the Lord work in us, if with faith
and diligence we use the holy means; that so all that see us, shall Glorify
GOD for us.

Thus we see generally how great the issue and posterity of Sarah was.

But it is more particularly enlarged by two comparisons: As many as the
stars, in the sky, or as the sands by the sea shore, which are innumerable.

His comparisons are two: One taken from the heavens, as many as the stars in
the sky. The other, from the earth, as the sands in the Sea. And these two are
used by the holy Ghost, being things of incredible number, to express the
multitude of the Israelites, that came all from Sarah.

Not but that other things also are of as great number; as, the drops of water,
dust of the earth, and hairs of men's heads, etc: but these two are most common,
and prouerbiall phrases, whereby to express a multitude. And again, the
stars of the sky are rather named then any other, because God himself in the
beginning pleased to use it to Abraham, when he had never a child, Genesis 15.8.
God carried Abraham forth in the night, and bad him count the stars if he
could, and said, so shall thy seed be. And Moses afterward uses the same
comparison, Deuteronomy. 10.22. Our Fathers went down into Egypt 70. persons, and now
the Lord has made us as the stars of the sky in multitude.

Now because all men are not Astronomers, as Abraham and Moses were, and that
ignorant men might say, they can perceive no such matter in the stars:
Therefore he uses another comparison, which every Countryman may discern how
innumerable they be; namely, the sands of the Seashore: And least any should
say, I dwell in the mid-land Country, and never saw the sea sand, and am
ignorant, and so cannot judge of the stars: therefore to put him out of
doubt, the holy Ghost assures him in the end of the verse, that they are both
innumerable; that is not in themselves, or to God, but in regard of man, and
man's skill unable to be counted.

Concerning these two comparisons, let us observe the manner or the phrase of
speech in them used:

Secondly, the matter in them intended.

For the first, we are to know, that the speech is not proper, but
figurative: For properly, they were not as many as the stars, or as the
sands: neither are the stars or sands innumerable: but it is a figure called
by the Rhetoricians (...), which is an excess of finenesse of speech, or an
excessive elegancie. And as it is ordinary in all Writers, and even in common
speech: so it is not refused by the holy Ghost, but used both here, and in the
two forenamed places: and the like also of the same nature (but in other
phrases) in other places, as Saint John, 21.25. I suppose, says he, if all
the sayings and doings of Christ were written, the world could not contain the
books that would be written. Meaning, they would be exceeding many, and more
then would be needful for salvation. And Deuteronomie, 9. verse 1. Moses
says, That the Cities of the Canaanites were great, and walled up to heaven.
Meaning, that they were very high, and so high as was possible for Cities
walls to be, and as was impossible to have been scaled in all men's reason,
had not GOD fought for them.

These and such like are common in the Scripture: and seeing we allow that
liberty to all Writers, and to our selves in common speech, no reason to
deny it to the Scripture, which was written for all men's understanding, and
therefore in such phrases as are usual and ordinary with all men.

And the like liberty is here taken also in another figure, as many as the
sands by the shore of the sea: the word properly signifies, and sounds, the
lip of the Sea. Now the sea has no lip, but it is a speech taken or
borrowed from man or beast who have lips, and the sea shore resembles a
lip. For, look what a lip is to them, the shores are to the sea: as the
two lips do enclose the mouth: so the two shores on both sides do enclose
the Sea, which lies as in a mouth betwixt them. From hence we may learn
profitable instructions:

First, that therefore Rhetoric is a warrantable, good, and lawful Art; and
it arises thus: That which the holy Ghost practiceth, must needs be not only
not evil, but good and warrantable. But the holy Ghost uses and practiceth
Rhetoric, here and in many places else of the Scripture. Therefore it is a
good and lawful Art. The proposition is undoubted, the assumption is clear
both by these places, and almost the whole body of the Scripture: many of Saint
Paul's Epistles, many of Christ's own Sermons, Saint John's Gospel, many of the
Prophets, especially Esayah have as much and as elegant Rhetoric in them, as
any VVriters in the world; and, beside all other virtue and Divine power in
them, do even for figures and ornaments of Art, match any Orators, that have
written in the Greeks or Latins. Nor would it be any hard task to
undertake to prove, and illustrate every approved rule of Rhetoric, out of
some part of Scripture. Now if it be lawful to practice the rules of
Rhetoric, then is it lawful also to collect those rules together, to pen
them, and to make an Art of them. They therefore that holding the contrary, do
say, or teach, or write, it is unlawful, go against the stream, and common
practice of the Scripture, and rules of common reason.

Secondly, here it is apparent, that in preaching Gods word, it is lawful,
and warra^table for a Minister to use Rhetoric and eloquence. And the reason
is good: for that which the holy Ghost uses in penning of the Scripture, the
same may Gods Ministers use also in preaching the same. They therefore that
deny that liberty to Ministers, are too rough and rugged, and pull out of the
hand of the Ministers, one of his weapons, and out of the wings of the
Scripture one of her feathers.

Yet we must know, that all, or any kind of eloquence is not permitted to a
Christian Minister: For, S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 2.13. We speak the words of
God, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy Ghost
teaches, co^paring spiritual things with spiritual things: So that there is
a holy, a sanctified, a spiritual eloquence, an eloquence fit for spiritual
things, and that eloquence must be used. As the Israelites might marie the
Midianite women, whom they had taken in war, but not til they had purified
them, Numb. 31.18.19. And more plainly and particularly, Deuteronomy. 21.11.12.13.
Moses explaneth what that purifying is: And thou shall bring her home into
thine house, and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails, and put off
the garment she was taken in, and then thou may marie her: So, humane
eloquence must be brought home to divinity, and be pared and shaued with
spiritual wisdom, and then may lawfully and profitably be used.

For our more special direction herein, these cautions may be observed.

First, the more natural it is, and the less affected, the more commendable
is it in the doer, and more profitable to the hearer.

Secondly, it must be grave, sober, and modest; remembering the height and
holiness of the place a man stands in, and of the work he does. Therefore it
must not consist in telling strange tales, or using such gestures or words,
manner, or matter, as may move laughing, and smiling in the Auditors. There may
be wit in such doing: but it can hardly be the sanctified and spiritual
eloquence, which S. Paul there speaks of.

Thirdly, it must be such as may be a help, and not a hinderance to the
understanding of Gods word: for, it is a damsel to Divinity, but not her
Mistress. Gods word therefore must not bow and bend to her; much less be
wrung and wrested to her, but she to Gods word.

It must in a word be such, as may most lively, purely, plainly, and
significantly express the meaning of Gods word. Therefore a man must endeavor
that all his speech be in one language, at least in such as his hearers
understand: for else if he speak the body of his speech in one, and piece out
the members in other, which the people understand not; he may indeed in his
own spirit speak mysteries, but to the hearer he speaks parables. And to
his own understanding, he may preach well, but the hearer is not edified: as
the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 14.2.17. Therefore let not eloquence, be a
hinderance to the understanding of the hearers, which GOD has ordained to be a
help and furtherance. And with these or such like qualifications, eloquence
may be used, with good warrant, and much profit. And for cautions or
qualifications herein, hardly can any man set-downe better rules, then every
man's conscience will unto himself.

Thirdly, inasmuch as the holy Ghost here and elsewhere uses so much
Rhetoric, Divines may learn where the fountain of Christian eloquence is;
namely, in the Scriptures of the old and new Testament. Which being compi^ed
by the wisdom of God, we are to assure our selves, they contain in them true
wisdom of all sorts. Precepts of Rhetoric* I confess, are to be learned out
of other books, which purposely do ^each them; but the practice of those rules
in examples, can be no where better, than in Moses, the Prophets, and the
Evangelists. And this must needs follow upon that, that has already been
granted. For if we yield, that Rhetoric is good, and lawful, and practiced
in the scripture; then it must needs follow, that it is there practiced in the
best manner: for shall the Divinity there taught be the soundest? the History
there reported, the truest? the conclusions of Philosophy, Astronomy,
Geometry, Arithmeticke, Cosmographie, and Physic, there delivered, the
surest? the Music there practiced, the exactest? the Logycke there practiced,
the sharpest? the Laws there enacted, the iustest? and shall not the
Rhetoric there practiced, be the purest? Surely, if Moses had written a
book of his own, as he was a mere man, and as he was Moses brought up in
Egypt: or Paul writ a book, as he was a Pharisie, and Doctor of the Law; they
would both have been full of all excellent learning: for Paul was brought up,
at the foot of Gamaliel, Acts 22.3. And Moses was exceedingly learned in all
the learning of the Egyptians, and mighty in word and deed, Acts 7.22.

Shall they then be the Secretaries of the most high God, the fountain of
wisdom, and learning; and shall not their books be filled with the most
excellent learning in all kinds? Doubtless, who ever searches it, shall find
it to be so.

Seeing therefore, Eloquence is lawful, and that Preachers may lawfully use
it; let them also know, where to have it: let them study Gods Books, and
there they shall find not only Divinity, but knowledge and learning of all
sorts, and that most exquisite: and as excellent patterns and presidents of
Eloquence, as are to be found in any Authors in the world. And let them, if
they would preach with spiritual power, and eloquence; look how Moses, the
Prophets, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles preached* for, to follow them is
the true way.

Thus we see the manner here used by the holy Ghost, in these two comparisons,
to describe the greatness of this her posterity.

Now, the matter in them contained is, that here is the performance of one of
the greatest promises made to Abraham. The promise is, Genes. 22.17, I will
surely bless thee, and greatly multiply thy seed, as the stars in the
heaven, and as the sands by the sea shore. There is the promise; and behold
here the performance, in the very same words, and that most true and
effectual: For, at the time when the holy Ghost wrote these words, the
Israelites were multiplied to many millions; yea to a number past number.

So that here we learn, God is true in all his promises, be they never so
great or wonderful. If he speak the word, if the promise pass him, it is
sure: Heaven and earth shall rather pass away, than any one piece of his
promise shall fail.

The use is to teach us, first, to believe God when he promises, what-euer it
be* for, he is worthy to be believed, who never failed to perform what he
promised. He promised these Millions to Abraham, when he had but one child;
nay when he had never a one: Genes. 15.8: And Abraham believed. Such a faith
was excellent indeed, and deserves eternal commendation (as here it has).
Let us be children of this faithful Abraham, and the rather, seeing we see
the performance; which he saw not. We think it a disgrace, if we be not
believed; especially, if we do use to keep our word: Let us then know
thereby, what dishonor it is to the Lord, not to believe him, which never
failed in the performance to any creature.

Secondly, we must here learn of God to be true and faithful in our words and
promises. God spoke plainly, and deceived not Abraham: and after at the time
performed it; So must we deal plainly and simply in our words and bargains,
and think that to deceive and ouer-reach by crafty words, and double
meanings, and equivocal phrases are not beseeming Christianity. And we must
make conscience of a lie, else we are like the devil and not God. Also a
Christian man must take heed what, how, and to whom he promises: but having
promised, he must perform, though it be loss or harm to himself: if it be
not wrong to God, or to the Church, or State. Wrong to himself must not hinder
him from performance. Christian men's words must not be vain, they should be as
good as bonds; though I know it is lawful, and very convenient in regard of
mortality, to take such kind of assurances.

Lastly, Abraham had the promise his seed should be so, Genesis 15.8. And here we
see it is so, but he himself saw it not: so that Abraham had the promise, and
we the performance. So Adam had the promise of the Messiah, but we see it
performed: The Patriarchs, and Prophets, the promise of the calling of the
Gentiles, but we see it performed.

See here the glory of the Church under the New Testament above the old. This
must teach us to be so much better then they, as God is better to us, then he
was to them: and to excel them in faith, and all other virtues of holiness;
or else their faith, and their holy obedience shall turn to our greater
condemnation, which have had so far greater cause, to believe and obey God,
and so far better means than they. Which, if it be so; then alas what will
become of them, who come behind them; nay have no care to follow them in
their faith, nor holiness, nor any duties of holy obedience.

Thus much for the Example of this holy woman's faith: and of the commendation
thereof.

Now before he come to any more particular examples of faith, the holy Ghost
gives a general commendation of the faith of all those jointly which are
spoken of already.

VERSE 13. All these died in faith, and received not the promises, but saw them
afar off, and believed them; and received them thankefully, and confessed
that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.

HItherto the Holy Ghost has particularly commended the faith of diverse holy
believers. Now from this verse to the 17. he does generally commend the faith
of Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, and Iaacob together; yet not so much their faith, as
the durance and constancy of their faith. Particularly the points are two.

1. Is laid down their constancy and continuance; All these died in faith. 2.
That constancy is set fourth by four effects: 1. They received not the
promises, but saw them afar off. 2. They believed them. 3. Received them
thankefully. 4. Professed themselves strangers and pilgrims on the earth.

The first point touching these believers is; that as they begun, so they held
on: as they lived, so they died in faith.

All these died in faith. The truth of the matter, in the words, may be
referred to all before going, saving Enoch; who died not; yet he continued also
constant in his faith, and in that faith was taken up: but as for Abel and
Noah, they died in faith. Yet I take it, that principally and directly* the
holy Ghost intended no more than these four I named: and my reason is, because
the particular effects in this verse, and the points whereby this their
consta^cy is amplified in the three verses followwing, ado all agree,
especially with these four; and not so properly with Abel, or Noah: so that I
take, he means by all these, all these men that lived in the second world,
since the flood. All these died in faith; that is, in assurance that the
promises, made unto them, should be performed in Gods good time.

These promises were principally these two; 1. Salvation by the Messiah. 2. The
possession of the Land of Canaan.


In this faith they died; that is, they held it (through all as^aults and
temptations to the contrary) even to the last gasp, and died therein.

In this their practice, is commended unto us a most worthy lesson of
Christianity; namely, that we must so live, that we may die in faith. Many
say they live in faith: and it is well if they do so; but the maine point is,
to die in faith. There is none so ill, but howsoever he lives, yet he would
die well: If he would die well, he must die in faith. For miserable is the
death, that is without faith. And herein faith and hope differ from other
graces of God; Love, joy, zeal, holiness, and all other graces are imperfect
here, and are perfected in heaven: but faith and hope are perfected at our
deaths; they are not in the other world, for there is nothing then to be
believed, nor hoped for, seeing we then do enjoy all things: but as they are
begun in our life, at our regeneration, so they be made perfect when we die;
and they shine most gloriously in the last and greatest combat of all, which
is, at the hour of death. So that the death of a Christian, which is the gate
to glory, is to die in faith.

Besides, as life leaves us, death finds us; and as death leaves us, the last
judgment finds us: and as it leaves us, so we continue for ever and ever
without recovery or alteration.

Now to die in faith, is to die in an assured estate of glory and happiness;
which is that, that every man desires: therefore, as we all desire it, so let
us die in faith, and we shall attain unto it.

Saint Paul tells us, 1. Corinthians. 15.55, Death is a terrible serpent, for he
has a poisoned sting: Now when we die, we are to encounter with this hideous
and fearful serpent. He is fearful every way, but especially for his sting;
that sting is our sin: and this sting is not taken away, nor the force of it
quenched, but by true faith, which quenches all the fiery darts of the
devil, Ephesians. 6. If therefore we would be able to encounter with this great
enemy (in the conquering of whom who stands our happiness; and by whom, to be
conquered, is our eternal misery) we must then so arm our selves with
faith, that we may die in faith; for he that dies in faith, that faith of
his kills his sins, and conquers death: but he that dies without faith, death
and sin seize on him, and his sins live for ever, and his misery by them.

Now, if we would die in faith, we must live in faith; else it is not to be
expected: For, so these holy Patriarchs lived long in this faith, wherein they
died. For, their holy lives showed plainly, that they lived in that faith,
which (the Apostle says) does purify our hearts, Act. 15.9. Now, if we would
live in true faith, the means to attain it, set down by Gods word, are these;

First, we must labor to get knowledge of the fundamental points of
religion; of God, of the Creation, the Fall, the immortality of the Soul, the
two Covenants, of works by the Law, of Grace by the Mediator; and such other
substantial points, touching God, his Word, Sacraments, Law, Gospel, Prayer,
good Works, etc. as the Scriptures, and the Creeds, and Catechismes, out of
the scripture do yield unto us. Herein, the case of the common people of all
nations, is miserable. In Popery, their Clergy is so fat and full, they will
not: In our Churches, the Ministry (a great part of it) so poor, and ill
provided for, they cannot teach. Betwixt both, the people of the world do
perish for lack of knowledge; for how can they but perish, that die not in
faith? How can they die so, that live not in faith? And how can they ever have
faith, that have no knowledge, seeing knowledge is the foundation of faith?
Therefore, it needs the help of those that may, and the prayers of all; that
our Church may have Teachers* and our people Catechisers: for without learning
the Catechism, it is impossible to learn religion.

Secondly, when we have got knowledge, and so laid the foundation; then must
we learn the promises of God for salvation, and we must hide them in our
hearts, as the Jewels of life and salvation. We must believe them to be true
and effectual, to all that will take hold of them: and we our selves, must
therefore take hold of them, and apply them to our souls.

Thirdly, after both these, we must conform our selves throughout (heart, and
life) unto the holy laws of God: we must leave all bad ways, and ungodly
courses, though they be never so dear unto us, or so common in the world; and
must make conscience of all sin, and endeavor to do all duties to God and
man.

The first of these, is the ground of faith: the second, is faith it self: the
last, the fruit and effect of it, and an assured testimony of it to God, to his
Church, and to a man's own conscience. And to do these three things, is to
walk in the old and holy way* consecrated by Christ's blood, and trodden in by
all the holy Fathers: and Popery, nor any other religion can appoint so ^a^e,
so sure, nor so direct a way. Thus lived Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, and Iaacob; and
after this course they died in faith, and now live in glory: and so shall we
with them, if we will live in faith, as they did; but else, we may long look
for heaven, before we come there. Indeed, God can make a man that lived not in
faith, die in faith: but, the matter is not what he can do, but what is his
ordinary course; and that is this: They that live in faith, die in faith.
Therefore, let us take the ordinary course, and repent, and turn betimes, and
live the life of faith; and leave late repentance to them that think it but a
sport to venture a soul: that course may speed; but this course is sure to
speed: he that lives in sin, may hap to die in faith; but he that lives in
faith, is sure to die in faith, and to live in glory for ever.

Secondly, observe how it is said, All these died in faith: not some, but all*
Abraham, the father, and the root, and with him, the wife, the child, and the
grandchild: behold a true noble blood, a holy kindred, a blessed generation:
worthy is Abraham of all the honor he has, who was the root of such a noble
and blessed brood. And worthy are Isaac and Iaacob of so good a father, who
stained not their blood, by forsaking their faith; but held it, as they
received it, and lived and died in it. Let this teach us, first, if we be
fathers, to shine before our children, in a holy religion, true faith, and good
life; and it is great hope that our wives and children will follow us in the
same.

Secondly, if we be sons, to look which of our forefathers and ancestors
embraced the most holy religion; and to choose, and live, and die in their
faith. Most of our young Papists can say no more for their religion, but this;
my father and grandfather were of that religion. But they must look to all
their forefathers: Isaac and Iaacob would not be of their great grandfathers
( Nahors or Terahs) religion, but of their father Abraham's: and Abraham
himself, would not be of his father Terahs, or his grand father Nahors
religion; but he went up a great deal higher, to his forefathers to the tenth
generation, Noah and Shem, and embraced their religion. So that we see, it is
nothing to say, I am of my fathers, or grandfathers religion; unless first I
prove that theirs was of God: and then he is a Noble Christian man, which
knowing that, will not forsake it, but will live and die in it.

Thirdly, see here, true honor and gentry, is to live and die in the true
faith, and holy religion of our ancestors: here is the fountain of honor, to
do as these did. Abraham perceiues he is wrong, and erred with his fathers;
he therefore leaves his fathers and grandfathers religion, and goes up
higher, and takes a better. Isaac his son, makes himself heir, not of his
land alone; but of his fathers religion also: Iaacob the grandchild, follows
both, and dies in faith with them. Behold here Iaacob, a true gentleman in
blood; his holiness and religion is in the third descent: Let us all learn to
adorn our gentilitie and nobility with these ensigns of true honor.

And let all them, that shame to stain their blood by treasons, or
misdemeanors; shame also, to let their forefathers religion, holiness, or
virtues, fail in them: but let them all so live in them, that with Iaacob they
may die in their fathers faith.

Lastly, observe how it is said, they died in faith: they before lived in it;
but now their principal commendation is, they died in it.

Let us learn here, to hold on in a good course, when we have entered into it;
for constancy and continuance is the true commendatio^: he that dies in faith,
is he that receives the crown. To this end, let us stir up our selves, with
the Apostles exhortation, Galath. 6.9, Let us not be weary of well doing, for
in due time we shall reap, if we faint not.

And further, let this teach us all to choose that faith to live in (with these
holy Patriarchs) that we may boldly die in. It is a true observation, that
Popery is a good religion to live in, but ours to die in. The Papists usurp
this saying, and turn it the contrary way; but they have as much right to it,
as the thief to the true man's purse. The liberty, the pardons, dispensations,
sanctuaries, the pomp and outward glory of their Church; and their fasting and
outward austerities, being foul and fained hypocrisies, and indeed, open
licentiousness: these and many things more, may allure any natural man in the
world, to live in their religion; but when they come to die, then they all
know, and some confess, it is surest and safest to die in our religion. Let us
therefore, cheerfully, and comfortably, live in that religion, and faith,
wherein we may so boldly die, that even our adversaries confess it to be
safest.

Now follow the four effects, and fruits of their faith.

The first is this: that They received not the promises, but saw them afar
off.

By Promises, we understand, first* the promises of the Land of Canaan.
Secondly, the spiritual promises of the kingdom of Christ. These they did not
receive; that is, fully; though in part they did: for, true faith does always
receive, apprehend, and apply unto it self truly, though not fully, the thing
promised. God said, he would give them the Land of Canaan: but they did not
fully enjoy and possess it: So likewise, the Messiah was promised unto them;
but they never saw his coming in the flesh, and yet they believed Gods
promise, and died in that faith.

Where we may see, the invincible force of their faith, that cleaued fast unto
the promise of God, even unto death; though they never enjoyed the things
promised in this life: which plainly condemns our age of unbelief, for we
have more accomplished unto us, than ever they had. Abraham never saw Christ,
but afar off; yet we have him exhibited in the flesh: we see and know he
lived and died, rose again, and ascended, and now makes continual
intercession for us and we have the true sacraments, which shall last for ever
pledges of him, and of life everlasting by him. And for temporal promises, we
have far more accomplished unto us, than ever he had. But though we go
before Abraham in the fruition of Gods promises, yet we come far behind him
in belief; for faith works by love, and love is seen in true obedience: but
generally, this is too true, men make no conscience of obedience; which shows
undoubtedly, that there is little sound faith among us. And it may be feared,
that these notable men, Abraham, Isaac, and Iaacob, shall stand in judgment
against us, to our further condemnation; for they never received the
accomplishing of Gods promises, and yet they believed: but we do see the same
fulfilled and exhibited unto us, and yet we will not believe.

But saw them afar off. Here is the property of their faith, and the power
of it; the promises were afar off, and yet they saw them. The phrase here
used, is borrowed from Mariners: who being far on the sea* cannot descrie
towns, and coasts afar off, but only by help of some tower or hie place,
which their eye will sooner discern, though it be afar off: And so Abraham,
Sarah, Isaac, and Iaacob, being long before the day of Christ's incarnation,
could not other ways see Christ, but afar off, by the eye of faith, in the
promises of the Messiah: for, this is the property of faith, to make a thing
absent, to be present, after a sort; Faith being the ground of things hoped
for, and the evidence of things which are not seen.

Here then we may learn a difference between the Church in the old
Testament, and in the new. We in the new Testament, have greater measure of
knowledge, more lively discerning of the Messiah, and a clearer light of
understanding, in the mystery of our salvation by Christ; than the Church had,
under the old Testament: howsoever they excelled in faith, yet in the
knowledge, and discerning of Christ, they were inferior unto us. And therefore,
the Lord made this promise to the time of the Gospel, long before; that the^
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover
the sea. And Saint Paul proves this performed, when he affirms of the Church
of the new Testament, 2. Corinthians. 3.18. But all we as in a mirror behold the
glory of the Lord, with open face. And Christ, Ioh. 6.45. They shall be all
taught of God.

If this be true, that knowledge should so abound in the time of the Gospel;
then all ignorant persons of this latter age of the world must know, that they
have much to answer for at the day of judgment: for, God in the new testament
has made his Church to abound in knowledge, so that their ignorance (for which
they think God will hold them excused) shall be a bill of indictment against
them at the last day, to their further condemnation: because the light of the
Gospel is so clearly, and plentifully revealed in these days; that whereas
the most excellent Patriarchs of all, could then but see Christ afar off, the
most simple may now see him near unto them.

Again, where is more knowledge, there should be more obedience: therefore it
concerns all those that profess themselves to be Christians, and submit
themselves to hear and learn the word of God taught unto them; not content
themselves with bare knowledge, though it be never so much: But withal, to
bring forth the fruits of obedience in their lives and co^uersations. For,
though Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in regard of faith did go far before us:
yet seeing we have more knowledge then they had in the Messiah, we must labor
to become like unto them in the obedience of our lives: Their faith was stronger
then ours: but our obedience should be greater then theirs, because we have
more cause to believe then they. S. Paul says, We all behold as in a mirror,
the glory of the Lord with open face: 2. Cor. 3.18.
And the end thereof is this, that we may be transformed into the same image
from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. So that the more knowledge
we have, the more sanctification we ought to have, and the more hatred of
sin, and more obedience to Gods commandments. But, the more is the pity,
the case goes far otherwise with the world: for even many among us that are
no Students by profession, have great and commendable knowledge in religion.
But where is the fruit hereof in holy obedience to the Laws of God? God by
calling has made us a pleasant vine: but the sower Grapes of sin, are our
ordinary fruit, they be the Grapes of gall (as Moses says). Deuteronomy. 32.33.
For Atheism, blasphemy, contempt of Gods word and worship, with open
profaning of Gods Sabbath, do every where abound; to omit the heinous crimes
against the second table, as oppression, adultery, and blood touching blood:
for all which, we may justly fear, that the Lord will either remove his
Candlestick from us, and so of a Church and people of God make us no Church;
or else sweep us away by some fearful judgment, as with the besome of
destruction, because we withhold the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18: For
better it were not to have known the way of righteousness, then to turn from
the holy commandment given unto us: let us therefore join with our knowledge
obedience, that so we may show forth our faith in doing the duties of piety
unto God, and of brotherly love, and Christianity, unto our brethren. Thus much
of the first fruit of their faith.

The second fruit of their faith is noted in these words; And believed them:
where, by believing, we must understand not so much the act of faith, for that
was noted before, as the growth and increase of their faith; for the word
imports a confirmation of their hearts, and a resolution in assurance of the
promises made unto them: which is not unusual in Scripture: for Paul prays
for the Churches who had true knowledge, faith, and love, that they might
increase and abound therein more and more, Ephesians 3.16.17. Philippians,
1.9.11. Colossians 1.9.11.

Here then we may observe in the example of these Patriarchs, that it is the
duty and property of every true believer, to go forward and increase in faith,
till he come to a full persuasion and assurance in Gods promises. All the
gifts of GOD (and therefore faith) are the Lords talents, and every true
believer is the Lords servant, called to occupy therewith. Now GOD, having put
his talent into any man's hand, does require the increase thereof, as the
Parable shows, Luke 19.13. And this Paul teaches: for, praying for the
Ephesians, that they may go on, and be strengthened by the spirit in the inner
man, Ephesians 3.16, he signifies, that he that does truly believe in Christ,
must go on from grace to grace, till he be a tall man in Christ: as a child
grows from year to year, till he come to be a strong man. The nature of
faith is like unto fire, which will not go out, so long as wood, or other
fuel is put unto it, but will take hold thereof, and grow unto a greater
flame: and so will faith grow up to a full persuasion in all those that
conscionablie apply themselves to the Word and Prayer.

But goes the case thus with us in the matter of faith? Nay verily, generally
it is far otherwise: for many among us have no regard of faith at all, but
think they may live as they lust, their good meaning will serve the turn:
others, and those not a few, are so far from going forward in faith, that
they are every day worse and worse, and still go backward more and more. A
third sort we have, that will hear the word, and receive the Sacraments; but
yet their growth in grace is very slender, they stand at a stay, and profit
little.

Now, howsoever it may be thought but a small fault, not to profit in Religion:
yet undoubtedly it is a fearful Judgment of GOD, when the hearers of the
word in any congregation are daily taught, and do not profit thereby: and
therefore the holy Ghost notes those women to be laden with sin, which are
ever learning, and yet never are able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2.
Timoth. 3.7. If a child lately borne, like not well, nor grow, when it has
good keeping: the common saying is, that it is a Changeling. So, if a man hear
the word of God, and do not increase in knowledge, faith, and obedience, we
may most truly say of him, that he is a spiritual Changeling: and therefore
to avoid this fearful judgment of God, we must first labor for faith; and
having faith, increase therein, and in other graces of God, till we come to be
strong men in Christ.

It is here said, that those Patriarchs increased in faith: But it may be
demanded how, and by what means they did attain hereto? Answer. In the book
of Genesis, we may find three ways, whereby they were confirmed in the faith,
and did grow up in grace. The first means was from God himself; for, when he
had made his covenant with Abraham, mercifully renewing the same, during his
life as occasion served sundry times, he stayed not there, suffering it to die
with Abraham: but when Abraham was dead, God renewed his covenant with Isaac and
Rebecka: and with Jacob also after them. Now the tongue of man cannot utter,
what a wonderful furtherance it was unto their faith, to have the Lord
himself to renew his gracious promises unto them. The second means of
increasing their faith* was, their holy conuersing one with another: for, the
manner of the Patriarchs, was to teach and instruct their children, and to
nurture them up in the true worship and fear of God; by which means they did
not only implant Gods promises in the hearts of their children, but were
themselves confirmed in the same: for, he that teaches another from a feeling
heart, greatly strengthens his own soul. Now God himself does testify
this thing of Abraham, Gen, 18.19.
saying: I know him, that he will command his sons and his household after
him, that they keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment.
Now look what Abraham herein did to Isaac, that no doubt did Isaac unto Jacob.
The third means to increase their faith was, from each one to himself: for
they gave themselves often times in their own persons to muse and meditate
upon the promises of God: Genesis 24.63.
so it is said of Isaac, that he went out to pray or to meditate in the field
toward evening: and we may persuade our selves it was concerning this and
other promises of God, and the accomplishment thereof. And we need not to
doubt, but that Abraham and Iaacob did the like.

These are the means, by which these godly Patriarchs were strengthened in
their faith. All which, must be marked of us diligently, and put in practice:
for, the cause why we hear the word often, and yet profit little by it, is
chiefly this; because the means by which men should grow up in faith, are so
slenderly used among us. For, the first means, which is on Gods behalf to
man; is through his great and unspeakable mercy, plentifully affoorded in many
parts of the Land, in the holy Ministry of the gospel: wherein, Gods gracious
promises of mercy, are opened and applied to men's hearts, and his judgments
against sin, are sharply denounced, to drive men to lay hold on Gods mercy
in Christ. But, if we regard the second means; which is, mutual instruction,
of father to child, of master to servant* and of one neighbor to another;
together with mutual conference, about that we are taught: Or else, if we
regard the third means; which is, private meditation upon Gods word and
promises taught unto us (which meditation, is to a Christian soul, like the
chewing of the cudde unto a beast; for, as chewing the cudde turns that which
was eaten, into true feeding; so does holy meditation, make Gods word, and
promises, spiritual refreshing, by digesting them in the heart): If (I say)
we take a view of these two latter, we shall find them seldom used of very
many, or not at all. Blessed be God, we need not to doubt, but there be some,
who use these means, with care, and reverence: but alas, these some, are very
few. And because this duty is so slackly performed; hence it is, that though
the covenant of mercy in Christ, be often repeated, yet men reap little profit
by it. So that we must learn to follow this notable practice of these godly
Patriarchs, and look what means they used for the increase of their faith;
the same also, must we use, and that diligently: so shall we grow, and
increase, and wax strong in faith, as they did.

The third fruit of their faith, is this; And received them thankefully.

(...), the word in the original signifies, to salute; and that not only by
speech, but any way else: as by embracing, etc. and therefore in this place, is
not unfitly translated, And received them thankefully; that is, they took them
kindly at Gods hands.

This is a notable fruit of faith, whereby they are commended; that seeing the
promises of God afar off, did yet take them most kindly at Gods hands. But,
here we must consider, how they took them kindly: namely, by doing 2. things.
1. By an action of their heart. 2. By an action of their life. The action of
their heart was this, that howsoever the promise was not accomplished in their
days; yet they were wonderfully glad thereof: for, our Savior Christ said to
the Jews, Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was
glad. Ioh. 8.56.
It did Abraham's heart good to see Christ afar off: and so we may safely
think of Sarah, Isaac, and Iaacob, that their hearts were also ravished with
joy, to hear the wonderful promise of God, concerning the Messiah; and to
think of the most joyful performance, which they knew should follow in due
time.

Secondly, they took this promise kindly, by the practice of their life; for,
when they came to any strange place (as we may often read in the story) there
they built up altars, Genesis 12.8. and ^2.9. and 33.10.
and offered sacrifice unto God, and called on his name. All which they did, to
testify their inward joy, and thankful acceptance of Gods promises in Christ,
and of the promised Land; though neither were accomplished in their days.

Now, as touching our selves, the same maine promises of God, that were made to
Abraham, Isaac, and Iaacob, has the Lord made and continued unto us: nay, we
have the same already accomplished; and we see the same verified more evidently
and plainly, than any of the Patriarchs did. Which being true, our duty is, to
take the same much more thankefully, and kindly, at Gods hands, than they did
or could do; because we have more light and knowledge in the promises of God,
than ever the Patriarchs had.

But we have just cause to bewail the days and times wherein we live: for,
whereas we should take the promises of God most joyfully, and kindly; the case
is far otherwise. For generally, it may be said of our nation and people that
in regard of the mercies and promises of God, we are an unkind people. And
that this is true (for the most part) in all of us, if we^ will but a little
examine the matter, we shall find too apparent, by many evidences: for first,
let any of us be brought to a place, where we may behold some vain Interlude,
or Show; a man would not think how wonderfully we are ravished therewithal,
so as we could find in our hearts to spend whole days in beholding them. But
let us be brought to hear the Gospel of Christ, his holy word preached, and
taught; as it was unto Abraham, Isaac, and Iaacob (wherein they much rejoiced)
and there we sit heavy and drowsy, so as the Word seems loathsome unto us, and
one hour is so tedious, as we hardly hold it out without sleeping: and if it
pass the hour a little, O how impatiently our nature takes it! All which show
plainly, that we have no such joy to hear of Christ, and his merciful
promises, as these godly Patriarchs had: so that we are both hard hearted, and
unkind; and altogether insensible of so great favors of our God toward us.

Secondly, consider men's behavior in Gods worship: It is evident, that the
greatest part of people, worship God but in formal show, for fashions sake.
These godly Patriarchs, Abraham, etc. built altars in every place where they
came* and offered sacrifice unto God, to signify their kindness, and willing
heart, toward God for his promises. But now men worship God formally, not in
way of thankefulnes; but either because the Law co^pels them to it, or else
because it is a custom, and order, which must be kept. For proof thereof,
take some one of the common sort, and ask him why he comes into the
congregation? he will say, he comes to do as other men do; but what they
do, he knows not; or what he himself ought to do, he cannot tell, nor
cares much to know. Others also come to worship God: but ask them how they
do it? they will say, by saying over the ten Commandments, the Lords prayer,
and the belief. But, if the word be either preached, or read, they regard it
not; thinking that all Gods worship stands in the repeating of those three
things. Which shows, that they worship God but for fashion sake, and with
little more, than a plain lip-labor.

Another sort there are, which come near to God with their lips, but their
hearts are far from him; for though their bodies be present in the
congregation, yet their hearts are wandering about their worldly business, or
the works of sin: so that we may truly say, God is not worshipped with faith,
in the heart. And therefore we are an unkind people, and quite degenerate
from the faith of our forefathers, these holy Patriarchs, who received Gods
promises so kindly, and thankfully.

Thirdly, we have the word of God daily preached and taught unto us: but how
many be there that make conscience of obeying the same in their lives and
callings? Men do come and hear, and should learn: but when they come home,
they do s^at contrary to that which is taught. Now there can be no greater
unthankfulness nor unkindness toward Gods then this, that men should hear
and not obey; 1. Sam. 15.23. Isay 66.3.
for disobedience is as the sin of witchcraft: nay, the Lord himself says,
that he that makes no conscience of obedience in his life, is in his actions
of Gods worship, no more acceptable unto God, then a murderer is when he kills
a man.

Wherefore, seeing obedience is so rare to be found among us, and disobedience
abounds every where, it is a plain argument, that we take not the promises
of God kindly nor thankfully at his hands: for if we did, we would at least
endeavor our selves, to do what God commands in his Law, and desires in his
Gospel, and so be thankful unto GOD for his mercies, showing forth our
thankfulness by our obedience. So that it stands us in hand every man to
look unto himself for his own part, seeing God has given us his Gospel the
means of our salvation, that therefore we receive and embrace the same, least
God do either take the same from us, or us from it: for, we may be sure that
the one of these two will follow, if we do daily hear and make no conscience
to obey. And thus much of the third fruit of the Patriarchs faith.

The fourth fruit of their faith follows: And confessed, that they were
strangers and Pilgrims on the earth.

Herein we are to consider diverse points: 1. The Text says, They confessed;
that is, they professed openly, what they were, and what their religion was,
and that not only amongst themselves, but before the face of Gods enemies, and
heathen men. Genesis 23.4: Abraham told the people of the Land of Canaan, that he
was a stranger and a forrainer among them. And when Jacob came before Pharaoh,
he confessed, that both his days and the days of his Fathers, were days of
Pilgrimage: Genesis 47.9. Now, affirming so openly that they were strangers in
those Countries, they intimated a plain denial and dislike of the religion
and idolatry of those heathen Countries, and proclaimed themselves to be of
another religion: so that this is true which here is said of them; that they
made confession and profession of their estate and their faith, and that to the
enemies of God.

Hence we learn, that we are not to be ashamed of that holy profession of
Christian religion to which we are called. Our calling is to profess the
Gospel and religion of Christ; now to many it is a reproach and ignominy: but
we must learn this special lesson by the example of these men; that howsoever
the world judge of Christ and his religion, yet we having entered into this holy
profession, and being called hereunto, must never be ashamed of it; much less
deny or forsake the same. In the primitive Church it was a co^temptible thing
both among the Jews and Grecians to be a Christian: to the one, the Gospel
was a stumbling block, to the other a laughing-stocke, 1. Corin. 1.23. And yet
Paul professed openly, that he was not ashamed of that holy Gospel: Romans
1.16. And so it ought to be with us: we profess Christ's religion, and
therefore we must not be ashamed of it. Some there be that know but little,
and yet have a good mind to religion; but when they see some do nothing else,
but make a mock and a jest of religion, they are thereby daunted and held back
from the open profession, and embracing of it.

But if we look to be saved by faith, as these men were, we must learn by
their example, not to be ashamed of the profession of Christianity, whereto
we are called: but must follow this notable example of Abraham and the
Patriarchs, who were not ashamed, nor afraid to testify their profession among
the Heathen, whenever any occasion was offered: for, whosoever is ashamed of
Christ in this world, Christ will be ashamed of him at the day of Judgment,
be-his Father in the world to come, Luke 9.26.

To go further: These Patriarchs profess two things: 1. That they were
strangers: 2. That they were Pilgrims. A stranger, is one that has his abode
not in his own, but in a strange Country, though he travail not.

And a Pilgrim is one that is going through a foreign Country to his own
home. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were strangers, because they dwelt as strangers
in Tents, not in their own Countries where they were borne; but in that
strange Country, whither God had called them: and they were Pilgrims, because
they were always ready to go thence, whithersoeuer GOD would call them: and
in all places wheresoever they were, still they waited on God, and sought to
him for the kingdom of heaven.

Now this was not proper to these Patriarchs, but is also common to all
Christians, that look to be saved by the same faith: for David, long after
them, confesses unto God, Psalm. 39.12: that he is a Stranger and a Pilgrim,
or soiourner with him, as all his Fathers were. And even we also must follow
their faith in the practice of this profession: dwelling here on the earth, we
must testify and profess our selves to be both Strangers and Pilgrims.

But how (will some say) shall we be answerable to this profession? Answer. For
the practice hereof, we must do these 3. things: 1. We must use this world and
the things thereof, as though we used them not; 1. Cor* 7.31: The temporal
blessings we here enjoy, we must so use, as though they were not ours; but as
strangers do, only for the present occasion: but we must not set our hearts
thereon. And the rather to persuade us heereunto, let us consider the practice
of these godly Patriarchs. They had the promise of the Land of Canaan
distinctly and absolutely: so as no man in the world has more right to any
thing that he possesses, then they had to this Land; yet when they came into
it, they enjoyed it, and all things therein as strangers; and possessed
nothing, but did even buy ground to bury their dead in. And so must we use the
things that we have in this world: for our houses, we must use them as
Strangers do an Inn: and for our goods, we must use them as Pilgrims do
other men's goods, where they stay for a night: we must so use them always, as
being ready and willing to leave them the next morning, or at any time when God
shall call us away.

Secondly, we must cast off all things in this world, that may any whit hinder
us in our journey to the kingdom of heaven; like unto good trauailers, who
will carry nothing with them in the way, but that which may further them to
their iourneyes end; and if any thing hinder them in the way, they will cast it
from them, and rather lose it then be hindered from their home. But what is that
which is burdensome unto us in this our journey to heaven? This S. Paul
shows, when he says, 2. Tim. 3.6, that certain simple women are laden with
sin. Behold, sin is that that ladeth v^: and the Author to the Hebrews,
calls sin the thing that hangs on so fast, and presses us down: (Heb.
1^* 1^)* Therefore* if we will be good travelers, and pilgrims toward the
kingdom of heaven; we must take heed of all sin; for that will hold us
down, that we cannot go one step forward, but will draw us backward unto
hell: for, the way is strait that leads unto life, and the gate narrow, and
few there be that can enter into it: Math. 7.13. He that would come hither,
must come with an humble, and pure heart: for the gate will not suffer any that
is laden with sin, to enter therein. The proud man, whose heart is puffed up
with pride: and the covetous man, whose heart is enlarged with desire of gain:
the ambitious man, who i^ with child with worldly pomp and state: and the
luxurious and voluptuous man, who fats himself with earthly and carnal
pleasures: all these are grown too big to enter into this strait gate; But
the meek in spirit, who lead an humble and innocent life, these shall tread
this path though it be narrow, and enter in at this door, though it be
strait. And therefore, we must cast off every sin by the practice of true
repentance; and so make our selves fit pilgrims for the way to heaven.

Thirdly, we must learn contentation of heart, in every estate of life, which
God shall send upon us: we must be contented as well in sickness as in
health* in poverty, as in plenty; in trouble, as in peace: and in good report,
and ill report; and in all estates of life and death. A pilgrim in his way
takes all things patiently, that befall him; and if he be iniuried any way, he
puts it up quietly, without seeking revenge, or making complaint* till he come
home; where he knows he shall have audience, and redress. Even so must we
behave our selves in this our pilgrimage to heaven: in hope of that redress
and rest we shall have, we must bear all things patiently, that befall us in
this life, which is the way: and doing these three things, we shall become good
pilgrims and strangers in this world.

Here two questions offer themselves to be considered. First, if every man,
both in profession and practice, must show himself to be a pilgrim and
stranger in this world: Whether then, is it not a good estate of life, for a
man to contemn the world, and all things in it, and to betake himself to
perpetual beggerie, and voluntary poverty? Answ. The world in Scripture is
taken diverse ways: first, for the corruptions and sins in the world; and
these must be contemned by all means possible: yea, that is the best religion*
which teaches best how to contemn these; and he the best man, who most
forsakes them, in what calling soever he lives.

Secondly, for temporal blessings, as money, lands, wealth, sustenance, and
such like outward things, as concern the necessary or convenient maintenance
of this natural life. And in this sense, the world is not to be contemned,
for in themselves, these earthly things are the good gifts of God, which no man
can simply contemn, without injury to Gods disposing hand and providence, who
has ordained them for natural life.

The Papists esteem it an Angelical state of perfection, approaching near to
the state of glory, when a man forsakes all, and betakes himself to
voluntary poverty; as begging Friars do: But indeed it is a mere device of
man's brain, and has no warrant in Gods word, which decrees thus; that he
that will not labor (in some lawful calling) shall not eat. Object. But here
they will say, that our Savior Christ, speaking to the young rich man, bade
him go and sell all that he had, and give to the poor, and he should have
treasure in heaven. (Mar. 10.) Answ. That commandment was not ordinary, but
special, belonging to that young man: It was a commandment of trial, given to
him only; as this was to Abraham, when God said, Abraham kill thy son, Genesis
22.2. And the reason of that commandment, was peculiar to him; namely, to show
him his corruption, and to discover his hypocrisy. Again, howsoever the young
man was commanded to sell all, yet he is not commanded to give all; but only
thus, Sell all, and give to the poor. 2. Object. Again they object, that
Christ himself was a beggar, and his Disciples also, and had nothing of their
own, but went up and down the world, as beggars; and lived of that which
others ministered unto them. Answ. This is a mere forgerie, and cannot be
proved out of the word of God. The bag which Judas carried, does prove the
contrary; for, he was (as it were) the steward in Christ's family, who looked to
their provision, and to their contribution to the poor: as may be seen, Ioh.
13.27, 28, 29. Yea Christ's Disciples, though they left the present use of their
houses, and places; yet they gave not over their title and possession in them:
for, Christ went to Peter's house, where he healed his wives mother, Math. 8.14.
And after the time of Christ's passion, Peter, and the other Disciples, returned
to their ships again, and became fishers for a time. For Christ (John 21.)
after his resurrection, appeared to them while they were fishing.

2. Quest. Whether may a man lawfully seek to be rich, seeing we must
profess our selves to be pilgrims and strangers in this life? Ans. Riches
are taken two ways: 1. for things sufficient. 2. for abundance. For the
first, by things sufficient, I mean things necessary and meet for a man's
estate, to maintain him and his family; and thus a man may seek to be rich:
for, so we are taught to pray, in the fourth Petition, Give us this day our
daily bread; that is, things meet and needful for the day. From whence I
reason thus: That which we may lawfully ask at Gods hands, we may lawfully
seek for: But we may lawfully ask of God all things necessary to this life;
Therefore we may lawfully use the means to attain unto them. And this, Prou.
30.8.
Agurs prayer shows also, Give me not poverty nor riches, feed me with
food convenient for me. Where we see, it is requisite a man should labor for
things necessary to this life. Now, because man's corrupt nature is so gripple,
that he would not be contented with the whole world, though it were all his;
therefore we must learn this rule of contentation, for worldly things: namely,
to follow the counsel and example of wise and godly men, who are neither
covetous, nor riotous; but rest contented with that which is sufficient. As for
the wearing of apparel, we have no special rule, nor precept in Gods word: and
therefore our direction, must be the example and fashion of the most grave and
godly, in that calling whereof we are; whose president must be our direction
in all cases, whereof we have no precept nor rule in Gods word.

But if riches be taken in the second sense, for abundance, above that which
is competent and sufficient; then it is not lawful for a man to seek to be
rich: for proof hereof, we have the plain testimony of the word of God; Paul
says, 1. Tim. 6.8, 9. When we have food and raiment, we must therewith be
contented: for they that will be rich, fall into tentation* and snares, and
into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction. Where, the Apostle does not simply condemn a rich estate, but
rather the desire to be rich, that is, a desire to have more than is necessary
for the maintaining of a man's estate. Yet this is the common sin of the
world, men are so covetous that they will not be contented with that which is
enough, but still toil and moyle for more; till they have gotten so much under
their hands, as would honestly and sufficiently maintain ten men of their
estate and calling. But all such are condemned, by the testimony of the holy
Ghost, in the place before named.

Quest. What if God give abundance to a man, by lawful means; what must such
a man do? Answ. When God sends riches in abundance to any man, he must
think himself to be appointed of God, as a steward over them, for the good
disposing of them to the glory of God, and the good of his Church; always
remembering this rule of the Prophet David, Psalm. 62.10, If riches increase, set
not thy heart on them. He says not, If riches increase, refuse the^* but, set
not thy heart on them: and thus much of these Questions.

Now this practice of the Patriarchs is as necessary for us in these days as
ever it was; for the cause why we profit little after much hearing of Gods
word, is this: we have not behaved our selves like Pilgrims and strangers in
this world, but the cares of the things of this life have choked it up, Math.
13.2^, that it could take no ground, nor root in our hearts: when we have
heard the word we remember it not, because our hearts and the affections
thereof, are set on the pleasures and commodities of the world. We therefore
must shake off this filthy sin, and learn to behave our selves like
Pilgrims and strangers, not intangling our selves with the things of this
life, but using them as though we used them not, so as they be no hinderance to
the growth of Gods graces in us.

For they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country. In
the former verse, was set down the constancy of Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, and
Jacob, in the faith. Now in the 14.15. and 16. verses, the holy Ghost
proceeds to amplify and enlarge the commendation of their perseverance in
the faith: for the scope of all these verses, is to prove, that all these
particularly were constant in the faith unto the end. The proof is made by one
substantial reason; the sum whereof is this: Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, and
Jacob, sought for their Country, which was heaven, and therefore they were
constant in the true faith.

But some may think that this reason is not substantial, for men may seek
for heaven that never had true saving faith. As, Balaam desired that his end
might be like the end of the righteous, Numb. 23.10: wherewith no doubt he
desired the state of the righteous after this life.

I answer, that this desire of Balaams was not grounded upon any constant
persuasion, nor settled resolution, but upon some sudden motion: Secondly,
though he desired to die the death of the righteous, yet he would not live the
life of the righteous: he had no delight to walk in the way to come to that
end which they walked in; without which, no man ordinarily can come to it.

Yet further some will say, Many shall seek (as our Savior Christ says) to
enter in at the strait gate of the kingdom of heaven, and shall not be able,
Luke 13.24. Therefore to seek for heaven is no sufficient argument of true
faith.

Answer. True indeed, many shall seek to come to heaven, and shall not be
able to enter; because they seek when the door of mercy is shut, and when the
day of grace is past: for there is a time of grace wherein the Lord will be
found. Now if men seek him not in this time, though they seek him never so
long after, yet they shall not find him. But the seeking of these Patriarchs
was a sound and constant seeking, and so a notable fruit of their true faith.
For 1. they sought a heavenly Country: 2. they sought it in due time; not for a
brunt, but through the whole course of their lives: 3. they went the right way;
denying themselves and their estate in this life, as being strangers upon
earth: and they were willing to forsake all things in this world to attain
heaven, esteeming it as their true dwelling place, and their eternal rest.

Now more particularly, the holy Ghost divides this reason into two parts, and
handles the same severally: 1. he proves that they sought a Country, in this
verse; and 2. that this Country which they sought, was heaven it self, verse
15.16. For the first part; that they sought a Country, is thus proved: They
which say they are Pilgrims and strangers, they show plainly that they seek a
Country.

But Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob said of themselves, that they were Pilgrims
and Strangers.

Therefore they show plainly that they seek a Country.



The first part of this reason is evident in it self: for he that says he
is a Pilgrim and a stranger in any place, shows plainly that he is forth
(...) his own Country, and therefore seeks one. The second part of the
reason is assumed from their confession, in the end of the former verse; and
confessed, that they were Pilgrims and strangers on the earth: from whence,
the conclusion is laid down in this 14. verse, that therefore these Patriarchs
sought a Country.

In this reason observe, first, that the Author of this Epistle had diligently
read the History of Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, and Jacob, penned by Moses in the
book of Genesis: and in reading, had observed that which they particularly
confessed of themselves in many places of that book; namely, that they were
Pilgrims and strangers: yea, also he gathered from their confession, this
most heavenly meditation, that therefore they were not in their own Country,
but sought another. These three things then the Author of this Epistle used
about the holy Scriptures: Reading, meditation, and observation.

Whence we learn, that all Gods Ministers, and those which prepare themselves
to the work of the Ministry, are diligently to read and study the holy
Scriptures, and to meditate therein. No doubt, the Author of this Epistle was
an Apostle, and had most notable gifts by virtue of his calling, and yet he
bestowed pains in viewing the particular words of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
recorded by Moses in the book of Genesis. Daniell also was an extraordinary
Prophet: yet (as we may read) Daniel 9.2, he studied with admirable
diligence the prophecies of Jeremy and Ezekiel. And Timothy, though he were a
Disciple (Acts 16.1) and well learned: yet Paul charge him to give attendance
to reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine, 1. Timothy 4.13. And Ezekiel is
commanded to eat the role, and to fill his belly with it, Ezekiel 3.3: And
Saint John likewise is commanded to eat up the little book, Revelations,
10.9.10: which thing he did: all which strongly enforce the former duty,
showing that Gods servant in the Ministry, must as it were eat up Gods
book; that in judgment and understanding, he may digest as far as is
possible the deep things of God, and the hardest places of the Scripture: here
must he lay his foundation, and hither have recourse from all other writing
whatsoever, in any matter of doubt.

This direction is most necessary for the Schools of the Prophets, and for all
Gods Ministers: and yet notwithstanding, the contrary practice bears sway in
the world. For, in the Popish Universities, most of their divines apply
themselves to study the books of certain schoolmen, and the Expositors or
Commenters thereupon. These are applied day and night, though they be both many
and large, and full of needless quiddities, and oftentimes they be also
publicly expounded, whereas in the mean time the Bible lies neglected, or
little regarded: wherein we may see the notable work of the Devil and his
malice, toward the Church of God; for the Schools of the Prophets are the
fountains of learning. Now, when as Satan by this means, does steal away
from them the study of the Bible, and in stead thereof foisteth in corrupt
humane writings; hereby he poisons the fountains, to the danger of infecting
the whole Church. And as this is common in the places of Popery; so likewise
some fault is this way committed among us that be Protestants; for, many in
their private studies take little pains in the book of God, but apply
themselves wholly to the writings of me^; as Counsels, Fathers, Schoolmen,
and other Expositors: and in the handling of the Scripture, they glory more to
prove a point of doctrine by multiplicitie of humane testimonies, then by the
written word. But the truth is, thus to do, is to prefer the handmaide
before the Mistress: and as for the opening and expounding of Scripture by other
Writers, it is no such point of deep learning: a man of ordinary capacity and
diligence, may easily deliver what others have done before him. But to open the
Scripture soundly and purely; as it ought to be, is of another nature then
these me^ take it: and hereto the sound study of the Text itself, will prove
the best help, as they will confess who have tried most of all. And though
the best men's works be but base stuff to the pure word of God, yet the
writings of holy me^ must not be contemned; but must be read and regarded in
their place, for our furnishing and enabling to the study of the Scriptures,
and for the helping of our knowledge and judgment in the word of God: they
that hold or practice the contrary, know not what helps they be; and what
light they yield to many dark places of Scripture: But still above and beyond,
before and after all, the word of God must be eaten up of us, and studied with
all diligence.

Secondly, in that the Author of this Epistle notes their particular sentence,
and by consequence gathers this meditation out of it; that they sought a
Country; Hereby all men are taught to exercise themselves in hearing and
reading all the places of the Bible: even the Histories of men therein; and out
of the words to gather godly meditations. So Paul says to the Colossians,
Psalm. 1.2.
Let the word of God dwell plentiously in you, Coloss. 3.16. The Prophet David
also notes it for the property of a good man, to meditate in the Law of God
day and night: And the practice of the blessed virgin Mary, is registered as an
example for us to follow; that she kept all the sayings of Christ in her
heart. But pity it is to see, how reading in the word of God is laid aside;
Luke 2.51.
for it is so little practiced, that men now-adaies will not be at charge to
buy a Bible: for books of Statutes, men will not only have them in their
houses, but at their fingers ends; but Bible they have none: and if they have,
it lies on the deske, or table, and they read it not; and if sometime they
read, yet they never meditate thereon, as we are taught in this place.

Further, whereas the holy Ghost reasons thus upon these examples, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, were strangers and Pilgrims, therefore they sought a
Country: Herein he teaches us this special point, to wit; that a doctrine,
though it be not expressed in plain words in the Bible; yet being gathered
thence by right and just consequence, is no less to be believed and received,
then that which is plainly expressed: and therefore they are far to blame
which mislike these terms in Divinity, person, nature, sacrament,
consubstantiall, trinity, etc. because they are not expressed in the word.
But, they may with good conscience and much profit be retained; because, though
not literally, yet in sense and meaning they are contained in the Scripture,
and may by just consequence be gathered thence. And, we deny not
transubstantion, because the word is not in the Scripture; but because the
matter is not there: nor can by necessary consequence be derived from it, but
rather the contrary.

Again, many refuse these doctrines, the proceeding of the holy Ghost from the
son; and the baptizing of children, because they are not expressed in the
Scripture. But hence we answer, that though they be not expressly set down in
so many words, yet by just consequence they may be soundly gathered out of
Scripture, and therefore are true doctrines no less to be believed, then that
which is plainly expressed. And thus much of the first part of the reason, And
if they had been mindful of that Country, whence they came, they had leisure
to have returned.

But now they desire a better, that is an heavenly: Wherefore God is not
ashamed of them to be called their God. For he has prepared for them a City.



Here the holy Ghost proves the second part of the former argument, by 2.
reasons: the first, is contained in the 15. verse, and the beginning of the 16.
It is taken from the distinction of Countries, and may be framed thus; They
either sought an earthly Country or an heavenly Country.

But not an earthly: Therefore they sought an heavenly Country. The first part
of this reason is clear of it self. The second part is in the 15. verse: from
whence follows the conclusion in the beginning of the 16. verse.

To come to the first part, in these words: And if they had been mindful of
the country, etc. That is, if they had regarded, or thought upon Mesopotamia,
or Caldea, from whence they came, and where they were borne; with any desire to
have enjoyed the profits, or pleasure thereof; they had leisure enough to have
returned back thither, by reason of the length of their days which they
lived, in the Land whither God called them.

Here observe two points: First, that they are not mindful of (or, as the
word imports) they remember not the country from whence they came: but when
God gave them commandment to depart thence, and not to return to Mesopotamia
again; after this commandment given, they came forth, and did forget their
own country.

Whence we learn, that howsoever usually, Forgetfulness be a vice; yet some
kind of forgetfulness, is a notable virtue: namely, to forget the things that
displease God, and which he would not have us to think upon. Psalm. 45.9. The
Church is commanded to forget her own people, and her fathers house: That is,
her own will and desires; she must never think thereof (nor of any other
thing whereby God is displeased) unless it be with dislike.

This condemns the practice of many aged persons, in these days, who delight
themselves among the younger sort, to tell of the bad practices of their youth;
in wantonness, contentions, and breaking Gods commandments: But, in so doing,
they sin grievously; for, a man must not remember his sins, but with
dislike, and detestation; being grieved with them, and angry with himself for
them; or else to teach others how to avoid them.

And as this kind of Forgetfulness, is a good virtue; so there is also a
virtuous and good Remembrance: namely, to be mindful of that which may please
God: as of Gods Judgments, to be humbled thereby: and of his Mercies, to be
thankful unto Almighty God for them: and of his Commandments, to become
obedient to his will. These things therefore, we ought to imprint by diligence,
in our memories.

Secondly, here observe, God calls them out of their own country, and
bids them live in the land of Canaan, as strangers and pilgrims; and so
they do, abiding there, without any purpose to return; nay, they are not
mindful of their former home.

Hence we are taught, to be constant in that calling whereunto God has
called us. It is a fearful sin, for a man to go back from that calling,
in which God has placed him. When the Israelites abode not patiently, and
constantly, with God in the wilderness, but desired to shake off the calling
of God, and to return to Egypt, there to sit by the fleshpots again; they
had Gods hand upon them grievously: as we may read at large, Psalm. 78. Lots
wife, for looking back, when she was commanded to the contrary; was
fearfully, and strangely punished, being turned into a pillar of salt, Genesis
19.26. And our Savior Christ says, Luke 9.62, No man that puts his hand to
the Lords plough, and looks back again, is apt to the kingdom of God. As
though he had said, He that starteth from the plough, is not fit for the field:
no more is he that shifteth from his calling, fit for Gods service.

To apply this to our selves: God has called us to profess Christian
religion: whence we are called Protestants. We therefore must profess the same
constantly, and hold it fast, without wavering, or doubting (even without
being mindful of that spiritual Egypt of darkness and superstition, whence
we are delivered) much more, without turning to any other; this being the true
religion, which is grounded on Gods word.

Again, in this our calling of Christianity, we have vowed unto God for our
selves, to renounce the flesh, the world, and the devil. Now, this being our
calling; as we have promised, and undertaken it: so we must obey it in our
lives, fighting manfully every day, against the world, the flesh, and the
devil. For, if we profess religion in word, and do not obey it in deed; we
make our selves unfit for the kingdom of heaven. But alas, men are like to the
Swine that returns to the puddle, though he be washed never so clean; and to
the Dog, that returns to his vomit: for, most men do but serve the flesh,
and the world, and the lusts thereof; therein is their joy, and their hearts
ease: take away these things from them, and take away their lives: so far are
they from seeking the kingdom of heaven, as these Patriarchs did.

Thus much for the first part of the reason.

Now follows the second part, which is this; But they sought not a place in
earth: and therefore the conclusion follows, That they desire a country,
which is heaven; in these words: But now they desire a better.

But some will say, the Patriarchs were dead many hundred years, before this
was written; How then can they be now said, to desire a country? Answ. The
Author of this Epistle, here observes, and follows the manner of them that
write Histories; who speak of things past long ago, as though they were now
present.

Now, it is said, they desired a better country. These Patriarchs had laid
before them two countries, the Land of Canaan, and the kingdom of Heaven; and
of these two, they might choose whether they would, to be their portion, and
inheritance, upon which they would bestow their hearts: Now, they esteemed
heaven (though it was to come) better than Canaan, though present; and
therefore made choice of heaven, and longed for it.

Where we learn, that as we must be thankful to God, for all his blessings;
so among them all, we should choose the best. This, David does: for being put
to choose, whether he had rather live in safeguard, and in solace, with the
wicked and ungodly; than in base estate, and in great danger, near to Gods
sanctuary: He says, Psalm. 84.10, He had rather be a doore-keeper in the
house of his God, than to dwell in the Tabernacles of wickedness. And Solomon
is highly commended by the holy Ghost, 1. King. 3.10.11, for choosing a wise
and understanding heart, before riches and honor. Moses also (as we shall see
afterward) had his choice, whether he would live gloriously, and at ease, in
Pharohs court; or with the Church of God in adversity: now, Moses having the
gift of discerning, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and
chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season. Which holy examples, do all teach us; that
when God sets before us diverse sorts of his blessings, we in spiritual
wisdom, must make choice of the best. On the contrary, Esau had this choice
set before him; his brothers red broth, and his birthright; but he chose the
worse: and therefore, in the new Testament, the holy Ghost notes him with this
mark, to be profane Esau, for his labor. And the Gaderens also are branded
with a note of infamy to all ages, for choosing their hogs before Christ, and
his salvation. And the like choice is set before us every day; for God of his
mercy, in ye preaching of the word, for his part, does set forth unto us,
Christ Jesus crucified; and in him, remission of sins, and salvation. Now, on
the other side, comes the devil, and sets before us, all sorts of vain
pleasures, and delights; showing to every man those sins, to which he is
given; and with them, all the profits or pleasures, that usually accompany such
sins. Now, most men having this choice set before them, do leave the true
and substantial blessings of God, and come to Satan's painted Pageants, and
there make choice of sin, with those base companions that do attend her. This
is too apparent to be denied: for, howsoever the word of God be preached unto
us, and we do hear the same, yet we prefer the vanities and pleasures of
the sinful world, before Christ crucified; making no account of him, nor of
our own salvation by him, in comparison of the present profits and pleasures
of sin. But we must pray to God to give us spiritual wisdom, and the gift
of discerning, that now when God sets before us things so far differing, we
may have grace to discern between them; and withal, to prefer and make
choice of the best, and to refuse the worst. But as for them that are so mad in
their choice, that they now prefer sin before the blessings of God in
Christ, they shall see the day when they would wish themselves to be Dogs,
Toades, or Serpents, rather then men and women: and yet (though they would be
glad of that exchange of state) they shall never compass it, but shall remain
woeful men and women for evermore, because that once they made so profane a
choice: when the path of life was set before them, they chose the way of death
rather then of life; and therefore when they would desire death, they shall not
have it, but shall live a life more bitter for ever then any death in the
greatest pangs.

Thus we see in general their choice was of the better. Particularly the Text
adds; That is, an heavenly.

In which words is laid down the last and chief point in this reason, to wit,
that the Patriarchs desired a better Country then the Land of Canaan, and that
was an heavenly Country, even heaven it self: the proof whereof is
principally intended in this place.

Now whereas the Patriarchs, being our forefathers in faith, and patterns
whom we must follow, did desire heaven: by their example every one of us is
taught the same duty, to aim at another and a better Country, then that in
which we live, even at the kingdom of heaven; and not to think that this
world is the Country we are borne for. This better Country we must all seek
for, whatsoever we be, high and low, young and old, learned and unlearned, if
we will follow these godly Patriarchs. And this we must do not at death
only, seeking this world all our life long, for that is to despise heaven; but
even in the time of our youth, and strength of our days, must we set our
hearts on heaven; endeavoring so to use this world, and the things thereof,
that when we die, we may come to heaven, that blessed country, which we
desired, and sought for in our lives.

And to persuade us hereunto, consider the reasons following. First, worldly
wisdom teaches this: If a man dwell on his own land, and in his own house,
he is careless; But if in another man's house, whereof he has no lease, but
contrariwise, is certain to be put out, he knows not when: this man will in
time provide himself of another that so he may remove into it, and not be
destitute; and if it be within his power, he will provide a better, that so he
may not remove for the worse. Behold, while we live in this world, our
bodies are tents and tabernacles wherein our souls do dwell, for a time: and
besides; this time is uncertain; for there is no man that can say certainly,
he shall live to the next hour: Therefore, we must every one of us, provide
for himself a dwelling place in heaven, where we may abide for ever, in all
blessedness.

Again, consider the state of all sorts of men in the world: for, sin,
Atheism, and profaneness, abound every where, the blaspheming of Gods holy
name, and the breaking of his Sabbath; besides daily sins against the second
table: Now, all these cry continually for vengeance, and for Gods judgments
to be inflicted upon us, and we know not how God will deal with us for own
sins; whether he will take from us our goods, and good name, our health,
friends, or life it self: and therefore it stands us in hand to provide for
our selves, a resting place, wherein we may abide for ever, after this frail
life full of misery is ended.

Thirdly, if we shall not do this, mark what follows: this, and no other,
is our estate; By nature, we are the children of wrath, and of the devil; and
by our manifold sins, we have made our ease far worse: Now, what is due
unto us, for this corruption, and for these transgressions? Surely, not heaven,
but another place; even the contrary, the place of eternal woe, and
destruction, the bottomless pit of hell. Now, if this be our due by nature,
then let not sin, nor Satan, deceive us; persuading us, that we may come to
heaven, and still continue in the state of our corrupt nature: but let us
labor by all means, to eschew this place, which is due unto us by nature;
that thorough the gift of faith in Christ, we may come to the heavenly city,
which these godly Patriarchs so seriously soght for. But if we remain in our
sins, and so die, we are sure to go to the place of destruction, and there
to remain in woe and torments, with the devil, and his angels for evermore:
so that it stands us in hand, to use all good means to come to heaven, or else
our case will be the most miserable of all creatures; for, perdition and
destruction will be our portion world without end.

This must awake and stir up our dead and drowsy hearts, that are so
besotted with sin, that though we hear, yet we neither learn, nor
practice. In worldly things, we can take care and pains: but if we will do
any thing for our own everlasting good, let us labor by all means to come to
heaven; for if we miss of that city, it had been good for us, we had never
been borne: or that we had been the vilest creatures in the world, rather
than men. For, when the unreasonable creatures die, there is an end of all
their misery; but, if we die, and be not prepared for that place, our death
will be unto us the beginning of all woe and misery.

Wherefore God is not ashamed of them to be called (...) their God, for he
has prepared for them a city. In these words is laid down a second reason,
whereby is proved, that these Patriarchs died in the faith, seeking their
country in heaven. The reason is drawn from the testimony of God himself,
recorded by Moses in the book of Exodus, where God says, He is the God of
their Fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Exodus 3.16.

The exposition. Wherefore] that is, that this might appear and be evident,
that these Patriarchs died in the faith, and sought this Country of heaven, God
was content to vouchsafe and grant unto them this favor, to be called their
God.

Was not ashamed] To be, or not to be ashamed of one, properly belongs to men;
and it cannot be affirmed properly of God, that he is ashamed or blusheth (as
the word signifies) but the meaning is, that God vouchsafed unto them this
favor, and showed them this honor and dignity. Quest. What was this honor
and dignity which he showed unto them? Answer. To be called their God. By which
is meant thus much, that God accepted them in his mercy, to be such, with whom
he would make his covenant of salvation, and not with them alone, but with
their seed after them. Secondly, that he chose them, to make the covenant in
their names for all the rest: Thirdly, he vouchsafed them a special and
extraordinary favor, even that himself would bear their names, and they
should bear his, making his glorious name renowned to the worlds end, by this
title, The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Hereupon the reason is framed
thus; God would not be called in special manner the God of unfaithful men,
but rather would bestow such a special favor upon Believers: but that favor
did God vouchsafe to these three Patriarchs; therefore doubtless they lived
and died in that holy faith.

In that it is said, God was not ashamed to be called their God; Here first we
learn, that God does not vouchsafe his mercy equally to all men, but some men
have more prerogagatiue in his favors and mercies then others. Kings make
choice among all their subjects, of some men, whom they will prefer to be of
their counsel or guard, and to whom they will give special countenance, and
dispense their favors more liberally then to all: Even so God among all
Abrabrahams kindred makes choice of these three persons, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, to bestow on them such special honor, as he vouchsafed not to any of
their forefathers before them, nor posterity after them. No marvel therefore
though he bestow not his special mercy upon all, seeing he dispenceth not his
inferior favors unto all alike. And yet for all this, he is no accepter of
persons: for, he only is properly said, to be an accepter of persons, that
prefers one before another, in regard of some quality in the person: but God
vouchsafed this honor unto these three, only of mere mercy and good will, and
not for any thing he respected in them.

This confuteth the conceit and error of many men broached abroad in this
age, that God does equally love all men as they are men, and has chosen all
men to salvation as they are men, and has rejected none: for (say they) it
stands with equity and good reason, that the Creator should love all his
creatures equally: and this opinion they would build upon the general promise
made to Abraham: because that in him God said all the nations of the earth
should be blessed, Genesis 22.18. But we must understand that (All) is not always
taken generally, but sometime indefinitely for many: and so Paul speaking of
this covenant of grace in Christ, says; The Lord made Abraham a father of many
nations, Romans 4.17: where repeating the covenant recorded by Moses, he puts
many for all. Again, grant that Abraham were the father of all nations, and
that in him All the kindreds of the earth were blessed: Yet it follows not,
that therefore God should love all men equally and alike; for he may love the
faithful of all nations, and yet not love all men in all nations: for, in his
bountiful mercy in Christ, he prefers some before others. And this answer
seems the better, because we may have some reason to think that God will save
of every nation some, but no ground to imagine he will save all of any nation:
much less all of every nation.

2. Here we may see, that God honors those his servants that honor him, as
he says to Ely the Priest, 1. Sam. 2.30. Which is a point to be marked
diligently; for, this God is the glorious king of heaven and earth: yet he
abaseth himself, and is content to be named by his Creature, advancing them by
abasing himself to be called their God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Where we may apparently see, rather then God will not have them honored that
honor him, he will abase himself, that they thereby may be honored.

Hence we may learn many things. First, that all that profess religion truly,
must inure themselves to go through good report and ill report, and in all
estates to be content, for Gods honors sake: as Paul says; I have learned in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content: I can be abased and I can
abound; Phil. 4 11.
every where in all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry,
to abound and to have want. Thus spoke that holy man of God: and so must we all
endeavor to say, and accordingly to practice. And the reason is good: because
if a man honor God, howsoever he be contemned, or not regarded in the world,
yet God will honor him, and esteem highly of him: that will prove the way to
all true honor, as it has done, even in this world to all that tried it.

Secondly, hence we learn which is the true way to get sound honor amongst
men; namely, to honor God. Good estimation in the world is not to be contemned,
for the Lord commands all inferiors to honor their superiors, whereby he
also binds every man to preserve his own dignity. Exodus 20.12.
Now God honors them that honor him; therefore the surest way to get true
honor among men is this: Let a man first lay his foundation well, and begin
with God, and set all the affections of his heart and thoughts on this, To
honor God. Quest. How may a man honor God? Answ. By forsaking the rebellious
ways of sin and ungodliness, and walking in the way of righteousness through
the course of his life. This does God take to be an honor unto his high
Majesty. And when a man does this unfeignedly, then God will honor him, even
among men, so far forth as shall be for his good; for God has all men's hearts
in his hand, and will make them to honor those that honor him: so S. Paul
says, If any man therefore purge himself from these, 2. Tim. 2.2^.
he shall be a vessel unto honor; not only in glory eternal after death,
but also in grace and favor with Gods Church. This confuteth the opinion, and
condemns the practice of many, who would feign have good report in the world,
and be spoken well of by all men: but what course (I pray you) take they to
come by this good name? They do not begin with God, and lay their foundation
by honoring him; but they strive to please men, whether it be by doing well
or ill, they care not; their only care is to please all: for, that is their
rule and resolution, all must be pleased* and because most men are ill, they
rather choose oftentimes to do ill, than they will not please the greater
sort. But he that begins to get honor by pleasing men, begins at a wrong
end; for, by the testimony of the holy Ghost in this place, the way to get
sound approbation before men, is first to begin with God, and to honor him.

Thirdly, if God will honor them that honor him; then by the contrary,
consider what a miserable case many a man is in: For, those that dishonor God,
God will dishonor them again; as we may see at large, and very plainly, in
the example of Elie, and his two sons: for, them that honor me (says the
Lord unto him) I will honor, and they that despise me shall be despised, 1.
Sam. 2.30. And in Zachary we may read, that the man that by blasphemy,
theft, or perjury, dishonors God, the flying curse of the Lord shall enter
into his house, and remain in the midst thereof, and consume it with the
timber thereof, and the stones thereof: Zach. 5.4. And because Elie did more
honor his children than God, 1. Sam. 2.31, therefore the Lord threateneth the
destruction both of him, and his family: and according as the Lord had
threatened, so it came to pass. For, when the Israelites fought with the
Philistims (Chap. 4.11.) his two sons were slain; and hear the hearing of
the news, fell down and brake his neck.

Now, if this be so, what shall we say of our own nation and people, amongst
whom it is as common to dishonor God, as ever it was amongst the Papists, or
Pagans; partly, by light using of his holy titles, and taking his name in
vain: and partly, by swearing, and open blasphemy: and sometime, even by
abominable perjury. Nay, it is many men's rule, that they may swear,
dissemble, lie, and forswear for advantage. These sins are some of them rise
in all sorts of people, and hardly shall you talk with a man, that does not by
vain oaths dishonor God: yea, it is so common, that children, so soon as they
can crawle, or lispe out a word; the first thing they can speak, is to curse,
or swear, and take Gods name in vain, whereby God is dishonored every way:
so as it is a wonder that the earth does not open and swallow up many men
quick, for their swearing and blasphemy. And whereas Gods Judgments are often
grievously inflicted upon us, in many places of the Land; we may persuade our
selves, that among other sins, it is for our blasphemy, and taking Gods name
in vain. And if it be not speedily redressed, it is to be feared lest God will
rain down his judgments upon us, and in his wrath sweep us all away; and
take away the father with the child, the good with the bad, because there is
no reformation of so vile, and yet so needless a sin.

To be called their God. Observe here further, that Abraham, Isaac, and Iaacob,
could all of them say, God is my God. Now that which these worthy Patriarchs
could say of themselves, we must every one of us in our own persons labor for;
for, their example is and must be a rule for us to follow. We therefore must
labor for this assurance, by Gods grace to say, as these holy Patriarchs did
say, The true Iehoua is my God: and of this I am resolved, and undoubtedly
assured in mine own conscience.

Qu. How shall we be able to say unfeignedly, God is my God? Ans. By becoming
his servants and people, in deed and truth; for, to him who is one of Gods
people, God is always his God. But how shall we become Gods true servants?
Answ. By setting our hearts upon the true God, and giving them wholly unto him,
and to his service; and restraining our selves from all occasions of sin,
because sin displeases him. Quest. But how shall a man set his heart wholly
on God? Answ. This he does, when he loves him above all, and fears him
above all, and above all things is zealous for GOD; glory; when he has full
confidence in Gods word and promises, and is more grieved for displeasing God,
than for all things in the world besides. Or, more plainly thus: then a man
does set his heart on God, when his heart is so affected, that when God
commands, he is always ready to obey: So the Lord says, Hos. 2.23, I will say
to them that were not my people, Thou art my people; and they shall say, Thou
art my God. And in the Psalms, the Lord says, Psalm. 27.8, Seek ye my face:
Then the holy man's heart, as an Echo gives answer, I seek thy face O God.
And such a one is the heart of him, that is indeed the servant and child of
God, and one of Gods people.

For he has prepared for them a city. These words are a reason of the former,
proouing that God was not ashamed to be called their God, because he prepared
a city for them. And indeed, this shows evidently, that God was greatly
delighted with them, rather than ashamed of them; for, had he been ashamed of
them, he would have shut them out of his presence. Herein therefore he
declared his love and favor, that by preparing this city, he procured that
they should live in his sight for evermore.

Hence we learn, that he which has God for his God, has all things with
him; according to the common proverb, Have God and have all. And on the
contrary, Lack God and lack all. And therefore David says, Psalm. 145.15,
Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. Other things, which here might be
added, have bin handled before.

Abraham's Faith.
Verse 17. By faith Abraham offered up Isaac, when he was tempted; and he
that had received the promises, offered his only begotten son.

18. To whom it was said, in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

19. For, he considered that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead:
from whence he received him also, after a sort.


IN the former verses, we heard the faith of Abraham, Isaac, and Iaacob,
commended jointly together. Now the holy Ghost returns to the commendation of
their faith severally. And first, he begins with Abraham's faith; whereof, he
had formerly propounded two works, or actions: 1 His going out of his own
Country. 2 His abode in a strange Land. Now, here follows the third, which
is the most notable work of all, wherein his faith shines most gloriously; and
his example herein is unmatchable. The particular points herein, are these: 1
The work of his faith is plainly laid down, in his offering up of Isaac. 2
The same work of faith is notably commended, by three special arguments; to
wit, 1 by three great impediments that might have hindered this work of faith;
as we shall see in their place, v. 17, 18. 2 by his victory over these
impediments, v. 19. 3 by the issue of this temptation, and his work of faith
therein, in the end of the 19. verse.

For the first. The fact of Abraham's faith here commended, is this; That he
offered up Isaac his son. It may first of all be demanded, How Abraham could
offer up his son by faith, considering it is against the law of nature, and the
law of God, for a man to kill his own son; which Abraham must do, if he did
offer him up in sacrifice unto God. For answer hereunto, we need go no further
than the Story, Genesis 22. where we may see, he had a ground for his faith: for,
though the general commandment be, Thou shall not kill, yet he had a special
commandment, Abraham kill thy son: and by virtue of that, he did it; and did
it in and by faith. But if that be so, then thereupon rises another and a
greater doubt: namely, How can these 2. commandments stand together, one being
contrary to the other? Ans. Here a special point is to be observed; namely,
that whenever two commandments are so joined, that a man cannot practice
both, but doing the one, the other is broken; then one of the^, must give place
to the other: For, howsoever all Gods commandments bind the conscience; yet
some bind it more, some less; because some are greater, and some lesser than
others. Whence, this rule may be set down, that when 2. Comm. of God cross one
another, so as a man obeying one, breaks another; then a man must prefer the
greater. As for example, this is Gods Comm. Honor God, commanded in the first
table. Again, the 5. Comm. says, Honor Parents and Magistrates. Now, if
parents or magistrates command any thing, the doing whereof would dishonor God,
being contrary to the first table; then the 5. Comm. gives place unto the
first: and a man must rather disobey magistrates and parents, than dishonor
God: for, the maine duties of the first table, take place before the maine
duties of the second. And therefore Christ says, If any man come to me, and
hate not his father and mother, wife and children, brethren and sisters, yea
and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple; meaning, that if father or
mother, wife or children would draw us from God, we must hate them rather then
disobey God. Again, a commandment ceremonial, and a commandment of love and
mercy concur together, and it so falls out, that they should be both kept,
and cannot: in this case therefore the ceremonial Law of the first table, must
give place to the Law of Charity and Love in the second table; Because the
ceremonies are the inferior duties of the first, but charity and mercy the
principal duties of the second table: for example, the Lord inioyneth us in the
fourth commandment to rest on the Sabbath day. Now it falls out that my
neighbors house is on fire upon the Sabbath day: whether then may I labor
with my neighbor that day to save his house? Answ. I may; for the strict
observation of rest on the Sabbath day is a ceremony: but the quenching of
fire in my neighbors house, is a work of mercy, and a maine duty of the second
table, and therefore must take place before a ceremonial duty of the 1. table.

Thirdly, God has given us ten commandments, containing all ordinary duties
both of piety and of mercy: yet if God give us a particular and special
commandment contrary to any of the ten; that must stand, and the ordinary
commandments must give place and yield unto it: as for example; the second
commandment forbids any man to make any graven Image; yet Moses by a
special commandment, Number. 21.8.9.
made a brazen serpent in the wilderness to be a figure of Christ. So the sixth
commandment, Thou shall not kill, is an ordinary commandment, and binds the
conscience of every man to obey the same; yet God comes with a special
commandment to Abraham, and says, Abraham, kill thy son; and therefore the
ordinary commandment of the 2. table gives place for ye time. And so go all
ye co^ma^dements, thou shall do thus and thus, unless God command otherwise:
for God is an absolute Lord, and so above his own Laws, he is not bound unto
them, but may dispense with them, and with us for the keeping of them, at his
will and pleasure. And thus was Abraham warranted to sacrifice his Son;
namely, by virtue of a special, and personal commandment to himself alone.

But if Abraham had not had this particular commandment, the sacrificing of
Isaac had been unlawful and abominable; for, the killing of a man is a
heinous sin: much more is the killing of a man's own son without a special
commandment; for that is against nature: and therefore the Lord by Jeremy
does severely condemn the Jews for burning their sons and daughters in
sacrifice, Ier. 7.31, without any warrant from him; though it may be they would
pretend their imitation of Abraham in the sacrificing of Isaac: yea, and to
show his detestation of that fact, he changes the name of the place, calling
it the valley of slaughter, verse 32, and in the new Testament it is used to
signify hell, Math. 5.29.30. And because this sin is so odious, it is rather
to be thought, that Iephte did not kill his daughter in sacrifice to the Lord
(as some think he did) especially being a man commended for his faith by the
holy Ghost: but hereof we shall speak when we come to his example, verse 32.

Thus we see Abraham had ground for this fact to do it by faith, even Gods
special command. But here it will be said, that Abraham did not offer up his
son indeed: for though he had bound him, and laid him on the Altar, yet when
he lifted up the knife to have killed him, the Angel staid his hand, and
suffered him not, Genesis 22.11.12. How then can it be true which is here said,
that he offered him up? for the writer of a Story must make true reports; but
it seems the writer hereof is deceived in the very principal point, affirming
Isaac was offered, when in truth he was not. Answer. God is the Author and
inditer of this Story, and in Gods sight and estimation he was offered, though
not in the worlds: and therefore it is so said, in regard of Gods acceptance;
because Abraham's purpose was to have done it; and if he had not been staide,
he had done it.

Where we note a point of special comfort, to wit; that God in his children
and servants, does accept the will for the deed: so S. Paul says, 2. Corinthians.
8.12: If there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has,
and not according to that he has not: speaking of their releeuing of the poor
he tells them, that GOD regards not so much a man's work, as the heart
wherewith he does the work. And therefore the poor widow in the Gospel, Luk
21.3. is said by our Savior Christ, to have cast more into the treasury
(though it were but two mites) then many rich men that cast in great
abundance: more in heart, not in substance.

This serves to stay the heart of many a man that is found bruised in
conscience; for, seeing his weak obedience, and the greatness of his sins
past, he begins to call his election into question: now what must a man do in
this case? Answer. Surely he must go on forward in obedience, and endeavor
himself to continue therein: and then though he fail many times through
infirmity, yet for his endeavor GOD will accept of him, and be pleased with
the same.

This doctrine is very comfortable to a distressed conscience; but yet it must
not make any man bold to sin: for many abuse this Doctrine, and say, that
though they live in sin, yet God will accept of them, for they love GOD in
their heart. But they deceive themselves: for, this merciful dealing of God in
accepting the will for the deed, is only toward those that endeavor
themselves sincerely to leave their sins, to believe in God, and to walk in
obedience: but such as flatter themselves, lying in their sins, God will not
be merciful unto them, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20.

Here further it may well be demanded; How Abraham could take Isaac and bind
him, and lay him on the altar to have offered him: for, though the common
opinion be, that he was but 13. years old, yet the more received opinion of
the best Writers is, that Isaac was 25. or 27. years old. How then could
Abraham being an old man of more then 120. years, be able to bind Isaac
being a young and lusty man, and lay him on the altar to kill him? For though
Abraham had a commandment to kill Isaac, yet we find not that God
commanded Isaac to suffer himself to be killed; now Nature moves every one to
seek to save his own life, and to resist such as would kill us. How then was
Isaac brought to yield thus far to his Father?

For answer heereunto, we are to know, that Abraham was no ordinary man,
but a Prophet, and that an excellent and extraordinary Prophet: So God himself
testifies of him to Abimelech; He is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee:
Genesis 20.7.
yea, he was esteemed and reverenced as a Prophet, and an honorable man, even
of the heathen. The Hittites tell him: Thou art a Prince of God amongst us.
Genesis 23.6.

Now being a man of so high place, and so great regard even in the world;
doubtless he was of much more authority in his own house. It is therefore
very likely that he tells Isaac his son, that he had a special
commandment from GOD, to kill him in sacrifice. Now Isaac being an holy man,
and well brought up, hearing this is contented to be sacrificed, and obayes his
Father herein.

This I speak not as certain, but as most probable; and it is the judgment of
best learned, who have had good experience in the Scripture.

This circumstance well observed, serves greatly for the commendation of them
both: of Abraham the Father that had so religiously brought up his only
Son; that was most dear unto him, that he would not resist the will of GOD
revealed unto him, though it cost him his life. Oh that Parents would follow
Abraham, in so doing to their children; then would it go well with the Church
of GOD. Again, Isaacs behavior is here admirable, that he would not resist
his weak and aged Father, but suffers him to bind him, and to lay him on
the Altar; yielding himself unto death, when his Father told him, My son,
GOD will have it so.

This example must be a pattern of obedience, not only for children toward
their parents; but for us all toward Gods ministers, when they shall tell us,
what God would have us do: we must submit our selves, and yielde, though it
turn to our bodily pain and grief; for Isaac yields, though it were to the
loss of his life. But alas, who will follow Isaac? For, let the minister
speak against our carnal pleasure, and unlawful gain; let him cross our
humor, and affections, then we refuse to hear, and will not obey. Nay, if
the minister of God, as the Lords priest, come with the sacrificing knife of
Gods word, to the throat of our sin, to kill the same in us, that so we may be
pure and acceptable sacrifices unto God; do we not resist him, and say in our
hearts, We will none of this doctrine? Or, if he like a Prophet of God, come
and offer to bind our consciences, with the cords of obedience, and to lay
our affections on the altar of the Law; then we resist, and are either too
young, or too old; too rich, or too learned; or too great, to be taught, and
bound to obedience. But let us know, that if we will be true Isaacs, even the
sons of faith and obedience, and the true heirs of Abraham's faith (as we
would bear the world in hand) then as he did submit himself to be bound of
his father; so must we yield our selves to the ministers of God, to be bound
by his word: and suffer the same word to be in us, the two edged sword of the
spirit, to cut down sin and corruption in us, and to make us new creatures;
that so both in body and soul, we may become pure and acceptable sacrifices
unto our God. Thus much of the fact it self, wherein Abraham's faith is set
forth.

Now follow the Arguments, or reasons, whereby the same work of faith is
commended unto us. The first Argument is taken from the great impediments which
might hinder his faith; and they are in number three: First, that he was
brought to this work, not by ordinary command, but by an extraordinary course
in temptation; Being tempted. Secondly, that he was to offer his own child;
yea, his only begotten son. Thirdly, that he who had received the promises,
must offer him, and kill him, in whom the promise was made.

For the first impediment. In the ordinary translation, it is read thus, When
he was tried: But that is not so fit, being rather an exposition of the
meaning, than a translation of the word. For, the very word signifies, to be
tempted; and the meaning is, when he was tried. I would therefore rather read
it thus; when he was tempted: or, being tempted, as the word signifies.

In the handling hereof, first we will entreat of the nature of this
temptation, and then come to the circumstances belonging to the same.

Temptation (as it is here used, may be thus described) It is an action of God,
whereby he proves, and makes experience of the loyalty and obedience of his
servants. First (I say) it is an action of God: This is plain by the testimony
of Moses in Genesis, Genesis 22.1. where (if we read the history) we shall find
that God did prove Abraham. Object. But against this it may be objected, that
Saint James says, James 1.13, God tempts no man: and therefore no temptation
is the action of God? Answ. That place in James is thus to be understood; God
tempts no man: that is, God does not stir up, or move any man's heart to
sin. Yet further it will be said, That temptation is an action of Satan; for
so in the Gospel we may read (Mat. 4.3,) that he is called the tempter? Answ.
Some temptations are the actions of God, and some the actions of Satan: God
tempts, and Satan tempts; but there is great difference in their
temptations: first, in the manner; for, Satan tempts a man to sin against
the will of God, and to do some evil: God tempts a man to do something,
which shall be only against his own affections, or his reason. Secondly, God
tempts for the good of his servants: but Satan tempts for the destruction
both of their bodies and souls.

Again I say, Whereby he makes trial, etc. Here some will say, God knows
every man's heart, and what is in them, and what they will do, long before; and
therefore he needs not to make trial of any man? Answ. God makes trial of
his servants, not because he is ignorant of that which is in their heart; for,
he understands their thoughts long before: but because he will have their
obedience made known; partly to themselves, and partly to the world: so that
he makes trial of his servants, not for himself, but for our sakes.

Now further, God tempts men three ways: first, by Judgments, and
Calamities in this world: so the Lord says to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 8.2, Thou
shall remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee this forty years
in the wilderness for to humble thee, for to prove and to know what is in thy
heart. That journey might have been gone in forty days, but God did lead them
in it forty years; to prove and try by this unwonted calamity, whether they
would obey him, or not. So likewise God suffered false prophets, and Dreamers
of dreams, to come among the people; for this end, To prove them, and to
know whether they loved the Lord their God, with all their heart, and with all
their soul, Deuteronomy. 13.3. Now this first kind of temptations, by outward
Judgments, is most grievous; when the Lord lays his own hand upon his
servants so heavily, as they shall think themselves to be quite forsaken. In
this temptation was David as we may read at large: Psalm. the 6: and Psalm. 38:
and Job being afflicted not only outwardly in body, but inwardly in mind,
cries out, that the arrows of the Almighty were in him; Job 6.4, and through
the whole chapter he bewaileth his grievous estate by reason of this
temptation.

Secondly, God tempts his servants by withdrawing his graces from them, and
by forsaking them in part; and this kind of temptation is as grievous as the
former: herewith was good King Hezekias tempted; for as we may read, God left
him to a sin of vain glory, and the end was to try him and to prove all that
was in his heart. 2. Chron. 32.31.

Thirdly, God tempts his servants by giving unto them some strange and
extraordinary commandment; As in the Gospel, when the young man came to our
Savior Christ, and asked him, what good thing he might do to have eternal
life? Math. 19.16, Christ bids him go and sell all that he had and give to
the poor. This commandment had this use, to be a commandment of trial
unto the young man, whereby God would prove what was in his heart, that the
same might be manifest both to himself and unto others. And under this kind,
we must comprehend this temptation of Abraham: for, when God said, Abraham,
offer up thy son in sacrifice; it was not a commandment requiring actual
obedience (for GOD meant not that Abraham should kill his son) but only of
trial, to see what he would do. And these are Gods temptations, whereby he
proves his servants.

Yet farther the temptations of God whereby he tempts his children, have two
ends: 1. they serve to disclose and make evident the graces of God, that be
hidden in the hearts of his servants: so S. James says, My brethren count it
exceeding great joy when ye fall into diverse tentations; James 1.2. The reason
follows; Knowing that the trial of your faith brings forth patience, verse
3.

Where we see this end of temptation set down, To manifest the gift of patience
wrought in the heart. And Saint Peter says to the Church of God, That they
were in heaviness through manifold tentations, that the trial of their faith
being much more precious then gold that perishes (though it be tried with
fire) might be found unto their praise, and honor and glory, at the appearing
of the Lord Jesus: 1. Peter 1.6.7: Where temptations have this use, to make
manifest the soundness of men's faith in GOD, as the fire does prove the gold
to be good and precious. So in this place, The temptation of Abraham serves
for this end, to make manifest his notable faith and obedience unto GOD, with a
reverend fear of his Majesty, as the Lord himself testifies, saying; Now I
know that thou fear God, seeing for my sake thou have not spared thine
only son. Genesis 22.12. Meaning this: Now I have made thy faith, and love,
and fear of me so manifest, that all the world may see it and speak of it.

Secondly, Gods temptations serve to manifest hidden sins and corruptions,
partly to a man's own self, and partly to the world. And for this end God
tempted Hezekias. For, being recovered of his sickness, after that the King of
Ashur his great enemy was vanquished, especially when the Ambassadors of the
King of Babell came to enquire of the wonders which were done in the Land; 2.
Chro. 32.31.
God left him that he might see his sins, and the corruptions of his nature,
as pride and vainglory, wherewith he was puffed up at the coming of the
Ambassadors to him. And thus he who little thought, that pride and
vainglory could have taken such hold on him, perceiving how his heart was
lift up in him, was doubtless much humbled at the sight of this his so great
corruption; for when the Prophet came unto him, he submitted himself to the
word of reproof, Isay 39.8.

First, whereas Abraham the servant of God was tempted, that is, was proved and
tried by God himself; Here we are taught, that if we persuade our selves to
be the servants of God, as Abraham was, then we must look to have
temptations, at Gods own hand; for his example is a pattern for us: and
therefore in him we must see that which we must look to have; for, it could
not be needful for Abraham, but it may be also needful to us. In regard
whereof, Saint Peter counts it as a thing necessary, that men should fall
into sundry temptations, 1. Pet. 1.16.
that the trial of their faith might be unto their praise. So, that in this
life we must look for trial: and the more glorious our faith is, and the more
like to our father Abraham's, the more trialls shall we undergo.

Again, seeing we must be tried, therefore every one of us must labor for
soundness of grace in our hearts; as of faith, repentance, hope, and of the
love of God (though they be but little in measure) for, we must come to trial,
and it must appear, whether we be hot or cold. Now, if we have not
soundness of grace in us, in the time of trial, then look, as dross
consumes in the fire, when as gold comes out more clear; so shall
hypocrisy, formalitie, and all temporizing profession, come to nothing, in the
midst of tentation; when sound grace, and a good conscience, shall pass
through, and shine more pure and perfect after, than before.

Thirdly, considering we are to look for trials and temptations from God;
therefore we must be careful to remember, and practice that counsel of Christ
to his Disciples, before his passion: Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation, Math. 26.41. And because they were careless in practicing this
duty, therefore they fell into temptation: especially Peter fell most
grievously, by denying his master. We must persuade our selves, that the same
commandment is given to us; for, God will prove us by temptations, to make
manifest the corruptions that be in our hearts: we therefore considering our
own estate, must pray for Gods assisting and strengthening grace, that when
temptations shall come, we may be found sound and steadfast in the trial.

Thus much of the nature of Abraham's temptation: now follow the circumstances
to be considered therein: And first, of the time, when Abraham was tempted.
Hereof we may read, Genesis 22.1: After these things, says Moses, God did
prove Abraham. The words will admit a double reference. But this I take to be
most proper and fit for that place, to wit; that after God had made most
excellent promises unto Abraham, and given him most wonderful blessings and
privileges, then he tempted him.

Hence, we learn this notable lesson: That those people in Gods Church, which
receive from God more graces then others, must look for more tentations. This
we shall see to be true in Christ Jesus the head of the Church: for, when he
was Baptized, and had received the holy Ghost, Matthew 3, in the form of a
Dove, and had this voice of GOD the Father pronounced upon him, that he was his
well-beloued son in whom he was well pleased; then presently follows this,
that he was led into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil: Matthew 4.1.
Luke 4.1: being full of the holy Ghost, as Luke says: So likewise when God had
testified of Job, that he was an upright and just man, one that feared God and
eschewed evil, Job 1.8; then Satan took occasion thereby to tempt him: as in
all the whole course of that book we may plainly see, wherein are set down
most wonderful temptations and trialls whereby he was proved. So Jacob must
wrestle with the Angel, Genesis 32.24.28, and by the power of GOD overcome GOD
himself. This was a notable prerogative, To prevail with the Lord; but yet he
must prevail with his foil (Verse 31) and at the same time, and ever after
draw one of his legs after him, even to his dying day. Saint Paul was rapt
up into the third heaven, into Paradise, and heard words which cannot be
spoken; yea, which are impossible for man to utter: yet least he should be
exalted out of measure, through abundance of revelations, there was given unto
him a prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him: 2. Corinthians
12. Verse 7: God will honor him with revelations, but yet Satan shall have
leave to buffet and beat him as it were black and blew. In all which we may
see, that to whom GOD vouchsafes a a greater measure of grace, to them he
appoints singular trialls and temptations above other men. And the reason is;
First, because Gods graces do better appear in temptations then out of them:
as gold is best tried in the fire, and thereby proved most pure and perfect:
Secondly, temptations serve to abase the servant of God, and to bring him down
in his own conceit, that he be not proud of those things that are in him,
or puffed up with conceit that there is more in him, then indeed there is.
This we saw in Paul's example; He was buffeted of Satan, lest he should be
exalted with abundance of Revelations. We may see a type hereof in worldly
affairs; The best ship that floateth on the Sea, when it carries in it most
precious Jewels, is ballaced with gravel or sand, to make it sink into the
water, and so sail more surely, least floating too high, it should be
unstable: even so deals the Lord with his servants; when he has given them
a good measure of his graces, then does he also lay temptations upon them, to
humble them, lest they should be puffed up in themselves.

The second circumstance to be considered in this temptation, is the
greatness thereof. It was the greatest that ever was, for aught we read of,
That God should command him to kill his own son. For, if God had told
Abraham, that his son Isaac must have died, it would have been very
grievous and sorrowful news unto him; and yet more grievous if he had told
him, that he should have died a bloody death. But yet this was most grievous
of all, that Abraham himself with his own hand, should sacrifice his own
son, nay his only son; and that which is more, he must kill his only
child, in whom the promise was made, that in him should his seed be called:
this must needs be a great wound unto his heart; and yet to augment his
grief, he must not do it presently, nor where he would, but go three days
journey in the wilderness. During which time Satan undoubtedly wrought
mightily upon his natural affections, to dissuade him from obedience: which
could not choose but be far more grievous unto his soul.

Out of the greeuousnesse of this temptation, we may learn this lesson: that
GOD, in tempting a man, does sometime proceed thus far, Not only to cross
his sins and corruptions, but even to bring him to nothing, in regard of
humane reason and natural affections. For, this commandment ( Abraham kill
thy son) might have made Abraham (if he had consulted with flesh and blood)
even distracted in himself, and without reason, not knowing which way to turn
himself. And accordingly, let all GODS children, especially such as have the
greatest graces, look for such temptations as shall lay their humane reason
s^at upon the ground and bring them to this point, even utterly to deny
themselves.

The third Circumstance in this Temptation, is this; What Abraham did when he
was tempted? the Text tells us, that by faith he offered up Isaac, being
tempted.

Abraham being thus tempted* whether he would obey GODS Commandment or not;
obayes GOD in offering up his soon, and yet lays hold upon Gods promise made
in him. For, we must know, that Abraham had a promise of blessing, in Isaac:
and being now commanded to kill Isaac, he did not now cast off his hope, and
desperately think it could not be performed, if this commandment were obeyed;
but by the great power of faith, he both obeyes the commandment, and yet still
believes the promise: For, so says the text, By faith he offered up Isaac.
Therefore, in the very action of killing Isaac, he believed the promise, that
Isaac should live. And this was the excellency of Abraham's faith. For, if God
should with his own voice bid a man kill his son, it may be some would be
found, that would do it; but to do it, and still to believe a contrary
promise made before, betokens the virtue of an admirable faith.

In this circumstance we may learn a good instruction; to wit, in all
temptations that befall us, still to hold fast the promises of God. Though in
the devils purpose, they tend to the loosening of our hold; and in all common
reason, we have good cause to let them go: yet for all that, we must never
let go, but still hold the promise fast, and rather let go all reason in the
world, than Gods promise. And this is not only true faith, but even the
excellency of faith. For example, Gods promise is (Ioh. 3.16,) God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten son into the world, that whosoever
believed in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Now, when we are
in the extremity of all temptations, we must still hold fast this promise, and
venture our souls upon the truth of it. This was Abraham's practice; for in
this temptation, Gods meaning was to try Abraham, and to see what he would
do: Now Abraham, he holds fast the promise, and yet obeyes God; though all
the reason in the earth, cannot tell how that promise, and that commandment
could stand together. But this was Abraham's faith, though I know not, nor
reason knows not; yet God knows: and therefore, seeing I have his
commandment, I will obey it; and seeing I have his word and promise, I will
believe that also, and never forsake it. And even thus must we strive to do in all temptations whatsoever; yea, even in those that come from Satan, which are
full of malice and all violence, In our heart and conscience we must still
hold and believe the promise of God: and this is ever the surest and safest way
to get the victory over Satan, To hold, that Gods promise shall be performed,
though we know not how, but rather see the contrary. And though in humane
reasoning, it be a note of ignorance, and want of skill, to stick always to
the conclusion and question; yet in spiritual temptations, and trialls, this
is sound divinity, Always to hold Gods promise, and to stick fast to that
conclusion: and not to follow Satan in his Arguments, neither suffer him by any
means to drive us from it.

Further, in that this fact of offering up Isaac, was only Abraham's trial; we
may observe, that it did not make him just before God, but only served to
prove his faith, and to declare him to be Just. And therefore, whereas Saint
James says, Iam. 2.21, That Abraham was justified through works, when he
offered his son Isaac upon the altar: His meaning is, that Abraham did
manifest himself to be just before God, by offering up his son; and not,
that by this fact Abraham of a sinner was made just; or, of a righteous man,
was made more just: For indeed, good works do not make a man just, but only
do prove and declare him to be just.

Thirdly, God gave Abraham this commandment; Abraham kill thy son: but yet
he concealed from him, what was his purpose and intent herein; for God meant
not that Abraham should kill his son indeed, but only to try what he would
do; whether he would still believe and obey him, or not. Where we see, that
God, who is truth it self, reueales to Abraham his will; but not his whole
will: whence arises this question,

Whether it be lawful for a man, according to this example of God, when he
tells a thing to another, to conceal his meaning, in whole, or in part? For
answer hereunto, we must know, there are two extremities, both which must be
avoided in this case: 1 That a man must always express all that is in his
mind. 2 That in some cases a man may speak one thing, and think another;
speaking contrary to his meaning: But this later is no way lawful, and the
other is not always necessary. We therefore must hold a mean between both;
to wit, that in some cases a man may conceal his whole meaning, saying
nothing, though they be examined: namely, when the concealing thereof, does
directly stand with the glory of GOD, and the good of his brother.

Thus godly Martyrs have done: for, being examined before tyrants, where, and
with whom, they worshipped GOD; they have chosen rather to die, than to
disclose their brethren: and this concealing of their minds was lawful,
because it touched immediately the glory of God, and the good of his Church.

Secondly, a man may conceal part of his mind: but that must be also with
these two caueats; First, that it serve for Gods glory: Secondly, that it be
for the good of GODs Church.

Thus did Jonas conceal the condition of mercy from the Ninevites, when he
preached destruction unto them, saying; Within forty days and Niniuie shall
be destroyed: though it is evident by the event, that it was Gods will they
should be spared, if they did repent. But that Condition God would have
concealed, because it would not have been for the good of the Ninevites to
have known it; since the co^cealing of it caused them more speedily, and
earnestly to repent.

But out of these cases, a man (being called to speak) must declare the whole
truth, or else he sins greatly against Gods commandment, forsaking the
property of the godly, Psalm. 15.2.

And thus much of the first impediment of Abraham's faith.

The second impediment to Abraham's faith, is contained in these words: Offered
his only begotten son.

We know that the love of Parents descends to every child naturally, but
especially to the only begotten; upon whom (being but one) all that is
bestowed, which, when there are many, is divided among them. And therefore in
all reason, this might greatly hinder Abraham's obedience, That God should
command him to offer his son, yea, his only begotten son: But yet by faith
he overcomes this temptation, breaks through this impediment, and offers up
his only son.

Where we note, that true faith will make a man overcome his own nature. Love
is the strongest affection in the heart, especially from the father to the
child, even his only child: And a man would think it impossible to overcome
this love in the parent, unless it were by death; there being no cause to the
contrary in the child. But yet behold, Abraham by faith subdued this special
love which he bare to his only child: God himself testified of Abraham, that
his love to Isaac was great* Genesis 22.2. and yet by faith he overcomes this
his love.

This point is carefully to be marked, as declaring the great power of true
saving faith; for, if faith can overcome created and sanctified nature, then
undoubtedly the power thereof, will enable man to overcome the corruptions of
his nature, and the temptations of the world: for it is an harder thing to
overcome our nature which we have by creation, than to subdue the corruption
thereof, which comes in by transgression. And hence such excellent things are
spoken of faith: it is called the victory that overcomes the world: 1. John
5.4. And God is said by faith to purify the heart: faith strengthens the
heart: Acts 15.9: And through faith we are kept by the power of God unto
salvation. 1. Pet. 1.5.

Is this the power of faith to overcome nature, and the corruptions thereof?
then howsoever religion be received, and faith professed generally among us,
yet undoubtedly there is little true faith in the world: for, even among the
professors thereof, how many be there that subdue the sins of their lives,
and suppress the works of their wicked nature? surely very few. Now where
corruption bears sway, and sin reigns, there sound faith cannot be: for, if
faith were sound in men, it would purify their hearts, and cleanse the
corruptions thereof: and bring forth obedience in life.

Secondly, this power of true faith in man's heart must teach us, not to content
our selves with a general faith and knowledge in religion, but to go further,
and to get a sound faith that may purify the heart, at least in some true
measure; for, saving faith will cleanse a man in every part of soul and body,
and strengthen his soul in temptation.

Quest. Here it may be asked how it can be truly said, that Isaac was Abraham's
only begotten son, seeing Ismaell was also his son, and was borne before
Isaac, as is evident, Genesis 16? I answer two ways: first, that Ismaell by Gods
appointment was put out of Abraham's house, (for it was the express
commandment of God, to put forth the bondwoman and her son, Genesis 21.10)
and so was made no child of Abraham. Secondly, Ismaell was his child indeed,
yet not by Sarah, but by Agar a bond woman; and so was (as I may say) base
borne, whereupon he is reputed for no son: but Isaac is the only begotten
lawfully; which may be an Item to beware of the bed defiled, seeing such
offspring is so debased with the Lord.

Now follows the third impediment of Abraham's faith; which is also a notable
circumstance whereby the same faith is commended: and it is taken from the
person of Abraham: in these words, who had received the promises.

The meaning of the words. WHO.] This must be referred to the person of Abraham
of whom the holy Ghost here speaks. Received the promises.] That is, by
faith; for, when God made his promises unto Abraham, he did not only hear
them; but (which is the principal point of all) he believed them, and applied
the same effectually unto his own soul; so much does the word [ receiued]
import. Now it is said that he received (not one promise) but the Promises
plurally; for these causes; first, because God having made one maine promise
unto him touching Christ, did repeat and renew the same diverse times.
Secondly, because GOD had made diverse particular promises unto him; as first
that he would be his God, and the God of his seed: Genesis 17.7. Secondly, that he
would give him a child in his old age: Genesis 17.16. Thirdly, that unto him and
his seed, he would give the Land of Canaan for ever: Genesis 13.15. Fourthly, that
in Isaac he would bless all the Nations of the earth. Genesis 21.12.

And because the receiving of Gods promises in general could seem no great
impediment to Abraham's work of faith; therefore the holy Ghost annexeth his
receiving of a particular promise in Isaac in the 18. verse, To whom it was
said, in Isaac shall thy seed be called. Which might seem impossible to stand
with the doing of this work in sacrificing his son; and therefore the
consideration of it in Abraham, must needs be a great impediment to him in
this work: for, he goes about to kill Isaac (in obedience to Gods command) in
whose life he believed to receive the blessings promised of God.

Here then, observe a most wonderful impediment to Abraham's faith: which above
all might have hindered him from obeying God; for, how could he choose but
reason thus with himself? God has made unto me many gracious promises, and
that which is more he has said, That in my son Isaac the same must he
accomplished: and, in him all the nations of the earth must be blessed. Now
then, if I shall kill and sacrifice my son, how shall these promises be
accomplished? And reason in this case would say, I see no way, but that the
promise is gone, and all hope lost. But what does Abraham in this case? for all
this, he does sacrifice his son, and that by faith; still believing and
holding assuredly, that though Isaac were sacrificed and slain, yet in him
should all the nations of the earth be blessed.

Here then we note this special point, wherein the faith of Abraham does
notably appear; That when Abraham's case, in respect of enjoying the promise of
GOD, might seem desperate, and void of all hope and comfort, then he
believes: for, when Isaac was dead, in all reason he could have no hope of the
accomplishing of Gods promises unto him, because they were made to him in
Isaac: Isaac was the man in whom all the nations of the earth should be
blessed; and yet when all hope is past in man's reason, then good Abraham set
his heart to believe.

This practice of Abraham must be a pattern for us to observe and follow, all
our lives long, in the matter of our salvation: if it fall out that we shall
doubt of our salvation, and feel many things in us that would carry us to
despair; when we are in this case, and feel no comfort, then let us call to
mind Abraham's practice who believes Gods promise, when the foundation thereof
is taken away: even so let us do at the same instant, when the promise of GOD
seems to be frustrate, and we have no hope of the accomplishment thereof,
then we must cast our souls upon it. For, we must not only believe, when we
feel comfort in our consciences concerning GODS mercies; but even then when
God seems to stand against us, and when we feel in our souls the very gall
of hell, then (I say) we must believe.

In Paul's dangerous voyage toward Rome, when he was in the ship with the
Mariners and Centurion, there arose a great tempest, and neither sun nor
stars appeared for many days: so that, as the Text says, All hope that they
should be saved was taken away, Acts 27.20. Now, what says Paul in this
extremity of danger? Now I exhort you to be of good courage: for there shall
be no loss of any man's life, save of the Ship only, (Verse 22.) and so
persuaded them to take bread. Even so, when our case falls out to be this;
that either by reason of sin, and of the temptation of Satan: or else by
reason of some outward calamities and troubles, we feel our soul (as it
were) overwhelmed with sorrow, and even entering into destruction, and can
neither see (as it were) light of sun or star; then we must set before us
Gods promises, and labor to believe the same. So David being in great
affliction, and grievous temptation, says thus of himself, Psalm. 77.2, 7* 8,
9, 10, In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, my sore ran and ceased
not, in the night my soul refused comfort. Yet at the very same instant he
prayed, When his spirit was full of anguish; and though he seemed (as it were)
to despair (when he said, Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he
show no more favor? Is his mercy clean gone? Does his promise fail for
evermore? And has God forgotten to be merciful? etc.) Yet he checkes
himself, and says, This is my death, and my weakness. Even so, every true
member of Gods Church, in the extremity of all temptations, and in the time of
desperation, is bound to believe the promises of God; and indeed, that is the
fittest time for faith to show it self in: for faith (as we have before
heard) is the ground of things hoped for, and the subsisting of things which
are not seen.

Now further it is said, Abraham received Gods promises; that is, he applied
them to his own soul and conscience, and believed them, and made them his
own by faith. This is a notable point, and worthy the marking: God made his
promises to Abraham: now Abraham he does not only hear, and learn the
promises; but applies the^ to himself, and by faith makes them his own. And
thus ought we to do with all the gracious promises made in Christ. But the
manner of our days is far otherwise; for, when the merciful promises of
God, are laid down unto us in the ministry of the word, we are content to
hear, and (it may be) to learn, and know the same: But where is the man to
be found, that will apply them to his own^ conscience, and by faith make them
his own? Men commonly are like unto wayfaring men, or travelers on the sea,
that pass by many goodly fair buildings, rich towns, and Islands; which,
when they behold, they admire, and wonder at: and so go their way, without
making purchase of any of them. And thus deal the most men with Gods merciful
promises. In the ministry of the word, God lays open unto them his rich
mercies, and bountiful promises in Christ; and men approve thereof, and like
them well: whereupon, many do willingly apply themselves to know the same; but
for all this, they will not receive them by faith, and so apply them to their
own souls.

But we must take a better course: and when we hear of the promises of God
made unto us in Christ; we must not content our selves with a bare knowledge
of them, but labor to believe them, and apply them unto our selves, to our
souls, and consciences: and so by faith make them our own. As it is said of
Abraham, and in him, of all the faithful; The blessing of Abraham came on the
Gentiles, thorough Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the
spirit, through faith: Gal. 3.14.

Further observe, the holy Ghost sets down that particular promise which God
made to Abraham, in his son Isaac: To whom it was said, in Isaac shall thy seed
be called, Genesis 21.12. Romans 9.7. In which places it is said, that in Isaac
should his seed be called. The meaning whereof is plain, and thus much in
effect: Ismael shall not be thy son and heir, but Isaac is the child which
shall be thy heir; he it is, in whom I will accomplish the promises of life
and salvation made to thee.

From the words thus explaned, first we must observe Paul's collection gathered
from Gods dealing with those two persons (Romans 9.7): namely, that God before
all worlds has chosen some men to salvation in his eternal counsel, to
manifest the glory of his grace; and has refused and rejected others, leaving
them unto themselves, to show forth his Justice upon them.

This Doctrine is gathered out of this place, after this manner: Such as is
Gods practice and dealing toward men, in time; such was his eternal counsel
and decree (for as God before all time determined to deal with men, so in time
he deals with them). Now Gods practice and dealing with Isaac and Ismaell is
this; Ismaell is vouchsafed to be made partaker of temporal blessings; but
yet he is cut off from the spiritual covenant of grace, and Isaac is the man
that must receive the Covenant, and by virtue thereof be made partaker of life
everlasting. And so accordingly it is with others; GOD has decreed to choose
some men to salvation, and these are admitted into the Covenant: others he has
decreed to reject, and they are cut off from the Covenant and from life
everlasting. These two persons, Isaac and Ismaell, are two types of these two
sorts of people who^ God does elect, and reject: Isaac represents those that
are chosen to salvation, who become the true members of Gods Church; and
Ismaell is a type of those that are rejected. Now in regard of this different
dealing of God with mankind, choosing some and refusing others, we must all
put in practice Saint Peter's lesson with fear and trembling; even careful
above all give all diligence to make our election sure: 2. Peter 1.10: for, all
be not elected to salvation, but some are rejected; all be not Isaacs, but some
are Ismaelites. If all were elected and chosen to salvation, then no man needed
to care for it; but seeing some are rejected, and never vouchsafed to come
within the Covenant indeed, therefore it stands us greatly in hand to take the
good counsel of the Apostle, and to give all diligence to make our election
sure.

Secondly, whereas it is said, Not in Ismael, but in Isaac shall thy seed be
called: We may note the state of Gods Church in this world, in regard of the
different sorts of men that live therein. For Abraham's family was GODs Church
in those days, and therein were both Isaac and Ismael; though both his
children, yet far differing in estate before God. Ismael indeed was borne in
the Church, and there brought up, taught, and circumcised; but yet he was
without the Covenant in Gods sight: Now Isaac was not only borne, and brought
up in the Church, and circumcised, but also received into the Covenant; and
herein differed far from Ismael: for, he is that son of Abraham, in whom
God will continue the Covenant of grace unto life everlasting, to his
posterity. And so it is with GODs Church at this day: in it there be two
sorts of men; one, which are baptized and brought up in the Church, hear the
word, and receive the Sacraments; but yet are not saved, because they have not
the promise of the covenant effectually rooted in their hearts. The other sort
are they, which being baptized in the Church, hear the word effectually, and
receive the Lords supper worthily, to their salvation; because God does
establish his Covenant in their hearts. This difference is plain in Scripture,
in the parables of the draw-net, (Math. 13.) of the Sower, and of the tares: as
also by Christ's behavior at the last judgment, (Math. 25.32.) seuering the
sheep from the goats, both which, live together in the Church. And by Saint
Paul, who speaking of those which are borne and brought up in the Church,
says; that some are children of the flesh, and some children of the promise,
Romans 9.8.

This being so, that every one which lives in the Church is not of the Church;
that is, is not a true member of the Church, and the true child of Abraham: it
must make us all careful, to use all holy means, whereby we may be fully
assured that the Covenant of grace belongs unto us; for, it is not enough for
us to dwell in the Church, to hear the word, and to receive the sacraments
(for so did Ismael, and yet never was saved) unless therewithal we have the
covenant of grace belonging unto us, and the assurance thereof sealed in our
consciences, by Gods holy spirit.

Again, consider who spoke these words; But in Isaac shall thy seed be called:
We shall find in Genesis 21.12. it was God himself. Let it not (says God
unto Abraham) be grievous in thy sight for the child, and for the bondwoman:
in all that Sarah shall say unto thee, hear her voice; which was, to cast out
the bondwoman and her son Ismael. For (says GOD) in Isaac shall thy seed
be called.

Here observe a notable practice of Abraham, as a good direction how we ought
to judge of all those that live in the Church, submitting themselves outwardly
to the ministry, and regiment thereof. Abraham here has two sons, Isaac,
and Ismael; he circumciseth them both, and instructs them both (for he taught
all his household to know God, and to fear, and obey him, Genesis 18.19.) he
judges them both to be in one state, in regard of Gods covenant; though they
were not: but that difference is made by God. Abraham does not on his own head,
and by his own will, put Ismael out of the Church, which was in his family; but
God bids him put him out, and then he put him out, and not before: till such
time he kept him in, and held him to be within the covenant, as well as Isaac
was. Even so must we deal toward those that live in the church: secret
judgment must be left to God; and (till God manifest the contrary) in the
judgment of charity, we must hold them all elect. This is the practice of
Saint Paul in all his Epistles: writing to the Corinths (1. Corinthians. 1.2,) he
calls them all sanctified: and to the Galatians (Gal. 1.2,) he calls them all
elect; speaking so in the judgment of charity, although he knew that among
them there were many profane and wicked men; and though he reprove many great
errors and heinous sins amongst them.

And thus much of the first argument whereby Abraham's faith is commended unto
us; namely, the great impediments which might hinder the same.

Now follows the second Argument or reason, whereby his faith is commended; to
wit, Abraham's victory over these impediments, or the means whereby he overcame
them, and induced himself to obey GOD, in these words; VERSE 19. For he
considered, or reasoned, that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead.



HEre is the true cause that made Abraham to offer his son, and yet believe
the promise, that in him his seed should be called: We may persuade our
selves, that Abraham had rather have died himself (if it might have stood with
the will of God) than to have sacrificed his son. How then does he induce
himself to offer him up? Ans. By this which is here set down: he reasoned
that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead.

Here are diverse points to be considered of us: First observe, the text says
not, that Abraham murmured, or reasoned against God; but reasoned with
himself, that God was able to raise up his son again: and thereby induced
himself to sacrifice his son unto God.

Hence we learn, that when God lays upon us any hard commandment, we must
not plead the case with God, or murmr against him; but with all quietness
and meekness obey. This is a notable grace of God commended unto us by God
himself: In rest and quietness (says God, Isay 30.15.) shall be your
strength; in quietness and confidence shall ye be saved. Many think it
impossible, to endure or do some things, which God imposes on his children:
But our spiritual strength stands in these two, in silence, or rest, and in
quietness; by these we shall be enabled. When Nadab and Abihu, the sons of
Aaron, offered strange fire before the Lord, which he had not commanded,
There went out a fire from the Lord, and devoured them; so they died before the
Lord. Leuit. 10.1.2.
Now when Aaron their father asked Moses a cause hereof, Moses said, It was
that which the Lord spoke, he would be glorified in all that came near him*
which when Aaron heard, the Text says, He heide his peace, and said not a
word: so David behaved himself in the case of distress. I held my peace and
said nothing, because thou Lord did it. And this is a special point for
us to learn and practice; we must not grudge or repine at Gods hard
commandments, nor plead the case with him, but in all quietness and silence
obey God in all that he says unto us.

Again, whereas it is said, that Abraham reasoned, that God was able, etc.
Here we learn, that it is a necessary thing for a man that believes, to have
good knowledge in Gods word: that when a temptation comes against his faith, by
knowledge and reasoning out of Gods word, he may be able to put back the
same; for, all our reasoning in matters of faith, must be grounded on the word:
so does Abraham in this place, against this strong temptation, reason out of
Gods word to stay himself: so that knowledge in the word of God, is necessary
to him that believes. And therefore that Doctrine of the Church of Rome is
erroneous, and here condemned, which says; that if a man become devout, and
believe as the Church believes (though he know not what the Church believes)
yet this faith will save him: but this is a mere device of their own, and
has no ground in the word of God: for (as we see here) knowledge in the word
is necessary for him that has true saving faith.

But what is Abraham's argument, whereby he moves himself to obey God? Surely
this; He reasoned that God was able to raise up Isaac from the dead. One part
of his reason he takes for granted, which here he conceales: for this
promise was made unto him, In Isaac shall thy seed be called. Now this he
takes for granted, that God will never change his promise. From whence he
reasons thus: God is able to raise up Isaac my son from the dead to life
again; and therefore I will sacrifice my son according to his commandment:
for, this I know certainly, that in Isaac shall my seed be called, seeing God
has promised that, as well as he commands this other.

In this example, we see a means set down unto us to enduce us to obey God
in all hard and difficult cases imposed by God: which is a point to be
considered carefully of every one of us. For, say that any of us shall be so
touched in conscience for our sins, that we even despair of our own
salvation, what must we do in this case? we must take Abraham's course, and
dispute with our selves for our selves, and we must draw our arguments from
the promise of God, and from the power of God; we must join the promise and
power of GOD together. As for example: thus we must say; God has made this
promise, this I have heard, and I do believe it, that God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, John 3.16.
that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
This is Gods promise, and it shall never be changed. Now therefore howsoever my
case be heavy and desolate, yet God is able to comfort me, and to bring my
soul out of hell, and from this case of desperation; therefore though he kill
me, I will trust in him, and I will use all holy means whereby I may overcome
this hard and grievous temptation. So, if it shall please God to call us to
suffer any thing for the name of Christ, and his holy profession; flesh and
blood we know, is weak, and Nature will make this objection, that life is
sweet: what course therefore shall we take? we must do as Abraham here does;
unto the certainty of Gods promise we must adioine his power, and reason thus;
God has made this promise, that he will be with them that suffer any thing for
his own names sake, and I know that he is able to deliver me: and though he
will not, yet he can make me able to bear it; therefore I will patiently
suffer, and abide whatsoever his holy hand shall lay upon me. Thirdly, is a man
so troubled with some sin, that he cannot get out nor overcome it? Then also
let him set before him this fact of Abraham; and unfeignedly endeavor to do
hereafter. For that which is past, let him labor to believe this promise of
God, At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin, he will put
all his wickedness out of his remembrance. And for the time to come (being
first resolved, that God can enable him to leave his sins) let him strive by
good means to leave his sin, avoiding the occasions of it, and praying
against it; and this will be as a cablerope to draw him out of the pit of
sin: This course we must take, and this do, in every hard case that shall
befall us.

And thus much of the means whereby Abraham induced himself to obey God.

The third and last reason whereby Abraham's faith is commended unto us, is the
issue and event thereof in these words: From whence he received him also after
a sort.

From whence; that is from death: After a sort, or (as it may be read) in some
show. This is said, because Isaac in the thought and purpose of Abraham, was
but a dead man: for, Abraham was fully resolved with himself upon Gods
command, to have sacrificed him; yea, he had gone so far, as to put the
sacrificing knife unto his sons throat, and had slain him indeed, had not
the Angel of God staid his hand: and therefore when the Angel said, Lay not
thy hand upon the child, neither do any thing to him, even then did Abraham
in some show receive Isaac from death.

Here we learn diverse points: 1 That whosoever shall rest on Gods providence,
and good pleasure, even in cases of extremity, when he shall be out of all
hope with himself; shall at the last have a good issue. This we see to be
true by Abraham's example in this place. As we said before, he himself (no
doubt) had rather have died ten thousand times, than to have Isaac slain, in
whom the promise was made: but yet, believing Gods promise, that that should
never change, he rests himself on Gods good pleasure and providence, and goes
on in obedience; and so in the end received a blessed issue. This is very
clearly set down unto us in the History recorded by Moses. For, when Abraham
had gone three days journey in the wilderness, and had built an Altar, then
Isaac said unto Abraham, Genesis 22.7, Father, here is the fire and the wood, but
where is the lamb for the burnt offering? Then Abraham said, My son, God
will provide him a lamb for a burnt offering, Verse. 8. And thus yielding
himself to Gods good pleasure, and providence, he received his son again;
as a dead child restored to life. So, when we are in cases of extremity, when
all goes against us, and when we can see no hope of any good issue or end, and
all good means seem to fail us; if we can then cast our selves on Gods
providence, and roll our selves upon God, we shall have comfort in the end,
and a good issue out of all. We do all of us in word acknowledge Gods
providence: but when we come to the pinch, that we fall into cases of
extremity; then we use unlawful means, and do not with Abraham cast our
selves upon God, but seek help of the devil, and wicked men. But all such
persons must look for a cursed issue. They therefore, that fear the Lord,
being put to any plunge, or extremity, must cast themselves upon God wholly,
and wait for his good time and pleasure; and then will the issue be both
joyous and comfortable unto their souls.

Here some circumstances of this fact are to be considered, out of the larger
story. The first is this: What did God unto Abraham at this time, when he was
about to kill his son? Answ. God now gave him a commandment, to stay his
hand, and not to slay his son: By virtue whereof, Abraham stays his hand.
God before commanded him to go three days journey in the wilderness, and
there to sacrifice his son: Hereupon Abraham goes; but now being come to the
place, having bound his son, and is ready to cut his throat; God bids him
stay his hand: and then also Abraham obeys God, and does not kill his son.
Here we see, Abraham is at Gods command; and (as we say) at his beck: He
does not follow his own will and pleasure* but when God calls, he is
wonderful pliable to do Gods command, whatsoever it be, one way or other.

This practice of Abraham, must be a looking glass for us, wherein to see,
what manner of persons we ought to be. Look what God commands us to do,
that we must do; and what he forbids us, that we must not do. But this is
a rare thing to be found in these days: our practice generally is contrary;
for in our lives we follow our own humors and affections, never regarding
what God does either will or nill. But if we will be Abraham's children, we
must follow Abraham's practice in this place; For, the sons of Abraham will
do the works of Abraham, John 8.39. Good servants will come and go, Math.
8.9.
do and undo, at their Lords pleasure; and forget themselves, to obey their
masters: And so must it be with us, if we call God our good Lord and master,
Luke 6.46.

The second circumstance to be considered, is the time when Abraham received
his son from death; to wit, at the very same time when his knife was at his
sons throat, and he himself ready to offer him up for a sacrifice unto the
Lord: at that same instant God spoke unto him by his Angel from heaven, and
said, Abraham stay thy hand, Genesis 22.10. This circumstance is worth the
marking: for, God lets him alone three whole days in great perplexity; and
Abraham goes forward, according to Gods command, even to lay his knife to his
sons throat.

Here then we see, what is the Lords dealing with his servants; He lets them
alone for a long season in temptation and pitiful distress: and at the
length, when it comes even to the extremity, and when the knife is (as it
were) at the throat; then he shows himself, and brings comfort unto them.

The Spouse (in the Canticles) which is the Church of God, or a true Christian
soul, whether you will (for it is true both in the general, and particular)
Cant. 3.2.3, She seeks Christ every where, in the streets and open places,
but she finds him not; then she goes to the watchmen (which are Gods
ministers) and there inquires after him whom her soul loved, and they cannot
tell her where she might find him; so that now all hope of finding him might
seem to be past: but when she was a little from them, then she found him,
and Christ comes to her when she was most in fear not to have found him at
all.

The people of Israel, were many years in bondage in Egypt: and when the time
came that Moses was sent of God to fetch them thence, and to be their guide and
deliverer; when he had brought them out, and carried them to the red sea, then
came Pharaoh with a huge army after them to destroy them, Exodus 14.25. Before,
they had been in great affliction and bondage: but now they were quite past
all hope of recovery; for they had before them the red sea, and on each side
of them great hills and mountains, and behind them the huge host of
Pharaoh; and therefore they cried out unto Moses, who then by GODs
commandment did divide the red sea, and made it dry land, and delivered
them through the midst of the red sea: but as for their enemies, Pharaoh
and all his host, the Lord drowned them in the midst thereof.

So for our selves, when God shall exercise any of us in cases of extremity,
we must look to be so dealt withal at Gods hand; He will let us alone for
a time, and never help us, till the last pinch: and therefore, we must wait
for his good pleasure with patience; for, this he will do to try us to the
full, and to make manifest the graces of God wrought in us.

The third circumstance to be considered is this: In what manner did Abraham
receive his son from the dead. This we may read of, Genesis 22.13, He must take
a Ram that was caught behind him in a bush, and offer him in stead of Isaac:
so Isaac is saved, and the Ram is sacrificed and slain.

Now whereas Abraham offered Isaac in sacrifice to God, and yet Isaac lives,
and the Ram is slain in his stead: Hence some gather this use, and we may
profitably consider of the same; to wit, that the sacrifices which we offer
unto God, now under the Gospel, must be living sacrifices: for, Isaac he was
offered in sacrifice to God, and yet he lived and died not, but the Ram is
slain for him. So must we offer our selves in sacrifice unto God, not dead in
sin, but living unto God in righteousness and true holiness. And thus shall
we offer up our selves living sacrifices unto God, when as we consecrate our
selves unto Gods service, and obey him in our lives and callings. And look, as
under the Law the burnt offerings were burnt all to smoke and ashes; so must
we in our lives, wholly and altogether, give our selves unto God, and
renouncing our selves, be nothing to the world, but wholly dedicated to God.
Neither must we come unto him in our sins: for sin makes our sacrifice
dead, lame, halt, and blind, which God does abhor; but we must bring our
selves living sacrifices unto God (as Paul says, To. 12.1.) I beseech you
brethren, by the mercies of God, that you give up your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable serving of
God.

Hence also some gather, that this sacrificing of Isaac was a sign and type of
Christ's sacrifice upon the cross. For, as Isaac was sacrificed and lived, so
did Christ; though he died, yet rose again, and now lives for ever: but
because it has no ground in this place, though it be true which is said of
both, therefore I will not stand to urge the same.

And thus much of this third reason, whereby Abraham's faith is commended, with
the circumstances thereof: and consequently, of all the examples of holy
Abraham's faith.

Isaacs Faith.
VERSE 20. By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come.


IN the three former verses, the holy Ghost has particularly commended the
faith of Abraham: Now in this verse, he proceeds to set down unto us the
faith of Isaac particularly also. Wherein we are to mark these four points:
First, a blessing wherewith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau: Secondly, the cause of
this blessing, that is, his faith: Thirdly, the parties blessed, which are,
Jacob and Esau: Fourthly, the nature and matter of this blessing in the end of
the verse; Concerning things to come. Of these, in order.

First, for the blessing. That we may know the nature and quality of it, we
must search out the kinds of blessings how many they be.

In Gods word we find three kinds of blessings: 1. whereby God blesses man.
Now, God blesses man, by giving unto him gifts and benefits either temporal
or spiritual: and so he blessed all his creatures in the beginning, but
especially man.

The 2. kind of blessing, is that, whereby man blesses God: and this, man
does by praising God, and giving thanks unto him, who is the Author of all
blessings. So Paul says, Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things
in Christ: Ephesians. 1.3: beginning his Epistle with this kind of blessing, that
is, by praising God. And so Zachary after the birth of his son, and the
receiving of his sight, he sings unto God this song of praise: Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, Luk 1.68; that is, praise and thanksgiving be unto the
Lord, etc.

The third kind of blessing, is that, whereby one man does bless another: and
under this kind we must understand Isaacs blessings in this place.

Now further, this kind of blessing, whereby one man blesses another, is
either private or public. A private blessing is that, whereby one private man
whatsoever he be, in his place, prays to God for a blessing upon another. And
this is common to all men: for every man may bless another, that is, pray to
God for a blessing upon another; but especially it belongs to Parents thus to
bless their children, by praying to GOD for a blessing upon them. And
therefore the Commandment goes thus, Honor thy fa-thy father and thy mother,
that they may prolong thy days in the Land, which the Lord thy God gives
thee. Exodus 20.12. Now, Parents prolong their childrens days by blessing them;
that is, by teaching and instructing them in religion, and by praying unto God
for a blessing upon them, that he would bless them. Secondly, there is a
public kind of blessing, which is done by the minister of GOD, in the name of
God. And after this sort, Melchisedech blessed Abraham, as he returned from the
slaughter of the Kings, Heb. 7.1: and without all contradiction, (says the
Author of this Epistle) the less is blessed of the greater (Verse 7). Further,
these public kind of blessings are of two sorts; either ordinary or
extraordinary. An ordinary kind of public blessing is that, which is
pronounced, and uttered out of Gods word by an ordinary minister, upon the
people. Example of this we have in the ordinary Priests in the old Testament;
whose duty was in the service of God to bless the people, before their
departing. And the form of blessing which they should use, is prescribed unto
them by Moses, after this manner from the Lord: Thus shall ye bless the
children of Israel, Number. 6.23.
and say unto them; The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his
face to shine upon thee, and be merciful unto thee: The Lord lift up his
countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. Where, we see the manner of the
Priest was to bless the people, not in his own name, but in the name of God,
stretching out his hand over the heads of the people.

This kind of blessing was then ordinary: and yet some way figurative;
signifying unto them the blessings which Christ Jesus the Mediator, God and
man, should not only pronounce, but even give unto the Church in the new
Testament: which our Savior accordingly performed to his disciples at his
Ascension. For ye Story says; When he was risen again, he led them to
Bethania (where he ascended) and lift up his hands and blessed them. And S.
Paul declares this blessing of Christ more at large, Luke 24.50.
saying; Ephesians. 4.8.11.12: Christ ascended on high, and led captivity captive,
and gave gifts unto men: some to be Apostles some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers; for, the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of
Christ. Where we see, that our Savior Christ did not only pronounce a
blessing upon his Church, but was also the author thereof from God his father.
And as the Priests in the old testament had an ordinary kind of blessing the
people: so the ministers of GOD in the new Testament, they have the same in
substance; for, the ministers may bless their people two ways: First, by
praying unto GOD for them: Secondly, by pronouncing a blessing upon them,
according to GODs holy word. A form of this blessing we have from the Apostle
Saint Paul, who blessed the Corinthians after this sort; The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion (or fellowshippe) of the
holy Ghost be with you all: 2. Corinthians 13.13.

Secondly, an extraordinary kind of blessing is, when an extraordinary
Prophet, or servant of GOD, does set down and pronounce a blessing unto any,
and foretells their estate from GOD. Thus did Noe bless his two sons, Shem
and Iaphet, (Genesis 9.25, 26, 27.) and pronounced a curse upon wicked Canaan.
This he did, not as an ordinary father, but as an extraordinary Prophet; not
only praying for a blessing upon his two sons, but also foretelling them
what should be their condition or estate afterward. So in this place, whereas
Isaac blesses Iaacob and Esau, it is no private blessing, but a public; and
yet indeed, not an ordinary public blessing, but extraordinary, by telling
unto Iaacob and Esau before hand, what should be their particular estates and
conditions, and what blessings they should have from GOD, both in this life,
and in the life to come. For, we must not here conceive of Isaac, as an
ordinary father, but as a holy Patriarch and Prophet of the Lord, and an
extraordinary man; foreseeing, and foretelling by the spirit of prophecy, the
particular estate of his two sons; and also what particular blessings they
and their posterity should receive from God.

The meaning then of these words, Isaac blessed Iaacob and Esau, is this; that
Isaac being a Prophet, an extraordinary man, and a famous Patriarch, did by
the spirit of Prophecy foresee, and set down, and tell before hand, what should
be the particular estate of his two sons, Iaacob and Esau: and as he did
foretell it, so likewise he prayed unto God that the same might come to pass;
as it did afterward. And thus much for the meaning.

Now, though this were an extraordinary kind of blessing, which Isaac used;
yet from hence, we may all of us learn an ordinary duty: for, look as Isaac
blessed his two sons, so we by his example must learn to abstain from all
wicked speeches; as cursing and banning, and exercise our tongues in blessing,
not making them the instruments of sin, to curse, and revile, as many do:
for, vengeance is mine (says the Lord). He must curse, that has absolute
power and authority to inflict the same, when he will. But we are not
absolute Lords over any man, or any creature; and therefore we must remember
Saint Peter's lesson, 1. Pet. 3.9, We must not render evil for evil, nor
rebuke for rebuke; But contrariwise bless: and he renders a reason, Knowing
that we are thereunto called, to be heirs of blessing. Far be it from us
therefore, to open our mouths to curse either men, or any of Gods creatures:
and indeed, vile, and abominable is the practice of many, who exercise their
tongues in cursing and banning, not only men, but also other creatures of God.
But let such as fear God, both learn and practice the contrary.

The second point to be considered, is the cause of this blessing; to wit,
Isaacs faith: By faith Isaac blessed Iaacob and Esau.

Here first we are to consider, how Isaacs faith blessed Iaacob and Esau?
surely thus: He did most notably gather together all the promises of God made
to him, and to his two children, which were specially three. First, I will be
thy God and the God of thy seed. 2. God had promised, that he and his seed
should possess the promised Land of Canaan: 3. That his two children should be
two mighty Nations, and that the elder should serve the younger.

Now Isaac does not consider these blessings apart one from another, but has
them all in memory; and on them all (receiving them by a lively faith) he
builds his blessings: for, by faith in these promises, he did certainly
foresee what should be the future estate of his two sons, and accordingly
does he pronounce particular blessings upon them both.

But it may be thought, that Isaac did not bless his sons by faith; for if
we read the History in Genesis, we shall see, that he blessed them by error,
and was deceived therein: for, he was purposed to have blessed Esau, only
with the special blessing, when as he gave the same to Jacob unwittingly; how
then could he do this by faith? For the answering of this, we must consider
two things: First, it is true indeed, that Isaac was blinded overmuch with a
fond affection toward Esau, and loved him otherwise then he ought, and therefore
was purposed to have blessed Esau with the special blessing. This was a fault
in Isaac: but yet it takes not away Isaacs faith, nor makes it to be no faith:
But it shows that Isaacs faith was weak, and joined with some infirmity in
forgetting Gods particular promises. Secondly, howsoever at the first Isaac
erred in his purpose for the blessing of his children, yet afterward he
corrects himself for it. For, as we may read in the History, after he had
indeed blessed Jacob, supposing it had been Esau, when Esau came for his
blessing with his venison, the Text says, Genesis 27.33, That Isaac was stricken
with a marvelous great fear, and said, I have blessed him, and therefore he
shallbe blessed; correcting his fault in his former purpose: yea, and though
Esau sought it with tears, yet he could not move Isaac to repent himself of
blessing Jacob, Heb. 12.17: wherefore it is undoubtedly true, that he gave
these blessings unto his children by faith.

Now from this that Isaac blessed his children by faith, we learn many
instructions. The first concerns Parents; that, howsoever they cannot as
Isaac did, like Prophets and Patriarchs pronounce blessings upon their
children, and foretell what shall be their particular estate afterward: yet if
Parents would as far as they may, follow the practice of Isaac, they should
bring great comfort and consolation unto their own souls, both in this life
and in the life to come.

Isaac set before his eyes all the promises that God had made both concerning
him and his sons; and by faith in these promises is moved to bless his
children: so, if Parents would have true comfort in their children, they must
search through the whole book of GOD, and see what promises God has made unto
the godly and to their seed; and withal, they must by faith apply unto their
own souls, all these gracious promises, endeavoring also to make their
children to know the same, and to walk worthy thereof: and then as their
obedience shall increase, so will their joy increase not only in God, but
mutually one in another. This will stay their hearts in all assaults, yea even
in death it self.

Secondly, whereas Isaac blessed his children by faith: here we may take just
occasion to speak of such wicked persons as are commonly called blessers; who
are too much esteemed of, by many at this day, and their wicked practices
counted blessings, and good means of help: when as indeed they are most vile
and wretched creatures. This may be thought a hard censure, because they are
taken for cunning men and women, and for good people who follow Isaacs example
in blessing men's children and cattle: they are thought to do no harm at all,
but much good by helping strange mischaunces that befall men in their bodies,
children, or goods. Thus would some excuse and defend these wizards and
blessers, who are the wretched limbs of the devil: but let us know that if
they will bless aright, it must be by faith. Now what faith have they? has
God made any promise to them, that by their means he will help those that
come to seek help at them for their children and cattle? nay verily, there
is no such matter: God never made promise to any such; nay, he has flatly
forbidden, not only such practices as they use, Leuit. 19.31.
but also for men to seek to any such persons: and therefore they cannot
bless men's children and cattle by faith. But they say they do these things
by faith: yet it is by faith in the devil, and in his promises. For this is
certain, that as God has his Laws and Sacraments for those that enter
covenant with him: so on the contrary, the devil has words, spells, and
charms, as his laws and rites, wherein he exercises his slaves: and by a
Satanicall faith in the devils word and promise, do these Wizards and
wise-women bless men's goods and children. This is true by the common
confession of many of them, to omit all other proof. And therefore we must
hold them for the limbs of the devil, and his wicked instruments to draw men
from God; and so in no case go to them for any help: for in so doing, we
forsake the living Lord and his help, Isa. 8.19.20.
and seek for help at the devil; then which what can be more odious? But,
say we receive some outward help by their means: yet mark the issue; the
Lord has said, Leuit. 20.6, If any turn after such as work with spirits, and
after southsayers to go a-whoring after them, then will I set my face against
that person, and will cut him off from among his people. Therefore unless we
fear not the curse of God, we must be warned hereby, not to seek for help at
their hands. For they are graceless people; who have no fear of God before
their eyes: but they set themselves against God and his word. And indeed these
common blessers which seem to do no hurt, but to bless men's children and
cattle, are more dangerous then notorious Witches, who can only hurt men's
body and goods, when God permits; whereas these blessers ensnare the soul, and
draw whole Towns and Countries to the approbation and partaking of their
wickedness.

The third point to be considered is, the parties blessed, that is, Jacob and
Esau. Here mark first the order which the holy Ghost uses: he sets Jacob
in the first place, and yet Esau was the elder brother: what is the reason of
this? Answer. We must know that the Scripture uses a threefold order in the
naming of persons:

1. The order of Nature: as when the first borne is put first. And thus David's
sons are numbered according to their age; first, Ammon, then Daniell, the
third Absolon, etc. 1. Chronicles 3.1.2.3.

2. The order of dignity, when as those are put in the first place, not which
are the eldest, but which are best and most in GODS favor. This order the
holy Ghost uses in naming Noah's sons, Genesis 5. verse 31: saying, Noah
begat Shem, Ham, and Iaphet; when as Iaphet was eldest, and by order of nature,
should have been put first: yet with Shem GOD continued the covenant.

3. The order of History, when as one that is first or chief in dignity, is
placed last, because his History begins in the last place. So our Savior
Christ is mentioned last in the Genealogy made by Saint Matthew; Math. 1.
because his History began in the last place, though in dignity he were
first and principal. To apply this to our purpose: The order which the holy
Ghost here uses, is not the order of History, nor of Nature, but of
dignity; because Jacob was chief in the favor of GOD, therefore the holy
Ghost puts him in the first place.

Here then we see in this order of dignity, that the first blessing (of life
everlasting) belongs to Jacob: Esau must have his blessing, but in the second
place.

Here observe these two things: First, Jacob is received into Gods covenant,
and Esau put by. Jacob gets the principal blessing, and Esau loses it: but
what? are these things so, for Jacobs desert, or for the default of Esau? Nay
verily: The good pleasure of GOD is the chief cause hereof: for, touching the
blessing; if we read the History, we shall see, that Esau at his Fathers
commandment, went and hunted, and took the pains, and got his Father
venison, and told him nothing but truth. But Jacob never went to hunt, but
gets a Kid dressed, and comes to his Father with it, and while he talks with
his Father, does foully gloase and lie: so that in all reason it might seem,
that Esau deserved the better blessing; yet GOD will have it otherwise, and the
principal blessing belongs to Jacob. Wherein we may note, that Gods special
love to man, whereby he receives him into his covenant, is not grounded on
man's behavior, but on his own good will and pleasure.

Secondly, in that Jacob here had the principal blessing; we learn, that
the counsel of GOD does ouerrule the will of man. For, Father Isaac had
purposed to have blessed Esau with the chiefest blessing; but yet Gods counsel
was contrary, and the same ouer-rules Isaacs will. For, though Isaac had cause
to suspect that it was not Esau, both because he came so soon, as also for
that the voice was apparent not to be Esaus, but Jacobs voice: yet Gods
counsel ouer-ruled his will; and when he came to handle his sons hands,
he could not discern between a Kiddes skin, and the skin of a man: what is
the cause hereof? Surely it was Gods will and counsel, that Jacob should have
the chiefest blessing; and therefore he ouer-rules Isaacs will, and blindes
his senses, and makes him to bless Jacob with the chiefest blessing.

The consideration hereof is profitable unto us; for it is a received opinion
with many at this day, that GOD did purpose to save all men. Now when question
is made, Why then are not all men saved? They answer, because men will not,
though God will. But this opinion is erroneous; for, it makes man's will to
overrule GODs counsel: as if they should say, GOD wills it not, because men
will it not; or else (which is worse) God wills it: but it comes not to
pass, because man will not do it. But Gods will and counsel is the highest
and chiefest cause of al; and look whatsoever he wills, that brings he to
pass: and because all men are not saved, therefore we may safely think, and
say, that God did never decree to save all men.

Now further, more particularly of Jacobs blessing: first, it may be asked, How
could Jacob be blessed, seeing he came dissemblingly and lying to his father?

Answ. We must know, that howsoever Jacob sought the blessing by fraud, yet
he might be blessed; for, he failed not, neither did amiss in seeking for the
blessing, but only in the manner of seeking it: it was his duty to seek it,
though not after that manner which he did; he should rather have stayed that
leisure and time, wherein God had caused Isaac to have blessed him, without his
sin in seeking it.

Secondly, consider the manner how Jacob receives his fathers blessing; namely,
in his elder brother Esaus garment.

Here we may see a notable resemblance of Gods manner of blessing us: When we
look for a blessing at Gods hand, we must not come in our own garments, in
the rotten rags of our own righteousness; but we must put on Christ's garment,
the long white robe of his righteousness. And so coming unto God, as Isaac said
of the savor of Esaus garments, which Iaacob had put on, (Genesis 27.27, 28.)
Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field; God give thee
therefore of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of
wheat and wine: So will God say unto us, that the righteousness of Christ,
which we have put on by faith, is a sweet smelling savor in his nosthrils,
Ephesians. 5.2. Now seeing all the blessings we enjoy, come to us in Christ, and
our acceptance with God, is in his righteousness; we therefore must labor to
put on Christ every day, by becoming new creatures: we must seek to resemble
him in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness: so shall our assurance
increase of Gods blessings upon us more and more.

Lastly, mark that howsoever Iaacob was blessed otherwise than Isaac had
purposed; yet, after the blessing is pronounced, it must needs stand: for, so
when Esau came* Isaac said unto him, I have blessed Jacob; therefore he shall
be blessed: Ephesians. 27.33. Even so, the Ministers of Gods word, in the assembly of
the Church, who have power to pronounce Gods blessings upon the people;
howsoever they be but weak men, and may be deceived, being subject to error,
as other men are: yet when they pronounce Gods blessing upon their
congregation, in the ministry of the word; if they do it in sincerity of
heart, and uprightness of conscience, that blessing shall stand. And so on the
contrary, look whom they curse, for just cause out of Gods word; their curse
shall stand.

Further, as Isaac blessed, but knew not whom; so the Ministers of God, in the
dispensation of the word, they must bless Gods people, though they know not who
they are particularly, that do receive it.

Thus much of Isaacs blessing Jacob. Now I come to his blessing of Esau: for
he also was blessed, as the Text says; yet in the second place, albeit he
were the elder brother. Quest. How could Esau be blessed at all, seeing Isaac
had but one blessing? Answ. Esau was only blessed with temporal blessings, and
not with spiritual. Object. But some will say, Esau was a bad man, and wicked;
now it is said, that to the impure all things are impure: how then could the
bestowing of temporal things be blessings to him? An. Temporal things bestowed
on the wicked are blessings, and no blessings: they are blessings in regard of
God, that gives them; but they are no blessings, in regard of men that receive
them, and use them amiss.

Quest. How came it to pass, that Esau being the elder brother, loses his
birthright, and blessing both; how came it to be Iaacobs?

Answ. The cause was his profaneness, as we may see and read in the next
chapter; where it is said, (Heb. 12.16.) that he sold his birthright for a
portion of meat: even for a mess of read broth; and being so profane, as to
contemn so high an honor, he must be content to have his blessing in the
second place. And hence we may observe a good instruction.

There is many a young man in these our days, baptized as Esau was circumcised,
and living in the Church, as he did in Isaacs house; who, during prime of his
age, is given to nothing but to his pleasure; that is as good to him, as Jacobs
read broth was to Esau: take this pleasure from him, and take away his life:
herein is all his joy, and he delights in nothing so much, as to spend his
time in hunting, hawking, dicing, gaming, wantonness, and drinking. Now know
for certain, this is a right Esau; and yet many such have we among us, who
think of themselves, that they are they jolly fellows, and they only carry
the brave mind: but as for Iaacob, and such as make conscience of their ways
and words; those alas are silly fellows. Now, what is to be said or thought of
these? Surely this, if they do not, (and that in time) look to their estates,
and to themselves, it will cost them their lives; even the life of their
souls. Esau lost his birthright by his profaneness: and so will these men
do, if they continue in this estate; they will blot their names out of the
book of life, and root themselves quite out of the kingdom of heaven.
Therefore, let all young men whatsoever they be, high or low, take heed how
they live in sin, and go on in their wickedness; for, if they take Esaus
course, and continue in profaneness, doubtless they will have Esaus end. How
wonderfully does Satan bewitch them, that while they go on in sin, they
should think so highly of themselves* and so basely of those that make
conscience of their ways? Wherefore, in the fear of God let such betime
redress their ways and courses; lest when Gods curse is upon them, they cry
too late for mercy. And thus much of the parties blessed.

The fourth point to be considered, is the nature or matter of this blessing,
in the end of the verse; Concerning things to come.

The meaning of these words is this: That old Isaac their father did
pronounce blessings upon his sons, not only for the time present, but also
for the time to come; in blessings temporal and spiritual, (as we may read
Genesis 27. verse. 28, 39.) where he gives to them both the fatness of the Land,
and plenty of wheat and wine: and especially to Iaacob, that he should be Lord
over his brethren. But some will say, it may seem to prove otherwise; for,
while Iaacob lived, he was always humble and subject to Esau: and when he came
to his own country, from among the Aramites, as he met with Esau, he sent
presents to him; and when he saw him, he went before, Genesis 33.3.
and bowed himself to the ground 7. times, until he came near to his
brother, Answ. That prophecy of Iaacob and Esau, that the elder should serve
the younger, must not be restrained to the persons of Iaacob and Esau, but
referred to their posterity; especially in the days of David and Solomon: for
then were the Edomites who came of Esau, in subjection to the Israelites, the
posterity of old Ismael. Whereupon, David speaking as a King, says, Psalm.
60.8, Moab shall be my wash-pot, over Edom will I cast my shoe: meaning
thereby, that he would bring the posterity of Esau into a base and low
estate of subjection unto him; according as we may see verified, 2. Sam. 8.14.

But some will say, that Isaac when he blessed Esau, pronounced that he should
have a fertile soil, and the fatnes of the earth should be his dwelling place
(Genesis 27.39.)* whereas in Malachie the Lord says (Mal. 1.3.) he hated Esau.
And a token thereof was this; that he had made his mountains waste, and his
heritage a wilderness for dragons: meaning, that he should dwell in a barren
Land. How can these two agree? Answ. First, we may say thus: That the land of
Edom was a fertile land; but yet in respect of the Land of Canaan, but a barren
and waste Land. Secondly, Isaac speaks here of Idumea, as it was in his time;
not as it was afterward: for, it might be fertile in Isaacs time, (...) yet
after become barren: for, God will curse a Land by turning fruitfulness into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein, Psalm. 107.34.

And thus much for the example of Isaacs faith. Now follow the examples of the
faith of Jacob.

Jacobs Faith.
VERSE 21. By faith Jacob when he was dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph,
and worshipped on the end of his staff.


IN these words the holy Ghost lays down the notable and worthy example of
Jacobs faith: which is here commended by two actions; First, his blessing of
the two sons of Joseph: Secondly, his adoring or worshipping of God. In the
first action, consider these points: 1. The blessing it self: 2. The
circumstances belonging to the same; As 1. the time when Jacob blessed them,
that is, when he was dying: secondly, by what means did he bless them,
namely, by faith: thirdly, the parties blessed; Ephraim and Manasses. Of these
in order.

First, for the blessing: Of this kind of blessing, we entreated in the
former verse, in the example of Isaacs faith; and therefore need not now
repeat the same. Only this we must remember, that this blessing of Jacob is
not the common or ordinary blessing of a Father, but the extraordinary
blessing of an holy Patriarch and Prophet of God. The blessing it self stands
in three things: 1. Jacob makes the sons of Joseph his own sons, adopting
them and taking them into his family. And this is the meaning of those words in
Genesis, where Jacob says as he is blessing them, Let my name be named upon
them, and the name of my Fathers, Abraham and Isaac; Genesis 48.16, that is, they
shall be received into my family, and be my children, called after my name.

2. He gives them two portions in the Land of Canaan: for Jacob was made an
instrument of God, by way of prophecy to distinguish and divide the Land of
Canaan among his children.

3. He does as a Prophet, by the spirit of prophecy, foretell the condition
and estate of Ephraim and Manasses in their posterity; to wit, that they should
be great Nations, and of them should come two great people: in these three
things does Jacobs blessing consist.

Out of this blessing of Jacob, we learn two things: First, that God allows
this liberty to a master of a family, to adopt and choose for the upholding of
his house a child or children, in the want of issue from his own body. For
here old Jacob for the continuance of his posterity, and the enlarging of the
Church of God, adopteth his sons sons into his own family, to be his own
sons: And this he does by faith. And therefore a Lord and Master in his
family may do the like: but yet with this caveat; he must ever take heed
that in this adopting he do not unjustly hinder his own issue or kindred.

Again, whereas Jacob blesses these two sons of Joseph, by foretelling the
particular estate of their posterity, for their portion in the Land of Canaan;
here we learn, that in many things God does vouchsafe to reveal his will and
counsel in a special manner unto them that be his children: As, in this place
he reuealeth unto Jacob the particular estate of the two sons of Joseph. In
like manner, when God was to destroy the Sodomites; Shall I hide (says the
Lord) from Abraham that thing which I do, Genesis 18.17.18.19.
seeing that Abraham shall be indeed a mighty Nation? for, I know him that he
will command his sons and his household after him, that they keep the way of
the Lord. And the Prophet Amos says; Surely the Lord will do nothing, Amos
3.7.
but he reuealeth his secrets to his servants the Prophets. So says our
Savior Christ to his Disciples, Ye are my friends; and he gives a reason,
because (says he) I have revealed unto you all that I have heard of my Father,
John 15.15. So that those which are (in Christ) the friends of God, they shall
in a particular and special manner know those things which God will not
reveal unto others. And look as this is here verified to Jacob in a special
manner, so it is true generally in all Gods servants and children; he
reuealeth some particular things unto them, more then he does unto others.
For, besides that general knowledge which they have in his word, he reueales
particularly unto them the knowledge of their own election, of their
justification, sanctification, and glorification to come: though not by way of
prophecy, yet by the working of his spirit in the ministry and meditation of
his word. And thus much of the blessing. Now follow the Circumstances.

The 1. Circumstance to be considered, is the time when Jacob blessed the two
sons of Joseph; noted in these words, when he was dying: that is, being ready
to die, not in the act of dying.

In this circumstance we may learn two especial duties: one for masters of
families; the other for the Ministers of Gods word: for, here Jacob bears the
person not only of a Father, but of a Prophet. First, Masters of families are
here taught to set in order their houses and families whereof they have charge,
before they die: for, Jacob having a great charge, and many children; calls for
the sons of Joseph, Ephraim, and Manasses, before his death, and makes them
his own, to perfect his family.

Quest. How (will some ask) must a man set his house in order when he dies.
Answer. By doing two things after Jacobs example: for, first, he disposes of
his temporal things, and distributeth his temporal inheritance in the Land of
Canaan. Secondly, he gives them charge of some duties concerning himself and
some others, especially concerning religion and Gods worship, and then he dies;
as it is said, When he had made an end of giving charge unto his sons, he
plucked up his feet into his bed, and gave up the ghost. Genesis 49.33: So
likewise Masters of families, they must set their houses in order by the like
two duties: 1. By a due disposing of their temporal goods and possessions: and
2. by giving exhortation and charge unto their children and family, concerning
the worship of GOD, and the practice of true Religion. This (as we may also
read, 1. Kings. 2,) was the practice of good King David: when he was about to
die, and as he says, to go the way of all flesh, he calls for Solomon his
son, and makes him King in his stead, and gives him a most notable charge
concerning Gods worship, Verse 3; read the place: it is worth the marking. So
the Prophet Isaiah, when he comes to Hezekiah from the Lord, he aims at these
two: and bids him set his house in order, for he must die and not live: Isay
38.1: and so ought every Master of a family, after their example, both learn
and practice these two duties.

Secondly, Gods Ministers must hence learn their duty: for, Jacob was a
notable Minister and Prophet in Gods Church, which was then in his family.
Jacob he blesses the sons of Joseph, that he might receive them into his
family, and into the covenant; that so he might continue and preserve the
Church of God after his death: for, look as Isaac his Father did call him into
the covenant, and blessed him; so deals he with the two sons of Joseph.
And accordingly every Minister of GOD, in his place, ought to have special
care to convey and derive true religion, and the Gospel of Christ from hand to
hand, so much as they can while they live; that so after their death it may be
published and maintained. In the new testament we have a worthy commandment
for this purpose; S. Paul having instructed and taught Timothy in the ways of
godliness and religion, charge him, that what things he had heard and learned
of him, the same he should deliver to faithful men, which should be able to
teach other also: that so Gods Gospel and religion going on from hand to hand,
and from person to person, might increase from time to time. S. Peter's practice
herein, was notable, 2. Pet. 1.15, I will endeavor therefore always, that ye
may be able to have remembrance of the things of God after my departure:
having professed before; that while he lived he would stir them up, by
putting them in remembrance, v. 13. And in like sort, all Gods faithful
ministers must do their whole endeavor before they die; that the Gospel may
be preached when they are gone.

2. Circumstance. By what means did Jacob bless the two sons of Joseph?
Ans. By faith in the promises of God; so the text says, By faith Jacob blessed
the two sons of Joseph. And if we consider the matter well, we shall see it
was a notable faith: for, he was now a poor pilgrim in Egypt, and yet by
faith gives them portions in the Land of Canaan.

Quest. Why (will some say) did he not keep himself in the Land of Canaan?

Answ. Jacob indeed dwelt there for a time, but yet as a soiourner, having no
more liberties than he bought for himself; no not so much as water for his
camels, or a place to bury the dead: and besides, he was driven out of this his
own Land by famine, and was feign to fly into Egypt for food and sustenance;
and there to live as a poor pilgrim and stranger, forth of his own country:
And yet for all this extremity (as though he had bin some mighty potentate of
the world, or some Emperor) he makes his Will, and bequeathes unto his
children the Land of Canaa^, allotting to every one his part and portion; which
must needs be a work of a notable faith, wonderfully apprehending and applying
the promise of God.

In his example we are taught a notable duty in the matter of our salvation:
When as any of us (by reason of the rigorous temptation of sin and Satan, and
by their assaults) shall seem to our selves to be (as it were) thrust out of
our inheritance in the heavenly Canaan, what must we do? We must not despair;
but even then set before our eyes, and call to remembrance the promises of God
made unto us in Christ, concerning life everlasting: and thereon we must rest
and stay our selves. Then let temptations assault us, and drive us whither they
can: still we must hold fast the promise with both hands of faith; and above
hope, by faith appoint and design unto our selves, a part and portion in the
kingdom of heaven. And so doing, we shall be true Israelites, and true
followers of this faithful Patriarch; who by faith (beyond all likelihood)
allots the Land of Canaan to his posterity.

3* Circumstance. The parties whom he blessed; namely, the two sons of
Joseph, Manasses and Ephraim. Hereof we may read at large, Genesis 48.8, 9, etc.
where among many things, observe this one: Joseph brings his two sons,
Manasses and Ephraim, unto Iaacob his father, that he might bless them, as he
lay on his bed. Now, Joseph's mind was, that Manasses (the elder) should have
the chiefest blessing; and therefore, he set Manasses at Iaacobs right hand,
and Ephraim (the younger) at his left: But Iaacob being to bless them, lays
his hands a-crosse, putting his right hand on Ephraims head, and the left on
the head of Manasses; whereby, he gave the birthright (which was a principal
prerogative) unto Ephraim, contrary to Joseph's desire. Unto Manasses he gave a
blessing also, but far inferior to Ephraims. Now, here we may not think,
that Iaacob did this upon any fond affection (as parents oftentimes do,
because they love one child better than another) but he did it after a
special manner; by the direction and instinct of Gods spirit, which so
appointed it: For, when Iaacob blessed them, he knew not (of his own
knowledge, by the benefit of his senses) which was Ephraim, and which Manasses.
Again, look as Iaacob gave the blessings at this time, the principal unto
Ephraim, and the lesser to Manasses; so afterward they came to pass: For (as
we may read) the tribe of Ephraim was far more populous, and more glorious
than the tribe of Manasses. And therefore, in the books of the Prophets (Hos.
4.16. and 5.9. and 6.4, etc.) we shall find that the name of Ephraim is given
to all the ten tribes; and they are called by that name, because it was the
most noble tribe of all, and the most valiant, and (as it were) the shelter of
all the rest. Yea further, of this tribe came (1. Chron. 7.27.) Iehosuae, that
noble captain; and (1. King. 11.26.) Jeroboam, and many other mighty Kings of
Israel.

Where we may learn, that God is the disposer of honors and dignities in this
world; he gives these to whom he will, to some more, and to some less, as
pleases him: yea sometime he raises up men of base and low degree, to great
dignity; as David says, Psalm. 113.7, He raises the needy out of the dust,
and lifts the poor out of the dongue. Now, whence comes this? Is their
learning, their great strength, their beauty, or wonderful skill, and
knowledge, the cause of their preferment? or the wealth of their parents, or
any thing in them? No surely: If we speak of the first cause, we see in this
example, that the preferment of Ephraim above Manasses, was for no cause in
Ephraim; for, what was in Ephraim, that was not in Manasses, when Iaacob
blessed them? Surely nothing: for, he was but a child as the other was, and a
younger child also; but he was preferred by reason of Gods good will toward
him. And so it is with all those that are advanced to preferment in this world.
Wherefore, seeing honor and dignity comes not from themselves, or any thing
in them; therefore they must not ascribe it to their own wit, learning,
strength, or friends; but wholly to the gift of God, as the first cause: and so
must labor to use it to the honor of him that only gives it, of his good
pleasure; else they sacrifice to their own net: Hab. 1.16.

Quest. Why does the holy Ghost in this place put Joseph's name down, who was
not blessed? and conceal the names of the two children that were blessed?
Answer. If we read the History in Genesis, we shall see the reason hereof.
For, when Joseph heard that his Father Jacob was sick; though he was a mighty
Prince and a noble Potentate among the Egyptians, and his Father but a poor
Pilgrim: yet he comes to his sick Father before his death, and brings his
two sons with him, to have his Father to bless them before he died; and
therefore the holy Ghost here names Joseph to show unto us what respect he had
of his Fathers blessing: he made more account thereof, and did more esteem
it, that so he might have his sons within the covenant, than of all the
Kingdoms in the world* and therefore he brings them both to his Father to be
blessed* a little before his death.

Now look what mind and affection Joseph bears, the same should be in every
one of us. Whatsoever our estate be, whether honorable, or base, and mean;
we must with Joseph esteem more of Gods covenant, and to be members of Gods
Church, then of all the honor in the world besides; and we must esteem our
places and preferments that we have, or our children may have, to be nothing in
comparison of the blessing of God, and his favor. Yea, we must choose with
Joseph rather to leave our honors and dignities for a time, or (if it were)
for ever; then to lose the blessing of Gods grace: and blessed shall those
Fathers be with Joseph, who had rather have their children blessed of God, then
advanced in the world. The second action of Jacobs faith, is in these words;
And worshipped on the end of his staff: and it is a notable work for the
commendation of his faith. But before we come unto it, there are certain
questions which may profitably be considered: As first, for the translation;
how the words should be read. The Papists read them thus: And adored the top of
his Rod; that is (say they) the top of Joseph's Scepter who came to visit him.
From whence they would gather and ground their abominable Idolatry, in the
Adoration of creatures, and namely of Holy things, as Crucifix, Relics,
Images, as also of God at and before such holy things. But we must know that
their translation is false and erroneous, and cannot be justified, howsoever
they may bring some men's witness and testimony for the same. For in reading
it thus, and adored the top of his Rod; they leave out a substantial word of
the text, to wit, this word upon; whereby they corrupt the Text, and deprave
the meaning of the holy Ghost.

Again, their observation and collection hence, is most abominable: for, to
worship an Image or other holy thing, or GOD himself in or at the same, is
flatly forbidden in the second Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image, etc. Thou shall not bow down to them.

But our Translation in this place is true and right, according to the words
of the Text, and the meaning of the holy Ghost, That he worshipped upon the
end of his staff.

Yet further, there may be a question moved about the words: for, if we read
the History in Genesis, it is there said, that Jacob worshipped toward the
end or top of his bed. Genesis, 47.

Now, there is great difference between these two, To worship on the top
of his staff: and on the top of his bed.

How therefore can they stand together? Ans. They may stand well together, and be
both true; for when Jacob was about to give up the Ghost, and was ready to die,
he raised up himself upon his pillowe toward the beds head, and thereon
rested his body. Now, because his body was weak and feeble, he staide
himself also upon his staff: and thus comparing the places together, we see
there is no repugnancie in them. Again, this we must know, that the same
sentence of Scripture may be diversely read in diverse places of Scripture,
without any impeachment to the truth, certainty, or perfection of Scripture:
for, when the holy Ghost speaks the same thing often, yet in different
terms (as in this place) the diversity of words does enlarge or open the
sense and meaning, but no way corrupt or deprave the same. And thus much for
the words.

Now to come to the fact it self: in Jacobs worship, three circumstances are to
be considered: 1. The occasion: 2. The time: 3. The manner of it.

The occasion of Jacobs worship here spoken of (as we may read, Genesis 47)
was this: when the time drew near that Jacob must die, he called for his
son Joseph, and charge him deeply, That he should not bury him in Egypt
when he was dead, but that he should carry him thence, and bury him in the
burial of his Fathers; Joseph consents unto his Fathers request: and yet Jacob
for certainty makes him to swear that he shall do so, and Joseph swear unto
him. Now upon this issue that Jacob had with Joseph, the Text says, That
Israel worshipped toward the beds ^ead: that is, he praised GOD, and gave
thanks unto him for this benefit that he should be buried with his Fathers,
Abraham, and Isaac. And yet this benefit did not so much concern himself as
his children: for, the carrying of his bones thither, was to be a token and
pledge, and a certain assurance unto them, that the Land of Canaan should be
theirs, and that God would bring them thither again.

In this circumstance, observe a notable duty belonging unto Fathers and
Masters of families: they must in their life time have care of their
posterity, and use all means to help them, and benefit them in the faith;
not only while they are alive, but also after they are dead, after the example
of this holy Patriarch: and when they have obtained this benefit for them,
they must be glad in their hearts and rejoice, and thereupon take occasion to
praise the Lord, as Jacob did in this place.

2. Circumstance. The manner how he worshipped: Which is set down in these
words; on the end of his staff. This circumstance is worth the marking: for,
good Jacob, by reason of the weakness of his body and old age, was not able
to come forth of his bed, and kneel down or prostrate himself; but raises
himself up upon his pillowe toward his beds head: and by reason of
feebleness being not yet able to sit upright, he does lean and bear himself
upon his staff.

Here we learn, that we must not only worship GOD with our souls and
hearts, but with our bodies also: for GOD has created both, and therefore will
be worshipped in both, 1. Corinthians 6. verse 20. Old Jacob might have
excused himself, that by reason of the weakness of his body, he was not
able to adore GOD with any bodily reverence: but yet we see he leanes upon
his staff; and so, making supply to his bodily weakness, adoreth GOD with
his body.

Question. In what kind of gesture then must we worship God, with our bodies?

Answer. The word of GOD does not prescribe any, by way of limitation. For,
sometimes our Savior Christ prayed kneeling, Luke chapter 21. verse 41:
sometimes groueling; Matthew chapter 26. verse 59; sometime standing; John
chapter 11. verse 41: as also did the Apostles. And the Scripture approoueth
the Publican, who stood a-farre off and prayed, Luke chapter 18. verse 13.
Elias also; 1. Kings, chapter 18. verse 42, is said to pray with his head
between his legs; so that we have no certain form prescribed us: only
this, we must use that gesture which may best set forth and declare our humble
heart, and holy affection unto God.

Here then is confuted an opinion of those, which think that a man may worship
God with his heart, and yet worship images with his body; that he may be
present at idolatrous worship, yet keep his heart unto God. But Jacobs
behavior, in this place, does both confute and condemn them: for, he thought
his body as due to God, as his soul; and therefore worshipped God with both.

3. Circumstance: The time when he worshipped God thus; namely, when he was
dying, even then he worshipped God. In this circumstance we may note diverse
things.

First, here behold the bad practice of the world; for, many men when they are
dying, now-adaies, are so far from following Jacobs example in worshipping
and praising God; that then they are feign to call for men to teach them how
they should worship God: having spent the former part of their life carelessly,
in regard of their souls; following worldly profits and pleasures, never
thinking of their duty to God, till they die. But what a fearful course is
this, that men should thus brutishly go on from day to day, not knowing how to
worship God? Well, all such as love their own souls, and would be like to
godly Jacob; or (as our Savior Christ said to Nathaniel) would be true
Israelites, Ioh. 1.47, the natural sons of old Israel indeed; they must
have care so to live in this world, that they may worship God when they die:
and therefore they must not defer, but learn betime the knowledge and fear
of God; that when death comes, they may be able to show forth, and practice
the same. It is a lamentable thing, to consider how the devil bewitcheth men's
hearts, so as they live in the world, as though they should never go out of
it; never caring for religion till the day of death come upon the^; and then it
is too late to learn. But this is to follow Esau, and not Jacob; who is
therefore condemned by the holy Ghost.

2 Again, in this that Jacob worshipped God at his death, we learn this; That
as men live, so they die, for the most part: Jacob was brought up in Gods
worship, and therein lived all his life long; and look as he lived so he
died: for, when he died, he worshipped God, resting his body on the end of his
staff. This same truth is verefied now, and shall be for ever; let a man
worship God through the course of his life, and when he dies he shall be able
to worship and praise God. On the other side (take notice of it) he that lives
in covetousness, in profaneness, in fornication, and wantonness; for the most
part so dies: Come to a covetous man at his death, and talk with him, and you
shall find nothing in him ordinarily, but rauing, and talking about his
bargains, his bills, and indentures, and other worldly things. And so we may
say of other lewd livers; look what mind they had while they were living, and
that shall you find most in their mouths while they are dying: which shows
plainly, that as men live, so they die.

But some will say, that oftentimes the godly man raues and speaks lewdly, and
(it may be) profanely, before his death? Ans. It is true indeed: the best man
is not freed from any kind of bodily sickness, but is subject to them, as well
as the wicked; as, to burning fevers, and such like: by the violence and rage
of which diseases, they are often driven to rave, to speak fondly, and
sometimes lewdly; yea (it may be) profanely. But what is that to the purpose?
for though a godly man (for the time of his fit) cannot express the grace of
his heart, but rather the corruption of his nature; yet when he has recovered
himself, he is sorry for the same, and is then ready and willing to praise God
with all his heart. So that if we would die well, as Jacob did, praising God,
then let us lead our lives as he did; namely, by faith, and the direction of
his word and promises. Then come death when it will, and how it will, we may
indeed be sore assaulted by sickness and temptation; but yet we shall never
be overcome: for, God is faithful that has promised an issue to his children
in temptation, 1. Corinthians. 10.13.

Lastly, whereas Jacob worshipped God at his death: Here we learn, that sound
zeal will never decay. Many men have zeal indeed, but it comes only from
the strength and soundness of their bodily constitution: and look, as
strength decaies, so does that kind of zeal. But sound zeal will not decay
and weaken with the body; but (as David says of the righteous, Psalm. 92.13,
15.) will flourish like a palm tree, and grow like a Cedar in Libanon, it
shall still bring forth fruit in a man's age, and flourish. This we see, was
true in Jacob; for, though he were old, and feeble with sickness, yet he
shows forth sound zeal in his heart, at the hour of his death. Even so will
it be with us, that profess religion; if zeal be sound in our hearts, it will
show it self: and the older we are, the more fruits of grace we shall bring
forth; and then show forth more true zeal, than in younger years. For, though
bodily strength decay, yet sound zeal will never decay: but when strength
fails, then will zeal flourish (if it be sound) like to the palm tree,
which will bud and sprout, though the roots of it be cut off. Wherefore, if
we would show forth zeal in our age, we must get soundness of it in our
youth; for that will put forth it self in the time of death. And thus much of
Jacobs example.

Joseph's Faith.
VERSE 22. By faith, Joseph when he died made mention of the departing of the
children of Israel, and gave commandment of his bones.


We have heard in the former verses the several examples of the faith of the
three Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Now in this verse, the holy Ghost
sets down the example of Joseph's faith. The words in this verse are plain
and easy, and need no exposition: They are a plain and brief sum of the
end of the 50. Chapter of Genesis. Let us therefore come to the points of
doctrine, and instructions which are to be learned and gathered forth of the
words.

First, note in general, the great resemblance of this example with the
former; of Joseph a godly son, with Jacob a godly father: for, both of them
show forth their faith when they die. For, it is said of both, By faith when
he died: So that in ground and circumstance of time, they both agree.

Herein we may observe; first, that the good examples of Superiors (whether
they be civil or Ecclesiastical) are of great force to bring other men on,
and to make them forward in the duties of religion: their zeal (as Paul says
to the Corinthians in the case of alms) provoke many. Jacob the father,
being a worthy Prophet and Patriarch, and giving an holy and blessed example
unto Joseph and his children, does show forth at his death most notable
behavior; wherein, he worthily expresses the truth of his faith. Now, his
example works with Joseph, and he in his death behaues himself in the same
manner that his godly father did before him: and therefore superiors must look
to all their sayings and doings carefully, that they may be worthy examples to
their inferiors, to draw them on in religion, and in the fear of God.

Secondly, hence inferiors also must learn to follow the godly, holy, and
religious examples of their governors and superious (whether they be civil or
Ecclesiastical); as we may see in this place, Joseph does imitate the godly
example of his father Jacob. Hereof Saint Paul gives strait charge unto the
Philippians, saying; Brethren be followers of me, and look on them which walk
so, as ye have us for an example, Phil. 3.17. And in the next Chapter,
exhorting them to honest conversation, he biddes them do those things which
they had heard, received, and seen in him. But are these duties practiced
among us? be the elder sort teachers of good things to the younger? and do the
younger follow their elders in well-doing? nay verily: but such are our times,
too many among us, both those that give, and those which follow good examples,
are as signs and wonders, as the Prophet speaks; they are made a reproach,
and a byword among men, and are foully disgraced by odious terms, Isay 8.18.
But this indeed is a practice of Ismael, that mocked Isaac, Genesis 21. ver.
9. And we again, must undoubtedly know, that unless it be reformed, that hand
of God which has been stretched out against us in many fearful judgments,
will not be pulled back, but stretched out still, till it bring us to
destruction: for, God will not suffer his ordinances to be contemned, and his
holy ones to be abused: he looks for better fruits at our hands, and
therefore we must learn of these godly Patriarchs, both to give and to
follow good examples.

In the example of Joseph, more particularly we are to observe two points: 1.
Joseph's faith: 2. The actions of his faith whereby it is commended.

For the first: it is said, that by faith Joseph when he died, etc. Joseph,
for ought we find in Scripture, had not such means to come by faith, as his
Ancestors had before him. For the three Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, had otherwhiles the appearance of GOD unto them, otherwhile his holy
Angels brought them messages from GOD, and sometime they had his will revealed
unto them by dreams and visions; all which were notable helps and means both
to begin and to increase faith in them: but Joseph wanted all these means,
or at least many of them. For, read his whole History, and you shall not
find that either Angel appeared unto him, or else that GOD by dreams and
visions spoke unto him: and no marvel. For he lived out of the visible
Church where GODs presence was, in superstitious and Idolatrous Egypt: and yet
for all this, he is here matched in the matter of faith, with the three
worthy Patriarchs.

It is then a good question; how Joseph should come by this faith?

Answer. We must know this, that though he had not the like extraordinary
means with the Patriarchs; yet he wanted not all means: for, in his younger
days, he was trained up in his Father Jacobs family, and by him was
instructed in the ways of God, and in the practice of religion; and in his
later days also, he had the benefit of his Fathers company and instructions in
Egypt. Now Jacob was not an ordinary Father, but a notable Patriarch and an
holy Prophet; in whose family God had placed his visible Church in those days,
wherein Jacob was the Lords Prophet and Minister. Now Joseph, both in his young
age, and also after his Father came to Egypt, did hear and learn of him the
ways of God; and by that means came to this excellent faith, for which he is
so commended here, and matched with his Fathers the holy Patriarchs.

Hence we learn, that the preaching of Gods word by his Ministers (though
extraordinary means, as revelations and visions, be wanting) is sufficient to
bring a man to faith; yea, to such a faith as the three Patriarchs had. Indeed
in the ministry of the word, he which speaks unto us, is but a man as
others are; but yet the word which he delivers is not his own, but the mighty
word of God: and look what is truly pronounced by him unto us out of Gods
word, the same is as certainly sealed unto us by his spirit, as if God himself
from heaven should extraordinarily reveal the same. And howsoever in former
times men had visions and dreams, and Angels from God himself to reveal his
will unto them: yet this Ministry of Gods word in the new Testament, is as
sufficient a means of the beginning and increasing of true faith, as that was
then.

This plainly confuteth all those that neglect or contemn the Ministry and
preaching of the word, and look for extraordinary revelations, and for
visions and dreams, for the begetting and increase of faith and grace in their
hearts. But our Savior Christ does notably check all such in the Parable of
the rich man, by the words of Abraham to Dives; Luke 16.
saying, of Dives brethren, that they had Moses and the Prophets; if they will
not hear them, neither will they believe though one should come from the dead
again (Verse 31): insinuating, that if a man will not believe by the preaching
of the word, there is nothing in the world will make him to believe; neither
revelations, nor visions, no not the words of them that rise again from the
dead.

Secondly, the consideration of the sufficiency of Gods ordinance in the holy
Ministry, to beget and to increase true faith, must stir us up to all care
and diligence, not only to hear the word of God preached unto us, but to
profit by it both in knowledge and obedience: and thus much for the first point.

The second point to be handled, is the commendation of Joseph's faith by two
actions thereof: to wit, 1. His mention of the departure of the children of
Israel out of Egypt: 2. His commandment concerning his bones. Of both which
we will speak briefly, because the special points herein were handled in the
former verse.

For the first: Joseph when he died made mention of the departing of the
children of Israel, that is, out of Egypt into Canaan.

Here we may observe a most notable work of faith: it makes a man to keep in
memory the merciful promises which God has made unto him. This is it which
commends Joseph's faith for a lively faith, That being about to die, he
remembers this merciful promise of God, made to his forefathers touching
their posterity; to wit, that after they had continued as servants in a strange
Land 400. years, they should then have a good issue and a happy deliverance,
and be brought into the Land of Canaan. Genesis 15.13. This is a notable work of
faith, as may appear by two notable effects hereof in the life of a Christian:
For first, by this remembrance of Gods merciful promises, the servant of God
at all times, and in all distresses and extremities does find comfort unto his
soul. This brings to his memory the wonderful goodness and mercy of God, by
which he is comforted. When David was in a most desperate case, so as he cried
out by reason of affliction and temptation, Will the Lord absent himself for
ever, and will he show no more favor? Is his mercy clean gone? does his
mercy fail for evermore? Psalm. 77, with such like most fearful speeches; How
did he then comfort himself in this distress? Answ. Surely by remembering the
works of the Lord and his wonders of old, and by meditating in all his works
and gracious acts which he had done for him. So likewise in another place in
great anguish of spirit, he says to his soul, Why art thou cast down my
soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Psalm 43.5. Yet in the next words
he thus stays himself; Wait on God, for I will yet give thanks unto him:
he is my present help, and my God. How came David to say so, in this distress?
Answer. By means of faith, which does revive and refresh the dead heart of
man, by bringing to his remembrance the merciful promises of God.

Saint Paul pressed with corruption, cried out: O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7.24. Yet in the next words
he says, I thank my God through Jesus Christ our Lord: Then I my self in my
mind serve the Law of God, etc. How come the latter words to follow on the
former? Answer. In the first words indeed, he is cast down with the view and
sight of his natural corruption, which drew him headlong into sin: but yet
the later words are a remembrance of the merciful deliverance from sin which
GOD had wrought in him by Christ: and therefore he breaks out to this
saying, I thank my God through Jesus Christ, etc.

Secondly, the remembrance of Gods promises serves to be a means to keep a
man from sin: for man's nature is as ready and prone to sin, as fire is to
burn when fuel is put to it. But when by faith he calls to mind Gods
merciful promises, especially those which are made unto him in Christ: then he
reasons and strives against temptation, and lays the word as a shield unto
his soul, to keep out the fiery darts of Satan; yea, he applies the same
word to his own soul, as a corrosiue unto corruption: whereupon it is said,
that faith purifieth the heart, Act. 15.9. How? namely, beside the applying of
Christ's blood, it brings to memory Gods merciful promises in Christ: which
stay a man from committing such things as would pollute and defile the heart.
And therefore is faith said to be our victory over the world: 1. Ioh. 5.4.
because by applying to our souls Gods promises in Christ, we do not only
contemn the world, in regard of Christ; but also stand against the assaults
thereof: so that it is a most notable and excellent work of faith.

Lastly, observe the circumstance of time, when Joseph made remembrance of
their departing. The text says, When he was dying. Hereof we have spoken in
the former verse: yet this one thing may here again be well remembered; Joseph
calls to mind the promises of God at his death, which concern the temporal
deliverance of his people: and we by his example, when we are dying, must
learn to call to remembrance the gracious promises, which God has made unto
us in Christ, touching our eternal deliverance from the spiritual bondage of
the devil. Oh! great will be the fruit hereof, not only for inward comfort
to our own souls, and joy to such as love us; but also we shall hereby give a
worthy evidence to the world, that we have bin sound in the faith: wherein, we
shall leave a good president to those that follow us.

The second fact of Joseph's faith is this* He gave commandment concerning his
bones. The meaning thereof is this: that Joseph lying on his death bed, gave a
solemn charge to his brethren, to have special care how and where they buried
him; that his bones might not be lost, but so preserved while they stayed in
Egypt, that at their departure they might be carried into the land of Canaan,
and there buried in the sepulcher of his fathers. The causes why Joseph gave
this commandment were these: 1 Hereby to testify unto his brethren and
posterity, that howsoever he lived a long time in the pomp and glory of Egypt,
yet his heart was never set thereon; but he had a greater delight, and more
esteemed to be counted a true member of the Church of God, than to be a noble
prince in the Land of Egypt. For, if he had loved and liked the pomp of
Egypt, he would have had his sepulcher among them; but, giving commandment to
the contrary, it shows plainly, that his heart was never set on that glory
and pomp in which he lived.

By whose example we are taught, that in using the world, and the things
thereof, we must not set our hearts on them; but as the Apostle says, 1. Cor.
7.31, Use them as though we used them not: still having our affections set on
heaven, which is our spiritual Canaan.

2 Hereby Joseph would testify unto his brethren, what he esteemed his chief
happiness; namely, that in faith and hope he was joined unto his fathers, and
ancestors, that believed in God, and that he was of their religion, and
looked for a resurrection, and another life, as they did. And this he would
have known, not only to his brethren and posterity, but to the Egyptians
also, among whom he lived.

3 Joseph hereby intended principally, to confirm the faith of his brethren
and posterity in Gods promise, for enjoying and possessing the Land of Canaan
after his death: and this was a notable way to strengthen their faith. For,
when they should see or remember his corpse, it was unto them as a lively
sermon, to show them plainly, that howsoever they lived for a while in bondage
in Egypt; yet the day should shortly come, wherein they should be set at
liberty, and brought (as freemen into the land of Canaan. And undoubtedly,
Joseph would therefore have his bones kept among them, that they might be a
pledge unto them of their deliverance.

Yea note further, the story says, (Genesis 50.15.) that Joseph did not only
charge his brethren generally; but binds them by an oath to carry his bones:
hereby showing, that it was a matter of great weight which he did inioyne
them; even a sign and pledge of the truth of Gods promise in their
deliverance. Whence we learn, that it is a matter of great moment, for every
Christian, both carefully and reverently to use the sacraments, which God has
given as pledges of his covenant of grace, made with us in Christ. For, shall
Joseph cause his brethren and posterity to swear concerning his bones, that
so they might more reverently regard that pledge and sign of their outward
deliverance? And shall not we with all reverence and good conscience, both
esteem and use those holy pledges of our eternal deliverance by Christ Jesus?

The Papists, from this place, would justify their practice, in reserving and
honoring the Relics of Saints. Now by Relics, they mean the parts of the
bodies of Saints departed; as the head of John Baptist, the arms or bones of
this or that Saint, the milk of the virgin Mary, and also the parts of the
cross whereon Christ suffered, with such like. Answ. First, let us know, that
their Relics are nothing else but forged devices of their own, and no true
Relics of Saints; as by one instance may appear. For, the parts and parcels
of wood, kept in Europe, which they say are parts of the cross whereon Christ
died, are so many, that if they were all gathered together, they would load a
ship: which shows plainly, that herein they use notorious forgerie, for it
was no greater than a man may bear. And the like is their behavior in the
rest. Secondly, the keeping of Joseph's bones, was for a good end and purpose;
namely, to testify his own faith, and to confirm theirs, in believing Gods
promise for their deliverance, out of the bondage of Egypt: but their Relics
serve rather to extinguish faith in Christ, than to confirm it; for, they
nourish men in fond devices, and foul superstitions, and not in the truth of
Gods promises. Thirdly, we do not read in all the Bible, that Joseph's bones
were ever worshipped; and therefore from this place they have no ground whereon
to build their superstitious worshipping of Relics. And thus much of the
example of Joseph's faith.

Moses Faith.
VERSE 23. By faith, Moses when* he was borne, was hid three months of his
parents, because they saw he was a proper child; neither feared they the kings
commandment.


IN this verse the holy Ghost proceeds further, and sets down unto us a
notable and worthy example of the faith of Moses parents. If we would see the
history at large, we must read the 2. Chapter of Exodus; of which, these words
are an abbridgement, or brief Epitome. Now, here the faith of Moses parents is
commended unto us by two notable actions: 1 The hiding of Moses their child
when he was borne; 2 Their courage and boldness in that action; in not fearing
the Kings commandment. Of their hiding of him, we will first entreat
generally, and then come to the circumstances thereof. In general, Their
hiding of the child was this: They kept him close, and unknown to the
Egyptians for three months space; because the King had given commandment and
charge to all his people, that they should drown every man-child born among
the Hebrews. Exodus 1.22. In this action of their faith, we may observe some
special points.

First, Moses was to be a worthy Prophet, and Captain, or guide unto the
people of Israel: and therefore howsoever other men-children were drowned upon
the cruel command of Pharaoh, yet the Lord prouides for him so soon as he is
borne, that he shall be hid, and so preserved from the tyranny and rage of
Pharaoh.

Whence we learn, that God in the midst of all persecution, does evermore
preserve the seed of his Church. There be two estates of Gods Church in the
world: the first is quiet and peaceable, when the Gospel is publicly
professed, taught, and received without hostile opposition, as by Gods great
mercy it is in our Church at this day. The second is an hidden estate, when as
it cannot show it self visible, but the open profession of the Gospel is
suppressed by the rage of the enemy the devil, and by wicked and cruel men
that be his instruments. Thus GOD suffers his Church sometimes to be shadowed,
and in these times many of his dear children to be slain and put to death for
the sins of his Church; yet so, as that always he preserues the seed of his
Church. When Isay had showed the Jews the fearful desolation of their Land;
that the Cities should be wasted without inhabitant, and their houses without
man; Isa. 6.11.
yet then he says, There shall be a tenth in it, and the holy seed shall be
the substance or underprop thereof, Verse 13. God does not deal with his
Church, as he does with the enemies thereof: he but loppes off the branches
in his Church, when as he stocks up the root of the enemies, Isay, chapter
27. verses 7, 8. When he visited Sodom and Gomorrah, he destroyed them
utterly out of the earth: but the Lord does ever keep fast the seed of his
Church, that when the storm of persecution is blown over, his Church may
spring and flourish afterward.

Here some may say, Seeing God purposed to make Moses such a worthy man over
his people, why did he not by some wonderful, powerful, and mighty manner
preserve him against the rage of Pharaoh? Answer. God indeed was able to have
sent a legion of Angels for his preservation, or to have done it after some
strange visible manner; but yet he would not: for we must know and remember,
that it is Gods pleasure to show his power in weak means. He can preserve every
servant of his from all kind of injury: but he will not always do so. When
Christ himself our Savior was, in his infancy, persecuted by Herod, God his
Father was then able to have preserved him in Judea, and to have overthrown
his persecutor by many legions of Angels; yet he would not, but only uses
the poor help of Joseph, and Marie, with the ordinary weak means of
flight: and all this he did, that he might be glorified in the weakness of
his servants; for, when all means fail, then does he magnify his power and
providence in preserving those that trust in him. And thus much of this Action
in general.

The circumstances to be considered in the hiding of Moses, are four: 1. The
time when he was hid: the Text says, When he was borne. Moses (as we said)
must be afterward a notable servant, and a worthy instrument of GOD, whereby
he would work the deliverance of his people, out of the bondage of Egypt: and
yet we see, he is feign to be hid so soon as he is borne.

Hence we learn; that those that be the servants of GOD, and are in special
favor with him, must look for trouble and affliction in this life, from the
cradle to the grave, from the day of their birth, to the hour of their death.
Moses is in danger of his life by Pharaoh, so soon as he is borne. And so was
our Savior Christ by Herod, when he was but a babe: whereupon his Parents
fled with him into Egypt for his safety. And aunswerable to their infancy was
the rest of their life; full of danger, full of trouble: And as it was with
them, so is it with others; 2. Timothy, chapter 3. verse 12; He that will
live godly must suffer persecution: and he that will be Christ's Disciple,
must take up his Cross every day and follow him, Luke 9.23.

This is a point which all of us must mark; we must not look to have ease
and joy in earth: It is enough for us to enjoy that after this life. If Christ
himself carry his cross out of the gate, we then with his disciples must take
up our cross and follow him every day.

The 2. circumstance to be considered, is this: How long was Moses hid?
namely, three months. Question. Why was he hid no longer? Answer. Because they
could not; for it is likely, there was search for him, and therefore they made
a basket of reed, Exodus 2.3.
and dawbed it with slime and pitch, and laid the child therein, and put it
among the bul-rushes by the rivers brinke.

Thus did the Parents adventure the childs life, for the saving of their own:
wherein we may see a great want and weakness in their faith; for they kept
their child a while by faith: but afterward committed him to the dangers of
the waters, of wild beasts and fowls of the air. So that it is plain their
faith was weak, and mingled with fear and with some doubting. For in keeping
the child three months, they show forth lively faith; but when as they expose
him to danger for their own safety, herein they bewray some want of love, and
weakness of faith: and yet we see they are here commended for their faith.
Which shows plainly, that if a man have true and sound faith, though it be
but weak, yet God in mercy will take knowledge of it and commend it, passing by
the weakness of it; yea, and unto that faith will give the promises of life
everlasting made in Christ,

The third circumstance to be considered, is this; Who it was that kept Moses
three months. In Exodus it is said that his mother kept him; Exodus 2.3.
but here it is said, his parents kept him: where the holy Ghost includes his
father also. How can both these be true? Answ. We must know that the Mother
was the chief doer in this work, and the father though he was not a doer, yet
he gave his consent. Now we must remember, that consent is a kind of doing,
whether it be in good things, or in evil: for, when Saul did but keep the
persecutors clothes that stoned Stephen, (Act. 7.58.) whereby he signified his
consent; thereupon he confesses himself to be guilty of his death, Act.
22.20.

Lastly, observe the Cause, or rather the Occasion that moved the Parents to
save their child. It was a notable comeliness and beauty, which did appear
in the body of the child, when he was borne. This moved them to reason thus
with themselves: Surely God has given such beauty and comeliness unto this
child, that it is very likely he will use him hereafter, to be some notable
instrument of some great work: we therefore will keep him alive. This point
must be marked of us: for, beside their natural affection, this also was a
motive to make the parents save their child.

Hence we may learn, that those whom God will employ above others in some
special service for his own glory, are usually endowed with some special
gift above others; yea many times with outward grace and comeliness in the
body. For, this beauty in Moses body, moved his parents to seek to save his
life; they persuade themselves that God had not imprinted that in him for
naught. Saul (we know) was made King over Israel: and it is noted, that the
Lord had given him a goodly stature; for he was higher than any of the people
from the shoulders upward. 1. Sam. 10.23.
So David had a good countenance, 1. Sam. 16.12.
and a comely visage: for the Lord purposed to make him king over Israel. Now
as he did excel his brethren in beauty and comeliness, so he was to be far
above them in this special service of God, in governing his people.

Hence we learn, first, that comeliness and beauty is a gift of God:
Secondly, that those which excel others in these gifts of nature, must look
also that answerably they excel them in holiness, and zeal in the service of
God, and doing good unto men, as Moses and David did. But alas, wretched is the
practice of these times: for commonly those which have comeliness and beauty
above others, do use it as a bait and occasion unto all sin, and naughtiness;
as to whoredom and lasciviousness, that hereby they may more fully satisfy
their own wretched and fatanicall lusts: but this must carefully be looked
unto, of all such as have the gifts of nature in more excellent manner then
others. For if they use them, or rather abuse them to be means of sin, and
to set forth the pride and vanity of their hearts, they have much to answer for
unto God, at the dreadful day of Judgment. Has God given thee beauty and
comeliness? and do thou use it as a bait to ensnare others for the
satisfying of thy lust? then look unto it thou evil servant, for thou do
not hide, but consume thy Masters talent, employing it to his dishonor;
therefore it shall be taken from thee: and in stead thereof, thou shall have
ugliness and deformity, and so in soul and body be tumbled into hell with
unclean spirits. And thus much of the first action of their faith, with the
circumstances thereof.

The second action, whereby the faith of Moses Parents is commended unto us, is
this; They did not fear the Kings commandment. These words must not be
understood absolutely and simply, but with limitation. For many places of
Scripture are spoken simply, which must be understood with respect: as when
it is said, Math. 11.18, John came neither eating nor drinking, that is not,
eating nothing at all, but eating little: and Christ says, Math. 10.34, He
came not to bring peace, but the sword: that is (as Luke expounds it, Luke
12.51.) rather debate, than peace. And so in this place, Moses parents feared
not the Kings commandment; that is, they did not fear it overmuch, or wholly,
or only, or so much as others did in the like case.

Here then first we may learn, how far forth we must obey superiors and
magistrates; we must obey them, not simply, but in the Lord: Ephesians. 6.1. that
is, in all their lawful commands: but when they command things evil and
unlawful, then we must stay our selves, lest obeying them we rebel against
God. For this, we have sufficient warrant in this place, as also in the
Apostles; who being commanded (Act. 4.18, 19.) that in no wise they should
speak or teach in the name of Jesus: answered, Whether it be right in the
sight of God, to obey you rather than God, judge ye. And the midwiues of Egypt
are commended of the holy Ghost, (Exodus 1.17.) for saving the young children
alive, against the Kings commandment. And the three men of the Jews,
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, are renowned with all posterity, for
disobeying the commandment of Nebuchadnessar (Dan. 3.16, 17.) of worshipping
the golden Image. By which examples, we may see plainly, that our obedience to
men must be in the Lord only. Neither is our refusing to do their unlawful
commands, any disobedience indeed: because the fifth commandment in this case
cease to bind, and gives place to the commandments of the first table,
which are greater; as we showed before, v. 17.

Secondly, see here this godly boldness, in not overmuch fearing the Kings
commandment, is made a work of faith: whence we learn, that true faith in
the promises of God, does serve to moderate a man's affections. There is no man,
but if he be left to himself, he will go too far in the sway of his
affections: experience shows that many through anger, and joy, have lost
their lives; some for fear have forsaken religion, and sorrow has cost many a
man his life. Yea, any affection if it be not moderated and stayed, will
bereave a man of his senses, and make him a beast, and no man.

But behold the use and power of true faith: It serves to mitigate a man's
affection; so as if a man be angry, it shall be with moderation: and so we may
say of fear, joy, hatred, or any other affection; faith will assuage and stay
the rage thereof. For undoubtedly, Moses parents might have been overwhelmed
with fear of Pharaohs tyranny and cruelty, but that God gave the^ faith,
which did moderate this fear. There is none of us, but if we look well into
our selves, we shall see that we are excessive in many affections; sometime in
fear, sometime in anger, sometime in sorrow, and such like. Now, would we know
how to bridle these strong passions? Then get true faith: it is the means
whereby a man may moderate and stay the rage of his affections, so as they
shall not break out into extremity. Is a man angry? why, if he have faith,
he will bridle his anger. Is he sorrowful? yet it is in measure: and so for
the rest, faith will rule them all, and yet extinguisheth none. Which, should
greatly provoke us to labor for true faith, seeing it is of such use and power
in the stay of our affections.

Verse 24. By faith, Moses when he was come to age, refused to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter.

25. And chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

26. Esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches, than the treasures of
Egypt: For he had respect unto the recompense of reward.

HEre the holy Ghost comes to the commendation of Moses faith, and in these
three verses propounds a most notable example hereof.

By Moses faith, in this place, we must understand saving faith; which is
nothing else, but a gift of GOD, whereby Moses received the promise of God
touching salvation by the Messiah, and of the promised Land, made to Abraham
and to his seed after him, and applied the same unto himself particularly.

Now in the first entrance of this example, the holy Ghost sets down a
wonderful thing of Moses; namely, that Moses had faith, and by it did this
great work. This (I say) is strange, because he was brought up by Pharaohs
daughter in the Court of Pharaoh, where was no knowledge of the true God, and
indeed nothing but idolatry, wantonness, and profaneness. And yet here it
is testified of him, by the spirit of GOD which cannot lie, that he had faith;
which is a wonderful thing. And the like is recorded of others in the word of
God: As in Ahabs Court (who was a King that had sold himself to work
wickedness) yet the spirit of God testifies, that even there was good
Obadiah, a man that feared God greatly. 1. King. 8.3.
And Herod was a most deadly enemy to Christ: and yet Ioanna the wife of Chuza
Herod's friend, ministered of her goods unto Christ. And Paul says, The Saints
which are of Caesar's household salute you: Where, by Caesar's house, is meant the
Court of Nero, who was a most bloody man, and a wicked persecuter; and yet in
his house were the professors of Christ's Gospel. By these examples we learn,
that Christ has his children and servants in the middle among his enemies:
for, these 3. Courts, of Pharaoh, Herod, and Nero, may be called a kind of
hell; and yet there were some of Gods servants in them all. Which shows us
clearly the truth of Gods word, which says of Christ, that he reigns in the
middle among his enemies. Psalm. 110.2.
Howsoever they rage, and seek to blot out his name, and to root out his
kingdom, yet maugre their throats, he will rule in the middle of their
kingdoms, and there have those which truly serve him and fear his name: Revel.
2.13, God had his Church in Pergamus where Satan's throne was*

Again, this faith of Moses serves to check many a man in this age, that is
brought up in the Church of God, and under godly Parents and governors, and
yet is a hater and mocker of the religion of Christ. Surely Moses in the day of
judgment shall stand up against all such, and condemn them. For he had faith,
though he were brought up in a most profane place: and they are void of faith,
nay, enemies unto it; though they live in the bosom of the Church.

But let us come to the strange fact which Moses did, for which his faith is so
commended. The Text says of him first of all, That when he was come to age, he
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. How Moses became her
son, we may read at large, Exodus 2: where it is said, that she having found
Moses in the basket, preserved him alive, and brought him up as her own child*
purposing to make him her own son and heir. But this honor of hers he
would not accept; this he refused by faith, and this is that notable and
famous act, for which his faith is here commended unto us.

But some will say, This fact of Moses may seem rather worthy of blame then
praise, as being a practice of great rudeness and ingratitude: for she
preserved his life from death, and brought him up as her own child, and
vouchsafed him this special favor to make him her heir; and therefore Moses
should not thus have contemned her favor. Answer. Indeed it had been Moses
part to have showed himself thankful, in accepting this favor at her hands,
and also in enjoying the same, if he might have done it with the fear of God,
and keeping a good conscience. But, that he could not do: for, if he had
dwelled still with her, and been her son and heir, he should have been
undutiful unto GOD. Now this is a rule to be remembered and practiced always;
that in duties of like nature (...) the Commandments of the second table do
bind us no further then our obedience thereto may stand with obedience unto
the commandments of the first table: and when these two cannot stand
together, then we are freed from obedience unto the second table; as, from
performing honor and thankfulness unto men, when we cannot therewithal
perform obedience and service unto God. And this was Moses case: because he
could not both serve God, and continue his thankfulness, to Pharaohs daughter
(for in staying with her, he should have made shipwreck of true religion)
therefore he forsakes her favor and honor; and for this cause is here
commended unto us. The like did our Savior Christ, for when the people would
have made him King, he refused it, and fled from among them, John 6.15, because
it would not stand with that calling, for which he was sanctified and sent into
the world: therefore Moses fact was commendable, and does greatly set forth
unto us his holy faith.

In this fact of Moses thus generally considered, observe a notable fruit of
true faith: It makes a man to esteem more of the state of adoption to be the
child of God, then to be the child or heir of any earthly Prince. This is
plain in Moses in this place. And the like we may see in David: for though he
were a King, yet he set all his royalty and majesty at naught, in regard of
Gods blessing of adoption; and therefore says, The Lord (not the Kingdom of
Israel) is my portion. Psalm 16.
And again, when he was kept from the Lords tabernacle, and the company of Gods
Saints, through persecution; he says, The Sparrowes and Swallows were more
happy then he, Psalm 84, because they had nests where they might keep their
young, and sit, and sing; but he could not come near the Lords Altar. And yet
more fully to express the earnestness of his affection this way; he says, he
had rather be a man of a base office, even a dore-keeper in the house of GOD,
then a man of renown in the tents of wickedness. But howsoever, these men
were of one mind herein; yet come to our age, and seek in Town, Country, and
people, and we shall see this fruit of faith is rare to be found: for
generally (though I will not say all) the most of those that are borne of good
parentage, as the sons of Knights or Squires, and especially of Nobles, are
so bewitched with the pride of their earthly Parentage, that they have scarce a
thought after adoption in Christ. Gods heavenly graces will take no place in
their hearts, but they utterly contemn all other estates of life in regard of
their own. And this is the common sin of the whole world: for, at earthly
preferments men will stand amazed; but seldom shall you find a man that is
ravished with joy in this, that he is the child of God, as Moses did. But his
practice must be a president for us to follow: we must learn to have more joy
in being the sons of God, then to be heirs of any worldly Kingdoms; and to
take more delight in the grace of adoption through Jesus Christ, then in the
sonship of any earthly Prince.

It is a great prerogative to be heir to a King or Emperor: but yet to be the
child of God, goes far beyond it, even above comparison. For, the son of
the greatest Potentate may be the child of wrath: but the child of God by
grace, has Christ Jesus to be his eldest brother, with whom he is fellow heir
in heaven; he has the holy Ghost also for his comforter, and the Kingdom of
heaven for his everlasting inheritance. And therefore we must learn of Moses,
from the bottom of our hearts, to prefer this one thing, To be the child of
God, before all earthly things, either pleasures, riches, or any other
prerogatives whatsoever.

Now, more particularly in this fact of Moses note two circumstances: 1. The
manner how: 2. The time when, he refused to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter.

For the first; his refusal was not in word, but in deed: for, if we read
the whole History of Moses, we shall not find, that either he spoke to
Pharaoh, or to his daughter, or to any other to this effect, that he would not
be her heir, nor called her son; but we find that he did it in deed: for,
when he came to age, he left the Court oftentimes, and went to visit his
brethren, to comfort them, to defend them, and to take part with them. And
hence we must learn, not so much to give our selves to know, and to talk of
matters of religion, as to do and practice the same both before God and men.
This did Moses. It is the common fault of our age, that we can be content to
hear the doctrine of religion taught unto us; yea, many will learn it, and
often speak thereof: but few there be that make conscience to do the things
they hear and speak of. But let us learn of Moses to put those things in
practice which we learn and profess, and in silence do them: for, the fewer
words the better, unless our deeds be answerable. If any of us were to walk
upon the top of some high mountain, we would leave off talking, and look unto
our steps for fear of falling. Behold, when we enter the profession of
Christianity, we are set upon an high mountain: for the way of life is on
high; and Christianity is the high calling of God. Phil. 3.14.
We therefore must be wise, as Salomo^ says, Pro. 15.24, and look well to our
conversation, having a strait watch over all our ways, through the whole
course of our life, even to the end of our days; and not stand so much on
speaking and talking, as on doing: for the doer of the work shall be blessed in
his deed, Iam. 1.25. This is the thing we must look unto, as the only ornament
of our profession, declaring that we have the power of godliness: but if deeds
be wanting, our religion is vain, we are like the Figtree which Christ cursed,
Math. 21.19.
having leaves but no fruit.

The 2. circumstance to be considered, is, the time when he refused this
honor; namely, when he came to be a man of years and discretion. A man in
common reason would judge thus of Moses fact; Moses has rare fortune offered
him, he might have bin son and heir to a Princess: surely this is a rash
fact of his* and void of consideration, to refuse it; undoubtedly he far
ouershot himself herein, either through rashness or ignorance. But to prevent
such carnal surmises, the spirit of God sets down this circumstance of time;
saying, that he did not refuse it in his youth: but when he was come to age,
that is, to perfect years of discretion, and by reason thereof, must needs
have consideration and judgment to know what he did; then did he refuse this
honor, to be Pharaohs daughters son and heir. In the seventh of the Acts,
we shall see that he was forty years old when he did this. And therefore
this is true which is here said, that when he was come to age, and staidness;
then he refused this honor: for, forty years is a time, not only of
ripeness for strength; but of staidness in judgment and discretion.

Out of this circumstance we learn two points. 1 That it is a common fault of
young years, to be subject to inconsideration, and rashness; for, Moses did not
refuse the honor of Pharaohs daughter, when he was young, lest it should
seem to be a point of rashness: but, when he was come to age (as the text
says); insinuating, that if he had done it when he was young, it might have
been esteemed but a rash part, and done in some hasty passion of youth. Every
age of man has his faults: and this is the fault of youth, to be heady and
rash in their affairs, for want of consideration and experience. And therefore
all young persons must have care of these sins of youth, and watch the more
against them, because they are so incident to their years. Now, the way to
avoid them, is to follow Christ's example, Luke 2.52, to labor to grow, as in
years, so in wisdom and grace: and to obey the counsel of Paul to Timothy,
2. Timoth. 2.22, to fly the lusts of youth; following after justice, faith,
charity, and peace, with all that call upon the name of the Lord with a pure
heart.

Secondly, this circumstance of time, noting Moses deliberate staidness in
this fact, does plainly advertise us, what is, or should be, the virtue of
old age, and the ornament of years; namely, staidness, and discretion:
whereby, I mean, not only that natural temper of affection, which old age
brings with it; but such religious discretion, whereby men of years do all
things in faith, so as their works may be acceptable and pleasing unto God.
For, when a man is grown in years, and has had experience and observation in
the Church of God, he must not only have a general knowledge and wisdom; but
a particular wisdom, whereby he may do in faith, whatsoever he takes in
hand, and therein please God. But alas, this may be spoken of old men in these
days, that in regard of this wisdom, they are very babes; a thing greatly
disgraceful to their condition. For, Paul biddes the Corinthians, 1. Cor.
14.20, that they should not be children in understanding, but of ripe age: yea,
and he forbiddes the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.14, to be children still, wavering and
carried about with every wind of doctrine. Whereby we may see, that aged
persons do quite degenerate from that they ought to be, when they are babes in
knowledge, void of spiritual wisdom. Indeed, we must grant, that our aged
persons are worldly wise; and he must have a cunning head, and (as we say)
rise early, that herein goes beyond them: But bring them to the book of God,
and to give a reason of their actions, that they are done in faith; herein,
they are mere babes, and ignorant: neither can they tell what it is to do a
thing in faith, so as it may be acceptable to God. Herein, many that are young
in years, do quite out-strippe them. What would we think or say of a
child, that being set to a good school, should still be in the lowest
form, though he had long continued at it? Surely, we would judge him either
exceeding negligent, or destitute of ordinary capacity.

Behold, the Church of God is the school of Christ: and if a man have lived
long therein (as twenty, or forty years) and yet be no wiser in religion,
than a young child; is it not a shame unto him? and shall we not condemn him
of great negligence? Wherefore, let all aged persons here learn their duty;
which is, to grow to ripeness in spiritual wisdom, that so their age may be
to them a crown of glory, being found in the way of righteousness, Prou.
16.31.

VERSE 25. And chose rather to suffer adversities with the people of God, than
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

THe meaning of these words is this: Moses cast with himself, that if he
should yield to become heir to Pharaohs daughter, he must live with her, and
please her in all things, and so altogether leave Gods Church, and people, and
gods holy religion; which thing to do, he abhorred in his heart: and withal,
he must leave and lose the eternal blessedness of Gods children, for the
honors, and sinful pleasures of the Court, which were but momentany. These
things considered, he chooses rather to be in affliction and misery with the
people of God, than upon these conditions, to live in Pharaohs Court, and to
become his daughters son and heir.

And because this may seem a strange choice, the holy Ghost does afterward
render a reason hereof, which is this; Because Moses liked rather to enjoy the
prerogatives of Gods Church (though it were in misery) than to enjoy any honor
in a wicked Court, such as indeed Pharaohs was.

In this verse therefore, we are to note a second fruit of Moses faith; to
wit, that he preferred the fellowship and communion of Gods Saints, before all
other societies in the world. The same also was David's practice. Psalm. 16.3,
All my delight (says he) is in the Saints that dwell on the earth.

This fruit of Moses faith, does discover unto us a grievous fault, which
reigns in this age; to wit, the neglect and contempt of the communion and
society of Saints. There is a society and fellowship that is loved and
magnified among us: but what manner of society is that? surely of such as give
themselves to drinking, jesting, scoffing, riot, mirth, and gaming. This is the
common and general good fellowship: through which, God is greatly dishonored.
For most men set their delight therein, and are never merry but in such
company, wherein indeed they delight themselves in their sensuality. True it
is, men plead that this good fellowship is a virtue. But then was Moses far
ouer-seene: for in Pharaohs Court he might have had all kind of such good
fellowship and company; yet he likes it not, but rather chooses affliction
and misery with the people of God, then to enjoy such fellowship in Pharaohs
Court. And as for the goodness of it, it is neither so esteemed nor called by
any, but by them that call good evil, and evil good. We see, Moses a man of
wisdom and learning, Acts 7.23. no child, but a man of xl. years old,
hates and abhorres this good fellowship, as the worst estate in the world:
rather choosing the society of a miserable and persecuted Church, then the best
of that fellowship which a Kings Court could yield. Let us therefore learn
more wisdom out of his practice. Some say, this good fellowship is harmless;
and such men who thus merrily pass their times, do no such hurt as many
others do. But I answer, men are borne to do good. Again, to misspend time,
wealth, and wit, are not these evil and harmfull, both in themselves and in
the example? And which is worst of all, it is no fellowship with God, nor any
part of the communion of Saints, but rather a fellowship with Satan: therefore
let all that will, like true Christians, have true comfort in that article of
their Creed, the communion of Saints, esteem the fellowship of good and holy
men above all other. For, by this communion with Gods Saints, a man reapes
great profit, when as the other brings to a man the ruin both of his body and
soul. By the society of the godly, we are first made partakers of their
gifts and holy graces; and secondly, of their prayers, and the blessings of
God upon them: which things if there were no other, might move us to embrace
this blessed society before all other. And yet further; by being of this
society, a man auoids many of Gods judgments: If there had been ten righteous
men in Sodom, they had all been spared from destruction. Wherein we may see,
Genesis 18.3^.
that they that cleave to such as fear the Lord indeed, never receive harm by
them, but rather much good; for, for the elects sake it is, that the world yet
stands: and if they were gathered, heaven and earth would go together; but
for the calling of the Elect, the hand of God is yet stayed. Why then should
not Moses example be our rule, Above all worldly pleasure to rejoice in the
society of Gods Saints?

Thus much in general: Now, in the particular words, are many notable points
of doctrine, which we will touch in their order. And chose rather, etc.] Mark
here a rare and strange choice as ever we shall read of. There are two
things propounded to Moses: The first is, honor and preferment in Pharaohs
Court; to be son and heir to Pharahs daughter: wherewith he might have
enjoyed all earthly pleasures and delights. The second, is the miserable
afflicted condition of GODs Church and people.

And of these two, Moses must needs choose the one: well what chooses he?
Surely he refuses the prerogatives and dignity, that he might have had in
Pharaohs Court, and makes choice of the misery and affliction of GODs people
in adversity; that so he may enjoy the privileges of GODs Church. A
wonderful choice: for which, his faith is here commended, and he renowned to
all posterity. The same choice has GOD set before men in all ages. In former
times GOD set before Esau two things; A mess of red broth, and his
birthright: but profane Esau chooses the worser, he forgoes his birthright,
so he may have the broth. But far worse did the Gadarens; there was set
before them Christ Jesus the Lord of life, and their hogs and cattle: Now
they prefer their hogs before Christ; A most miserable and senseless choice.
And is it not as ill with us? There is set before us on the one side heaven,
and on the other side hell; but men for the most part choose hell and forsake
heaven. Civil worldly men whose delight is all in riches, they prefer earth
before heaven, the service of sin which is the greatest slavery, before the
service of GOD which is perfect freedom, and glorious liberty of the Saints in
light: and thus do all men without Gods special grace. Whereupon Paul prays
in his Epistles for the Churches, that God would give unto them the spirit of
wisdom, Philip. 1.10.
that they may be able to judge between things that differ. And this wisdom we
must labor for, that when these different things are set before us, we may
make a wise choice: otherwise, we show our selves to be like brute beasts
without understanding, and do quite ouerturne our own salvation. In the
Ministry of the word we have life and death, good and evil set before us, as
Moses said to the people, Deuteronomy. 30.15, 19. Let us therefore endeavor our selves
to choose life by embracing and obeying the word of God: and so shall we follow
both his precept and practice.

To suffer adversity with the people of God. Here we may observe what is the
ordinary state and condition of Gods Church and people in this world: namely,
to be in affliction and under the cross. Hence Paul says, That we must come
to heaven through manifold afflictions, Acts 14.23. The Lord knows what is
best for his servants and children: and therefore he has set down this for a
ground, that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution.
2. Tim. 3.12.

Thus the Lord deals with his children for special causes: for first, all
crosses, as loss of goods, friends, liberty, or good name, they are means to
stir up and awake Gods people out of the slumbring fit of sin; for the
godly are many times overtaken this way. The wise virgins sleep, as well as
the foolish: Now, afflictions rouse them out of the sleep of security. See
this in Joseph's brethren, who went on a long time without any remorse for
selling their brother: But when they were stayed in Egypt, then they are rowzed
up, and can say, Genesis 42.21. This trouble is come upon us, for selling our
brother.

Secondly, afflictions serve to humble Gods children, Leuiticus 26.41. So the
Church of God speaks, I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him, Micah 7.9.

Thirdly, they serve to weane the people of God, and to drive them from the
love of this world: for, if men might always live in ease, they would make
their heaven upon earth; which may not be. And herein GOD deals with his
children like a Nurse; when she will weane her child, she lays some bitter
thing upon the pappes head, to make the child to loathe the pappe: so the
Lord, to draw our hearts from the world, and to cause us to love and seek
after heaven and heavenly things, he makes us to taste of the bitterness of
affliction in t^is world. Fourthly, afflictions fer^e to make Gods children to
go out of themselves to seek sincerely unto GOD, and to rely only upon him:
which in prosperity they will not do. This, Paul confesses of himself and
others: We (says he) received the sentence of death in our selves, because
we should not trust in our selves, but in God: 2. Corinthians chapter 1. verse
9. So good King Iehosaphat, when he was compassed of his enemies, He cried to
the Lord, and said; Lord we know not what to do, but our eyes are toward
thee: 2. Chronicles, chapter 20. verse 12. Yea, the rebellious Jews are
hereby driven to seek the Lord, whom in prosperity they forsook: as we may
see at large, Psalm. 107.6.12.13.19.

Lastly, afflictions serve to make manifest the graces of GOD in his children.
The Lord (says Job) knows my way and tries me; Job 23.10. Deuteronomie 8.2,
Remember all the way (says Moses to the Israelites) which the Lord thy GOD
led thee, this forty years, for to prove thee and to know what was in
thine heart. Hence James calls temptations, the trial of faith, James,
chapter 1. verses 2.3: And Paul makes patience, the fruit of tribulation:
Romans, chapter 5. verse 3. For, look as the showers in the spring time cause
the buds to appear: so do afflictions make manifest Gods graces in his
children. Patience, hope, and other virtues, lie close in the heart in the day
of peace: but when tribulation comes, then they break forth and show
themselves.

Hence we learn, that it is not always a token of Gods wrath, To suffer
affliction. If any man or people be laden with crosses, it is no argument, that
therefore they are not the children of GOD: for, as Peter says, Judgments
begin at Gods house, 1. Peter, chapter 4. verse 17: and any cross upon a
people, family, or particular persons, if it bring forth the fruit of grace in
them, is a true sign, they belong to GOD. Yea, when men wander from God by an
evil way, these afflictions are means to call them home to GOD. Psalm
119.67: Before I was afflicted I went astray. And they that forsake their sin
and return to GOD in the time of affliction, are certainly Gods people: for,
the wicked man fretteth and murmureth against God when a cross comes, and he
cannot abide it. But the godly man is humbled thereby, and it makes him more
obedient in all duties unto God.

This we should consider: for by an outward profession, we bear the world in
hand, that we are Gods children, and therefore we come to hear Gods word, and
to learn how to behave our selves as beseems his children. But if we would be
known to be Gods children indeed, then when any of Gods judgments do
befall^ us, we must make this use of them; namely, labor thereby to be
humbled for our sins, and to forsake our sins, and to make conscience of
all bad ways for ever afterward; and then we show our selves to be Gods
children indeed: but if under the cross, or after the cross, we be as
dissolute as ever we were, and still follow our old sins, then we cannot
be judged to be Gods people and children, but rather a wicked and stubborn
generation, which the more they are corrected, the worse they are; like a
stithy, the more it is beaten, the harder it is. Let us therefore by the use of
Gods judgments, show our selves to be Gods children: so shall we say with
David with much joy and comfort, It is good for us that we have been in
trouble. Psalm. 119.71.

Thus we see what Moses chose: now come we to the thing he refused; To enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season. By pleasures of sin, we must understand
the riches and dignity that Moses might have had in Pharaohs Court and
Kingdom: Which are called the pleasures of sin, not because they were so in
themselves; for, so they were the good gifts of GOD: but because Moses could
not enjoy them in Pharaohs Court without living in sin; for, he must have
refused the society of Gods Church and people, and so have been a stranger
from the covenant which God made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and with his
seed after them, if he would have been son to Pharaohs daughter.

Here then the holy Ghost sets down two notable reasons, which induced
Moses to refuse these honors and dignities: First, because they were the
pleasures of sin; And secondly, because he should enjoy them but for a
season.

The first reason affords unto us many notable points worthy our
consideration. 1. Here we learn, that riches, honor, and dignity severed from
true religion, are nothing but the pleasures and profits of sin. This was
Moses judgment, as the holy Ghost here testifies: and it is the plain truth
of God, as Solomon after lamentable experience disputes, Eccles. all over.
and proves at large: concluding of riches, honor pleasures, and all earthly
things separated from the fear of God, that they are nothing else but mere
vanity and vexation of spirit. And Paul says, To the impure all things are
impure; Titus, 1.15.
his meat, drink, and apparel, which in themselves are otherwise the good
gifts of God.

The consideration hereof is of great use* for, first it lets us see what is
the state of these men which lay aside religion and good conscience, and betake
themselves wholly to the world, to get riches and preferment: most men are of
this disposition, and such indeed are only counted wise. For, let there be
speech tending to a man's commendation, usually this is the first matter of his
praise, that he is a substantial wealthy man; and one that looks well to
himself: as though riches or honor were a man's chief happiness. But,
howsoever the world judges of these men; yet hereby we may see and know, that
their case is miserable. For without religion and the fear of God, their
riches and honor are but the pleasures and profits of sin: and therefore the
more they heap up riches after this sort, not regarding Christ nor his Gospel;
the more they heap up to themselves the treasures of sin, and consequently
the greater condemnation: for worldly treasures severed from religion, are but
the Mammon of iniquity which causes damnation. Hence Christ said unto his
Disciples (upon occasion of the young rich man) that it was as easy for a
great Camel to go through the eye of a needle, Math. 19.24.
as for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven; that is, such a rich
man as sets his heart to get riches and honor, not regarding the religion of
Christ. Whence also in another place he pronounces this fearful sentence
against them: Woe be to you that are rich, for you have received your
consolation: Luke 6.24. They therefore that lay aside religion, and give
themselves wholly to seek gain and honor, are before God most wretched and
miserable: and the longer they continue in this course, the more miserable they
are; for the more sin they heap up, and so the deeper shall be their
condemnation. Wherefore if any of us have been thus minded heretofore, let us
now leave this course, as most dangerous to our souls: for, what will it
profit a man to gain the whole world, if he lose his soul?

2. Hence we must all learn, especially they that have any measure of wealth
more or less, to join with the use of our riches the fear of God, and the
practice of true religion: for, sever these asunder* and riches are nothing
else but sinful pleasures. It is a good conscience which rectifieth the owner
in the right use of his honor and treasures: but without that, he pollutes the
blessings of God which he enioyes; and they being polluted shall turn to his
greater woe. Dan. 5.1.3.
A man would have thought that King Belshazzer had been an happy man, when he
kept his royal feast, and drank wine in golden bowls before a thousand
Princes that were under him, and before his Concubines: but the end of that his
iollity may show us the nature of such prosperity. For so soon as he saw the
fingers of a man's hand, writing upon the wall, he became quite confounded in
himself: his countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him; so that
the ioints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against the
other: What comfort had he now from all his riches and pleasures? So Dives,
while he lived, might seem for his wealth and riches to be happy: yet all this
did him little good; for, he had but his pleasure for his life time, Luke
16.25: and after this life, his soul went down to hell. A worldly man would
judge the rich man in the Gospel, a most happy man, that said unto his soul,
by reason of his great abundance of outward wealth, Luke 12.19, Soul, soul,
thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and
take thy fill: yet because herewith he wanted religion, a good conscience, and
the fear of God, this sentence was denounced against him; Oh fool, this night
will they fetch away thy soul: th^n, whose shall these things be? Wherefore,
unless we will wilfully cast away our own souls, let us sanctify our
interest in all earthly blessings, by a sincere endeavor in all things, to show
forth the fear of God, with the keeping of faith and a good conscience: and
let us begin with this, as Christ says, First, seek Gods Kingdom and his
righteousness, Matthew chapter 6. verse 33. Let us hereby seek to have our
hearts acceptable unto God: and then all things shall be clean unto us.

Thirdly, are riches and honor, being severed from true religion, but the
pleasures of sin? then undoubtedly all recreations, all sports, and pastimes,
severed from religion and a good conscience, are much more the pleasures of
sin. This Solomon knew well: for, speaking of such mirth, he calls laughter
madness; and to joy (he says*) What is it that thou do? Eccles. chapter
2. verse 2. Oh then how manifold be the sins of all sorts of men? for, who
almost does not neglect religious duties for matters of sport and pleasure?
Wherefore, if we desire joy indeed in any worldly things, let us first lay
the foundation in our own hearts, by getting and keeping true faith and a good
conscience.

Secondly, whereas Moses refuses dignity and honor only for this, Because
they would be unto him the pleasures of sin; here we are taught in what
manner and order we ought to enjoy worldly riches and honor. Moses practice
here, must be our direction* we must enjoy them, and use them with
thankfulness to GOD, so far forth as they will further us in the course of
religion and true godliness. But if the case stand thus, That we cannot
enjoy them both togethe^, then we must follow Moses example; choose religion
and a goood conscience, and let honor and preferment go. This is Moses
practice: and we may resolve our selves, that if he might have enjoyed them
together, he would have refused neither; but because he could not have them
both, therefore he prefers the religion of Christ with a good conscience,
before the honor and wealth of Egypt.

Thirdly note this, Moses does not only refuse the riches and pleasures of
Egypt, when they would become unto him the pleasures of sin; but rather than
he will enjoy them, he is content to suffer great misery, and adversity
with GODs people. Where, behold a singular virtue in Moses: He judges it too
be the greatest misery, to live in sin; and therefore he chooses rather
to suffer any adversity and reproach in this world, than live and lie in
sin: because thereby, he should displease God, his most loving father in
Christ. A most notable virtue in this servant of God: and the like mind bear
all those, that have the same graces of saving faith, and true repentance that
Moses had. S. Paul esteemed the Temptations unto sin, which Satan suggested
into his mind, to be as beatings and buffettings, and as pricks and thorns in
his flesh, 2. Cor. 12.7. And David says, Psalm. 119.136, His eyes gush out with
rivers of waters, because men brake Gods commandments. Was David thus grieved
for other men's sins? Oh! then what a grief did he suffer, when he himself
brake Gods commandments, and thereby displeased God?

Now, look how these servants of God were affected, so must every one of us,
that profess the faith and religion of Christ, labor to be affected toward
sin; we must judge it the greatest misery and torment in the world, to do
any thing that shall displease God. But alas, come to our days, and the case
is far otherwise; for, to most men, it is meat and drink unto them to
commit sin: so far are they from counting it a misery. Yea, if a man be
ordinarily addicted to some special sin, you then may as soon take away his
life, as bereave him of his sin: he will adventure the loss of heaven for
ever, for the pleasure of sin for a time. But all such, are far unlike
these holy servants of God; for they counted it the greatest cross, and
misery that could be, to do any thing that displeased God, and did check and
break the peace of a good conscience. And if we look to enjoy like peace and
comfort with them; we must strive against our own corrupt disposition, and
labor to find sin to be our greatest sorrow. Worldly miseries may affect
us: but, in respect of sorrow for sin, all worldly grief should be light
unto us. Indeed, we are otherwise minded naturally: but herein, we must show
the power and truth of grace, that to displease God by any sin, is our
greatest grief.

The second reason, that moved Moses to refuse the honors and pleasures of
Pharaohs Court; was, because he should have enjoyed them but for a time: for,
the time of his natural life, was the longest that possibly he could have
enjoyed them. And the same reason must move every one of us, to use this world,
and all things herein (even all temporal benefits) as though we used them not:
being, always willing and ready to leave them whenever God shall call. This
same reason does Paul render when he persuades the Corinthians to the same
duty, 1. Cor. 7.31: Use this world (says he) as though you used it no^; for
the fashion of this world goes away. As if he should say, All things in the
world last but for a time; and if a man would never so feign, he could but
enjoy them to the end of his life: and therefore, use them as though you used
them not. But pity it is to see, how far men are from the practice of this
duty; for, they set their whole heart upon the world: and to get riches is
their delight, and their God. This ought not so to be. God has not laid down
these precepts and examples in vain: undoubtedly, if they draw us not to the
like practice, they shall rise up in judgment against us at the last day. And
thus much of Moses choice, and refusal.

VERSE 26. Esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches, than the treasures of
Egypt; for he had respect to the recompense of reward.

MOses (as we have heard) refused the honor and wealth of Egypt, and chose to
live in affliction with Gods people. Now, because this might seem to be a
strange choice, and a natural man would soon condemn him of folly for his
labor; therefore here the holy Ghost lays down a reason that moved Moses
thus to do: to wit, Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with Gods people,
than to enjoy the pleasures and honors of Egypt; because he was persuaded,
that reproach for Christ his sake, was greater riches, than all the wealth in
Egypt. So that he refused not absolutely riches, honor, and other comforts;
but chose the best riches and honor, and left the worser, upon a sound
judgment between things that did differ.

Hereby we may observe in general, how needful a thing it is for every
Christian, to have sound knowledge and understanding in the word of God. For,
he that would walk uprightly, and approved of God, must be able to judge
between things that differ; not only between good and evil, but between
good and good, which is the better: and so of evils, which is the worser.
Which, no man can do, but he that has a sound and right judgment in the word
of God; for, therein is attained the spirit of discerning. Many there be, that
by the course of their lives choose hell, and refuse heaven; which,
undoubtedly, comes from their ignorance in the word. But ignorance will excuse
none. He that will come to heaven, must be able to discern good from evil;
and accordingly, to choose the good, and to refuse that which is evil; which,
without divine, and supernatural knowledge, no man can do. And therefore all
ignorant persons, and all such as are blinded through the deceitfulness of
sin, must shake off their security, and get sound knowledge in scripture,
with a good conscience; that when things which do differ are set before the^,
they may with Moses choose the better.

But let us come to Moses judgment more particularly. He esteemed the rebuke
of Christ, etc. that is, he was firmly resolved, that reproach and contempt
for Christ his sake, was greater riches unto him, than the treasures of a whole
kingdom. But some will say, This is a very strange judgment: can it possibly
be true and good? Ans. Yes undoubtedly, it is most sound judgment, and worthy
eternal remembrance of every one of us; that to suffer reproach for Christ his
sake, is greater riches, than all worldly wealth. The truth hereof is proved by
many reasons out of Gods word. 1 God has made a promise of blessedness to those
which suffer for Christ's sake. Mat. 5.
Blessed are you (says Christ) when men revile you, and speak all manner of
evil sayings against you, for my names sake, etc. And S. Peter says, If ye
be railed upon for my names sake, 1. Pet. 4.14.
blessed are ye. And lest any should doubt how this can be, Christ shows
wherein this blessedness consists, saying; He that forsakes houses, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, Mat. 19.29.
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names sake; shall receive an
hundred fold more, and shall inherit eternal life. A most worthy promise,
assuring us that no man loses by suffering for Christ's sake; for, he shall be
rewarded an hundred fold over. In stead of earthly friends, and worldly
comforts, he shall have the love and favor of God shed abroad in his heart;
which will be an ouer-flowing fountain of comfort for soul and body for
ever, far more worth than the wealth and treasures of all the kingdoms in
the world. A small springing fountain (we know) is better to an house, than a
hundred Cisternes full; because of continual supply from the springing
fountain, when the Cisterns will be spent. Behold: the love of God in Christ,
with other spiritual graces, shall be in all that suffer for the name of
Christ, as living streams flowing unto life eternal; when as the cisterns of
all worldly pleasures and treasures, shall be spent and dried up. 2 By suffering
affliction for Christ's sake, we are made conformable unto him in his
humility; that so we may be made like unto him after this life in glory. So
Paul says, Our light affliction causes unto us, an eternal weight of glory,
2. Cor. 4.17. And again, it is a true saying; If we be dead with Christ, we
shall also live with him: If we suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2. Tim.
2.11, 12. This assurance can no worldly riches give: and therefore we may
boldly say, that the suffering of reproach for Christ his sake, is greater
riches than the treasures of a whole kingdom. 3 To suffer for Christ his sake,
is a token of Gods special love: and therefore S. Paul biddes the Philippians,
Not to fear their adversaries: which is a token of salvation unto them and
that of God; Philip^ 28, 29.
because it is given to you (says he) for Christ, that you should not only
believe, but suffer for his sake. Wherefore, if suffering for Christ have a
promise of blessedness; if it make us conformable unto Christ, and be a sign of
Gods special love; then is it to be esteemed above the riches and honors of
the whole world.

Are afflictions for Christ to be esteemed above the treasures of a kingdom?
then we must all learn to rejoice in the troubles and wrongs which we suffer
for Christ's sake. So did the Apostles, Act. 5.41. They departed from the
council, rejoicing in that they were counted worthy to suffer affliction for
his name. And S. Paul brags hereof greatly, saying; I bear in my body the
marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6.17. And look, as these servants of God
rejoiced in their sufferings for Christ: so likewise must we labor for the
same heart and affections in the like case; for, who would not rejoice to be
made partaker and possessor of the treasures of a kingdom? Well, the rebuke of
Christ is greater riches than the treasures of a kingdom.

This lesson is of great use: for, howsoever many among us come to hear Gods
word, yet there be many also, that scoff and mock at religion, and at the
Gospel of Christ, and the professors thereof; whereby, the most are hindered in
profession, and many daunted, and quite driven back. But, we must here
learn, not to be discouraged by these mockes. Indeed we must take heed, we
give them no just occasion to mock us; and then if we be scoffed at, we shall
never be hurt by it: nay (though that be far from their intent) yet in
mocking us, they do us great honor. For, the word of God that cannot lie, is
this; that to suffer affliction for Christ his sake, is greater honor and
riches, than the treasures of a kingdom. And if Moses his judgment be good,
which God himself does here commend; then we are happy and blessed, in
enduring these mockes and scoffs for Christ.

Secondly, we must here learn instruction for the time to come: We have for a
long time, through the great goodness of God, enjoyed peace and wealth, with
the Gospel of Christ; but undoubtedly, these days of peace will have an end,
they cannot last always, Gods people must pass through the fiery furnace of
affliction: Well, when this is come upon us, how shall we be able to bear it?
Surely, we must now learn to be of this opinion that Moses was of; we must
judge it to be the greatest honor and riches that can be, to suffer
affliction for Christ his sake: and this will be the ground of all constancy,
courage, and Christian boldness, in the day of trial. For, he that is of this
mind, will never fear affliction, nor reproach for Christ his sake: nay, he
will be so far from fearing it, that he will rejoice and triumph therein.

Further, whereas it is said, Esteeming the rebuke of Christ; here mark, the
rebuke of Gods church and people is called the rebuke of Christ. The people of
God in Egypt were laden with reproaches and rebukes: and behold, Christ
accounts it his rebuke, and the holy Ghost so calls it. Where learn this, That
Christ esteems the reproach and affliction of his Church, as his own
affliction. When Saul went to persecute the brethren at Damascus, Act. 9.2, 4,
Christ Jesus calls to him from heaven, saying; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? Saul went to persecute the Christians: and yet our Savior Christ takes it
unto himself. And after his conversion he says, 2. Cor. 4.10, Every way we
bear about in our bodies, the dying of the Lord Jesus. And again, Let no man
put me to business: for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal.
6.17. This is a point of special use.

First, hence we learn, that Christ has a special care of his Church and
Children, in that he judges their afflictions to be his own afflictions; and
therefore, he can no more forget, or leave off to help them in distress, than
deny himself.

Secondly, here is a special comfort for Gods children that be in affliction:
their afflictions are not their own alone, but Christ's also; he is their
partner, and fellow sufferer. This may seem strange, but it is most true:
Christ puts (as it were) his shoulders under our afflictions, and takes them to
himself, as though they were his own; than which, what can be more
comfortable? For, though thou thy self cannot bear it; yet trust undoubtedly,
that Christ who bears with thee, will give thee strength to undergo it, unto
victory.

Thirdly, if the afflictions of a Christian, be the afflictions of Christ;
then it is a fearful sin for any man to mock or reproach his brother, in
regard of his profession and religion: for, mocking is persecution, Gal. 4.29.
with Genesis 21.9. And that reproach which is cast upon a Christian, is cast upon
Christ; and Christ takes it as done unto himself: the persecutor wounds Christ
Jesus through the sides of a poor Christian; which is a fearful thing. For,
in so doing, he sets himself against the Lord Jesus, he kickes against the
pricks; and if he so continue, he must needs look for some fearful end;
for who has ever been fierce against the Lord, and has prospered? Job. 9.4.
Wherefore, if any of us be guilty of any sin in this kind, let us repent:
for unless we turn, our condemnation will be remediless.

Again, the afflictions of the Israelites, are here said to be their
sufferings for Christ: where note, that though Christ his coming were then
afar off, yet the Israelites then knew of Christ; for else they could not
suffer for him.

This confuteth those which hold, that every man may be saved by his own
religion, whatsoever it be, if he live ciuilly and uprightly therein. Their
reason is taken from the Jews, who (they say) had only the knowledge of
outward ceremonies, and so were saved. But that opinion is here disprooued;
for, the Jews knew Christ, and professed him, or else they would never suffer
for him: and therefore they were saved by him, and not by their obedience to
outward ceremonies. And thus much of the reason, which moved Moses to make
such a choice as he did.

Now in the end of the verse is added a reason, why Moses was of this strange
judgment; to think the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt: namely, because he had respect to the recompense of reward. That is, he
often set his eye to behold, and his heart to consider, how God had made a
promise of life everlasting after this life, unto all those that obeyed him,
and trusted in him in this life: for the enjoying whereof, he preferred that
estate wherein he might live in the fear of God, though it were a state of
reproach, before all other whatsoever. Where we see, what it is that will
bring a man to esteem affliction, with the fear of God, better than the
treasures and pleasures of an earthly kingdom: namely, as we set the bodily
eye to behold the affliction; so we must lift up the eye of the mind of faith,
to behold the recompense of reward; that is, the state of glory in heaven
prepared for Gods children. Thus did the Christian Hebrews in the primitive
Church, Hebrews 10.37, They suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods. (A
very hard thing, but yet most true, for it is the word of GOD) And the reason
is rendered, They knew in themselves how that they had in heaven a better and
more enduring substance. And our Savior Christ endured the Cross, and
despised the shame, for the joy that was set before him, Hebrews 12.1; that
is, in consideration of that joy in glory, whereto he should be advanced
himself, and bring all his members. This we must make use of: for if we will
live godly in Christ Jesus, we must suffer affliction. This, flesh and blood
will not yield unto: and therefore, to persuade us to suffer with joy, we must
with Moses have respect to the recompense of reward. We must say thus to our
souls, The day will come wherein we shall have everlasting life in the
Kingdom of heaven, if we now serve and fear him: Shall we not then for his
sake be content to suffer a short affliction; seeing the greatest of them are
not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed? Romans, chapter 8. verse
18.

Question. But why does the holy Ghost call everlasting life, a reward?
Answer. It is not so called, because Moses did procure it, and deserve it at
Gods hand by the dignity of his works in suffering: for sure no man can merit
any thing at Gods hands. The case is plain: For, Christ as he is man
(consider his manhood apart from his Godhead) could not merit any thing at
Gods hands: for, he that would merit of God by any work, must do three
things: 1. He must do the work of himself, and by himself; for if he do
it by another, the other meriteth, and must have the reward and praise of the
work. Secondly, he must do it of mere good will, and not of duty: for that
which is of duty, cannot merit because a man is bound to do it. 3. The work
done to merit, must be of that price and dignity, that it may be proportionable
to life everlasting, which is the reward. Now, though Christ as he is man, be
above all men and all Angels in grace and dignity: yet consider his manhood
apart from his Godhead, and he could not do a work with these three
properties. For first, the works done of the manhood were not done of it
self, but from that fullness of the spirit wherewith he was endued. Secondly,
Christ as man is a creature: and so considered, his works are of duty to the
Creator, and so cannot merit. Thirdly, Christ's works as man simply considered
are finite; and so could not merit infinite glory.

Question. How then did Christ merit at Gods hands? Answer. Partly by means
of Gods promise made in the Law, which was this; Do this, and thou shall live:
but properly and chiefly, because he was not a mere man only, but (withal)
true and very God: for, because his obedience both in his life and death
(though performed in his manhood) was the obedience of him that was God and
man, even from the infinite excellency of the person whose it is, it becomes
meritorious. In his manhood, he obayed the Law, and suffered for our sins:
but the dignity thereof came from his Godhead; for, he that did these works
for us, was both God and man.

Now, if Christ considered as man only cannot merit: then much less can any
other man merit at Gods hands. And therefore Moses, though he were a worthy
man, yet because he was but a man, and a sinful man also, he could not by
any work deserve life everlasting at Gods hands.

But life everlasting is called a reward in the Scripture, because it is the
free gift of God, promised by GOD to his children in Christ; for this end, to
allure and draw them on in obedience. And it must not seem strange, that we
say a reward is a free gift: for so it may be, as we shall see by comparing two
places of Scripture together; to wit, Matthew 5.44. with Luke 6.32. For,
whereas Matthew says, If you love them that love you, what reward have you;
Saint Luke repeating the same thing, says, What thank have you, or (as the
word signifies) what favor or free gift have you? Secondly, there may be
another cause rendered, why life everlasting is called a reward; to wit, not in
regard of the work done: but in regard of the worker considered in Christ:
for, Christ's merit makes life everlasting to be a reward. Now, every true
believer that endeavors to do the will of God, is in Christ: and so Christ's
righteousness with the merit thereof, is his, so far forth as serves to make
his person acceptable to God. Whereupon, he has a promise of reward made unto
him upon his obedience; yet not for his work, but for the work of Christ's
obedience, in whom he is: And so must these words here be understood.

1. The consideration of this reward of life eternal given, through Christ, to
those that suffer for his sake, may make us joyful and patient in all our
afflictions for righteousness sake. A natural man will endure much for a good
recompense in the end. Now Christ says, Great is your reward. Math. 5.11.
And therefore let us rejoice in suffering for Christ; holding fast our
confidence, which has so great recompense of reward. Heb. 10.35.

Secondly, is life everlasting a recompense, that is, a giving of a reward?
Then here is condemned the desperate practice of many a one, who spend their
whole life in a greedy pursuit after the profits and pleasures of the
world: as it were running themselves out of breath in the way to hell, without
all regard of their souls, till death come; thinking, that if at the last
gasp they can cry God mercy, and commend their souls to GOD, all is well.
But all such persons for the most part deceive their own souls, not
considering that life everlasting is given as a reward. Now, we know that no
reward is given to any man, till the work be done which he is set about; he
must come work in the Vineyard some part of the day that would have his penny
at night: as for those that neither stir hand nor foot to do the work,
what reward can they look for? And yet this is the state of carnal livers,
they addict themselves wholly to earthly things. But if we look for any
reward at the day of death, we must labor in the works of godliness all the
days of our life; for, therefore were we redeemed. Luke 1.74.75.

In the whole book of God, we find but one man that lived wickedly, and
repented at his end: that is, the thief upon the Cross. Which shows that it
is a most rare thing for a man to have the reward of life everlasting after
this life, that labors not in the works of godliness in this life.

Thirdly, the consideration of this reward, must stir up all Gods children
unto all diligence in the duties of godliness, and that with cheerfulness,
through the whole course of their lives. When we shall die, we will look
earnestly for this reward; and therefore while we live, we must diligently do
the works that God commands: and then when death comes, we may assure our
selves that God will give us this reward; not because we did deserve it by our
works, but because he has promised it in Christ, upon our endeavor in
obedience and true repentance. And thus much for the reason of Moses choice.

VERSE 27. By faith he forsook Egypt, and feared not the fierceness of the
King. For, he was courageous, as he that saw him that is invisible.

IN this verse, the spirit of God proceeds to another example of Moses faith:
and heereto also in the verse following, he adds a third. Now he is thus
large in the commendation of his faith, for this end; to persuade the Hebrews,
to whom this Epistle is sent, that they were not to look for any Justification
by the works of the Law: and his reason is; because if any man could be
justified by the works of the Law, it must be Moses, who gave the Law to the
people from the Lord, and did excel in obedience to both Tables, and therefore
is a renowned Prophet unto all posterity in special favor with God, Numb.
12.7.8. But Moses could not be justified by the works of the Law; for here the
holy Ghost proves, that Moses was justified and saved by faith. The thing that
co^mends Moses and makes him stand before God, is not his works, but his faith:
and therefore the conclusion is; that as Moses was not justified by his works
but by faith, no more must they stand upon their works to be justified thereby,
but labor for such faith as Moses had. Now, this faith of Moses is a true
saving faith, founded on these two promises of God: 1. On this great and maine
promise made to Abraham, I will be thy God and the God of thy seed: 2. On
another particular promise rising from the general, made unto him when he was
called to fetch the Israelites out of bondage; which was this; I will be with
thee and guide thee. Exodus 3.1^.
And in this place Moses is said to have faith, not only because he believed
that God would be his God, as he was the God of all Abraham's seed; but because
he believed particularly that God would be his God, and defend and be with him
in the deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt.

To come particularly to this fact. By faith, Moses forsook Egypt. Moses
departed from Egypt twice: First, when he had slain the Egyptian, and fled
from Pharaoh unto Midian, and there kept Iethroes sheep. Secondly, forty
years after when he led the people of Israel out of Egypt into the Land of
Canaan: and here some make it a question, whether of these departures is meant
in this place. Answer. It is most like, that this place is to be understood
of his second departure, rather than of the first: And the reason is taken out
of Exodus, Chapter the second, verses 14, 15. Where we find that the first
time, he fled for fear: for, so soon as he heard that his slaughter of the
Egyptian was known to Pharaoh, he fled in such fear, as that he durst not
return again, of 40. years. Now, these words are not to be understood of
such a flight: for here it is said, He departed, not fearing the Kings wrath
or fierceness.

Here some will say, This is no commendation: for, malefactors and rebels do
fly their Country? Answer. They fly indeed, yet not in faith, but in fear.
Moses fled in faith: and hereby his faith is commended, that he fled, not
fearing the King. But malefactors fly for fear of due punishment. Moses
departed with courage and boldness, and therefore fled not as a malefactor: for
he feared not the King, as appears plainly in the History; for, though
Pharaoh had said unto him, Exodus 10.28* Get thee gone, see thou see my face no
more: for when thou come in my sight, thou shall die; yet Moses went once
more: namely, the tenth time, and told him of the tenth plague, and said,
That Pharaohs servants should come down unto him, and fall down and pray him
to get him out with the people and their cattle. Exodus 11.8.
And when the Israelites murmured against him at the red sea, when Pharaoh was
at their heels, and they had no way to fly, Moses encourages the people;
saying, Fear not, stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord which he
will show you this day: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen this day, shall ye
never see again, Exodus 14.13. Whereby, it notably appears, that Moses
departed in faith without fear of Pharaoh.

But some will say; For a man to come into another man's Kingdom, and to carry
away his Subjects without the Kings consent, is a fact of rebellion and
sedition; and therefore worthy no commendation, but rather shame and punishment:
And this did Moses, he comes from Midian, and caries away the Jews which had
been a long time Pharaohs subjects; and for whose service he might plead
possession, and a long prescription: therefore it seems to be no fact of
faith? Answer. Indeed if Moses had done this on his own head, he might
worthily have been thus censured. But when he came to Egypt, he had a
calling immediately from God to do as he did; and for confirmation hereof* he
had Gods promise of assistance in working strange miracles: and when he carried
the people out of Egypt, he did it by commandment from a King that was higher
then Pharaoh. Neither yet did Moses carry them away as a private man; for, he
was a public person, an high Magistrate, and no stranger, but one of
themselves: yea, he was a King, as may appear in Gods word; for, Deuteronomy. 33.5,
He is plainly called a King: and Genesis 36.31, it is said, There were so many
Kings in Edom, before there reigned any King over the children of Israel. Now,
the last of those Kings reigned at that time when Moses went with the
Israelites out of Egypt: so that Moses was their King, and had the aucthority
and government of a King over them from the Lord; and therefore it was no fact
of rebellion in him, but a work that did greatly commend his faith, being
grounded upon Gods commandment and promise.

Thus we see how we must conceive of Moses fact. Now we come to some
particular points to be considered therein.

How came it to pass, that Moses now had this courage, to depart from Pharaoh
not fearing his commandment; whereas 40. years before, being called to show
himself unto his brethren, as one whom they were to respect as their
deliverer, Acts 7.23, 25, he fled immediately out of Egypt upon the notice of
one fact of defense in behalf of the Israelites? why did he not show as much
courage when he slew the Egyptian* as at his second departure? Answer. The
cause of his courage at this later time was this; God now renewed his
commission* and confirmed his former calling. For, when he was first called,
he did his duty and revenged their wrongs: but yet being in danger, and his
calling being as yet but a secret instinct, he was fearful, and fled. But now
when God called him the second time, and confirmed the same calling both by
promise and commandment, and power to work miracles, then fearful Moses
becomes courageous and bold.

Here then observe, that there is a difference of Gods graces; there is a first
grace and a second grace. The first, is that which God gives to any man for any
calling: the second is that, which God adds to the first, for the confirming
thereof. And the first, is not effectual without the second; As here we see,
Moses first calling was not effectual with him, till the second came. And so
Gods first grace is not effectual till the second come; by which the former is
confirmed, strengthened, and increased. And the second is confirmed by the
third: and so we must go on from grace to grace, if we will be bold and
courageous in any duty, either of our general or particular calling. This must
be well considered; for, that any man stands in grace, or increases therein,
either respecting his particular calling, or his Christian conversation, it
comes from this, that God adds a second grace unto the first. And therefore
whosoever is enabled for any duty, has great cause to praise God: for, whether
we continue in grace or increase therein, it comes from the goodness of God,
who adds grace to grace: which if he should not do, we should fall away, and
not be able to go forward in the fear of God, and the duties of our calling;
for the first grace would not suffice to strengthen us against temptation. And
therefore howsoever God has strengthened us for the time past, yet still we
must pray to God to deliver us from evil: which plainly imports, that our
standing is from his daily supply of new grace.

2. Point. When went Moses out of Egypt? The time is directly set down, Exodus
12.41, Even the self same day when the promise of God was expired: for when
the four hundred and thirty years were expired, then went all the host of
the Lord out of Egypt, neither before nor after, but the very same day. Indeed
Moses was chosen to be their captain 40. years before, and sent unto them by
God: and S. Stephen says, He thought they would have understood so much. But
then they would not take him for their guide. Yet now 40. years after, when
Gods determinate time of 430. years was expired, he comes again unto the^, to
carry them out of Egypt; and then they acknowledge him, and follow him out,
according to Gods commission.

Hence we learn, first, that no creature can alter the rule of Gods
providence. Forty years before, Moses would have delivered the people; but he
must stay till the time of the Lords promise was accomplished, and then he
carries them all away. Secondly, this must teach us, not only to believe, that
God both can and will keep his promises; but also by faith to wait for the
time, wherein he will accomplish the same unto us. Moses is feign to wait 40.
years for the fulfilling of Gods promise. Dan. 9.
When Daniel understood how long the Israelites must be in captivity, he would
not pray for the shortning of that time: but when he knew that the time of
their return drew near, then he prayed unto the Lord most earnestly, waiting
for the accomplishment of Gods promise in their deliverance. And David thus
waited on God for deliverance in all his troubles. Psalm. 42.11.
And their examples must we follow, for the fruition of all Gods blessings.

3. Point. In what manner does Moses depart? The text says, He went out, not
fearing the Kings commandment: so that his departure was with courage. Whence
we learn sundry instructions. First, here is a notable president for the
framing of our lives, which must be a rule unto us. We must walk diligently in
our callings, as Moses did; and though crosses meet us, so that Pharaoh fall
out with us, if Kings become our enemies: yet we must not lay aside the duties
of our callings; but after Moses example, go on therein with courage. Moses
without fearing the Kings wrath, went and led all the people away. And so must
every one of us do: although dangers come, we must not fear, but stand fast
in our profession, and go on in the duties of our calling: Eccles. 10.4, If
the spirit of him that rules rise up against thee, leave not thy place.

Secondly, hence we may learn, that Magistrates which are to govern the
people, ought to be men of courage in performing the duties of their calling.
When too heavy a burden lay on Moses, in judging all the congregation
himself; Iethro his father in law bids him provide among all the people men of
courage, fearing God, to be Rulers, Exodus 18.13, 21. Now their courage must not
be a proud hautinesse, or an indiscreete cruelty; but a godly boldness,
which may enable them to the duties of their calling, without fear of man. To
this end, the Lord put of his spirit upon the seventy, which were to rule
with Moses, Numb. 11.17. Now, the spirit of God, is not a spirit of fear, but
of power, and of love, and of a sound mind, 2. Tim. 1.7. Which shows, that in
a Magistrate must be courage to call, and (if need be) to compel others to
the duties of their calling, how great soever they be. And it is a matter of
great weight and moment in Gods Church: for, the Minister may teach, and speak
as much as he will, or can; yet unless with the sword of the spirit, there
be joined the temporal sword of the Magistrate, to reform men's lives, and to
keep them from open sin against the law of God, and to urge them to the
duties which the minister teaches: surely, their teaching and preaching will
be to small effect.

Lastly, Moses went with courage out of Egypt. This departure of his, was a
sign of our spiritual departing out of the Kingdom of darkness: for, so Paul
applies it, 1. Cor. 10. And therefore after Moses example, we must with courage
come every day more and more out of the Kingdom of darkness, marching forward
with courageous faith and heavenly boldness toward our blessed Canaan, the
glory of heaven: we must not leave this to the last breath, and then think to
have heaven gates ready open for us: but we must enter into Gods Kingdom, in
this life. Look as Moses by his faith did depart boldly out of Egypt, so must
we in heart by faith depart out of the Kingdom of sin. This we shall do,
when we use means to establish the Kingdom of Christ Jesus in our hearts, and
do forsake the works of sin and darkness. For, look where there is no
departing from sin, there is no faith: and therefore let us show our selves
to have true faith, by departing more and more boldly and joyfully out of the
Kingdom of sin and Satan; that so it may appear, we love the light and
hate darkness. And in this journey, let us not fear any contrary
commandment, nor the furious wrath of spiritual Pharaoh the devil, nor all
the gates of hell: for Christ Jesus is our guide.

Because a man might think at the first, that it was a rash and desperate part
in Moses, thus boldly to take away the Israelites, not regarding Pharaohs
commandment; therefore in the later part of the verse, the holy Ghost sets
down a reason, that moved Moses to do so, in these words: For he endured, or
was courageous* that is, he took heart to himself. Why so? Because he saw
God that is invisible. That is, he cast the eye of faith upon God, who had
promised the evidence of his power and presence, in their deliverance. So that
it was the work of Moses faith, laying hold on the promise of Gods presence,
and protection, from the rage of Pharaoh, that made him thus confident and bold.

Hence we learn, that the true valor and manhood that was in Moses, and is
in all Gods children, like unto him, is a gift of grace. Among many gifts of
the spirit, powered upon our Savior Christ, the spirit of strength, or courage,
is one, Isay 11.2. And Iethroes counsel to Moses is notable this way; he
biddes him provide for governors, men of courage, fearing God, Exodus 18.21.
Insinuating, that true courage is always joined with the fear of God, and is
a fruit of grace. But some will say, that many heathen men, who never knew
the true God, nor what the gifts of the spirit meant, had that courage. Answ.
True it is, they had courage indeed: but it was nothing but a carnal boldness
(not worthy the name of courage; being only a shadow of true fortitude)
arising from ambition, pride, and other fleshly humors; whereas Moses his
courage sprang from the grace of faith, in the merciful promises of God, made
unto him concerning his deliverance and safety. And indeed, howsoever wicked
men have a notable show of diverse virtues, yet in the trial they prove but
shadows; for, true valor, and other virtues, do always accompany
regeneration.

As he that saw him that is invisible. Here is the cause that made Moses thus
courageous: and this will make any man bold, if he can be persuaded in his
conscience of Gods special presence with him, and of his providence and
protection over him.

Here then observe a singular fruit of faith: it makes God, who is indeed
invisible, to be after a sort visible unto us. Moses by faith saw him that is
invisible; for, by faith he was persuaded of Gods providence, and special
protection in the delivery of his people, though Pharaoh should rage never so
much. So Enoch is said to have walked with God, Genesis 5.22.
because he saw him by the eye of faith, in all his affairs. And when Joseph
was allured to sin with his mistres, what stayed him? surely, the fear of God,
whom he saw by faith. How can I do this great wickedness (says Joseph) and so
sin against God? Genesis 39.9.
As if he should say, I am always where God is present; how then should I do
so wickedly, and God see it? And the same is the state of all true believers;
their faith makes the invisible God, to be after a sort visible unto the^; so
as a faithful man may say, God is present with me, and protecteth me. Whereby
we may see, what little faith is in the world; for few can truly say, they see
God: which, faith inables a man to do. Yea, most men care so little to see God,
that he is far from their very thoghts. Many have made means to see the
devil: but where is he that labors for such a measure of faith, that he may
see the invisible God? If wicked men run to Coniurers, to see the devil, whom
they shall once see to their sorrow; let us labor for faith in the word and
sacraments, and this faith will make us so to endure in all tribulation, as
though we saw God.

Furthermore, seeing Moses by faith endured, as he that saw God; we learn,
that the seeing of God by faith, takes away fear, and gives spiritual
boldness. This is a point of special use: for, naturally men are fearful;
some cannot endure the dark, nor solitary places, for fear of the devil: yea,
the shaking of a leaf, or the crawling of a worm does terrify others. Now,
howsoever some men's constitution may help forward this fear, yet many times it
comes from an accusing conscience, as a fruit of sin. And the way to remove
it, is here to be learned; namely, to do as Moses did: that is, labor to be
resolved of Gods presence with us, and providence over us; and this will arm us
against al satanicall, and foolish fear. For, if God be on our side, who can
be against us, to do us harm? Again, the Soldier, by his place and calling*
ought to be a man of courage; for else the state of his life, and the thought of
his enemies will much affright him. Now how may he become courageous? They use
to sound the drum and trumpet for this end; and it must be granted they be
good incitements and prouocations unto battle: but, when it comes to the point
of danger, these cannot give heart. Others use against the battle to fill
themselves with wine, and to make themselves valiant by strong drink. This
indeed may make them senseless, and so desperate. But the true way is, to
become Christian soldiers, knowing, and fearing God; and with their bodily
armor, to bring also the shield of faith: whereby their hearts may be assured,
that God has called them to that fight; and that he is present with them, to
cover their heads in the day of battle. This will make them to take heart and
courage to themselves, and to become truly valorous; though by nature they be
weak and timorous.

Thirdly, who knows whether God will bring us to this trial; either to lay
down our lives, or forsake his truth: for, he may justly take from us these
golden days of peace, for our ingratitude. Now, if such times come upon us,
what shall we do? Shall we deny the faith of Christ? God forbid. But how
shall we stand out in such a trial? Surely, we must follow Moses, and labor
to see him that is invisible, by faith. This will make us courageous, and
without fear in Gods cause; remembering this also, that among those which are
reckoned to go down to hell, the fearful man is one, (Revel. 21.8.) who
dares not stand to the truth of God, but for fear of men denies it. Let us
therefore now begin to settle our hearts in the assurance of Gods providence
and protection; that so, when trial comes, we may be bold in the case of God.

Him that is invisible.] That is God, who is a most simple essence, void of all
composition, or corporal substance: for, God is a spirit, (John 4.24.) and
therefore invisible, and not subject to man's senses. But some will say, God is
said to have head, heart, hands, and feet; with other parts of man's body: and
therefore he is visible? Answ. The holy Ghost so speaks in scripture of God,
by way of resemblance of him unto man; that we might the better thereby
conceive of his works: for, therefore are the parts of man's body ascribed unto
God in scripture, that we might know he does such works by his divine power,
as man does by the parts of his body. Man shows his strength and valor in
his arm: and by resemblance unto man, God is said to have an Arm, to note out
his power and valiant acts. And so God is said to have eyes, because we
should conceive, that by his infinite wisdom he sees all things more
clearly, than man does any thing at noone day, with his bodily eyes. And so of
the rest.

But Moses is said, to talk with God face to face: and, to see his back
parts, Exodus 33.11, 23. Answ. This imports not, that he saw the substance of
God; but only, that God did after a familiar manner, reveal himself unto
him, and in some resemblance show him his glory, so far forth as Moses was
able to behold it: for the text is plain, My face can not be seen. There
shall no man see me and live, verse. 20.

Here we learn, that when we pray to God, we must not conceive of him by
any form or image in our minds; for so we make an idol of God. Quest. What
then must we do? for, how (will some say) can I pray to him, and not think of
him? Answ. When we think of God, or pray unto him, we must conceive of him
in our minds, as he has revealed himself in scripture; that is, by his
works, and by his properties: we must think in our minds of an eternal
essence, most holy, wise, etc. who made all things, and gouernes them by his
mighty power. For, every image to resemble God by, either to the mind, or to
the eye is a plain lie; making him visible, who is invisible: as says the
Prophet, Hab. 2 18, The image, what profits it, for it is a teacher of lies?
Which flatly overthrows the opinion and practice of the Romish Church, who
resemble the true God, even God the father, and the holy Trinity, in images:
what else do they herein, but make a lie of God?

But the Papists say, they devise no image to resemble God in, but only such
whereby he has showed himself; as the scripture testifies: as the father,
like an old man; the son, as he was incarnate; and the holy Ghost, like a
dove, Math. 3.16. Answ. We must not conceive of those forms, of an old man,
or of a dove, to have been ever any images of the father, or of the holy
Ghost; but only signs and pledges for a time, whereby those persons did then
manifest their presence. Now, there being an express commandment against all
representation of God by images, not excepting those very shapes, whereby it
pleased God for a time to signify his presence; it must needs be idolatrous
presumption to make any image of God, or of the Trinity. And indeed, God being
invisible (as the text says) it is impossible to make any true image or
resemblance of him.

VERSE 28. By faith, he ordained the Passover, and the effusion of blood;
lest he that destroyed the first borne, should touch them.

IN the former verses, the author of this Epistle has showed unto us, the
notable faith of Moses, by two worthy acts: 1 His refusing to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter. 2 His departing out of Egypt. Now, here in this
verse, he commends his faith unto us by a third action; which is, the
ordination, or celebrating of the Passover. This verse is the sum of the 12.
Chapter of Exodus; the effect whereof is this: After that God had sent nine
several plagues upon the Land of Egypt, which were occasions to harden
Pharaohs heart; at last he sends Moses to certify Pharaoh, that unless he
would let the people go, he would send a tenth plague, which should be more
grievous to them, than all the former; even the slaughter of all the first
borne in Egypt, both of man and beast. Yet Pharaohs heart was not softened,
neither did he let the people go. Therefore Moses departs from him, and
(according to Gods commandment) assembles the Elders of Israel together, and
causes them to kill every man a lamb of a year old, and to eat it, roste
with fire; and to take the blood, and sprinkle it upon the door cheeks, and
upon the posts of their houses: for a sign unto them, that the Angel of the
Lord, (seeing the blood sprinkled upon their doors) should pass over them,
and touch none of their first borne, neither man, nor beast. This is the sum
and meaning of that history. Now let us come to the consideration of this fact
more particularly; and first, to the meaning of the words of this verse,
because there is some difficulty in them.

Through faith he ordained the Passover. The Passe-ouer here named, may be
thus described: It is one of the Sacraments of the old Testament, serving for
a sign to the people of Israel, both of their temporal deliverance from the
bondage of Egypt, and from the slaughter of the first borne; and also of their
spiritual deliverance from everlasting death, by the sacrifice of Christ Jesus
the immaculate Lamb of God.

Touching this description: first, I call it one of the Sacraments of the old
Test: because they had beside this, Circumcision, another ordinary Sacrament.
Next I say, It served for a sign to the people of Israel, to show that it was
properly a sacrament unto them For, it is of the nature of a sacrament, to
signify and seal up some blessing of God to his people: now that the
Passe-ouer did so, is plain, where the Lord calls it a sign or token of
deliverance unto them. But some will say, this Passe-ouer was a sacrifice: for
so it is called, This is the sacrifice of the Lords Passe-ouer. And, Thou shall
not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leauened bread, etc. Exodus 12.27.
Ans. It is called a sacrifice, because it was killed, Exodus 23.18.
also the blood thereof was sprinkled, Leuit. 3.4.
and some parts of it as the fat with the two kidneies were burnt in sacrifice
to the Lord. For, when Josias kept that famous Passe-ouer with all the people,
the Priests that slew the Passe-ouer, and sprinkled the blood thereof, did
first take away that which was to be consumed with fire, 2. Chr. 35.12.
and then gave to the people according to the divisions of their families as
Moses appointed. Now, in regard of these properties of a sacrifice which were
in the Passe-ouer, it is truly called a sacrifice. And yet more properly it was
a Sacrament, because it was a visible sign of special blessings from the Lord.

But what did this Sacrament of the Passe-ouer signify? Answer. It did
signify a double deliverance; one temporal, as well from the destroying
Angel, as also from the bondage of Egypt: The other spiritual, from the curse
of the Law, and from the wrath of God. The first is plain, where the Lord
says: Exodus 12.13.
The blood being sprinkled upon the door posts, shall be a token for you that
I will pass over you. And verse 17. Ye shall keep the feast of unleavened
bread: for that same day will I bring your Armies out of the Land of Egypt. And
touching the second, that it was a sign of a more heavenly deliverance from
the bondage of sin and Satan, Paul tells us plainly, when as he says,
Christ our Passe-ouer is sacrificed for us: 1. Cor. 5.7.
giving us to understand, that the Paschall Lamb in the old Testament, was
undoubtedly a true sign of the true Paschall Lamb Christ Jesus: to which
purpose John Baptist says; Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins
of the world: John 1.29: Where he calls Christ the Lamb of God, making there
an opposition between him and the Paschall Lamb of Moses, which may be called
the Paschall Lamb of men; for herein also they differ: The Paschall Lamb was
separated by men, though by Gods appointment; but Christ the true Lamb of God,
was set a part before all worlds by God the Father. And thus we see briefly
what this Passe-ouer is. It follows.

Ordained the Passe-ouer. The word translated, ordained, signifies, He made,
or did celebrate: for the better understanding whereof, we must have recourse
to the Evangelists. Matthew sets down Christ's speech to his Disciples about
the Passe-ouer, which he kept with them a little before his passion, thus: My
time is come, I will make my Passe-ouer at thine house. Now, S. Luke repeating
the same Story, mentions, first the killing, and then the eating of it: by
which two words he explaneth what Christ meant by making (which here is
translated ordaining) the Passe-ouer; Math. 26.18. Luke 22.7, 11.
to wit, first, the killing and preparing of the Paschall Lamb, and then the
eating of it as the Lord Sacrament. But this is a strange kind of speech (will
some say) how can the Passe-ouer be killed or eaten? seeing properly the
Passe-ouer is nothing else, but the act of the Angel passing over the houses
of the Israelites, when he smote the first borne in every house of the
Egyptians. Ans. The phrase is improper: yet it must not seem strange, because
it is usual in Scripture, entreating of the Sacraments, sometime to give the
name of the sign to the thing signified: as 1. Cor. 5.7, Christ is called our
Passe-ouer; and on the other side, to give the name of the thing signified to
the sign: as in this place, he ordained the Passe-ouer; that is, the Paschall
Lamb, which was a sign of the Angels passing over their houses. So, This is my
body, that is, a sign of my body. The rock was Christ. Math. 26.28. 1. Cor.
10.4.
The reason of these figurative speeches, whereby one thing is put for another,
is the Sacramental union of the sign with the thing signified: which yet is
not natural according to place, either by change of the sign into the thing
signified, or by including the thing signified in the sign, or fastening it upon
it; but respective and analogicall, by reason of that agreement and proportion,
which is between the sign and the thing signified: which stands in this, that
look when the outward sign is presented to the outward senses, at the very
same time the thing signified is thereby, as by certain visible words*
presented to the mind. And indeed look what conjunction is between words, and
the things spoken of, in the mind of the understanding hearer; the same is
between sacramental signs, and the things signified, in the mind of a
discerning receiver. But when words of sense are spoken to the ear, the
understanding mind does therewith apprehend the thing spoken of. And even so the
mind of the discerning receiver does inwardly apprehe^d the thing signified,
and apply it to his soul, when the sacramental sign is presented to the
outward sense. And this conjunction arises not from the nature either of the
sign, or the thing signified; but from the institution of the Lord. The
meaning then of the holy Ghost here is this, That Moses by faith did ordain
and appoint the killing and eating of the Paschall Lamb, which was the sign of
the passing over of the Lords Angel, when the first borne in Egypt were slain.

It follows: And effusion of blood; that is, the sprinkling of the blood of
the Paschal Lamb; which was a notable rite and ceremony used in this first
Passe-ouer, after this manner: The blood of every Lamb was put into a basin,
and sprinkled with a bunch of Hysope upon the door posts of every man's house
among the Jews. Now this rite did not continue always, but was peculiar and
proper to this first passe-ouer kept in Egypt at the institution thereof; being
then practiced (but not after) in regard of that special deliverance then at
hand, whereof it was an assurance: for it signified unto them, that the Angel of
the Lord, coming to destroy ye first born of Egypt, and seeing that blood so
sprinked, should pass over their houses, and touch none of their first borne,
of man nor beast. This end of the sprinkling of this blood, is here likewise
set down in these words; Lest he that destroyed the first born should touch
them. He: that is, the Angel of the Lord, who was sent to destroy the first
born throughout all Egypt both of man and beast, save only of those who had
their door posts sprinkled with blood. And thus much for the meaning of the
words.

First, observe what the H. ghost says of this fact of Moses, in ordaining the
Passe-ouer: namely, that he did it by faith. Hence we learn, that the
Sacraments of the new Testament must be celebrated in faith: for, herein we are
to seek to be acceptable to God as Moses was. The L. supper in the new
Testament succeeds the Passe-ouer in the old: for, that was a sign to the
Jews, that Jesus Christ the immaculate Lamb of God, should afterward be
sacrificed for their sins; and this is to us a sign of Christ already
sacrificed. Now look as that was ordained and received under ye Law, so must
this be administered and received under the Gospel. But in the old Testament
Moses celebrates the Passe-ouer through faith, and enioines the Israelites so
to do; therefore accordingly must we by faith celebrate and receive the Lords
supper under the Gospel. Cains* sacrifice was fruitless to him, and odious to
God, because he offered not in faith; and no less were all other faithless
sacrifices: even so every Sacrament and spiritual sacrifice received or
offered in time of the Gospel, is unprofitable to man, and unacceptable unto
GOD, if it be not received in faith. In every Sacrament we receive some thing
from God, as in every sacrifice we give some thing to God. In the Lords supper,
as the minister gives the bread and wine into the hand of the receiver, so the
Lord God gives his son unto their hearts. Now if faith be wanting, Christ
crucified is not received: for, faith is the hand of the soul, without which,
there is no receiving of Christ, and his benefits; but contrariwise, a heavy
and fearful sin, heaping up Gods wrath against us. Hereby we learn, how
sundry sorts of people sin most grievously against God: for, many come to
receive the Lords supper, who are altogether ignorant in the nature and use
thereof, not knowing what the sacrament means: and yet because it is a custom
in the church, they will receive (at least) once a year, though they know
nothing therein as they ought. Now such persons must know, they ought to come
in faith; which they cannot do, because they want knowledge: and therefore in
receiving it so, they commit a grievous sin, and so endanger their own souls,
because they receive it unworthily. And this is not the fault of young ones
only; but of many, whose years might shame them for their ignorance, if they
were not past all feeling of spiritual wants. A second sort there are, who
receive the Lords supper, and say they will do so, because they have faith.
But these are like the former: for their faith is nothing but honest dealing
among men; thinking, that if they bring that to the L. Supper, though they have
no more, yet all is well. The greatest sort are of this mind, taking fidelity
for true faith: and it is a plain point of popery, so common, as almost in
every place, men do embrace it. But these deceive themselves: for another kind
of faith is required of those that receive the Lords supper worthily; namely,
such a faith, whereby we do not only believe the remission of sins in Christ's
blood; but also are assured, that the bread and wine received worthily, are
signs and seals of the same blessing exhibited unto us by Christ. He that
comes only in a good meaning, deceiues himself, and receives to his
condemnation. And yet alas, many even of the ancient sort, have no other faith,
but their good meaning.

A third sort there are, who yet go further, and knowing the vanity of this
opinion; that a man's fidelity in his dealing with men, should be his faith,
to commend him unto God; they hold and know, that true faith, is to believe
their own salvation in the blood of Christ: and these are to be commended in
respect of the former. But herein they fail; that coming to receive, they
bring not with them a lively faith: for, it is not only required in a
communicant, that he profess the faith of Christ aright* but a worthy
receiver must look to his own heart, that his faith therein, be a living
faith, such as works by love, and shows it self by obedience. Now herein,
many that have good knowledge do grievously offend, That howsoever they make a
show of faith, in an orderly and religious carriage of themselves on the
Communion day; yet when that time is a little past, they return to their
former sins again, never else having any care (nay, not so much as making any
show) of laying away their sins, save only at the receiving of the Lords
supper. And thus do too many of those, who make a fair profession. These men
bring faith in profession, but yet their faith is dead; for, if it were a
lively faith, it would purify their hearts, and cause a change in them from
evil to good, and from good to better, every day more and more. But blessed be
God, by whose mercy it comes to pass, that there are some in his Church, who
come with such a faith, and thereby communicate acceptably to God, and
fruitfully to themselves. Yet we must confess, they are but few in
comparison. But as for all the other three sorts of people, they sin
grievously, because they bring not the hand of a lively faith, to receive those
things which their God offers unto them. We therefore in this example are
admonished, to celebrate and receive the Lords supper in such sort, as Moses
did; namely, in faith: and that not in an idle, or dead, but in a lively faith;
which may, both before and after the receiving of this sacrament, bring forth
good fruits, to the reforming of our lives, in continual obedience, for Gods
glory, and our own comfort and salvation in Christ.

2 Observe further: Moses ordained and made the Passe-ouer. We may not think,
that Moses killed all the lambs that were to be slain at this Passover; but
in his own family he killed his own lamb, and enjoined the people from God,
to do the like in theirs. The like phrase is often used in the scripture,
Joshua, 5.3, Joshua is said to circumcise the sons of Israel; which was almost
a thing impossible for one man to do: But the meaning thereof is this; that
Joshua enjoined and procured, that all the people should be circumcised, and saw
it done. And so we must understand this place.

Now in this, that Moses did in this manner celebrate this passover, we are
taught this lesson; that Governors and Superiors in their place, must
procure, that those which ^e under their government, do keep the commandments
of God; and especially those, which concern Gods worship. It is the
commandment of the Lord by Moses, that the King should have the law written;
that he may learn to fear his God, and keep all the words of this law
written, to do them. Now, how shall the king do all the words of the law?
seeing there be many commandments, that do not concern him, nor his place;
but his subjects, and other particular men, of other callings. Surely thus: He
must do those in his own person, that concern him in his place; and then see
that his subjects and servants do likewise such duties, both toward God and
man, as concern them in their places. This is a special point concerning all
Magistrates and Superiors whatsoever; and therefore Paul says, Romans 13.4, The
Magistrate bears not the sword for naught, but for the wealth of Gods people:
that is, for their good; not in body only, but principally, for the good of
their souls. And therefore every governor, either of town or kingdom, and
every master of a family, within the compass of his calling, is to see that
those which are under him keep Gods commandments; especially those which
concern Gods worship. When a magistrate shall do this, then the praise and
honor of the whole is given to him; as here the killing of the Passover is
ascribed to Moses, because he saw that the people did it. So on the contrary,
if the Magistrate be negligent in his duty, he becomes the greatest sinner of
all; for then the sins that are committed through his default, are ascribed
to him. Nehemiah, reproouing the Rulers, tells them that they brake the Lords
Sabbaoths, Nehem. 13.13; when as not only they, but the people also brake
them: yet there he charge the sin of the people upon them, because it came
through their negligence. As, if any sin be committed in a family, through
the defect of the governor of the family; it is not only the sin of the
particular party, but the governors sin. And so, when any man sins in breaking
the Sabbath, it is not only the sin of that particular man, but of the
governors to whom he is subject. And therefore governors must see that Gods
commandments be kept of those that be under their government. But here some
may object (as indeed some abuse the place to this end) that it seems no man
may be barred from the L. Supper; for the like reason is in the Lords Supper,
that was in the Passover: but Moses kept the Pasouer himself, and commanded
all the people of Israel so to do; therefore no man is to be put from Gods
table. Ans. It is true indeed, that in Egypt at the celebration of the first
passover, Moses kept it himself, and commanded every Master of a family among
the Israelites to do the same; and the reason hereof was, because at the first
institution, the Passover was both a sign and a means of a temporal
deliverance, besides the spiritual: and therefore there was great reason then,
why all the Israelites should eat the Passover, and none be put back; because
all of them were to escape the temporal punishment, which God was to inflict
upon the Egyptians. But afterward the Lord made a law, that if any were but
legally unclean, he might not eat the Passover, but must stay til the next
month, and the^ come, and only the clean must eat thereof: so that the Lord
himself did inhibit some from that Sacrament: whereby it is plain, that the
celebration of the Passe-ouer is so far from giving warrant to this
confusion, and careless admitting of all to the communion, that rather it
proves that there must be a distinction made, and a separation of the unworthy
from the Lords Table. Those which are fitly prepared are to be received: But
notorious offenders, who are morally and spiritually unclean, are to be put
back, till by repentance they have testified their worthiness.

3. Let us consider the signification of the Passe-ouer. For the Paschal Lamb
was a sign of Christ the true Lamb of God, shadowing out diverse things worthy
our observation: as first the Lamb; for the Passe-ouer was to be a Lamb of a
year old, without spot or blemish: which signified unto us, that Christ was
that immaculate Lamb of God and without spot, as Peter calls him, 1. Peter
1.19. Secondly, the Paschall Lamb when it was killed and eaten, had no bone of
it broken, so was it commanded, Exodus 12.46, and Numb. 9.12; signifying, that
Christ when he was crucified, should not have a bone of him broken, as S. John
applies the former Texts, John 19.36. Thirdly, the Paschall Lamb must be eaten
with sower herbs, Exodus 12.8: signifying that no man can feel any sweetness
in the blood of Christ, till he have his heart full of bitterness for his
sins; and, with Hanna, be sore vexed and troubled in mind, so as he can
pour out his soul before the Lord, 1. Sam. 1.15. The want of this is the
cause why so many do hear Gods word, and receive the Sacraments, and yet reap
no benefit by them. Fourthly, before the Paschall Lamb was eaten, all leaven
must be removed out of their houses. This had a notable signification: which we
need not to guess at, seeing the holy Ghost has set it down; namely, that
we must remove all old leaven of corrupt doctrine (Matthew 16.12) out of our
hearts; and the leaven of sin and wickedness, 1. Cor. 5.7.
out of our lives, if we profess communion with Christ. This is a point worth
our marking; for, unless we do so, we shall have no benefit by the sacrifice
of Christ: for if we will live in this old leaven, we must never look to
receive Christ Jesus into our hearts. Lastly, every person received the
passe-ouer in haste, with shoes on their feet, with staves in their hands,
and their clothes girt up, Exodus 12.11: yet this we must understand only of
the first passe-ouer in Egypt; Luke 22.49.
for Christ did eat it sitting. Now this ceremony used in the first
passe-ouer, signified thus much, that if we look to have benefit by Christ, we
must be of this mind to be always ready to leave this world, and be prepared
to go when and whither God shall call us: We must not have our hearts glewed to
earthly things, but always ready to receive Gods command, and to go at his
call. These be the significations of the Passe-ouer: which we must remember to
make good use of in the course of our lives. And thus much of the first branch
of this act of Moses faith, in ordaining the Passe-ouer.

The second branch of this work is this; And the effusion of blood: that is,
the sprinkling of the blood of the Lamb upon the posts of their houses, and
upon the door cheeks; which was a token to the Israelites, that the destroying
Angel should not strike the first borne of the Israelites either man or beast.
In man's reason, this may seem to be a weak and simple means; yet God
ordaines it to preserve all the first borne among the Israelites. And thus the
Lord uses to deal, that his people through the weakness of the means,
might be brought to acknowledge God to be their protector and defender. When
the Israelites were stung with the serpents, Numb. 21.
a man would have thought it had been the best way for their curing, to have
given them cunning Surgeons; but the Lord ordaines only a dead serpent of
brass, which they must look up unto, and be cured. Verse 8.
A weak means it was, and yet the Lord uses it; because he would have them
to give all the glory unto him, and not to ascribe the same either to
themselves or to the means.

Further, this sprinkling of the blood upon the door cheeks and the posts of
their houses, had a notable signification: namely, of the sprinkling of the
blood of Christ upon the doors of our hearts: to which Peter alludeth, 1. Peter
1.2; Through the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. And
David, when he says, Sprinkle me with Hisope and I shall be clean: David knew
well that the blood of beasts could not take away sin, and therefore no doubt
by his saving faith, he had an eye to the blood of the Messiah under legal
terms. Whence, we are taught this lesson: that as the Israelites with their
bodily hands did sprinkle ye blood of the Paschall Lamb upon their door
cheeks, and the posts of their houses: so by the hand of faith, every one of us
must sprinkle the blood of Christ upon our own hearts: which we shall then
do, when we do not only in general believe that Christ is a Savior and
Redeemer, but particularly that he is a Redeemer unto us; and that the merits
of his death, and the benefit of his blood are ours.

Object. But some will say, If this be so, then all is well, for I do believe
this? Answer. Herein very many deceive themselves, thinking that they have
faith, when indeed they have none. For, look unto their ways, and see into
their hearts by their lives; and it will easily appear, that they have nothing
in them but ignorance, security, and presumption in sin. Now, such men are
deceivers of their own souls; for after this sprinkling follows
sanctification, and rising from dead works to newness of life: so that they
that live in sin, and yet say they have faith, deceive themselves. For, if a
man's heart be sprinkled with the blood of Christ through faith, it will change
his life and conscience, and make him a new creature; for, Christ's blood is a
cleansing and purifying blood, insomuch as where it is truly sprinkled, it
certainly cleanses: Hebrews 9.14. And thus much of this ceremony of
sprinkling.

Now follows the end of both these actions, in these words: Lest he that
destroyed the first borne should touch them. Let us examine the words in order:
First, by the destroyer, is meant the Angel of God (as we may see in the
Story, Exodus 12.19): who at midnight smote all the first borne of Egypt both
of man and beast. Where by the way we may take a view of the wonderful power
and strength of Gods Angels, and also of their admirable swiftness and
readiness in doing the will of God, that in one night even at midnight, one of
them could pass through the Land of Egypt, and kill all the first borne of man
and beast, in every place of the Egyptians. The like we may see in the
destruction of Senacheribs host, Isay 37.26.
by one Angel in one night.

The first borne: that is, both of men and beasts. So it is in the Story, Exodus
12.29. But being so, it may not unfitly be demanded, How this Passe-ouer could
be a Sacrament, when as even the beasts of the Israelites had benefit by it;
for, they were spared by reason of this sprinkling of the blood of the Paschall
Lamb? Answer. That hinders not why it should not be a Sacrament. For, we must
consider this Passe-ouer two ways: First, as a means of temporal
deliverance; and so the beasts had benefit by it. Secondly, as a sign and
seal of our spiritual deliverance from hell by the sacrifice of the Lamb of
God Jesus Christ, which is the thing signified; and so it is a Sacrament for
man's salvation: and thus the beasts had no benefit by it. The water that flowed
from the rock in the wilderness, 1. Cor. 10.4. Numb. 20.11.
was a Sacrament, and the beasts drank of the water, but yet they did not
partake of the Lords Sacrament: for, we must consider that water two ways;
first, as a means to quench thirst, and consequently as an outward benefit to
preserve the life of the creature, and so the beasts had a benefit by it: but
consider it as a sign and seal of the water of life, and so their beasts had
no benefit by it, but only the believing people.

It follows; Should touch them. Here is the very use and end of both the
former actions; That the angel might not hurt them, but pass by the Israelites
houses. Here consider a notable point, concerning Christ, the true Passover:
namely, that they which have their hearts sprinkled with his blood, shall be
preserved from everlasting damnation; and not only so, but hereby they shall
have deliverance from all temporal judgments in this life, so far forth as
they are curses, and hurtful unto the^. So we may read, before the destruction
came to the city of the Jews, the angel of God went through the city with a
writers ink-horne, Ezekiel. 9.4.
to set a mark upon those that did mourn and cry for their sins. And David
says, the righteous man stands upon a rock, Psalm. 32.7.
so as the floods of many waters shall not come near him. This is a point of
great use: and the consideration hereof, should move all persons that have
been careless in religion, now to become careful and desirous to have their
hearts washed in the blood of Christ: and those also which have any care, must
have double care hereof; for they have freedom and security, both in
temporal, and eternal judgments.

Object. But many of Gods dear children are taken away in common judgments.
Answ. True: but yet they are never hurt thereby; but the judgment and
affliction is sanctified unto them, because they have their hearts sprinkled
with the blood of Christ. And as for those whom God knows it good for, they
are delivered in general judgments, and preserved for his glory, and use of
the Church.

But how did the Angel destroy the first born in Egypt, both of man and beasts?
Answ. By taking from them their temporal lives, by destroying or killing their
bodies. That is the sense, and plain meaning of the holy Ghost: and to this
signification answers the word in the original. Now some do abuse this
place, and such like, for the overthrowing of the ancient ce^sure of the church
in exco^municatio^: for (say they) the practice of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 5, is the
principal ground of excommunication; where Paul bids that the incestuous man
be given to Satan for the destruction of the flesh. Now, they that deny
excommunication, would have that place to be interpreted by this, because the
same word is there used: and therefore (say they) Paul's words must be
understood, of destroying the incestuous man's body, and taking away his
temporal life. This interpretation does quite overthrow excommunication: for,
if nothing else be there understood, but only the tormenting of the body, then
excommunication is not thence proved. But the truth is, that that censure
which the Apostle urges there, cannot be understood of the punishment of the
body: which I prove thus. In that place S. Paul opposes the flesh and the
spirit. Now usually, when he makes this opposition, Flesh signifies the
Corruption of the whole man; and the Spirit signifies the grace of God in the
man: so that his plain meaning is this, Let him be delivered to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh; that is, for the destruction of his natural
corruption, and of the body of sin.

Further, where it is said, the first borne; we must understand it of the
first borne among the Egyptians, both of man and beast. And whereas he says,
should touch them; he means the Israelites, who were not touched in this
destruction.

Hence we learn two points further. 1 The first borne of Egypt are destroyed,
both of man and beasts. This is markeable: for the Egyptians in former times
destroyed the Israelites children, and especially their first borne; for they
slew all the males, lest they should increase in their land: and now it comes
to pass, that their children, even the principal of them, their first borne
are slain for the Israelites sake; and when they are preserved. Where we may
observe a most righteous, and yet an usual kind of judgment with God. He
does often punish the wicked in their kind, with their own sins: This is
true even in the best, so far forth as they are sinful. The same injury
which David did to Vriah, was done unto him, by his own son, even by his
son Absolon, 2. Sam. 10. v. 10, 11. and 16.22. And this, our Savior Christ
teaches us, saying; (Math. 7.1.) Judge not, that ye be not judged. We find
this true likewise by experience: they that give themselves to backbiting,
railing, and slaundering, by the just judgment of God, have for the most part
the same done unto themselves by others; so that men are often punished in
their own sins. For, God has his storehouse full of judgments, and he
can punish men what way he will. But he often observes this order, to punish
men by their own sins, and to catch the wicked in their own devises.

This must be a motive to make us to look unto our selves, and to have care
against all sins of the second table; for, look wherein thou take thy
pleasure to Gods dishonor, therein shall thou feel and see Gods judgment
upon thee, to thy correction and confusion. Psalm. 109.17, As he loved cursing,
so shall it come unto him; and as he loved not blessing, so shall it be far
from him. This, Adonibezek felt and confessed, when his thumbes were cut off,
Judge. 1.6, 7, As I have done, so God has rewarded me.

Lastly, in that the destroyer kills the first borne of Egypt, mark a
strange kind of Gods judgments. King Pharaoh and his people sin, because
they will not let the Israelites go; but the punishment of their sin, is laid
upon their children and cattle. The like we read of 2. Sam. 12.14, when
David had committed those grievous sins of adultery and murder, a part of
his punishment was the death of his child. When he numbered the people, the
plague light on them, 2. Sam. 24. Now we must not too curiously pry into the
reason of this course of Gods judgments: for he is not bound to give account
of his actions, and yet in reason we may see the equity thereof. For, we must
consider of kingdoms and societies, and of towns and families, as of bodies:
every society is a body, and the particular persons therein, are members of
that body. Now, look, as it is in the natural body; so it is in the body
civil or politic. Oftentimes in the natural body, when the stomach is
sick, the head aketh; the brain is wounded, and the heart aketh; the foot is
hurt, and the head aketh; and the offense of the tongue may be punished with
stripes upon the back: Even so it is in civil societies, the Prince sins,
and the people are punished; or, the people sin, and the Prince is punished.
This is no injustice with God: for since Prince and people make but one body,
and so Parents and children; God may justly lay upon any member, the temporal
punishment of sin committed by another. And thus much of this example; and of
the faith of Moses alone.

The Israelites Faith.
VERSE 29. By faith, they passed through the red sea, as by dry land: which,
when the Egyptians had assayed to do, they were drowned.


HItherto we have heard the faith of Moses alone, highly commended, in two
examples. Now follows a commendation of his faith with others: so that here
is a new example of faith; to wit, of the Israelites together with Moses. For,
Moses is here to be considered not only as one of them, but as a principal
agent in this work of faith. And here their faith is commended unto us by a
wonderful strange action, which they did, through the power and goodness of
God: namely, by their passing through the red sea; not by passing over it: for,
that might have been by Art; but through it: which is above nature and Art,
and merely miraculous. This fact of theirs is largely set down, Exodus 14. And,
that it might appear to be every way wonderful as it is indeed, the Author of
this Epistle commends it by two circumstances; which notably set forth unto us
the strangeness hereof. First, by their manner how they passed through;
namely, as by dry Land. Secondly, by ye time when; namely then, when the
Egyptians following the^, were drowned. Here first we will speak of the fact
it self, and then of the circumstances.

The fact is set down in the first words; By faith they passed through the red
sea. The words are plain of themselves; and offer unto us sundry points worthy
our observation. And first, it may be asked, who they were that here passed
through, by faith? The answer is, the Israelites. Exodus 14 11, 12.
But some will say, we read in the History, that when the people came to the
red sea, they were wonderfully afraid, and murmured against Moses; saying,
That it had been better for them to have lived in the bondage of Egypt, then
to come into the Desert and there die. Now, how can they murmr impatiently
and fearfully, and yet pass through by faith? Answer. At the first indeed
they murmured, when they saw the danger they were in, having the huge Army of
Pharaoh following them, and the red sea before them, and hills and mountains
on each side. But howsoever they murmured at the first, yet when Moses spoke
words of comfort unto them in the name of the Lord, bidding them not to be
afraid, etc; and when he held up his rod, and entered into the red sea before
them, then they followed him by faith: and hereupon the holy Ghost gives unto
them the title of true believers.

Here we may learn, that true faith in Gods children, is mingled with
unbelief. The Israelites faith was true faith, but yet it was very imperfect
and weak: for, if it had been perfect and sound faith, they would never have
murmured, nor have been impatient and fearful. But look as it is in nature,
so it is in grace. In nature we cannot pass from one contrary to another, but
by the mixture of the contraries: As, in light and darkness, the one does not
follow the other immediately; but first, there is a mixture of them both in the
dawning of the day, and closing of the night: and so it is in other contraries,
even in those which concern the soul: Unbelief is a sin; faith is a virtue
and grace contrary to it. Now unbelief cannot be expelled by faith, before
there be a mixture of them both, and so when faith prevails, unbelief
decays; neither can faith be ever perfect, because it is ever mingled more or
less with unbelief.

This plainly overthrows the opinion of the Church of Rome, who say, that
after a man is regenerate, and believes, there is nothing in him that God can
hate. For they imagine that he is so thoroughly sanctified, that there is
nothing in him which may properly be called a sin: but here we see their
doctrine is false, seeing faith and unbelief are always mingled together.

Secondly, as it falls out with faith, so it is with the rest of Gods graces:
look as faith is not perfect, but mixed with unbelief, so are all other
graces of God whatsoever. The fear of GOD is not perfect in a man nor the love
of God: for, the fear of GOD is mingled with the fear of men; and the fear
of GOD for his mercy, is mingled with the fear of GOD for his judgments. And
hereby many are deceived; for when they fear GOD for his punishments, they
think themselves to be most miserable and void of grace: but they deceive
themselves. For there is no man upon the earth that fears GOD only for his
mercies, and does not fear GOD also for his punishments in part; for Gods
graces in this life are ever mingled with their contraries. And therefore to
imagine that a man may fear GOD for his mercies only, and not for judgments
also, is to conceive of such a man as none is, nor can be in this life; for the
best fear that is in any man living, is a mixed fear.

Further, when Moses had spoken words of comfort unto them, the unbelieving and
fearful Israelites, do stir up their hearts to believe. So we accordingly
must labor and strive against that inbred unbelief which is in us: for every
man has innumerable sins in him that resist faith; and if they be not
checked and suppressed, they will master his faith: but he that would have
faith to continue and last, must strive against natural unbelief, as the
Israelites do in this place; and as the man in the Gospel, Mark. 9.24. when he
said to Christ, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, knowing that his unbelief
did suppress his faith. And so did the Disciples of our Savior Christ; when
they prayed, Lord increase our faith, Luke 17.5. And David, being oppressed
with deadness of heart, stirs up his faith, saying; Why art thou cast down,
my soul? etc. wait on God, Psalm. 42. v. 11. For, he that has faith, is
troubled with unbelief; and the more it troubles him, the less he believes,
unless he strive against it manfully.

2. Quest. But how many of the Israelites believed, and went over by faith?
Ans. Not all: for Paul says, With many of them God was not well pleased; for
they were overthrown in the wilderness: 1. Cor. 10.5. Which shows, that all
that passed over had not true faith; for, some believed: and by the force of
their faith all went over safely.

Hence we note this (which has been often taught us) that an ungodly man
receives many temporal benefits, by the society of Gods people which believe:
as here the unbelieving Israelites had this benefit, to go through the red
sea safely, by reason of those that believed. And in the former example, the
brute beasts were freed from killing by the Angel, because they belonged to the
host of the Lords people. Now, shall a brute beast have benefit, by being with
GODs people, and shall not a man much more? Yes undoubtedly: for, so we may
read, that for Paul's sake, all the Mariners and Soldiers that were in the
Ship, were saved from drowning. Act. 27.24. This point must persuade every
one of us, to make choice of the godly for our society, and company, with whom
we live and converse; for, by them we reap many benefits, and freedom also
from many heavy judgments.

The third point is this: When did the Israelites believe? This circumstance is
worth the marking: They believed when they passed through the red sea; for,
they believed not only in general, that GOD was their GOD, as he had
promised to their fathers: but they believed, that GOD would be with them, and
give them life in the middle of the red sea. A notable point. They believed
(as it were) in the middle of their graves (for so might the red sea be well
called) that GOD would give them life everlasting, and preserve them safely
through the sea, and from their enemies.

In their example we are taught the same duty, to do as they here did. The
child of GOD in this life has innumerable causes of desperation: and
sometimes his own conscience will take part with Satan, in charging the soul
to be in state of damnation. In this heavy case, what must be done? Surely,
at this time, when a man is a castaway in himself, he must even then believe;
being in hell (as it were) he must believe that God will bring him to heaven.
It is nothing for a man to believe in prosperity, and peace; but in time of
desperation to believe, that is a most worthy faith: and indeed, then is the
right time for a man to show his faith, when there is in himself no cause of
believing. Object. But when a man is in this case, he cannot believe. Answ.
Indeed to believe then, is a wonderful hard thing, and a miracle of miracles:
But yet this is the property of true faith, so to do; and if there be but
one dram of true faith in the heart that despaires, howsoever it may for a
time lie hid, as dead: yet at the length it will make him to hope, and wait
for mercy and life at the hands of Almighty GOD. And therefore, if it shall
please GOD at any time to lay a torment upon our consciences, so as we shall
strive with the wrath of GOD, thinking that he has cast us away; yet for all
that, then we must believe GODs promises, and set before us his mercies, and
therewith refresh us. And if this faith were not, the child of GOD many sundry
times were in a most miserable case; the Lord therefore has most mercifully
provided to help him, by the grace of faith. When a man is past all hope of
life, he must then believe and hope for life, as the Israelites did in the red
sea, for preservation. And undoubtedly, this is a comfortable sign of grace,
if a man in the horror of conscience, can show forth the least spark of true
faith.

Fourthly, note the effect and issue of this faith. They passed through the red
sea. We say usually, that water and fire be unmerciful creatures; and
therefore the natural man fears them both: but the Israelites faith, makes
them not to fear the water; but it makes them bold, even to pass thorough the
sea. The like we may see for fire, in the 3. children, Dan. 3.16.23; who were
not afraid of the hot burning oven, but were as bold in it, as out of it.
Ravenous and wild beasts are terrible unto men; but faith makes a man not to
fear them: and therefore Daniel fears not the Lions, though he were thrown
into their den to be devoured, Dan. 6.22. Great is the fruit and force of
faith: it takes from a man the fear of those creatures, which by nature are
most terrible. And here we see a cause, why the holy Martyrs of God died most
cheerfully. A man would think it strange, that one should go into the fire,
rejoicing, as many of them did: but the reason is, Because they had faith in
their hearts, which takes away the fear of the most fearful creatures.

But if it be so (may some say) that the Israelites by faith went through the red sea, not fearing the water; why may not we that believe, now do the
same? for we have the same faith that they had. Answ. We have indeed the
same faith, and yet we cannot pass through waters as they did. For, their
faith rested on two promises: first, on this made to Abraham, I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed; Secondly, on a particular promise made to Moses.
For, when he commanded him to go through the red sea; withal he made a
promise, to keep and preserve them: and this they believed, and so went
through. Now, howsoever we have justifying faith, having the same general
promise; yet we have not the like particular promise, That if we pass through
the red sea, God will be with us and save us. And therefore, if any man shall
adventure to do so, let him look for nothing but death; for, it is not an
action of faith, but of presumption. And therefore Peter sunk, when he would
needs walk unto Christ upon the sea, having no such hold upon Gods special
promise, as here they had: and the Egyptians following presumptuously were
drowned. Wherefore, let us here be warned, not to attempt to do extraordinary
works, without Gods special warrant: for, a particular faith, requires a
particular promise, besides the general promise of God in Christ.

Further, let us here observe a wonderful work of Gods mercy and power. When
these servants of God were brought into extremity of danger, so as they were
in a desperate case for their temporal life; yet then the Lord finds a way of
deliverance. And indeed, if a man consider aright of it, he must needs
acknowledge that these Israelites were in a pitiful case; for, they had the
red sea before them, and mountains on each side, and themselves hindered from
flight, by their bag and baggage, and with their children, and the huge host
of Pharaoh behind them; so as to man's reason, there was nothing but present
death to be looked for: yet the Lord in mercy to save them, makes a way where
there was no way, and opens them a gappe to life, when natural reason could
lay* before them nothing but violent death. Which shows the wonderful mercy
of God, to his own people and servants. And the like thing we may read of in
David, when he abode in the wildernes^e of Maon: for there Saul followed him,
and he and his men compassed David and his men round about, 1. Sam. 23.26, 27.
Now, what hope of deliverance was there for David? Ans. Surely this only: David
was the servant of God, and the Lord preserved him, that he might rule his
people after Saul's death; and therefore he escapes, though wonderfully: for, a
messenger comes to Saul and bids him haste, for the Philistims invaded the
Land; and so Saul returned from pursuing David, and went against the Philistims.

Hence we learn this general rule, that in the extremity of all danger, God
has means to preserve and save his own children and people. Which must teach
us, to commend our case to GOD, and to rest on him in all dangers; for, when
our case is desperate in our sight, then are we fittest for Gods help. Let us
therefore in such cases, learn to practice our faith; and then especially to
cast our selves upon GOD. This, Iehosaphat did most notably: for, being
assaulted with the huge armies of the Moabites, Ammonites, etc. he prayed unto
the Lord most fervently, saying; 2. Chron. 20.12, Lord, there is no strength in
us, we know not what to do; but our eyes are toward thee: and, thus doing,
was preserved; for, God will in no extremity forsake them that trust in him.

The red sea.] In many places of the old testament, it is called the sea of
rushes, Psalm. 106.7, 9. Or, the sea of sedges, Ier. 49.21. It is a corner of
the Arabian sea, that parts Egypt and Arabia. Those, which have seen it in
travel, say, it has no other color than all other seas have; Why then is it
called the red sea? Answ. To omit many supposed causes hereof, there be two
especially, for which it is so called. 1 Because of the red sand; for both the
bottom of the sea, and the shore, are full of redder sand, than ordinarily
is elsewhere. 2 Some think it is called the red sea, by reason of the
sedges and bul-rushes which, grow much at the sea side, and be of a red
color; which, by reflection, may make the same color appear on the water.
But this need not to trouble any man: for the holy Ghost uses the same name,
which commonly the men of that country gave unto it. And thus much of their
fact, that they by faith passed through the red sea. Now we come to the two
circumstances, whereby it is commended.

The first circumstance is, the manner of their going through the red sea: they
went through as on dry land. This must not be conceived to be, by help of
bridge or ship, nor by means which men use, as swimming, failing, or wading;
but their passage was miraculous: for, the waters stood like walls on both
sides of them. And the channel of the sea was as a pauement or dry land; Exodus
14.22. which notably sets forth the strangeness of this fact, showing that
it was a wonderful work of God. And this also confuteth certain enemies of
the Scripture, who have cauilled at all the miracles which are recorded
therein: accounting of Moses but as a Magician and Sorcerer, and of the
miracles which he did, as of illusions: and for this miracle they make no
account of it; for (say they) Moses being a great scholar, and a wise man,
knew the time of the rise and fall of the waters, and knew the fords and
shallowe places: therefore he took his time, and found a place so shallow, that
when the tide was past, the sands were bare and dry (as the marshes in England
are) and then he led the host of Israel through. But Pharaoh and his host
following them, were drowned, because they went through at the flowing of the
sea? Ans. Whereas they say that this their passage was no miracle, here we see
it is overthrown by this circumstance of the manner of their passing over: for,
the bottom of the sea was as a pauement, and as ground on which no waters fall.
Now, in most places of the sea, where the waters ebb and flow, the ground is
never fully dry, but watery and full of moist places.

Again, the waters passed not away as at an ebb, but stood as walls on each
side of the host of Israel, both on the right hand and on the left: both
which show plainly, Exodus 14.^^*
there was no vantage taken by the ebbing and flowing of the water (as ungodly
Atheists do cavil, deriding Gods works to their own destruction) but a mighty
and miraculous work of God, first making the waters stand like two walls, and
then making the earth under it firm and dry, contrary to nature in them both.

The 2. circumstance is, concerning the time when they passed through; even,
then when the Egyptians assaying to do the same, were drowned. Mark the
words; for the thing is strange. The Egyptians come armed after the Israelites,
with a huge great Army. Now, the Israelites they take into the sea; and the
Egyptians seeing them, stand not still upon the bank, but adventure after
them, not by ship, but the same way that the Israelites took before them: but
yet without any warrant or commandment from God: so great was their malice
against them; and yet a man would have thought they durst never have adventured
into the sea after them, especially as they did.

Here, by this fact of Pharaoh and his men, we learn, that when God forsakes a
man, and leaves him to himself, he does nothing else but run headlong to his
own destruction. God (as Moses says) raised up Pharaoh to show his power upon
him: and now it pleases God to leave him to himself, and he pursues the
Israelites to his own destruction. And this is the course and state of all
those that are forsaken of God* The consideration whereof must teach us a
special clause to be used of us in our prayers: we must ever remember to pray
for this, That God would never wholly forsake us, nor cast us off. This
condition is more fearful than the estate and condition of any creature in
the world besides: for when God forsakes a man; all that he does, is hastening
himself to his own destruction. David knew this well, and therefore he
prays, Oh, knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy name, Psalm. 86.11.
And again, he prays that the Lord would not forsake him ouer-long, Psalm.
119.8; as if he should say, if it be thy pleasure to try me by leaving me to my
self: yet, O Lord let it be but for awhile, forsake me not ouer-long. This is
the scope of the sixth petition, Lead us not into temptation: where we are
taught to pray, that God would not forsake us, or leave us to our selves; or to
the power of Satan; but that he would be with us, and show his power in our
weakness continually. And this may enforce us unto this petition: for, the
consideration, That men forsaken of GOD, do nothing but work their own
destruction, is many times a cause of great trouble of mind. For, some
desiring to see such as hang or drown themselves, by beholding of them get
this conceit into their heads, that God will likewise forsake them as he has
done these whom they behold, and so shall they make away themselves; whence
follows great trouble, and anguish of soul for a long time. Now, how must a
man or woman in this case help themselves? Answer. The best way is, by prayer
to crave at Gods hands, that he would ever be with them, and never wholly
forsake them. And further, this must be remembered withal, that GOD will never
forsake any of his servants before they first forsake him: and therefore they
that can say truly and unfeignedly, that they desire to serve God, and to be his
servants, and seek this blessing by prayer, they may stand fast on this
ground, that God will never forsake them, till they first forsake him. And
therefore Azariah the Prophet says notably to King Asa, 2. Chron. 15.2, The
Lord will be with you while you be with him; and if ye seek him, he will be
found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. And James says,
Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you, James 4.8. It was never heard
that God did ever forsake any that did seek him. And if the causes were known
why men make away themselves, it would prove (generally) to be thus; because
they first by some fearful sins have forsaken God, and then he in his Justice
forsakes them. And therefore they that are troubled with this temptation, must
pray that they may stick fast unto God by faith and holiness: and so will ^e
never forsake them.

Secondly, in this circumstance, that the Egyptians following the Israelites,
were drowned, we have a notable pattern of the state and condition of all
persecuters of Gods church. In Pharaoh and his host we may see their end,
which is usually destruction: that is their reward for persecuting Gods Church.
Cain slaies Abell that notable servant of GOD: but his reward was this, he was
cast forth of Gods Church, Genesis 4.11.13* and stricken in Gods just judgment
with final desperation. Saul persecuted David: but his end was to kill
himself with his own sword, 1. Samuel 30.4. And Iesabell she persecutes the
Prophets and children of God: but her end was this, 2. Kings 9.35.36.
the dogs did eat her flesh. The whole stock of the Herod's were great enemies
to Christ: But their name was soon rooted out; and Herod, called Agrippa, that
slew James, Acts 12.23.
and persecuted Peter, was eaten up of worms. Many great Emperors in the
primative Church were persecuters: but they died desperately. And Julian, for
one, once a Christian, died blaspheming Christ; and, casting his blood up
toward heaven, cried, Thou have overcome o Galilean, thou have overcome. And
to come nearer these times; what reward from God the persecuters of the Church
have had, we may read in the book of Acts and monuments, which was penned for
that purpose. And to come to these our days, the whole band of those that call
themselves leaguers, in France, Italy, Spain, etc. like the Tabernacles of
Edom and the Ismaelites, Moab, and the Agarims, etc. Psalm. 83.5, 6, they vow
the destruction and persecution of Gods Church: but yet Gods Church stands; and
he so co^triues the matter, that they draw swords against themselves, and slay
and poison one another. Herein does God graciously make good his promise to his
Church, that the weapons made against her shall not prosper. Isa. 54.17.
And Zachary 12.3, there is a prophecy of ye Church in the new Testament: the
Lord says, He will make Jerusalem (that is his Church) an heavy stone; for all
people that lift it up shall be torn, though all the people of the earth be
gathered against it: where the Prophet sets down, notably, what shall be the
condition of those that persecute Gods Church: the more they persecute her, the
more they shall have Gods hand against them to confound them. Dan. 2.34, there
is mention made of a stone hewn out of a rock without hands, which smote the
image upon the feet, which were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces. By
that stone, is meant the kingdom of Christ, which shall dash in pieces the
kingdoms of the earth, which set themselves against Christ, and his kingdom.
For, Christ must reign till he have put all his enemies under his feet: so
that destruction is the end of the enemies of Gods Church. For, the hand of
the Lord shall be known among his servants, and his indignation against his
enemies, Isay, 66.14. And thus much of the 2. circumstance.

Now, in this whole fact of the Israelites passing thorough the red sea,
toward the Land of Canaan, there is a notable thing signified; namely,
Baptism. So Paul says, The Israelites were baptized unto Moses in the sea, 1.
Cor. 10.2. Yet we must remember, it was not ordinary Baptism, but
extraordinary; never administered before, and never shall be so again, for ought
we know. The Minister of this Baptism, was Moses; an extraordinary Minister,
as the Baptism was extraordinary. The outward sign was the red sea; or
rather, the water of the red sea. The departing of the children of Israel out
of Egypt thorough the red sea, signifies the departing of the children of
GOD out of the kingdom of darkness, from the power of sin and Satan. And the
drowning of Pharaoh, with all his host in the red sea, signified the
subduing of the power of all spiritual enemies, with the pardon and death of
sin; which stands partly in the abolishing of sin, and partly in newness
of life. And to this alludeth the Prophet Micah, saying; He will subdue our
iniquities, and cast all their sins into the bottom of the sea: Micah, 7.19.
As if he should say, Look as God subdued Pharaoh, and all his host, in the
bottom of the sea; so will he cast, and put away the sins of his people.

From this we learn two points: 1 That the Baptism of infants has warrant in
Gods word, howsoever some me^ be of a contrary opinion: for, here we see all
the Israelites were baptized in the sea; and among them no doubt were many
children. If it be said, this baptism was extraordinary, and is no ground for
ours; Answ. True: it was extraordinary for the manner; but yet herein, the
matter and substance, and the thing signified is ordinary, and the end all one
with ours: and therefore the baptizing of infants in the red sea, is some
warrant for the baptism of infants in the Church now adays.

Secondly, here we may learn another instruction. As the Israelites went
through the red sea (as through a grave) to the promised land of Canaan; so we
must know, that the way to the spiritual Canaan, even the kingdom of heaven,
is by dying unto sin. This is a special point to be considered of every one
of us: we profess our selves to be Christians, we hear Gods word, and
receive the sacraments, which are the outward badges of Christians, and we
persuade our selves of life everlasting after death: well, if we would have that
to be the end of our journey, then we must take the Lords plain way in this
life; which is, to die unto all our sins. So it is said, they which are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof:
where, this duty is enjoined to every Christian; he must crucify the lusts
and affections of the flesh, and not live in sin. For, a man cannot walk in
sin, and so run the broad way to hell, and yet wait for the kingdom of
heaven; these two will not stand together: and therefore, if we would walk
worthy the calling of Christianity, we must have care that all our sins,
whether they be of heart or life, little or great, new or old, may be
mortified and abolished. Many will for a time become civil, and seem to be
religious, especially when they are to receive the Lords supper; but when that
time of the sacrament is past, then they return to their old custom in
sinning again: whereby it appears, that their change was but in show, to blind
the eyes of men. And do we not each Sabbath profess our selves good
Christians, and seem to glory in it, by keeping this day with such solemnity?
But alas! as soon as that day is past, many (and some even this day) run
into all riot. This is not Christianity; this is not the way to heaven: but, if
ever we think to come to Canaan, we must kill and bury our sins, we must die
unto them; or else we shall never come to the end of Christianity: namely,
eternal life. And thus much of this circumstance, and also of the example it
self.

Iosuahs Faith.
VERSE 30. By faith, the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed
about seven days.


FRom the beginning of this chapter, to this 30. verse, we have heard two sorts
of examples of faith: the first, of believers from the beginnning of the world
to the flood. The second, of such as were from the time of the floode, to the
giving of the Law in Mount Sina: and of both these, we have hitherto
entreated. Now here, and s^ forward to the end of this chapter, is set down a
third order of examples of faith; namely, of such as lived from the time of the
giving of the Law, to the time of the reign of the Maccabees.

This 30. verse contains the first example of this rank; namely, the example
of Iosuahs faith, and of those that went with him into Canaan. And their faith
is commended unto us by a notable fact of theirs; the causing to fall the walls
of Jericho: the History whereof we may read at large, Iosuah 6. The sum of
it is this; Whereas the Israelites came unto Canaan, and could not enter into
the Land, by reason of the strength of Jericho, by which they must needs pass,
nor could win it by reason of the huge walls of Jericho; the Lord promises to
deliver Jericho into their hands: only the people must do this; they must
compasse-about the walls seven days, and carry the Ark of the Lord with
them, sounding with Rams horns, and showte, and so the walls should fall
down. Now, the Lord having made this promise unto them; the Israelites, and
specially Iosuah, obey his commandment, and believe his promise: and thus
doing, by faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were
compassed-about seven doyes. Indeed the power of GOD was the principal cause
of this ruin of the walls: but yet because upon their believing, GOD showed
this power, therefore is the downfall of them ascribed to their faith.

Here are many notable points to be learned. 1. Whereas the Text says, By
faith the walls of Jericho fell down; we may observe the wonde^full power of
true faith. Iosuah and the Israelites believed Gods promises, that he would
ouerturne the walls of Jericho: and as they believed, so it came to pass. So
our Savior Christ says, Matthew 17.20, If a man had but as much faith as a
grain of mustard seed, he shall say unto the mountain, remove hence, and it
shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible unto him: signifying, that by the
power of true faith, such things as are impossible to man's reason, shall be
brought to pass, if God have promised them; as we see in this place, the
mighty walls of Jericho fall down by faith, which to man's reason is
impossible. So, the Lord promised to Abraham, That he should be the Father of
many Nations: yea, Genesis 17.2. and 18.18.
that all the Nations of the earth should be blessed in him. This was strange;
but Abraham believed it: and as he believed, so it came to pass; for, many
Nations descended from him: and after the time of Christ's ascension, when all
the Nations of the world were called to the light of the Gospel, they were
blessed in Christ, the promised Seed of Abraham: and therefore is he called
the Father of the faithful in all Nations. And to come unto our selves: To
miserable men it may seem a strange thing, that the power of the devil and
the strength of the flesh, should be overcome in us: yet let a man believe this
promise of God; God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son,
that who so believed in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, John
3.16: I say, let him believe this effectually, and he shall find by faith the
Kingdom of sin and Satan, in his heart and conscience, weakened every day
more and more. And therefore S. John says not without cause, This is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, 1. John 5.4.

2. Here observe, that among the causes of the change and overthrow of Towns,
Cities, and Kingdoms, this is one; namely, faith in Gods promises. Many men
have written of the change of Kingdoms, and do give diverse reasons thereof: But
most of them omit the principal, and that is faith; by virtue whereof many
times Kingdoms and Towns are brought to ruin and overthrow. God promised to
Abraham and to his seed, that he would give the^ the land of Canaan for their
inheritance: now, they believed this promise, and here we see it comes to
pass as they believed; Jericho by faith is ouerturned and the rest of their
Cities, and the people of Canaa^ dispossessed. So that we see, faith in Gods
promises, is a means to Gods people, to ouerturn cities and kingdoms, that are
enemies to Christ and to his Gospel. God has made a promise unto his Church,
that the whore of Babylon, Revel. 18.2, that is, the Kingdom of Antichrist
shall flourish for a while, but after it shall be destroyed; yea, such a ruin
shall come unto it, that the Kings of the earth, and all great men and
Merchants shall bewail the destruction thereof. Now, this promise being
received by faith, and believed of Gods Church, shall undoubtedly come to
pass. It is in some part verified already (for we see, some Kingdoms and
people have renounced the cursed Doctrine and tyranny of Rome; and many
Christian Princes have already shaken off the Popes yoke) yea, and this
promise shall come to pass daily more and more. Let all the Kings of that sort
do what they can, and let the people set themselves never so much against Gods
Church, yet Babylon shall down: for, God has promised so to his Church, and
his Church believes the same; and therefore by their faith it shall be brought
to pass, in despite of the devil.

Thirdly, here we learn, that when any City, Town, or Kingdom, is to make
war either in defense of themselves, or in lawful assault upon their
enemies; a special means for good success herein is true faith. Christian
policy is a commendable thing in this case: but if policy be severed from
faith, it is nothing. Faith in Gods promises of protection and assistance, does
far surpass all worldly wisdom. And therefore good King Iehosaphat, when
he was to fight against the huge Armies of the Moabites, and Ammonites, gives
this counsel to his people, 2, Chron. 20.20, Put your trust in the Lord your
God, and ye shall be assured: Believe his Prophets, and ye shall prosper*
giving a most notable instruction, and showing that the best help for our
defense, is faith in God, whereby we rest upon his word and promise, that he
will help us: yet this takes not away the use of means, but it gives the
blessing and efficacy unto them. Ephe. 6.16.
Faith, we know, is called a shield, among the spiritual armor of God,
whereby a man awards the blows of Satan: and though that be the principal
virtue of it, yet is it also a notable shield to defend men, even against their
outward and visible enemies, and a most strong engine aginst the^, to work
their overthrow. Hence David says, He will not be afraid for ten thousand of
the people, that should beset him round about. Psalm. 3.6.
They therefore that would defend themselves against their enemies (yea, and
overcome them in lawful assault) must embrace and obey true religion; and with
Christian policy, ioyn faith in Gods promises: for, by faith we make God our
Captain, and through him we shall do valiantly, and beat down our enemies on
every side.

Lastly, here we may learn, what a vain thing it is to trust in outward
worldly means. The walls of Jericho were both strong and high, and hard it had
been to have overthrown them by ordinary means: but yet we see, it proved
but a vain thing to trust unto them, as the men of Jericho did; for, they
found but little relief and defense in them: for, the Lord lays them flat to
the ground; Josh. 6.20.
and so the people of Israel went straight forward and took the City. So
likewise it is a vain thing to trust to man's strength, or in the strength of
an horse, or in the number of men, or in riches, or in gifts of wisdom and
learning, or in any other outward ordinary means whatsoever: the reason is,
because God can ouerturne them with the least breath of his mouth.

This must admonish us, that howsoever, we use ordinary means of our
preservation and help, yet ever we must cast our whole care on GOD, and put
all our confidence in him for help and safety: for, without him all other
outward means are nothing but vain helps; For, vain is the help of man. And
thus much for the fact it self.

Further, this fact is set out unto us by two circumstances; to wit, by the
means which they used, and by the time which they observed for this exploit.
For the first; when they come to Jericho, this strong City, which they must
needs subdue (or else they could not this way enter and possess the Land,
they do not go about to ouerturne the City by undermining, battering, or
scaling the walls; but, according to Gods appointment, they go one by one in
order round about the City walls day by day for one week space: and on the
seventh day, they compass it seven times; during all which time they kept
great silence, save only that seven Priests sounded upon seven trumpets of
Rammes-hornes before the Arc, till Iosuah bade them shout. Now, in common
reason, a man would judge this rather to be some childish sport, then a means
to fling down these great walls. Nay, consider it well, and it may seem a
course tending rather to overthrow themselves, then the walls of Jericho: for,
they marched not in battle ray, as though they would pitch a field against the
people of Jericho, or lay siege to their City; but they went in length one
before another, so as they might compass the City about. Now, if the men of
Jericho should have come forth, and made assault upon them, in all likelihood
the Israelites had been overthrown; so weak and feeble were the means. And
yet the Lord for weighty causes, prescribes this course unto them: to wit, 1.
Heerby to try the faith of his people, whether they will believe his promises
or no, when they are enjoined to use weak and feeble means, and in man's
reason foolish.

Secondly, to make manifest in the weakness and insufficiency of the means,
his own all-sufficient power and wisdom, for the furtherance of his glory:
for, through weakness is Gods power made perfect, 2. Corinthians chapter 12.
verse 9. Hence, our Savior Christ, when he was to cure the man that was borne
blind, tempers clay of spittle, and lays it to his eyes, John, chapter 9.
verse 6; A means in common reason, rather fit to make a man blind, then to
recover his sight: and yet Christ uses it for the furtherance of Gods glory,
in the manifestation of his Divine power, whereby the people might know he
was able in himself, to do whatsoever he would.

Now, look what course the Lord here takes for the battering of the walls of
Jericho, the like he uses in overthrowing the kingdom of the devil, the
spiritual Jericho; especially in the new testament. For, after Christ's
ascension, when he intended to destroy the Kingdom of darkness, under which
all the nations sat, he sets apart a few fishermen, simple persons, wanting
worldly wit and policy; neither did he put a sword of flesh into their hands,
but the word of God into their mouths: and thus sent them to dispossess the
devil out of all the world, and to batter down the kingdom of darkness by
their preaching. And now in these later days, wherein the Antichristian
kingdom of the Pope had spread it self through all places almost, God used
the same weak means to overthrow it. For, he set apart a silly Monk, and
indues him with gifts to preach the truth: by which means, the kingdom of
Antichrist received a greater wound, than if ten Princes had set themselves
against it. And strange it is to see, how GOD ouerturneth all the stratagems
devised against his Church, and how he vanquisheth the power of sin, by the
weak means of the Gospel preached, and by the prayers of the Church; than
which, to the world nothing seems more feeble or foolish.

The consideration hereof, is of special use: for, it may be, we shall see
Kings, and people of great power and number, to make revolt from the Gospel of
Christ, and to fall to Antichrist, embracing popery: hereat indeed, we must
be grieved, but yet withal, here is good cause of comfort unto us; for we must
know, that Satan's kingdom must be battered down, not so much by the power
of Kings, as by the breath of GODs mouth: not so much by the sword of flesh, as
by the sword of the spirit. So it is said, that the man of sin, even
Antichrist must be abolished: not by the power of Princes; yea, let all the
princes and pote^tates in the world do their best for him, yet his kingdom
must down in Gods good time; for God will consume him with the breath of his
mouth, and abolish him by the brightness of his coming, 2. These. 2.8. that
is, by the preaching of the word, in the mouths of his Ministers, who are men
void of all worldly power and policy.

Yet further, observe the means. They walk about the walls of Jericho seven
days together. If men should attempt the like enterprise at this day, in all
likelihood it would cost them their lives; for, now there are devised such
instruments of war, I mean great ordinance, and field pieces, that will kill
afar off: and undoubtedly, if there had bin such instruments of war in this
city, the Israelites could not so safely have compassed the walls so many
days together. Whereby it appears more than probable, that in those days
there were no gunnes known; no, not amongst the heathen, which at this day are
so rise amongst Christians. Whence may be gathered, that these later days are
perilous times; for now men's heads are set to devise more hurtful means
against the life of man, than ever the savage heathen knew. For, beside the
invention of gunnes, which put down all evidence of prowess and valor, seen
in Ancient wars; our age exceedes in contriuing such strange kinds of
poisons, as were never known in former times. For, men have now devised poison
of that sort, that will kill a man, not presently; but a week, or a month, or
a quarter of a year after: as appears by the confession of those, that have
given themselves to study and practice such hurtful devises. And it is worth
the marking, that the principal inuentors and practicers of such hurtful
inventions, have been of the Romish religion.

The second circumstance to be observed, is the Time of this exploite. It was
not on any of the first six days, but on the seventh; and that after they had
that day compassed the city about seven times: then when the Priests blew the
trumpets, and all the people showted as Iosuah bade them, the walls of Jericho
fell down; for this was the time which God had appointed for this exploit. The
reason why God appointed seven days, and seven times co^passing on the seventh
day, is not revealed unto us in the word of God: and therefore we may not
curiously pry into it, nor yet (as some do) hence gather, that seven is a
perfect number. But from the consideration of the very time wherein the walls
fell down, we may learn this; that if we would have God to accomplish his
promises unto us, we must wait for that time and season which he has
appointed: we must not think that God will accomplish them when we appoint. But
we must believe Gods promise, and also wait his good leisure, and then will it
come to pass. The Israelites compassed about Jericho one day, and the walls
never stir; yea, they do so six days together, and six times more on the
seventh day, and yet they stand fast: The reason is, Because Gods appointed
time was not yet come. But on the seventh day, when they had compassed them
about the seventh time, all the people gave up the showt, and then they fell
down; because that was the particular set time, wherein God would accomplish
his promise.

Further, whereas they compass about the walls seven days together; it must
needs be, that they went about them on the Sabbath day, for that was one of
the seven. Now here a doubt arises: for, this was a servile work upon the
Sabbath, contrary to Gods commandment; which enjoined so strict a rest upon
the Sabbath day, that they might not kindle a fire thereon: how then could
they lawfully compass the city on the Sabbath day? Answ. All Gods
commandments in the moral law, must be understood with this exception; Thou
shall do thus and thus, unless I the Lord command thee otherwise: for, God is
an absolute Lord, and so above the Law; and therefore may lawfully command
that which the Law forbids. In the second commandment he says, Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven image, etc. And yet Moses by Gods special
appointment set up a brazen serpent, which was a figure of Christ. Upon such a
special command, Abraham lawfully offers to kill Isaac; the Israelites at
their departure spoil and rob the Egyptians; and Iosuah with the people,
here compass the walls of Jericho on the Sabbath day.

Rahabs Faith.
VERSE 31. By faith, Rahab the harlot perished not, with them which obeyed not,
when she had received the Spies peaceably.


IN this verse the holy Ghost proceeds further, in declaring the power of
faith; and, for this end, commends unto us the faith of Rahab. The words
contain the sum and abbridgement of the second and sixth chapters of Joshua:
the meaning of them is plain.

The points herein to be considered, are three: 1. The person believing; to
wit, Rahab. 2. The reward of her faith given by Iosuah: She perished not, but
was preserved in the destruction of Jericho. 3. The testimony of her faith, so
called by Saint James, chapter 2. verse 25, and set down in the end of this
verse, When she had received the spies peaceably.

For the person: Rahab was a woman of Canaan, dwelling in Jericho; as we may
read Iosuah 2: there she lived and had her abode: she was no Israelite, but
a forrainer in regard of her birth, and a Stranger from GODs Church. How then
comes it to pass, that she is commended for her faith, and here put into the
Catalogue of these renowned believers? Why are not the rest of the Cananites
preferred to this honor as well as she? Answer. We must know this, that
from the beginning of the world to the time of Christ's ascension, the Church
of God was small; sometime shut up in some few families, as, from the flood,
to the giving of the Law; and after limited to a small Kingdom and people in
the Land of Canaan, where the Lords people dwelt. During which time, all other
Nations and people of the world, besides this little company, were no people of
God, but strangers from the covenant of promise, and (as Pau^ says) Without
God in the world. And howsoever Gods Church was thus shut up, Ephe. 2.12.
as it were in a corner; yet now and then it pleased God to reach out his
merciful hand to some of the heathen, calling them into his Church, and
receiving them into his covenant: and they are called in the new testament,
Proselytes. In Abraham's family, Genesis 17.27.
his bondmen and servants were circumcised, and made members of the Church of
GOD. And in Moses days Iethro Moses father in Law, Exodus 18.1^.12.
a Priest of Midian, obtained this at Gods hands, to be joined unto Gods
Church: and so was Ruth the Moabite, Ruth 1.16: and Naaman the Assyrian, 2.
Kings 5.17: and as some think Nabuchadonozer, Daniel 4.3, but that is not so
certain. And so was the Eunuch of Ethiopia, Candaces the Queen of Ethiopias
chief governor, Acts 8.27. Now, as God in mercy dealt with these, so did he
in like mercy call Rahab the harlot above all the people of Jericho; for, they
trusted to their strong walls, and therefore died; but Rahab believed, that the
God of Israel was the true God, and so had mercy showed unto her. Now, after
the time of Christ's ascension, God dealt more bountifully with the world: for
he sent the light of his Gospel into all Nations; and (as the Scripture says)
their sound went through all the earth, and their words to the ends of the
world, Romans 10.18.

The consideration of this limited estate of the Church of God for so long a
time, serves to discover unto us the error of those that maintain and hold
universal calling of all and every man to the state of grace and salvation:
but if that were so, then in former ages the Gentiles would have believed;
whereas we see, that before the ascension of Christ, the Church of God was but
a small remnant, among the people of the Jews only; and not one of ten
thousand believed among the Gentiles. Now, if all men had been effectually
called, then all would have received the promise of the Gospel; but many
Nations in former ages never heard of Christ: and therefore there was never in
all ages a general effectual calling of all men.

Object. Paul says, God reconciled the world unto himself by Christ, 2. Cor.
5.19: and if that be so, then he called all men effectually? Answer. We must
understand the Apostle according to his meaning: for, Romans 11.15, he expounds
himself, and shows what he means by the world; saying, That the falling away
of the Jews, is the reconciling of the world: which cannot be understood of
men in all the ages; but in the last age of the world after Christ's ascension,
wherein God offered to all the world life everlasting by Christ.

Further, Rahab is here noted by a notorious vice, she is called a harlot;
whereby, she was infamous among the men of Jericho. Certain of the Jews
which are enemies to the new Testament, say, That the Author of this Epistle,
and S. James do great wrong unto Rahab for calling her an harlot; for (say
they) in Iosuah she is called but a Tauerner or Hostess?

Answer. We must know that the word which is used in Iosuah, signifies two
things; a Tauerner and an harlot. Now, take the word properly, as it is
generally used in the old Testament, and then most commonly it is put for an
harlot. And therefore in the new Testament, Rahab has no wrong done her, by
this title. For, it is the thing that Iosuah intended, to show what a one she
had been: and therefore in speaking of her to the spies, he bids them go
into That harlots house, Iosuah 6.22; using such an Article as implies, that
she had been infamous and notorious in that kind. And yet we must not think
that she played the harlot, after she had received grace to believe, but long
before; for, faith purifieth the heart: neither will it suffer any sin to
reign therein. She is called a harlot, therefore, in regard of her life past;
for which, she was infamous among the men of Jericho, before her calling to
the faith.

Quest. How could she believe, being a harlot in former times? for it is said,
That neither fornicators, nor adulterers, shall inherit the Kingdom of
heaven, 1. Cor. 6.9. Answer. That is true according to the Law: but the
Gospel gives this exception, unless they repent. And so are all legal
threatenings to be understood in the word of God.

In this circumstance of the person, and in the quality of her sin, we may
note the endless mercy of God toward sinners; for, he has vouchsafed to call
most notorious and grievous sinners to the state of salvation: as Isay says,
The Lord is very ready to forgive, Isay 55.7: yea, with the Lord is plentiful
redemption, Psalm. 130.7. This appears, by vouchsafing mercy to Rahab a notable
harlot: and as he deals with Rahab here, so has he showed like mercy to
other notorious sinners. King Manasses had sold himself to Idolatry and
witchcraft, and had shed innocent blood exceeding much, and caused Judah to
sin, 2. Kings 21, 6, 16; for which he was led captive: yet when he humbled
himself and prayed, God was entreated of him. 2. Chron. 33.13. And Paul says
of himself; When he was a blasphemer and a persecuter, and an oppresser, he
was received to mercy, though he were the head of all sinners; that Christ
might first show on him all long suffering, unto the example of them, which
shall in time to come believe in him unto everlasting life, 1. Tim. 1, 13, 16.

The consideration of this exceeding mercy of God toward sinners, is of great
use. First, it armeth a poor soul against despair: whereinto the devil
would draw it upon the view of the multitude; and greatness of his sins:
for, many reason thus: My sins are so heinous, so many, and so vile, that I
dare not come to God, neither can I be persuaded of the pardon of them. But
behold here the endless mercy of God, in forgiving sins to them that
repent, though they be like crimson and scarlet, and never so many. This must
comfort the wounded soul, and encourage all touched hearts, to repent, and to
sue to the Lord for mercy and pardon.

Secondly, it must move every one of us now to begin to repent, if we have not
repented heretofore: and, if we have begun, to do it more earnestly; for God
is most merciful, and with him is plentiful redemption. Yet we must beware
that we take not occasion hereby to live in sin, because God is merciful:
for, this is to turn the grace of God into wantonness; which, Saint Jude
makes a brand of the ungodly, Jude 4.
and a sign of the reprobate, who (as the Apostle there says) are appointed
to condemnation: yea, this is a despising of the bountifulness of God, which
should lead them to repentance; and hereby they heap up unto themselves
wrath against the day of wrath, Romans, chapter 2, verses 4, 5. Let us
therefore remember this counsel of Paul, Shall we sin that grace may
abound? God forbid. We must all, but especially young men take heed of this
course: for, if we bless our selves in our heart, and say we shall have
peace, though we live in sin, God will not be merciful unto us, but his wrath
shall smoke against us. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.


Further note, that howsoever she was a sinner, and a most infamous harlot:
yet when she repents, God does honor and grace her with the title of a
believer; and that among those most renowned believers that ever lived before
Christ: even to be one of that cloud of witnesses, Hebr. 12, 1.
in who^ faith is commended to the Church for ever. Hence also it is, Math. 1.5.
that Saint Matthew reckons her in the Genealogy of Christ, to be one of his
predecessors; when as Amasia, Achas, and such like, who (for ought we know)
did never repent, are not once named. Herein we may see Gods wonderful mercy
in honoring sinners, if they do repent. The consideration whereof must move
us, not only to learn the doctrine of Repentance, and to have it in our
mouths, but to labor that it may be settled in our hearts; that we may show
forth the power thereof in our lives. All of us desire honor and reputation
among m^n. Well: if we would be honored indeed, we must repent, and then
God himself will honor us; neither have our sins made us so infamous, as by
our repentance God shall make us honorable.

Further, concerning the party: How could Rahab come by faith? seeing she
lived out of the Church, where the word was never preached unto her.

Answer. If we read the Story, we shall find that she came to believe,
by a report of Gods marvelous acts: Josh. 2.20.
for, when the Lord delivered the Israelites out of Egypt through the red sea,
and drowned Pharaoh therein with all his ^oast* as they went further, he
delivered the Kings of the Nations into their hands: as, Og the King of
Baashan, with the Kings of the Amorites and Amalekites.

Now, the report hereof came to the people of Jericho: whereupon they were
strik^n with a wonderful great fear* And howsoever the men of Jericho made no
other use of it, but to arm and prepare themselves to resist and beat back
the Israelites: yet this report wrought further with Rahab; and therefore she
came to the Spies, whom she had received, and hid upon the roof of her house,
and there confessed the God of Israel to be the true God, in heaven above,
Josh. 29.10, 11.
and in the earth beneath.

Here we may note, that when ordinary means fail, for the beginning and
increase of faith; as the word preached, and the Sacraments: then God can work
faith extraordinarily, even by reports, and rumors. For, thus Rahab, and many
of the heathen came to believe. We say of the Church of Rome, that it is no
true Church, and that their religion cannot save a man: Hereupon, many that
savor that way, reply and say; Will you therefore condemn all your
forefathers, that lived and died in time of Popery? We answer, no: we dare not
give such censure upon them; but rather judge charitably of them: yea, we have
great hope that many of them were saved. For, though they wanted preaching and
reading, yet God might work faith in them extraordinarily, and bless even
good reports and speeches unto them, with the reading of other godly books,
besides Gods word, which some of them had. We need not then give so hard a
censure of them; because God is not tied to ordinary means, but can save
extraordinarily, when means fail.

Further, concerning Rahabs faith, it may be demanded whether it was weak or
strong? because, before she had done this fact of faith, her whole abode was
among the heathen. Answ. We must know, that there is in the child of God a
certain seed, or beginning, or preparation to a true and lively faith; which
our Savior Christ in the Scriptures, does honor with the title of a true and
lively faith: as, when a man knows no more but this, that Christ Jesus is the
true Messiah; having withal, a care and conscience to profit and increase in
the true knowledge of the Gospel, and to join practice therewith, in his life
and calling. Examples hereof, we have many in Gods word: A certain Ruler came
to Christ, and besought him to go down and heal his son, Ioh. 4.49, 50.
etc. Jesus but said unto him, Go thy way, thy son lives; and the Ruler
believed the word that Jesus spoke unto him, and his son lived. Now,
inquiring of the hour, and finding it to be the same time when Jesus said, Thy
son lives; the text says, He believed and all his household. Now, what was
this man's faith? Surely, he only acknowledged, that Christ was the true
Messiah: and withal, resigned himself and his family to be instructed further
therein. And though they knew nothing particularly, of the means whereby Christ
should be a Savior; yet for this willingness in embracing Christ, and
readiness to be taught, the holy Ghost says, they did believe. So in the same
Chapter, verse. 29, the woman of Samaria (being convicted in her conscience, of
the things that Christ told her) runs into the town, and says; Come see a
man that has told me all things that ever I did: Is not he the Christ? Then
the text says, Many of the Samaritans believed, because of the saying of the
woman. Now, what faith had these Samaritans? Surely, they did only acknowledge
him to be the true Messiah, and were willing to be further instructed in his
doctrine; which they testified, by going to hear him in their own persons. So
likewise, Christ gives a notable testimony to the confession of the Apostles
faith (Math. 16.17, 18) in the person of Peter, saying; Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock (that is, upon this your faith, which thou confessest) will I
build my Church; and yet the Apostles were ignorant of some maine points of the
Gospel. For a little after, when Christ tells them of his going to Jerusalem,
and of his passion, for the redemption of them, and all the elect, Peter
persuades him to the contrary, saying; Master, spare thy self, these things
shall not be unto thee. Whereby it appears, that Peter did not know how Christ
should be a Savior; neither did the Apostles particularly know Christ his
resurrection, till he was risen again: yea, at the very time of his ascension,
they knew not the nature of Christ's Kingdom; and therefore they asked him,
Lord, will thou now restore the Kingdom to Israel? (Acts 1.6) dreaming still
of a temporal Kingdom: for which Christ rebukes them. And notwithstanding all
these wants, Christ says, they had true faith; yea, such faith as the gates of
hell should never prevail against. This then is a most comfortable truth, That
if a man (in the want of means of further knowledge) do hold Christ Jesus to
be the true Messiah, and yield himself willing to learn the doctrine of the
Gospel, and (withal) join obedience to his knowledge, the Lord is willing
for a time, to accept of this as of true faith.

Now, to apply this to Rahabs faith: Her faith was but a weak faith, or rather
the seed and beginning of a lively faith afterward. For, as we may read, all
that she knew was this, that the God of Israel was the only true God, and
that he would certainly deliver the Land of Canaan into the Israelites hands.
Josh. 2.11.
This was a notable persuasion wrought by a report; and accordingly she ioynes
her self to Gods people, and resignes her self to obey the God of Israel: but
whether she knew the particular doctrine of salvation by Christ, it is not here
set down; and it is very like, that as yet she was altogether ignorant of it.
For, here are all things set down, that tend to her commendation. So that her
faith was very weak, and only the seed of a lively faith: and yet here the
holy Ghost does commend her for her faith, among the most renowned believers
that ever were.

Hence we may learn many good instructions. First, That God makes much account
of a little grace: if he see in a man but the seeds of grace, he does highly
esteem thereof. When the young man came to Christ, and asked him what he should
do to be saved; Mark 10.17.
Christ tells him, he must keep the commandments: the young man answers,
that he had kept them from his youth; at which answer it is said, Christ
looked upon him, and loved him. This he he did for the show of Grace, which
appeared in his answer: much more then will he like of that, which is true grace
indeed. So, likewise Christ reasoning with the Scribe, concerning the first
and great commandment, and perceiving that he had answered discreetly, he said
unto him; Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God* Mark 12.34: showing
hereby how deeply he tenders the sparks and seeds of true grace: nay, he
makes much of a very show of grace: which if it be so, then if God have given
to any of us but one spark of true grace, how ought we to tender it, and
cherish it, and to rejoice therein, with all thankfulness to God for it? yea,
we must seek to increase the same: for, according to our grace, is our
acceptance and respect with God in Christ.

Secondly, whereas Rahabs weak faith is thus commended, here is comfort for
all those that are willing to learn Gods word, and to obey the same. Many are
willing to learn: but they are so wonderfully troubled with dullness and want
of memory, that they cannot learn; and hereupon they grow to doubt much of
their estate toward God. But these me^ must comfort themselves: for though
they have but little knowledge, yet if they have care to increase in knowledge,
and make conscience of obedience to so much as they know, God will account of
the^ as of true believers: and in truth such are to be co^me^ded above those
which have much knowledge, and so seem to have much faith, and yet show forth
no obedience answerable to their knowledge; for, they have a show of godliness,
but want the power of it.

Thirdly, this confuteth our ignorant boasters, who say, they have as much
knowledge as any man needs to have: for, they know, that a man must love God
above all; and, that Christ Jesus is the Savior of the world: and this (say
they) is enough; and hereupon they take up their rest for matters of religion,
and seek to go no further. But these men know nothing at all: for, if they
would ad to this which they know, though it be but little, a care to increase
in knowledge, and with their knowledge ioin obedience, the^ it were something.
But whiles they have no care neither to get more knowledge, nor to show forth
obedience to that they know, they do hereby show plainly, that there is no
drop of saving knowledge, nor true faith in their hearts.

Fourthly, seeing God commends the seeds of true faith, for true faith
indeed; This must encourage all men to use all good means to come by true
faith and repentance. For though as yet thou have but little knowledge, and
therefore but little faith and repentance: yet if thou join hereto an endeavor
to get more knowledge, and have also care to practice that which thou know;
then will the Lord increase thy knowledge and thy small faith, till thou have
sufficient, and in the mean time accept of thee as a true believer. And thus
much for the measure of Rahabs faith.

The second point to be considered is, the reward which Rahab received at the
hands of Joshua, and the Israelites, for her faith; She perished not with them
that obeyed not: that is, she with her family was preserved alive, when as
Iosuah destroyed all that lived in Jericho, young and old, man, woman, and
child.

But some will say; The Israelites were the people of God, a religious people:
now, it may seem to be a cruel part to destroy all; for, what had the young
Infants done? Answer. In man's reason it may seem so indeed: yet it could not
be a cruel part, because they did no more then that which God commanded them.
For, it was Gods ordinance, that the Canaanites should be rooted out, and that
the Israelites should show no compassion on them, Deuteronomy. 7.3. Besides, even in
reason the Israelites had some cause to deal thus: for, God gave this charge
to the Israelites, that when they came to any City or people, First, they must
offer peace; and if they answered pea^eably, then they must be saved, and
become their tributaries and servants, Deuteronomie 20.10: but if they would
not make peace, then they must put them to the edge of the sword (Verse 17)
man, woman, and child, being inhabitants of Canaan, or near adjoining. And
thus no doubt Joshua dealt when he came to Jericho; first, he offered peace if
they would become their tributaries: but they trusted to their strong walls,
and would not yield to become their servants; for which cause he put them all
to the edge of the sword: and therefore it was no cruelty, because it was Gods
commandment; for, Gods will is the rule of justice.

But was not this partial dealing, To spare Rahab with her family, who were
inhabitants of Jericho as well as the rest? Answer. There were two causes why
she should escape: First, because she yielded her self to the people of
Israel, and joined her self unto them, and was content to become one of their
religion; and therefore the commandment of putting all to death, did not take
hold of her. Secondly, Rahab obtained this of the spies, and bound them to it
by an oath, that when they came to destroy Jericho, they should spare her and
her family: and therefore also did she escape.

In this preservation of Rahab, we may learn sundry points: first, whereas
she is saved alive, because of the oath of the spies, we see what special
care every one ought to have for the doing of those lawful things whatsoever
they are, whereto he binds himself by an oath. Joshua knowing this bond of
the spies to Rahab (as we may read) gives special charge for her
preservation. Hence David says, Josh. 6.22.
If a man bind himself with an oath, he must keep it, though it be to his
own hinderance, Psalm. 15.4. Every single promise binds a man's conscience, if
it be lawful: But when an oath is adjoined, then there is a double bond. And
therefore the Author to the Hebrews says, that God, to make known the
stablenesse of his counsel promised, Heb. 6.17.18
bound himself with an oath; that by two immutable things (to wit, Gods
promise, and oath) we might have strong consolation: so that an oath binds a
man double to the performing of his promise. And that this conscience is to be
made of a lawful oath, appears thus: If a man make a lawful oath, and yet
be induced to do it by fraud; he must perform it, and not fail: as appears
by Iosuahs fact to the Gibeonites, Iosuah 9.19. For, when they came to the
Jews craftily, as though they had been men of a far country, and had
brought them to swear that they would not hurt them: though the host of
Israel murmured at it, when they came to their cities; and though they might
have reasoned thus, that they got it of them by fraud, and therefore they would
not keep it: yet, this is the answer of Iosuah and the Princes unto the
people, That they had sworn unto them, by the Lord God of Israel, and
therefore they might not touch them. And when king Saul, in zeal to Israel,
had broken this oath of Iosuah, and the Princes, by destroying the Gibeonites,
2. Sam. 21. there came a plague upon the Land, for three years space; and was
not stayed, till seven of Saul's sons were hanged, for Saul's fact. So, that
the breach of an oath is a most dangerous thing; and therefore, he that has
bound himself thereby, must have great care to keep it.

Yet here some cases may be propounded, worthy our consideration. For first,
what if a man have taken an oath to do an unlawful thing, must he then keep
his oath? Ans. If his conscience tell him, out of Gods word, that the thing is
not lawful, then he must not keep it; for, an oath may not be the bond of
iniquity: the keeping of it is a doubling of the sin. David, in his anger, had
sworn to slay Nabal, and all the men in his family, for denying relief unto
his servants, 1. Sam. 25.22. This was a rash oath, and therefore afterward, when
he was prevented by Abigails good counsel, he blesses God for it, and
breaks his oath which he had made, verse. 32.

Quest. 2. What if a man take an oath, and yet afterward in conscience doubts
of the lawfulnes of that which he has sworn to do: what must be don in this
case? Ans. So long as he doubts, he must defer the performance of it. For,
he that does a thing doubtingly, condemns himself in the thing he does,
because he does it not of faith: and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans
14.23.

Quest. 3. What if a man be urged by fear to take an oath, must he afterward
keep it? As for example: a man is taken of thieves; now, wanting money, they
charge him on pain of death, to fetch them money, and they bind him hereto by
an oath: what must be done in this case, considering there must such great
care be had in keeping of an oath? Answ. So long as the thing which he is
bound by oath to do, respects his private damage only, he must keep his
oath; yet so, as he declare his case to the Magistrate, because their course is
against the common good: now the Magistrate hearing of it, is according to
equity, to provide for his defense, and for the safety of his goods.

A second point to be considered, in Rahabs preservation, is this; Rahab
escaped a common danger (but not without all means) only staying her self on
the bare promise of the Spies: but, as she believed in the true God, so she
used means, whereby she might be sure of her preservation, and that is this;
She binds the Spies by an oath, to save her life, and to spare her household:
Ioh. 2.18, 21.
also, she keeps within, and ties the cord of red thread in her window*
according to their mutual covenant. Thus she uses means for her temporal
safety: and so have other of GODs children done in like case. When King
Hezekiah (2. Kings 20.6.) was sick, he was certified by the Prophet from GOD,
that he should live fifteen years longer; yet he neglected not the means
whereby he should be healed, and live: for, he applied dry figs to his byle;
and used food, and raiment for his bodily life, during the whole space of
those fifteen years. So the Apostle S. Paul, in his voyage by Sea to Rome,
was assured by a vision, that none of them that were with him should perish,
but all come safe to land: and yet, when the Mariners would have gone out, he
tells the Centurion, that unless those stayed in the ship (that so they might
use the ordinary means) they could not be safe. Now, as it fares temporally
for the saving of the body; so is it in the spiritual case, for the salvation
of the soul: men must use means to come by grace, and so to salvation. But,
many in this regard be great enemies to their own souls: they say, God is
merciful, and Christ is a Savior, and I hope he will save me; yet they will
not use the means to come to salvation. But if we would be saved, the^ with our
inward faith, we must ioyn the observation of the outward ordinary means
whereby God uses to save men's souls; as namely, the hearing of Gods word,
calling upon God by prayer, and the receiving of the sacraments; that thereby
our sinful lives may be amended, and our faith strengthened. This must be
remembered of us: for, they that contemn or neglect the means, despise the
grace and mercy of God offered therein: and therefore Paul says of the Jews,
when they put the Gospel from them, that they did judge themselves unworthy
eternal life, Act. 13.46. It follows;

With them that disobeyed: That is, with the people of Jericho. Quest. How did
they disobey? Ans. Thus: When Iosuah and the people came unto them, and offered
them peace, if so be they would become their tributaries and servants, the
inhabitants of Jericho would not yield unto the^, but set themselves against
the people of Israel, and so against God, in that they would not undertake that
estate which God offered unto them: and therefore they are here esteemed
disobedient.

Hence we learn, that if it shall please God at any time to put us out of
these temporary benefits which we enjoy in goods and possessions; we must be
contented with Gods will and providence, and seek to obey God therein. The
inhabitants of Jericho pay dearly for their disobedience in this case: God
sets the Israelites as Lords over them: and because they will not yield to
become their servants, they die for it. David's practice was commendable in this
case: for, when he was put out of his own Kingdom, by his own son, he
murmured not, but said thus; If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord,
he will bring me again: but, if he say thus, I have no delight in thee;
behold, here I am, let him do to me as seems good in his eyes, 2. Sam.
15.25, 26. In other countries, we see Cities and Towns spoiled and sacked:
what must the people do? Answ. They must submit themselves to the Lords
pleasure; knowing that he permits it, who may do what he will. And so, if
it shall please God to bring us into the like case; as to suffer our enemies to
have dominion over us, and to dispossess us of our places: we must submit our
selves to Gods good pleasure, when we see no help by lawful means: we must
not murmr or rebel; for, that is but to disobey, as the people of Jericho
did: and so shall we be destroyed, as they were. And thus much for the second
point.

The third thing to be considered in this example, is the testimony of her
faith, in receiving the Spies peaceably. This was a notable work of faith, as
Saint James notes, Iam. 2.25; and the more commendable, because she received
them into her house, and entertained them: yea, she preserved them in danger
of her own life; for, she did it contrary to the pleasure of the State under
which she lived. But against this may be objected: first, that she lied in
this fact; for, when the King of Iericho's messengers came to search for the
Spies, whom she had hid in the top of her house, she said to the messengers,
they were gone another way. Now, how can it be a good work, which was don
with lying; especially to our Superior, who has power to ask us, and to whom
we are double bound to speak the truth? Answ. We must know that the work
was good which she did; and a work of mercy, to preserve Gods people,
although she failed in the manner of doing it: she received them by faith,
though she showed distrust, in lying for their safety. It was a notable work
of Rebecca, Genesis 27. to cause her son Jacob to get his fathers blessing; for
so God had determined, and yet she failed in the manner.

Quest. But how could this work be good, being faulty in the manner of doing
it? Ans. It might: for, Rebecca's person stood righteous before God in Christ.
Now, the worker being acceptable unto God, the work must needs be good also:
and though the worker failed in the circumstances; yet the evil of the work,
was covered in the obedience of Christ: and so the goodness of it was approved,
and the fault thereof covered.

The use of this doctrine is two-folde* first, it shows that the works of Gods
children, are partly good, and partly bad; even the best works they do, are
imperfect. Secondly, this shows the true meaning of Saint James, when he
says, that Rahab was justified by her works: hereby he means, that by her
works she declared her self to be just. For, that she was not justified by
her works, appears plain; because the work which she did, was faulty in
the manner, and not perfectly good: and therefore could not be answerable to the
perfect justice of God.

But some will further say, that this concealing of the Spies, and lying to the
Kings messengers, was a work of Treachery against her own country; and
therefore was a notorious fault, and so no work of faith? Answ. Treachery
indeed, is as great villainy, as one man can practice against another; and
therefore ought to be abhorred and detested of all men: but yet we must
know, that Rahab in this place is no Traitor. For, she had a plain Certificat
in her conscience, that the Land of Canaan, and the city Jericho, were given
by the Lord to the people of Israel, and that they were the right Lords
thereof, and should enjoy them: so that she hid the Spies, not in treachery,
but in faith.

Thus we see her fact. The duties which we learn hence, are these: First,
it is said that this harlot Rahab, being by calling an Hostess and a
Victualler, received the spies peaceably. Hence, Innkeepers are taught their
duty. First, if they will show themselves faithful, they must have special
regard and respect unto such guests of theirs, as be the servants of GOD, and
fear him. This was the work of Rahabs faith toward the spies of Gods people.
David makes this the property of every godly man, That in his eyes a vile
person is contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord, Psalm 15.
verse 4: And therefore if Innkeepers will show themselves godly, they must so
do. And to encourage each one heereto, our Savior Christ makes this notable
promise (Matthew chapter 10. verse 41) He that receives a Prophet, in the
name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward: and he that receives a
just man in the name of a just man, shall receive a just man's reward. And, if
any shall give, to one of these little ones to drink, a cup of cold water
only, in the name of a Disciple; Verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his
reward.

Also Strangers are here taught, that in seeking places for their abode, they
must make choice to be with those that fear the Lord: so GOD directs these
spies to do. And when Christ sent his Disciples to preach, he bade them
(Matthew, chapter 10. verse 11) when they entered into a City, To enquire who is
worthy in that City, and there to abide till they departed. But alas, these
duties are little performed; especially the first. For, Innkeepers and such as
entertain Strangers, do make most of those that give themselves to ryote and
good fellow^hip: they are best welcome, that spend most in gaming, drinking, and
lasciviousness. These might learn otherwise of Rahab, who did better, though
she had been an harlot.

Thirdly, In-keepers must here learn, that when a man comes into their house
(if he be no malefactor) they must give him protection. Thus, Rahab does here
to the spies of the Israelites, even with the danger of her own life. The like
also we may read of Lot: for, when two Angels in the likeness of men came
into his house, and the men of Sodom would have had them out; Lot besought
them to let them alone, Genesis 19.8. And his reason is, because they came under
the shadow of his roof.

Again, hence we may learn another general duty; to wit, that a Christian
man in the time of persecution and danger, is not to discover his fellow
brethren, or to detect them; but must rather endanger his own life, by
concealing them for their preservation. This was practiced by good Obadiah:
when Iesabel killed the Lords Prophets, he hid them by fifties in a Cave; which
if it had been known, would have cost him his life. And so did the Apostles
and brethren in the Primitive Church; when the Jews would have slain Paul in
Damascus, the brethren took him by night, and let him down through the wall
in a basket to save his life, Acts 9.25: And since those times, in the History
of the Church under the Gospel, we may find, that when the Christians were
urged by persecuters to reveal their brethren, they rather chose to lay down
their own lives, then to betray their brethren into their enemies hands. And
this is true love indeed, such as the holy Ghost commends, When a man will
give his life for his brother, 1. John 3.16.

Lastly, whereas Rahab received the spies peaceably, we note that it is a
special fruit of faith, to be peaceable and kind. The holy Ghost, repeating
the fruits of the spirit, names Peace and meekness among them. Gal. 4.22.
Now, this peace is, when a man is kind and peaceable to all, but especially
to those that ^e of the household of faith. And undoubtedly it is a fruit of
faith, which the Prophet Isay foretold should be under the Gospel, Isay 11.6;
that then the Wolf should dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie with the
Kid: signifying, that howsoever men by nature were as savage as Wolves, yet
being converted to the Kingdom of Christ, they should become gentle as Lambs,
being kind and peaceable one to another. This peaceablenesse is especially to
be showed in the place and calling where a man lives: for, there did Rahab show
forth hers, when the spies came unto her. And, where this is truly in outward
action, there is faith in the heart: it is a good token that a man is at peace
with God, when he lives peaceably with men. Which being so; we must learn, not
to give place to our heady affections, but must rather bridle the rage of
malice and anger, and endeavor to live peaceably with all, especially with
those that be members of Gods Church. And thus much of this example.

The Judges Faith.
VERSE 32. And what shall I say more? For, the time would be too short for me
to tell of Gedeon, of Barac, and of Samson, and of Iephte: Also of David, and
Samuel, and of the Prophets.

Which through faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, etc.


HItherto, the Author of this Epistle has set down unto us examples of faith,
more at large. But from this verse to the end of this Chapter, he heaps up
briefly together many examples of faith, one upon another. The reason whereof
is; First, because the number of true believers which are mentioned in
Scripture, is very great, and therefore he could not here stand to set them
down in order one by one. Secondly, by handling all the examples at large,
which the Author propounds, in this short Epistle, he should have seemed to
have restrained the name and title of faith to a very few: for, all that are
here named and commended for their faith, are but few, in comparison of all
that truly believed in the old Testament. And therefore he heaps up the
rest together, to intimate that the number of believers, was more than he could
record. And this he does, by a Rhetorical preterition or passing over, called
in Schools, Paralepsis; whereby matters are briefly dispatched and passed
over, with the very naming only.

What shall I say more? That is, as if he had said; I have propounded diverse
worthy examples of faith: and, besides these, there are also many more; but the
time of writing an Epistle, will not suffer me to handle them all at large.

First, in this particular quick dispatch of believers, by our Apostle, we
may observe a difference between the infinite understanding of God, and the
created understanding that is in man's mind. Man, indeed, understands the
things that are revealed to him of God; but yet, in a manner and order, far
different from that which is in God: for, man cannot conceive, in his mind,
all the things he knows, at once, by one act of his understanding; but must
have distinct time to conceive of them, one by one distinctly. For, look as he
vtters them distinctly, one by one (as we see in this place) so likewise, does
he apprehend them in conceit, and understanding. But, with God it is not so;
for, God at once, by one act of understanding, without distinction of time,
does conceive of all things at once, both past, present, and to come; and so
could utter and express them, if any creature were able in conceit so to
comprehend them.

Secondly, whereas the holy Ghost says, The time would be too short, etc. He
gives us to understand, that the number of believers is very great; and that a
long time would not serve to repeat them, or to write of them. This directs
us unto a good answer to a question, which much troubles our common people; to
wit, How great is the number of them that shall be saved; whether is it greater
than the number of them that shall be damned? Ans. We must consider the number
of the elect 2. wais: 1. in comparison of them that shall be condemned:
secondly, in themselves. If we compare the elect with the reprobate, the number
of the elect is but a small number: for, in most ages, the church of God has
been but a handful, to the rest of the world. And in the Church this likewise
is true, Many are called, but few chosen, in respect of them that are called.
But yet consider the elect, as they are in themselves, and they are a huge
great number; yea, innumerable, as Saint John says, speaking of the elect
among the Gentiles, beside the chosen Jews: for, all that do truly believe
shall be saved. Now, believers are innumerable: This the Author of this
Epistle would insinuate unto us by his phrase of speech, What shall I say more?
etc.

In handling these examples, we must observe the order here used by the holy
Ghost: for, in this 32. verse he sets down the names of the persons that
believe, all jointly together, rehearsing them one by one. And in the 33, 34,
45, verses, he lays down briefly the fruits of all their faith; in number,
ten most notable actions, serving all and every one of them, most worthily to
commend their faith. In the handling of them, we will follow the order
observed by the holy Ghost: and, first, speak of the persons; then, of their
actions.

The four first are these: Gedeon, Barac, Samson, and Iephte; These four were
Judges in Israel: the fifth is David, who was both a Prophet and a King: the
sixth is Samuel, both a Judge and a Prophet: lastly, the Prophets generally; by
whom we must understand especially these three; Elias, Eliseus, and Daniel.

In speaking of these persons here commended unto us; first, we will entreat
of them generally, and then in particular. In general, let us first observe
the order which the holy Ghost here uses in naming them. Gedeon, for time, was
after Barac; and yet here he is first named: so Samson was after Iephte, and
yet here he is put before him. This, the holy Ghost would never do, without
some special cause. We therefore must know, that the Scripture uses a
twofold order in reckoning up of persons; to wit, the order of time: when as
he that lived first, is first named: and the order of dignity; when the most
worthy and excellent is named first, though he were later in time. Now, the
Scripture accounts best of them that did excel in faith, and in the fruits
thereof: so in this place whereas Gedeon is set before Barac, and Samson before
Iephte; the holy Ghost observes not the order of time, but the order of
dignity, according to the excellency of their faith; naming them in the first
place, that were most famous for this grace of faith, and did exceed the other
in the fruits thereof.

Here we learn this special point: That the more men excel in faith, and
other graces of God; the more God will honor them: for, look who most honor
God, shall be most honored of him: but the more a man excels in grace, the
more he honors God. And for this cause is Gedeon preferred before Barac, and
Samson before Iephte* because they were more plentiful in the fruits of faith.
This must move us, not only to seek to have faith, but to labor every day
more and more for the increase of faith, and of obedience: for, the more a man
abounds in grace before God, the more will God honor him, both here, and in
heaven. And thus much for the order wherein they are propounded.

Secondly, let us consider what manner of persons these were, Gedeon, Barac and
the rest: They were extraordinary men, in their time, raised up by God, for the
special good of his Church, and the common wealth of the Jews, that they
might help and defend them in distress. And therefore, as their calling was
extraordinary; so God endued them with extraordinary gifts of wisdom,
strength, zeal, and authority: for which, they are here renowned in this
Catalogue of most worthy believers.

In their example we may observe this point: That whom God does raise up
extraordinarily, for some special good in his Church, them he endues with
extraordinary gifts to discharge that calling: and withal, he gives them the
spirit of grace, with a true and lively faith. This (besides the instance we
have in hand) appears plainly in Christ's Apostles: they were called by Christ
to preach the Gospel to all the world, and to plant his Church universally;
and thereupon (howsoever they were simple men before) were furnished with
extraordinary gifts of wisdom, zeal, and knowledge, and with this excellent
grace of saving faith, which did sanctify their other gifts: for, howsoever
Judas was numbered among them, having been a Disciple; yet he never came to the
execution of the Apostleship, but went astray from that ministration, Acts
1.25. And in these later days, when God restored his Gospel to light out of
the dark mist of Popery, he raised up extraordinary men, whom he endued with
wisdom, zeal, and judgment; which gifts also he sealed up in them by a
lively faith, which they testified by their piety and godliness in life and
conversation. And this course he observes usually, in all those whom he
raises up extraordinarily for the good of his Church.

This we must observe, to acquaint us with a special difference, between those
whom God raises up extraordinarily for special good, and all arch heretics
and traitors that set up themselves, unsent of God. For, many such wretches
have excelled in wisdom, in worldly policy, in zeal and authority: whereupon
they have pretended and persuaded many, that they were called of God. But
hereby especially they are to be discovered, that they are void of this rare
gift of true saving faith: for, look at their lives, and ordinarily for
impiety, they have been and are arch-diuels. So that, though they wanted not
authority, or outward zeal, and wisdom: yet they wanted faith, which should
purify their hearts; or else they would never have lived in such notorious
sins, as they were discovered to do. And this is the trial which our
Savior Christ directs us unto; saying, Ye shall know them by their fruits,
Math. 7.16. Let them therefore pretend what knowledge, what zeal, or authority
soever they will; if the fruits of faith appear not in their lives by
obedience, they are not called of God, for the special good of his Church.

Thus much of these men in general: now we come to entreat of them
severally, as they are propounded in the Text.

THe first person here commended unto us, is Gedeon: the History of whose acts,
is laid down at large, Judges chap. 6. In his example note one point
especially, to acquaint us with the manner which God uses in begetting and
increasing true faith in the hearts of his children. If we read the Story, we
shall see, that the Lord, in the likeness of an Angel, called Gedeon, once,
twice, Judges 6.12.14.16.
yea thrice to be a Judge to his people. But Gedeo^ greatly doubts of his
calling, and therefore desires a sign of the Lord; which God gave him: For,
the sacrifice which he offered, was burned up with fire from heaven: yet still
he doubted, and was in a greater fear then before, even of death it self:
but, being confirmed by the Angel, and set a-worke, he brake down the Altar of
Baall, and built one to the true GOD, and thereon offered sacrifice as God
commanded, though with some fear. And, when the Midianites and Amalekites
came armed against Israel, he is stirred up by the spirit of God for their
defense: but yet still he doubted of his calling, and therefore again asked a
sign at Gods hands, and had it; and after that asked another, which GOD also
granted. Now, having all these one in the neck of another, at length he
knows his calling, and so goes in faith, and defends Israel: so that he got
the assurance of his calling, by sundry particular signs and confirmations of
his faith. And though he doubted greatly at the first: yet, after he
believes, not only that he should be a Judge and Deliverer of Gods people
out of the hands of their enemies; but this principally, that God was his God,
and would give unto him everlasting life.

Here then we have a notable precedent of the manner of Gods working true and
sound faith in the hearts of his children. They receive not this grace at once:
but, by degrees, God works it in them by little and little. When a man is first
called of GOD, he has much doubting and fear; but then God sends sundry
helps to weaken this fear and doubting: and as they decrease, so is faith
increased. No man believes soundly at the first, but weakly; even as he grows
in years, so he must grow in faith: and the increase of our faith is by
continuance in the means, and by experience of Gods love and favor. And
indeed the more faith increases, the more we use the means to grow therein,
and the more we delight in the means; and at length, after long experience of
Gods mercy, we shall have wrought in our hearts this gift of true and lively
faith, which shall be able to prevail against all fear and doubting. And thus
much for the person of Gedeon.

The second person commended unto us, is Barac; of whom we may read, Judges
4. His Story is large and plain enough: and therefore we will not stand upon
it.

The third person is Samson; of whom we may also read, Judges 13.14, etc.
Now, touching Samson, this question may well be asked, how he can be justly
commended for his faith, seeing it may seem he killed himself? Answer.
Samson did not kill himself: for he was called extraordinarily to be a Judge
over Israel for their defense and delivery out of the hands of the
Philistimes. Now, when the Princes of the Philistimes were gathered together,
being his enemies, and the enemies of God and his people, he cast the house
down upon their heads to kill them therein, because (being blind) he could
not pursue them in battle. And therefore having them by Gods providence in
his hands, he destroyed them, as his calling was; albeit, he lost his own
life in the same action.

Again, Samson in pulling down the house, purposed not directly and wilfully
to kill himself, but to adventure his own life, by taking just revenge upon
his enemies, and the enemies of God; and therefore as Gods servant, he prayed
first unto God: and so did no more tha^ the Soldier in the field ought to do;
who, bearing a loving mind toward his Country, is content to adventure his
own life for the destruction of his enemies, in the defense of his Country;
and is resolved, that if he die in that defense, he dies in his lawful
place and calling, and dies Gods servant: yea, Gods Champion. This did Samson,
and therefore may justly be commended for his faith: neither is this fact of
his any disgrace, but rather a notable commendation of his faith, and an
evidence of great zeal for Gods glory, and of singular love to his people.

The fourth person commended here, is Iephte: of whom we may read, Judges
11. Iephte was the base son of Gilead, borne of an harlot. To be base borne,
is noted in Scripture as a matter of reproach; and therefore the Lord forbade A
bastard to enter into the congregation of the Lord, to bear any office, unto
the tenth generation, Deuteronomie chapter 23. verse 2: So ignominious is this
kind of birth, by the judgment of Gods spirit, unto that party on whom it
falls. For, this sin of fornication does not only hurt the persons
committing it, but even stains the children base borne to the tenth
generation. Yet, howsoever Iephte was base borne, and so suffered for it great
reproach; here we see, he is commended unto us for his faith, among the most
worthy believers that ever were. Indeed, besides Iephte, we shall not find
the like example in Scripture. Yet in Iephte we may see, that howsoever it be
a reproachful thing, to be borne of fornication; yet that does not hinder, but
the party so borne, may come to true faith, and so to the favor of God, and to
life everlasting. Such persons as are base borne, upon view of that reproach,
which the Scripture fasteneth upon them, might take occasion to think
miserably of themselves; even that God had rejected them: but, this example
serves to show, that it hinders not, but that they may come into the favor
of God, and by faith get honor of God, to countervaile that discredit, which
they have by their base birth.

Further, whereas we commonly say, that such as are base borne, are wicked
persons; here we see the contrary in Iephte: and therefore, we must not for
this cause condemn any for wicked or ungodly. Indeed, the Lord has branded
this estate with reproach, that men should shun the sin of fornication the
more.

Again, whereas Iephte is here commended for his faith; we may probably
gather, that their opinion is not true, who hold that Iephte sacrificed and
killed his own daughter. For, being commended here for his faith, certain it
is, he had knowledge in Gods will and word: and therefore, we must not think,
but that he knew, God would never accept of such a vow; by the performance
whereof, he should commit wilful and most unnatural murder. This his faith
shows, that it was not his intent to kill the first person that met him out of
his house; for, by the light of nature he might know, that God would never
accept thereof: and therefore, it is not like he so made his vow; for, this
faith, and such a vow cannot stand together.

But some will say, the text is plain (Judge. 11.31) that He vowed to offer for
a burnt offering, the thing that came out of the doors of his house to meet him
when he came home. Ans. It is so indeed, in some translations: It shall be the
Lords (And) I will offer it, etc. But the words, in the original, may as well
be translated thus: It shall be the Lords, (or) I will offer it, etc. And
this later translation is more suitable to the circumstances of the place; for,
this was Iephtes meaning, that whatsoever met him first, he would dedicate it
to God: and, if it were a thing that might be sacrificed, then his purpose was
to offer it unto the Lord in sacrifice.

Quest. But if he did not kill her, why did he then so lament for her? Ans.
Because, by his vow he was to dedicate her to God; and so she was to live a
Nazarite all her life long: which must needs be a very bitter thing to him, who
had no child but her; it being so great a reproach, and in some sort, a curse
in those days, to want issue. I speak not here, how well or ill Iephte did in
making her a Nazarite: But, this may no way be admitted, That believing and
godly Iephte should advisedly kill his own daughter. Undoubtedly, he could
not think that God would be pleased, with such an abominable sacrifice. Thus
much for these persons: the rest, I pass over, because this story is plain
and large in Scripture.

The Faith of the Judges and David.
VERSE 33, 34, 35. Which through faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, obtained the promises, stopped the mouths of Lions,

Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, of weak were
made strong, waxed valiant in battle, turned to flight the Armies of the
Aliants.

The women received their dead raised to life.


IN these words, the Apostle propounds unto us ten several fruits of faith:
the nine first whereof, are the particular actions of the parties spoken of in
the former verse; and they are here related for the commendation of their
faith. The first is, Subduing of Kingdoms; which serves chiefly for the
commendation of the faith of the four Judges there named, and of David. For,
as we may read in the books of Judges, and of Samuel, all these subdued
Kingdoms; as, the Canaanites, Judge. 4. the Midianites, Judge. 6. the Philistims,
Judge. 15. and 16. 2. Sam. 8.1. the Ammonites, Judge. 11. Moabites, and Aramites,
2. Sam. 8.2.6. Now, how did they overcome and subdue them? The Text says, by
faith; which, we must not not thus understand; as though only by the very
act of faith they subdued kingdoms: But, the meaning of the holy Ghost is,
that they believed the promises which God made unto them, of delivering these
kingdoms into their hands; and according to their faith, God accomplished his
promises unto them: and so they subdued Kingdoms by faith.

In this work of faith, we may learn two things: first, that it is lawful
for Christians in the new Testament to make war; for, that which may be done
in faith, is lawful for Gods servants: but, war may be made in faith; for,
these servants of God subdue kingdoms in war, and that by faith: and
therefore it is lawful for Christians, upon just cause to make war. The
Anabaptists of Germany say, It is not lawful for a Christian under the Gospel,
to carry a weapon, or to make war. But, this one place of scripture (if there
were no more) is alone sufficient to prove the lawfulness of war under the
Gospel, if it be used according to Gods will and word. When the Soldiers came
to John Baptist, and asked him What they should do? he bids them not leave
off their calling; but this, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely,
and be content with your wages, Luke 3.14. And our Savior Christ reports of
a Centurion (which was captain of a Band) when he came to have his son
healed; Math. 8.3.
that he had not found such faith in Israel. And he was not a Centurion,
only before he believed; but even afterward, when Christ commended his faith:
yet did he not dislike his calling. The like may be said of Cornelius, Act. 10.
All which, show plainly, that upon just causes, Christians may lawfully make
war.

Ob. 1. But to defend their opinion, they object some places of scripture; as
Mat. 5.39, Resist not evil, says Christ: therefore (say they) a man may not
wear a weapon, nor use a sword; lest those make him to resist, and so to break
this commandment of Christ. Ans. That place must be understood of private
revenge: and so it makes nothing against lawful war. For, what though a
private man may not revenge himself, nor make war; yet that hinders not,
but that a Magistrate who bears the sword, may lawfully use it. Again, it is
frivolous to imagine, that resisting is only by a weapon; for, the chief
resistance that God respects, is in the heart and affection. And a private man
may resist* that is break this commandment by unlawful resistance, though he
carry no weapon: and, the public person break it not, though he make war.

Object. 2. Secondly, they object the prophecy of Isay, who speaking of the
kingdom of Christ, under the Gospel, says; That then* they shall turn their
swords into scithes, and their spears into mattocks: therefore (say they) there
must be no war under the Gospel. Ans. That Prophecy signifies, that in
Christ's kingdom, there must be great love, and peace, and wonderful concord
among all the true servants of God. But, here they take advantage, and say; If
this be so, what then needs any war? Ans. We must know, that as there be
two kinds of Kingdoms, a spiritual kingdom, and a politic; so, there be
two kinds of peace, spiritual, and politic. Spiritual peace, is inward, in
the Church: and politic peace, is outward, in the common wealth. Spiritual
peace, i^ begun, and preserved by spiritual means of grace in the ministry
of the Church; but war is an ordinary means for the establishing and
preserving of politic peace.

Secondly, hence we learn, that Gods people may make war, not only by way
of defense; but also, in assault upon their enemies, and that according to Gods
word. For, here it is said, that Gedeon, Sampson, David, and the rest, by faith
subdued Kingdoms, making war against them by way of assault, and not in
defense only. Indeed, special care ought to be had, that offensive war,
in assaulting an enemy, be made upon just and good grounds: one special
ground or cause is here implied in this work of faith; to wit, the recovery
of just right in matters of importance: for, the Kingdoms of Canaan were given
to the Israelites by God himself, and for the recovery of them, they made
war by way of assault. So, when Lot was taken Captive by Keder-laomer, and
the Kings of the Nations; Genesis 14.
Abraham, Lots kinsman, gathers his servants together, and pursues the Kings,
and ouertaking them, destroyed them for the recovery of Lot and his goods.
Other respects there be, for which offensive war in assault may be made: but
because they are not here mentioned, I will not propound them.

The second fruit of their faith is this; they wrought righteousness: that
is, some of these men in their places wherein God had set them, gave to every
man his own. This working of righteousness consists in two things; First, in
giving rewards to such as deserved them: Secondly, in inflicting due punishment
according to men's deserts. In both these, the men before named did all excel;
but especially two of them, David and Samuel: for David, it is a wonder to see
how righteous he was: for when he was anointed King in Saul's steed, and Saul
rejected, how did he behave himself toward Saul? Did he seek Saul's blood?
No: But when Saul hunted him, as the hunter does the Partridge, David even then
gave himself to study and practice righteousness: yea, when Saul was fallen
into his hands both in the Cave and asleep in the camp, 1. Samuel chapter 24.
verses 5, 6. etc. and chapter 26. verses 7, 8: he would not touch him, nor
suffer others to do him hurt, because he was the Lords anointed: yea, so
righteous was David toward Saul, that his heart smote him for cutting off but
the lap of his coat. Therefore David is here commended especially, for
this effect of faith, the working of righteousness.

To apply this unto our times; If this be a fruit of faith thus to work
righteousness, then what may be said of the Church of Rome, and of the Popish
sort among us? They pretend the ancient faith, and none must be so good
believers and Catholics as they: but how do they show this their faith? Is
it by the practice of righteousness? Do they give to every one his due? Nay
verily: but they set themselves to work the ruin of Kingdoms, that join not
with them in religion. This, witness their manifold and devilish plots
against our State from time to time. This did not David, no not against Saul,
though he were rejected of God, and also most unjustly sought his death. But
they have many times sought the death of the Lords anointed over us: whereby
they declare their state to all the world, that they have no spark of true
faith at all: for, true faith will make a man practice righteousness and
innocence. And therefore we may judge of them, and all their adherents that be
of this mind to allow such practices, that they have none other but ye faith of
devils: which is, to believe the word of God to be true. This the devils do
with trembling. And as their faith is devilish, so are the fruits thereof:
namely, treachery and falsehood, such as the devil most approues. But we must
learn, that true faith is especially commended by these fruits, The study and
practice of innocence, and the maintaining of peace in Christian estates: for,
true faith, and treachery, and contention, will no more stand together than
light and darkness.

Secondly, Samuel also wrought righteousness; as appears by his protestatio
before all Israel, when he gave up his office of government over them unto
Saul: 1. Sam. 12.3: Behold (says he) here am I; bear record of me before
the Lord, and before his anointed: whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I
taken? or whom have I done wrong to? or whom have I hurt? or of whose hand have
I received any bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it.

Now, as these two, Samuel and David were famous, for this fruit of faith in
working righteousness: So likewise were the Judges and Prophets, before named,
in their places, careful of this virtue: and did practice the same, partly in
rewarding the good, and partly in punishing the wicked.

But some will say; To work righteousness, cannot be a fruit of faith: for,
the very Heathen, which never heard of Christ, by the light of nature have done
Justice, and are highly commended by Heathen Writers, for the same. Now, that
which the Heathen can do by the light of nature, is not thus to be extolled as
a fruit of faith? Answer. True it is, the Heathen have done many works of
justice: but we must wisely consider, that every just work is not a fruit of
faith, unless it be done by a righteous person in obedience to God, and for
his glory. But, in all these, the Heathen failed in their works. For, though
the things they did, were good in themselves: yet seeing the Heathen were
corrupt trees, remaining in the sinful state of corrupt nature, their works
must needs be corrupt fruit; as coming from them. For, an evil tree cannot
bring forth good fruit. The heart is the fountain of every action: now, their
hearts were corrupt, being destitute of faith which purifies the heart; and
therefore their works must needs be sinful. Again, they did not their
works in obedience: for, they were guided only by the light of nature, and
knew not God aright, nor his commandments. And lastly, they propounded not
the glory of GOD, as the end of their works, but the praise of men, their own
profit, or some such end. But these worthy persons do not only such things as
were just in themselves: but they do them in faith, in obedience, and for Gods
glory, and so please God.

Now, seeing these renowned Princes and Judges, have their faith commended unto
us by their practicing of righteousness; we must learn to follow them within
the compass of our calling, doing Justice and righteousness in such things as
concern us. There be many reasons set down in Gods word, to persuade us
heereunto. As, first, for this end has God caused the Gospel to be published.
Tit. 2.12, The saving grace of God has appeared; but to what end? To teach us,
that we should deny ungodliness, and live soberly and righteously: that is,
that we might do Justice. Unless therefore we work righteousness, we make
the Gospel a vain word unto us. Secondly, we desire to be counted just before
God and men; and it would grieve us, if we should be otherwise thought of: but
if we would be just indeed both before God and man, then we must work
righteousness; for (as S. John says) He that does righteousness, 1. John 3.7.
is righteous. Thirdly, there is no man set over a family, but he either does,
or ought to endeavor to bring a blessing upon his family. But this he cannot
do, unless he work righteousness, Pro. 20.7.
and do Justice: for, Solomon says; He that walks in his integrity, is
just, and blessed shall his children be after him. Lastly, we do all of us
desire to escape hell: well, then we must remember to practice righteousness; 1.
Cor. 6.9.
for, the Apostle says, no unrighteous man, that is, none practicing
unrighteousness, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. So that within the
compass of our calling, we must all endeavor to do Justice.

Here some will ask: How shall I do Justice, and work righteousness? Answer.
For the doing of it, we must remember to practice these rules that follow: 1.
That which is both the word of God, and the rule of Nature; We must do to all
men as we would they should do unto us: Math. 7.12.
this is the Law and the Prophets (says our Savior Christ). Now, the square
for all our actions, must be the word of God: and Gods word gives this
direction; Do thou to thy neighbor as thou in thy reason and conscience
think he should do to thee, if thou were in his case, and he in thine.

The 2. rule is, that which Paul teaches us; saying, Give unto every man that
which is their duty; ^. Romans 13.7.
tribute to whom tribute belongs, etc. That which Gods word, and our
conscience, and the wholesome laws of the realm bind us unto, that we must
give unto every man.

The 3. rule is this: Every man within the compass of his calling, must not
only intend and labor for his own good; but for the common good, in that
Church and common wealth wherein he lives. The blind would out of their
carnal minds, have learned this for a rule, Every man for himself, and God
for us all: and, this is many a man's practice, he will labor diligently in
his calling: but, all is for himself. But, he that propounds only this end
in his calling, to benefit himself alone, deals unjustly, both toward the
Church and common wealth, in which he lives; who ought to have a part of his
care with himself.

The 4. rule is taught us also by S. Paul: Defraud or oppress no man in any
matter. This rule concerns our manner of dealing in common affairs. In all
our traffic and bargains, as we would benefit our selves; so we must seek to
benefit those with whom we deal. This rule is very necessary to be learned:
for, this is ye common practice of men in their traffic, To use all means
whereby they may defraud others; so that they get unto themselves, they care
not how it come. But, in the fear of God, let us remember, that the practice
of justice (to which we are all bound) stands in this; that we defraud or
oppress no man in any thing. And thus much of this second fruit of their faith.

The third fruit and effect of these men's faith, is this: They obtained the
promises.] By promises, we must not understand the maine promise, concerning
the Messiah coming; for, that they obtained not as yet: for, (as it appears.
v. 39) they received not that promise; for, Christ was not incarnate in their
time. But* by Promises are here meant certain special and particular
promises, made unto them alone, and not common to all: so that the meaning of
these words is this* They obtained the benefit and accomplishment of those
particular promises that God made unto them. This effect is specially to be
understood of Cale^, and David* for* Cale^ entered into the land of Canaan* and
there enjoyed his possession, according to Gods promise made unto him, Ios. 14.
So, David had a particular promise made unto him, that he should be king over
Israel; this he long waited for, and resting herein, he was not only anointed
King, but in due time actually made King ouerall Israel.

Whereas these worthy men, by faith obtained these promises; Hereby we may be
directed, to see the true cause, why after so long preaching of the word, and
often receiving of the sacraments, men reap so little profit; especialally,
considering that God has made a promise of grace and salvation, by means of
his word and sacraments. Hence therefore we must learn, that the word of God
preached, and the sacraments received, are unprofitable, not because God
alters his will, having promised his blessing in these means; for herein the
will of God is unchangeable: but the cause is, the great measure of unbelief,
in those which hear and receive. They therefore profit not, because they
receive them without faith. For, howsoever men say they have faith; yet the
works of their lives, and their estate in sin, after long hearing, show
plainly, they have none at all. Take a vessel that is close stopped, and cast
it into a river, or into the sea; yet it receives no water, because it has no
place of entrance: Even so, bring a man that wants faith, to the word and
sacraments, wherein God has promised the fullness of his grace; yet he
receives none, because his heart is closed up through unbelief. This is it
which makes the heart like a stopped vessel, which has no entrance for Gods
grace. We therefore, in the fear of God, must labor to have our hearts purged
from this unbelief, and lip-faith, and to be endued with true saving faith;
whereby we may profitably hear the word, and receive the sacraments, and so
enjoy Gods most excellent promises in Christ. Men may lie, and be deceived;
but, God is truth it self, and cannot lie: and therefore, as he has made his
promise of life to believers, and to no other* so will he surely accomplish
the same to them, and to no other. Wherefore, if we love our souls, and desire
life, let us get into our hearts the grace of faith. And thus much of the third
effect of their faith.

The fourth and fifth effects, which I will handle together, are these: Stopped
the mouths of Lions: Quenched the violence of the fire.] For the fourth.
Whereas some of these persons are said to have stopped the mouths of Lions, it
is to be understood of Daniel* as appears in the 6. Chapter of that book.
For, Daniel (through the malice of others that incensed the Kings wrath against
him) was cast into the den of hunger-bit Lions. But, Daniel even then
believed in the Lord, and put all his trust in God; and for this cause, the
Lord by his angel stopped the mouths of the Lions, and (as it were) sealed up
their paws, that they could not hurt him.

The fifth effect, in quenching the violence of the fire, must be understood of
Shadrach* Meshach, and Abednego, the companions of Daniel: which three (as we
may read Dan. 3.) refused to worship the golden image, which Nabuchadnezzar had
set up. For which cause, they were cast into an hot burning Oven; but, they put
their trust in God, and claue fast unto him in obedience, even to the hazard
of their lives. Whereupon, the Lord by his omnipotent power, did most
miraculously preserve them, by staying the rage of the fire, contrary to the
nature thereof, that it had no power over their bodies; nay, it did not burn
the hair of their heads, nor cause their garments to smell. And therefore they
are said, to have quenched the violence of it, because it had no power over
them, though it burned most fiercely; but was to them, as though it had been
quite put out and quenched.

Now, ioyn these two effects together, and they afford us good instructions.
First, here we learn how to behave our selves in time of danger, and at the
point of death. Even as these four men did, so must we from the bottom of our
hearts forsake our selves, and put all our trust in Christ. This did Daniel,
when he was in the Lions den: and this did the 3. Children, in the hot fiery
furnace. And this has been always the ancient practice of Gods children in
all ages; At the very point of death, and in the extremity of all danger, they
rested themselves wholly upon the merciful promises of the true God. The time
will come upon us all, wherein we shall be called to the practice of this duty:
for, we must all pass the door of death, and once lie in the pangs thereof.
Now, what shall we do, when we lie half dead, gasping and panting for breath,
able to speak to no man, nor to hear any speaking to us, when all comfort of
the world fails us? Surely, we must then, at that very instant, labor to
leave our selves and this world, and yield up our selves by faith into the
hands of GOD, and cleave fast unto Christ's Passion, from the bottom of our
hearts* and he will surely deliver us from the danger; stopping the mouth of
Satan that roaring Lion, and quenching the fire of hell, that it shall not
touch us.

But some will say, if this be all we must do, then all is well: for, this I
can soon do when time serves, and therefore I will take no care till then?
Answer. Beware of spiritual guile* for, it will be found a most hard matter,
for a man to rely and cast himself wholly upon Christ, in the hour and pang
of death. For then, above all times, is the devil busy against us: then will
the conscience stir, if ever; and the body being tormented, the soul must
needs be wonderful heavy. This we may see by the state of our Savior
Christ, in his agony and passion: and therefore we must not reckon so lightly
of this duty.

Question. But, if it be so hard a thing, how could Daniell and the three
children do it? Answer. They were prepared for it* for, they rested upon God
in the time of peace; and so were enabled to rely upon him in time of peril.
Even so if we would believe in God when we die, and then show forth our faith,
we must while we live put our trust in him, and show it by obedience: for, rare
it is to find a man that lives in unbelief, to show forth faith at his end.
And therefore while we have health, strength, and peace, we must labor to
believe, and then shall we find the comfort of it in time of peril, and of
death.

Secondly, from these two effects of faith, we observe further, that Gods
divine providence does firmly rule and govern the whole world. Ordinarily God
gouernes the world by secundarie causes, setting one creature over another, and
ordaining one to do this thing, and another that, and accordingly they work:
but we must not think that God is bound to any of these means, but is most
free to use them, or not to use them. Ordinarily he executes this or that
punishment by this or that creature, and so by means conuayes his blessings:
but yet he can work without them, as here we see. For, he preserues his
creatures against the ordinary means; as, Daniel from the Lions, whose nature
is to devour: and against the nature of fire, he saved the three children in
the fire. So that God works by means, but yet freely; because he can work at
his pleasure either without or against means: and his powerful hand, saving
against means, shows his ruling and disposing providence over all things.

Thirdly, by these effects of their faith we learn, that Gods goodness and
mercy toward believers, is far greater, and more unspeakable than ever he
promised, or they could exspect. This point is carefully to be considered of us
all; for, it is of singular and extraordinary use, especially in time of peril
and trouble: and yet we see it is the plain truth of God; and therefore Paul
gives thanks and praise unto God, who is able to do for us exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think. Ephesians. 3.20.
Daniel put his trust in the Lord, when he was in the Lions den: and what does
he obtain for his labor? the Lord never promised to stop the Lions mouths,
neither did Daniell ever presume upon that deliverance; and yet the Lord saved
him. And so the three children, though they made no account of their lives,
because God had not promised to keep them from burning, yet they com out in
safety. For, God in mercy so quenched the heat of ye fire unto the^, that though
it burnt to death those that cast them in; yet did it not so much as burn
their garments, or the hair of their heads, to cause the same to smell. And the
like is his goodness toward all his servants. David says, Psalm. 21.3.
The Lord prevented him with liberal blessings; that is, when David never
asked such blessings at Gods hand, even then did the Lord bestow his liberal
blessings upon him: as namely this, when David was following his Fathers
sheep, and walking in his calling, he never dreamed of any Kingdom; yet
thence the Lord took him to be King over his people Israel. So the Israelites
having been 70. years in captivity, never thought of return; and yet then
were they delivered: and their deliverance was so strange and miraculous, that
they were like them that dream, Psalm. 126.1. When Peter was cast into prison
by Herod, and committed to four quaternions of Soldiers to be kept, Acts 12.4.
the Angel of the Lord came and awoke him as he slept, and led him out of
prison, past the watches, and through the iron gate, and then left him. Now,
this deliverance was so strange unto him, that he knew not whether it was true,
but thought he had seen a vision. From hence it is that God has made this
gracious promise unto his Church, to answer before they call, and to hear
while they speak, Isay 65.24. So endless is his mercy, and his goodness so
unspeakable toward his servants, that if they cleave unto him unfeignedly,
they shall find his bounty far surpassing all that they could ask or think.

The consideration hereof serves to stir up every one of us in our places, to
cleave unfeignedly unto the true God, with all our hearts by faith, in due
reverence and obedience. If a servant were to choose his Master, and among an
hundred should hear of one, that besides his wages, would give unto his
servants, gifts which they would not think of; this servant would forsake all
the rest to com unto this one. Behold, the Lord our God is this bountiful
master: who does not only keep covenant with his servants, in a full
accomplishment of his promises; but is exceeding gracious, preventing them with
liberal blessings, above all that they can wish for themselves: wherefore let
us forsake all our bad Masters, the world, the flesh, and the devil, in the
service of sin; and resign our selves with full purpose of heart, to serve
this our good GOD, to the end of our days. There is no man living, that can
have such cause of true joy in heart, as Gods servants have: for, God shows
more kindness unto them, then they can ask or think of. And take this for
truth also: there be none that thus give themselves to serve God faithfully
with all their hearts, but before they die they shall find this to be true, that
God is a most merciful GOD, and his goodness endless toward them above
their deserts.

Secondly, this endless mercy of GOD, must move us all to repent us of our
sins, and to trust in him for the pardon of them, be they never so many or
heinous: for, they can never reach to the multitude of his mercies. Though they
be in number like the sand of the sea, they must not dismay us from coming to
him: but considering that his goodness is endless, and his mercy is over all
his works, we must come unto him for the pardon of our sins. For, GOD is
merciful to perform his promise; yea, and beyond his promise, to do for us
more than we can think of. Many indeed abuse this mercy of GOD, by
presuming thereon to go on in sin: but such deceive themselves; For, God
will not be merciful unto them, Deuteronomy. 29.20. It is the penitent person that
shall find mercy.

The sixth effect of their faith, is in these words: Escaped the edge of the
sword. The words in the original, are thus: Escaped the mouth of the sword:
which is the Hebrew phrase in the old Testament, and here followed by the
Penman of this Epistle; and before, where he calls the word of God a two
mouthed sword, Heb. 4.12: hereby meaning (as it is translated) a two edged
sword. This effect must be understood of two worthy Prophets, Elias and
Elizeus: for Elias, we may read, that when he had slain Baals Priests (1.
Kings 19.1.) Iezabel the Queen threatened to kill him* which he hearing, fled
into the wilderness, and thence was led to Mount Horeb, and there escaped by
means of his faith. And for Elizeus, we may read, that when he disclosed the
King of Syriah his counsel to the King of Israel (2. Kings 6.) he was
compassed about in Dothan, the city where he lay, with a huge host of
Assyrians; but, praying to the Lord, the Lord smote the host with blindness,
and so the Prophet led them in safety to Samaria. So then, the meaning of this
effect, is, that when these servants of God were in distress, and danger of
death, they denied themselves, and their own help, and by faith relied upon
God unfeignedly, from the bottom of their hearts; and so found deliverance with
God, from the peril of death.

First, here we learn, that God prouides for the safety and deliverance of
his servants, in the extremity of peril and danger, when both might and
multitude are against them. This point we have touched in diverse examples
before, and therefore do here only name it.

Secondly, in that these men in the extremity of danger believed, and so
escaped the edge of the sword; we learn, that when we are in greatest danger,
so as we see no way to escape; even then we must put our trust in the true
God, and he will save us. This we must do, not only for the safety of our
body; but more especially, for the salvation of our soul. Put the case a man
were in despair of his salvation, and that he sees legions of devils
compassing him about to take him away: what must this man do in this case?
Answ. Look what Elias and Elizeus did, the same thing must he do; he must
not lie dead in desperation, yielding thereto: but, at the very same time, when
such terrors oppress him, he must by faith lift up his heart to God, and put
all his trust and confidence in him, thorough Christ. And, if he can this do,
he may assure himself, that he shall as certainly escape these fearful
terrors of conscience, and the torments of hell, as Elias and Elizeus did the
edge of the sword: for, let a man put his whole trust in God, and whatsoever
his troubles be, God will deliver him. Great are the troubles of the
righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of them all, Psalm. 34.19. Indeed we
must not limit God, for time, or manner of deliverance; but, wait on GOD by
faith, accounting his grace sufficient, till deliverance come. And thus much of
the sixth effect.

The seventh effect of their faith is this: Of weak were made strong. Or
thus: Of weak were restored to health. This must be understood of Hezekias, a
worthy king of Judah, who (as we may read, 2. Kings 20.) being sore sick, even
unto death, was restored to health, and obtained of GOD the lengthening of his
days, for the space of fifteen years. Which wonderful recovery, he
obtained by means of his faith, which he showed in time of his sickness, by
a prayer he made unto God; the substance whereof, stood in these two things:
First, being very sick, he prayed for the pardon of his sins. This
appears by his thanksgiving, upon his recovery, Isay 38.17. where he
confesses, that God had cast all his sins behind his back. Now, look for
what he gave thanks; that (no doubt) he had before begged of God in prayer.
Secondly, he made request unto GOD for prolonging of his days, for some
reasons which did concern himself; and this he also prayed for in faith.
Now, the reasons moving him to pray for longer life, were these: First, he
had then no issue to succeed him in his Kingdom; and therefore he prayed for
life, to beget a child, which might sit upon his throne after him. And the
ground of this prayer was this; GOD had made a particular promise unto David
and Solomon, 1. Kings 8.25, that they should not want issue after them, to sit
upon the Throne of Israel, so that their children took heed to their way, to
walk before the LORD, as David did. Now, King Hezekiah, knowing this promise,
had regard hereunto: and, building himself hereon, his conscience bearing him
witness, that he had walked before the Lord uprightly, he prays for issue
to succeed him; and, for that cause, he desires strength of body, and length of
days. This appears notably by his prayer, 2. King. 20.3, Lord (says he) I
beseech thee now remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart. The sum of his prayer is this: All the kings succeeding David
and Solomon, which walk in Gods commandments, shall have issue to sit on
their thrones after them. Now, from hence he prays thus; Oh Lord, I have
walked before thee, in truth and sincerity of heart: and hereupon the
conclusion follows, grant me issue to sit upon my throne after me; and
therefore, life and health to accomplish the same.

Secondly, he prayed that he might live to glorify God, in that weighty
calling, wherein God had placed him over his people. This appears likewise,
by his thanksgiving unto the Lord, upon his recovery; where he says, Isay
38.20. ^he Lord was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my song all the
days of our life in the house of the Lord. Thus by his worthy prayer, he
showed forth his faith notably: by virtue whereof, being sick unto death, he
obtained of the Lord, the prolonging of his days, for the space of fifteen
years. And, so we see, to whom this seventh effect of faith is to be referred.

Here we are taught a special duty, for the recovery of our health, in the
time of sickness: to wit, before we use the ordinary means of Physic, we
must (according to this example) first put our faith in practice, by humbling
our selves for our sins past, confessing them truly unto God, and praying
for pardon, from a resolute purpose of heart, to lead a new life; and also, by
entreating health of God, and his good blessing upon the means which we shall
use for our recovery. Thus have other of Gods servants done, beside Hezekias.
When David was grievously sick, the principal thing he did, was this practice
of faith; in humbling his soul before God for his sins, and entreating
earnestly the pardon of them, as we may see Psa. 6. and 38. This is the
principal thing, which in those Psalms is propounded of David. And so the
Apostle counsels, Iam. 5.14, 15* Is any man sick among you? let him call for
the Elders of the Church: and what must they do? Surely, first pray for him;
and then (as the custom was in those days) anoint him with oil, in the name
of the Lord. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up again: and if he have committed any sin, it shall be forgiven
him. And, here we must be admonished, to beware of the bad practices of the
world, in this case: the most men in their sickness, first seek to the
Physicians; and if that fail them, they send for the Minister. This was King
Asa his practice, for which he is branded to all posterity, that being
diseased in his feet, he sought unto Physicians, and not unto the Lord, 2.
Chron. 16.12; though otherwise, he had good things in him, as 1. King. 15.14.
And, many do far worse, who seek to witches and inchanters, when they, or
theirs, are in such distress: but, this is to forsake God, and to seek help
of the devil, like to Ahaziah, who sent to Baalzebub the God of Ekron, to know
of his recovery, when he was sick upon a fall, 2. Kings 1.2. This should be
far from all Gods children: for, as Ahaziahs sickness became deadly, through
his sending to Baalzebub; so undoubtedly, many diseases become incurable, by
the bad and preposterous dealing of the Patient, who either uses unlawful
means, or lawful means disorderedly, or trusting therein. We therefore, in
this case, must remember our duty in the practice of faith, as Hezekiah did.

The eight fruit of faith, is this: Waxed valiant in battle. This effect may
well be understood of all the Judges before named, and of all the good Kings
in Judah and Israel. But yet, there be two especially, to whom we may more
peculiarly refer it: to wit, Samson, and David. For, Samson, he by means of
faith, came to be so mighty (Judge. 15.15.) that with the Iawe bone of an ass
he slew a thousand Philistims. And for David, he likewise was so encouraged by
faith, that with the same sling, wherewith he kept his fathers sheep (which
was but a slender weapon for war) he encountered with Goliath that huge
Philistim, and hit him with a stone in the forehead, and slew him. Both these
facts, were the fruits of their faith, which made them bold to encounter with
these mighty enemies.

In this effect of their faith, first, we may observe, that true fortitude and
manhood, right valor and courage, comes from true faith. It must be granted,
that many heathen men had great strength and courage; but indeed, it was but a
shadow of true valor: for, right valor coms from a believing heart. And,
therefore it is said, that these Judges and Princes of Israel, waxed strong in
battle by faith.

Secondly, Does true faith make men valiant in battle? Then should the
preaching of the word, be set up, and maintained, as well in the Camp, and
Guarison, and among Soldiers on the Seas; as in Cities and Towns of peace.
For, the preaching of the word, is the means of this faith which gives valor
in battle, to them that fight in a good cause.

Hence it was, that the Lord enjoined by Moses, that when the people of Israel
went out to battle, the Priests should come forth, Deuteronomy. 20.2.3.
and encourage the people, that their hearts might not faint, nor fear, nor
dread their enemies; because of the powerful presence of God fighting for
them. The Papists object this (by way of reproach) against Zwinglius, who was
one of the restorers of the Gospel; That he died in the field among
Soldiers: But, this indeed is no reproach, but rather a matter of great
commendation unto him; in that, for the increase of faith and knowledge, in
them that were weak Christians about him, he was content to hazard his own
life. And thus much of the eight effect.

The ninth effect of faith, for which these worthy men are commended, is this;
They turned to flight the Armies of the Alients. This may be understood of the
most of the Judges, and of the good Kings of Judah and Israel. But I will make
choice, especially of two, Gedion, and Iehosaphat: for, Gedion, one of the
Judges, with three hundred Soldiers (Judges 6. and 7) altogether unweaponed,
only with light pitchers in their hands, put to flight a mighty huge Army of
the Midianites. And Iehosaphat a godly King, being assaulted with a mighty and
great Army of Moabites, Ammonites, and men of mount Seir, knew that by force
of arms he could not withstand them; and therefore by faith makes a worthy
prayer unto the Lord, and the Lord heard him, and set his enemies one against
another, and so did he put them to flight: which he could never have done by
any strength of his own.

Here we may learn, how Kingdoms and people may become able to put to
flight their enemies. The best way is, to put in practice their faith in God;
by humbling themselves truly for their sins past, with unfeigned confession of
them unto God, praying withal earnestly for the pardon of them; and for Gods
aid, assistance, and protection against their enemies. The power of this
means is evident in Scripture: and therefore when Eliah was taken up, Elisha
cried, My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof,
2. Kings 2.12: giving him this notable commendations, that he was as good to
Israel, by means of his faith, as all their Chariots and Horsemen. Question.
How could that possibly be true? Answer. If we read the Story, we shall find
it to be most true, that by his prayers which he made in faith, he did as much
or more then all the strength of the Land could do. And so it shall be with all
Christian Kings and people: if they can show forth their faith, by prayer unto
God, they shall do wonderful much hereby, in subduing of their enemies.

To apply this to our selves; we have had many and dangerous assaults from
Popish enemies, both domestical and foreign, who have of long time, and no
doubt still do purpose our overthrow. Now, how shall we be able to withstand
their might, and to escape their malice? True it is, Christian policy, and
warlike provision must be used: yet our stay and rest must not be thereon; but
we must stir up our faith, both Magistrates and Subjects, Prince and people:
and first of all humble our selves for our sins, and show forth our repentance
by new obedience in time to come; and then pray for a blessing upon the outward
means which shall be used. This is the right practice of faith, in the case of
danger by our enemies; which we shall find (if we exercise it unfeignedly) to be
a surer means of safety and victory against our enemies, then all worldly
munition and policy. For hereby we shall have the Lord for our protection, and
his blessing upon the outward means, giving strength and good success
thereunto; when as, omitting this duty, the Lord will not be with us, and then
we shall find that vain is the strength or wit of man. Let us not therefore
betray our selves wilfully into our enemies hand; but by this practice of
faith, enable our selves against all our enemies whatsoever: otherwise we may
justly fear to be delivered into their hands, for a prey unto their teeth. And
therefore, if we love our own safety, and the welfare of our Land, let us
practice this duty: For, the prayer of faith avails much with God, if it be
fervent; and therefore the Lord says to Moses, when he fell down before him,
to turn back the wrath that was broken-in upon the people, Let me alone: as
though Moses had held, or bound the Lords hand by his prayer, that he could
not smite his people. And thus much for the ninth fruit of faith.

The faith of the widow and the Shunamite.
VERSE 35. The women received their dead raised up to life.


THis is the tenth and last fruit of their faith, which must be understood of
these two women especially: the widow of Zarephath, and the Shunamite. The
widow of Zarephath, giving entertainment: ^. Kings 17.
o Eliiah in the great famine, had this blessing vouchsafed unto her for her
faith, that her dead son was restored to life by the Prophet: And the
Shunamite that provided lodging for the Prophet Elisha, 2. Kings 4.
had her only son restored to life from death by the Prophet through faith.
Now here we must observe, that these two women did not only believe in the
true God; but more particularly, that God would use these his servants, as
means to restore to life their two children that were dead: as appears by
this, that both of them made means to the Prophet, for the reviving of their
children; which they did, by faith.

But some will say, This last effect of faith, may seem to cross the Scripture
elsewhere; which says, that Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep.
1. Cor. 15.20.
How then could these that were before Christ's incarnation, be restored from
death to life? Answer. Saint Paul's meaning is this; that Christ is the first of
all those that rose from death to life, to die no more, but to live for ever.
So, indeed, Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep: for, he rose to
live for ever. As for these two, and some other, mentioned both in the old
Testament and the new, that were raised from death to life, they rose not from
the sleep of death, to live for ever, but to die again.

In this tenth fruit of faith, all Parents may learn their duty toward their
children, in the case of sickness or such like. They must follow the example
of these two godly women, and labor especially to show forth their faith in
such duties as God requires in such a case: to wit, they must humble
themselves for their own sins, and for the sins of their children and
family; praying earnestly to God for the pardon of them (for GOD may visit the
iniquity of the Parents upon the children in bodily judgments) and entreating
the Lord to restore them to health and liberty: and withal, they must use the
ordinary lawful means of recovery in physic and such like, praying to God
for a blessing thereupon.

This is their duty; but (alas!) the manner and practice of many Parents, is
far otherwise: for, whereas they should first seek unto the Lord, and come
to his Prophet, they either run first to the ordinary means of physic; or,
being worse disposed, seek help of wizards and blessers by their charms and
sorceries, forsaking GOD and running to the Devil. Indeed, the use of lawful
means is not to be discommended simply: but this preposterous course is
blameworthy, and depriues many, of Gods blessing in the means, That they
seek help of Physic, before they have sought to the Lord, in this holy
practice of faith.

Quest. But how can the parents faith benefit the child? Answ. It cannot
procure unto it eternal life: for, every one must be saved by his own faith
in Christ. And, yet the child receives many a good blessing at Gods hand, by
means of the Parents faith; as namely, the benefit of the covenant of grace in
the seals thereof; besides the fruition of many temporal blessings, as life
it self, in this place.

The consideration hereof, must move all parents, above all things, to labor
for true faith: for, by the practice hereof, they shall be able to bring the
greatest blessing upon themselves, and their children, and upon the lawful
means which they shall use for their good. Say, the Lord shall lay his hand
upon children and servants in a family, what must parents and masters do?
Surely, the best way for help, is the practice of faith, in true humiliation
for sin, and prayer to God for mercy, and for a blessing upon the means
which they shall use. In all societies this is true, that by the faith of the
governors, many curses are removed, and many blessings procured. God sends his
Judgments among us daily, and we know not when other more shall befall us: but
for the remoueall and preue^ting of them, we must give our selves to true
humiliation and prayer; and so shall we find the Lords mercy toward us, as
these two women did.

And thus much of this tenth fruit of faith, and of them all severally.

Now, from them all jointly together, observe this special point; That faith
is such a grace of God, as does bring down from heaven upon every believer,
all Gods blessings that are needful for him. Who is he that desires not to
be made partaker of GODs blessing^ needful for him, both in soul and body?
Well: the only way and means hereto, is to get a true and lively faith, and
to put the same in practice, in all such duties as God shall require at our
hands. The worthy men before named, obtained all the former most wonderful
blessings, by means of their faith: By it they escaped the edge of the sword,
they quenched the violence of the fire, waxed mighty in battle, etc. as we
have heard.

Now, if faith be such a notable grace of God, then above all things in this
world, let us labor for it. We must not content our selves with lip-faith, and
so presume upon Gods mercies; but, we must labor for a true and lively faith
in Christ, which may purify our hearts, and bring forth fruit in our lives.
Here are strong motives to persuade us hereunto: for, what do we desire?
riches, honor, or favor, and grace in the world? would we have health, and
strength? nay, the favor of God, which is all in all? then, look to get true
faith: for, in the practice thereof, thou shall obtain of God, all needful
blessings, both temporal and spiritual. Many toil themselves exceedingly, by
worldly means to get temporal blessings, as health, wealth, honor, etc. and
yet never attain thereto, because they seek them not by faith. I confess,
natural men get many good things: but to them they are no blessings; because
they want faith both in getting, and keeping of them: for, they lay all
religion aside, and toil themselves wholly in worldly means. This course the
child of God must beware of. Say, that a Prince bids one of his servants go
to his Treasury, and there enrich himself with Jewels, with gold, and silver,
and with whatsoever he lacks: what will this man do? Surely, first he will
call for the keys, whereby he may unlock the doors and chests; for else he can
get nothing. Behold, in the Ministry of his word, God shows us his full
treasury, wherein we may enrich our selves, with all his blessings: Now, we
must not with the fool, run without the key, but labor first, for true
faith; which is that key, whereby Gods heavenly treasures are opened unto us:
and, we must be sure that we have a sound key; that is, a true and sound faith,
which may strongly turn about the locks of Gods treasury. For, this is most
certain, he that does unfeignedly believe, shall never want any thing, either
in body or soul, that is good for him to have. Every one will say, he
believes; but the truth is, that true faith is rare: for, men's hearts are not
purified, nor their lives changed; but they remain as sinful as ever they
were: which causes Gods judgments to be rife among us. Wherefore, as we
desire our own good, both in soul and body; so let us labor for true faith,
and show forth the power of it in our lives. And thus much of these Judges and
Prophets, and of the fruits of their faith.

Believers under the Maccabees.
VERSE 35. Others also were racked, and would not be delivered, that they
might receive a better resurrection.


IN these words, the author of this Epistle proceeds to the fourth order of
Examples of faith, contained in this Chapter: wherein (as in the former lastly
handled) he proceeds briefly, heaping up in few words, many worthy examples
of faith, co^cealing the names of the parties, and only setting down those
things, for which their faith is commended unto us. And this fourth and last
order of examples, comprehends such believers as lived under the regiment of
the Maccabees, and afterward to the coming of Christ. For, of believers in
former times, it cannot be understood* because there is a manifest distinction
put between these believers, and the former Judges, Kings, and Prophets; in
these words, others also: whereby it is plain, that here he propounds
examples of believers different from those which he mentioned before. And it
is also plain, that these believers lived before the coming of Christ. For,
howsoever the Christians in the Primitive Church, were racked, scourged, and
tormented after this sort; yet of them this place cannot be understood,
because they enjoyed the promise of the Messiah: but, these here mentioned,
enjoyed not that promise in their days, but waited for it by faith, and
therein died, Verse 39. And indeed, in the time of the Maccabees, the Church
of the Jews was wonderfully persecuted by Antiochus, about two hundred years
before Christ; as we may see, 2. Maccabees 4. and 6. chapters.

Question. Where had the Author of this Epistle this large narration of these
strange persecutions, seeing they are not registered in the books of the old
Testament?

Answer. We may judge, that he gathered it out of the Stories and Records of
men: which (howsoever they be not now extant) yet in his days in the
Primitive Church were extant, known, and approved. Neither must this seem
strange unto us: for, the spirit of God, in the old Testament speaking of men,
has oftentimes reference and relation therein to humane Writings; as this
phrase (The rest of the acts of such and such, are they not written in the
books of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah and Israel) so often used in the
books of Kings and Chronicles, does evidently declare.

Now, those books of Chronicles, were not parcelles of holy Scripture, but
civil or ecclesiastical Stories, like to our books of Martyrs and
Chronicles. 2. Timothy chapter 3. verse 8, Saint Paul says, Iannes and
Iambres resisted Moses. Now, in the book of Exodus, we shall not find the
Sorcerers that withstoode Moses, once named. And Saint Jude makes mention of a
Prophecy of Enoch, Jude verse 14; which in all the old Testament is not
recorded: and it is like, that Moses was the first Penne-manne of holy
Scripture. Whence then had these Apostles these things? Answer. No doubt, the
holy Ghost might reveal such things unto them, though they had been unknown
in those times: but it is more probable, that the Apostles had them out of some
Jewish Writers, or records then extant, and approved among the Jews. So Paul,
preaching to the Athenians, alleges the saying of Aratus an Athenian Poet:
For, Acts 17.28.
we are his generation. And to the Corinthians, he propounds a sentence of
Menander; Evil words corrupt good manners. 1. Cor. 15. And to Titus, he
alleges Epimenides, a Cretian Poet; The Cretians are always liers, evil
beasts* slow bellies, Titus 1.12.

Now whereas the spirit of God takes these sentences out of the writings of
men; we may learn, that to read the writings of men is not unlawful, but a
thing of good use to the servants of God. But whereas some would hence prove,
that their authority may be alleged ordinarily at every man's pleasure in the
public ministry, it has no ground in these places. For, first, the
Apostles were so guided by the holy Ghost in their public Ministry, that
they could not err: but no Ministers at this day have such a privilege.
Secondly, the Apostles, alleging or recording the sayings of men, in their
Sermons or Writings, did thereby sanctify them, and make them to become a part
of holy Scripture. This, no ordinary Minister can do: but let him allege a
humane testimony ten thousand times, yet still it remains humane, and is
not Gods word. Thirdly, they that would warrant their practice, in alleging
humane testimonies in their Sermons, by the Apostles, ought to follow the
Apostles in their manner of allegations. Now, the Apostles were so sparing
herein, that in many books we shall not find one: for, there are only
three, in all the new Testament. Again, the Apostles did it without
ostentation: for, the names of the Authors are concealed, whence they took
their testimonies.

And lastly, the Apostles did it upon weighty cause and just occasion; to wit,
when they were persuaded in conscience, that those testimonies would convince
the consciences of their hearer in those things for which they alleged them.
Now, how far many differ from the Apostles in their allegations, let the
world judge.

Yet before we come to speak of these examples of faith in particular, there
are sundry general points to be handled. In the three former verses, the
spirit of GOD has set down the prosperous success of believers, through
faith* But here he comes to acquaint us, with a different estate of other
believers, under grievous persecutions and torments, even unto most cruel and
bitter kinds of death.

From this which the Apostle here observes, we may take a view of the state
of Gods Church and people here in this world. For, GOD vouchsafes peace and
prosperous success to some, as a just reward of faith and obedience: but
others must want the comfort of outward peace and welfare, and undergo most
grievous trials and persecutions. Look, as there is a continual interchange
between day and night, and the one does constantly follow the other, so as it
is one while day, and an other while night: so is it with the Church of God,
and with true believers in this world; sometime they have peace and prosperity:
and this continues not always, but another while they are in trouble, misery,
and persecution.

To make this point more plain, because it is of some importance; we may
behold the truth of it, in the Church of GOD from the beginning. Adams family
was GODs Church, and therein was first notable peace: but when GOD accepted
Abels sacrifice, and refused Cains, then persecution began, and Cain slew his
brother Abell. Abraham is called the Father of the faithful, and his family in
those days, was the true Church of God; wherein, we may notably see this
changeable estate: for, Gods calls him out of Charran, to dwell in the land of
Canaan, Exodus 12.1, 10. But, within a while, the family was so great in the
Land, that he was feign to go down into Egypt, to soiourne there. And, there
the Lord blessed him exceedingly, and enriched him so greatly, that he became a
mighty Prince, able to encounter with the Kings of those nations in battle,
after his return to Canaan, Exodus 14.

The Israelites, Gods chosen people, were 400. year in bondage in Egypt; but,
at the appointed time God gave them a glorious deliverance: and, yet they were
tried in the wilderness 40. years; after which time, they were planted safely
in the fruitful Land of Canaan, a Land that flowed with milk and honey. And
there also, the Church of God was in this case; sometime in prosperity, and
otherwhiles in adversity: for, when it was ruled by Judges (as in that book
appears) for ten, twenty, thirty, or forty years together, the Israelites
for their sins, were in subjection and bondage to the nations about them; as
the Moabites, the Philistims, the Ammonites, etc. Yet then, when they cried to
God, he sent them some mighty judge to deliver them, for so long time again.
This was the interchangeable estate of the Church, all the time of the Judges.
And afterward, when it was governed by Kings, it was in the same case: for, one
while God gave them good Kings, who would advance religion, and maintain and
cherish the Priests and Prophets of God; and, for their time the Church
prospered. But otherwhiles, for their sins, God would send them wicked
Princes; which persecuted the Prophets, and the godly in the Land. This is
plain in the books of the Kings and Chronicles. After the reign of good king
Josias, came the captivity into Babylon: and, 70, years expired, the Lord by K.
Cyrus returned the^ again. After their return, they were one while in peace,
and another while in distress; as we may see in the books of Ezra and
Nehemias: but, above all other, that persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes, was
most notorious, which was foretold by Daniel in his Prophecy, Dan. 11.36. and
is recorded in the books of the Maccabees.

To come to the times of the Gospel: The Primitive Church, after the ascension
of Christ, in the first 300. years, suffered ten most bloody and grievous
persecutions: betwixt each of which, she yet had some times of peace, and (as
it were) respite to breath in. And, after the tenth persecution ended, the Lord
raised up the good Emperor Constantine; who brought peace and welfare unto the
church. But, soon after him, the heresy of Arrius, raised up by the devil,
brought as grievous persecutions upon the church, as ever the Pagans did;
being a most blasphemous heresy, denying the eternal deity of Christ, and of
the holy Ghost: and, it prevailed in the Church for 80. years. Not long after
the suppression of that heresy, began the idolatry and tyranny of Antichrist
to prevail in the Church, for many hundred years. And now, about some
fourscore years agone, the Lord in mercy raised up worthy instruments, by
whose means, he delivered his Church from that idolatry and blindness: yet
so, as still the church has felt the bloody hand of Antichrist in grievous
persecutions. All which, shows this to be most true; that the outward state of
Gods Church, is interchangeable, having one while peace, and another while
grievous persecution.

To apply this to our selves: God has planted his Church among us in this
land, and for many years together, has blessed us with prosperity and peace;
which, in great mercy he has given us as a reward of the faith of his
servants which are among us: and, during this time, we have had great freedom
and liberty in Gods holy ministry, for the word, prayer, and sacraments. But,
we must know, that the state of Gods Church, for peace and trouble is
interchangeable, as day and night, for light and darkness. Wherefore, we must
be advertised, to look unto our selves: for, our estate in peace must not last
always, these golden days will have an end, and troubles and afflictions
will undoubtedly come. Indeed, God only knows, what kind of afflictions
shall befall, and the particular time thereof: but, that they shall come in the
time appointed of God, we may resolve our selves by the reasons following.

First, the tenor of the Law, is this; that the curse does follow the
transgression: so, that when any man, family, or people, live in the breach of
Gods commandments, they must look for Gods judgments to be powered upon
them. Now, we may too truly assume, that this our nation and people abound
with grievous sin in all estates: For, in the civil estate (to omit manifold
practices of oppression) Where is justice without bribery? or bargaining,
without fraud and deceit? And, in the ministry (beside many abuses) where is
that care which ought to be, for the building of Gods Church? And, for the body
of our people (beside gross ignorance, and superstition) what fearful
blasphemy, whoredom, swearing, and Sabbaoth-breaking, does every where abound?
beside fearful Atheism, which is a mother of abominations: whether we
respect natural Atheism, whereby many deny God by their works; or, learned
Atheism in some, who dispute against the truth of God, revealed in his word.
All these, and many other sins among us, cry loud for GODs judgments upon
us; even for that fearful judgment, the remooueall of Gods kingdom in the
Gospel of peace.

Secondly, consider what manner of persons of place, and note, both in Church
and common wealth, God takes from us by death, even in their best time: are
they not such as excelled among us, for great wisdom and learning, and for true
piety and good conscience? now, howsoever this may seem but a small thing in
the eyes of many; yet undoubtedly, it is a forerunner of Gods judgments: for,
the righteous perish, and no man considers it in heart; and merciful men are
taken away, and no man understands that the righteous is taken away from the
evil to come. Isa. 57.1.

Thirdly, God has set his fearful judgments among us, and about us, war
and sword in our neighbor nations; which also has been often shaken at us:
also, famine and pestilence throughout our own Land, by intercourse and long
continuance, Leuit. 26. Now this is the truth of God, that, when God sendes his
judgments upon a people; if they do not repent, one judgment is but the
forerunner of another more grievous and terrible than the former. But, little
or no repentance appears among us; nay rather, we fall away more and more, and
so stand still in danger of more fearful judgments.

Lastly, it is usual with God, thus to deal with his own servants: as he does
sometime reward their faith and obedience with peace; so, otherwhiles he will
try their faith by affliction. Thus he dealt with his servant Job, though
there were none for piety like him in his time, through all the world. Now, God
has his servants among us: for the trial of whose faith, we may persuade our
selves, some tribulation shall come upon us; For, all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer tribulation, 2. Tim. 3.12.

This being so, that our peace shall be turned into trouble (as by the former
reasons, which directly fasten themselves upon our Church and state, may
evidently appear) let us then here learn our duty.

First, we must cast with our selves, what may be the worst that can befall
us, when trial and persecution shall come. This is the counsel of our Savior
Christ to those that would follow him constantly as good disciples: they must,
as good builders, consider of the cost, before they lay the foundation; and,
like good Warriers, consider of their strength, before they go out into the
field, lest they leave off, and turn back, like fools and cowards, Luke 14.28.
etc. We by Gods mercy do now profess the true religion of Christ, with hope
to be saved thereby: therefore, we must cast with our selves, what our
religion may cost us, and see before hand, what is the worst thing that may
befall us, for our profession of Christ and his Gospel. If we have not done
this, at the beginning of our profession, we must now do it; for, Better late,
than never: lest going on securely, without this account making, we shamefully
forsake Christ when trial comes.

In former times, the constant profession of Christ, has cost men loss of
friends, loss of goods, and liberty; yea, the loss of their hearts blood:
and, the same case may befall us. Wherefore, we must cast with our selves, and
see whether we be willing to suffer the loss of goods, and friends; yea, the
loss of our lives, for the defense of Christ's true religion.

Again, as this estate of the Church must move us to make this account, for
resolution in suffering; so it must teach us to labor for those saving graces
of Gods spirit, which may enable us to stand fast in all temptations, troubles
and persecutions. We must not content our selves with blazing lamps, as the
five foolish virgins did; but, get the oil of grace into the vessels of our
hearts. Knowledge in the word, is a commendable thing; but not sufficient to
make us stand in the day of trial. We, therefore, must labor for true saving
graces; especially for this, to have our hearts rooted and grounded in the love
of God, through faith: whereby we are assured, that God is our father in
Christ, and Jesus Christ our redeemer, and the holy Ghost our comforter and
sanctifier. This assurance of faith will stablish our hearts in all estates:
come life, come death, we need not fear; for, nothing shall be able to
separate us from this love of God in Christ Jesus.

And thus much of the coherence of this verse with the former. Now to the words.

Others also were racked, etc. Here the holy Ghost begins to propound the
fruits of faith, for which this last rank of believers are commended unto us.
And they are not such famous exploites as the former, but nine several kinds
of sufferings; unto all which, we must remember to apply this clause by faith,
from the 33, verse: as thus, Through faith, they endured racking, mocking, and
so for all the rest.

Out of these effects in general, we may learn two things: First, a singular
fruit of faith, for which it is here so highly commended in this last rank
of examples: to wit, that by it the child of GOD is enabled to bear
whatsoever the Lord shall lay upon him. The torments wherewith man's body may be
afflicted, are many and terrible; and yet, be they never so many, nor so
terrible, true saving faith will make the child of GOD to bear them all for
the honor of Christ.

The effects of faith before set down, were many and singular: but
undoubtedly, this strength of patience, which it gives under the greatest
torments for Christ's sake, is one of the principal.

This, Paul does notably testify in this profession (Romans chapter 8. verses
38, 39.) I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor Angels* nor
principalities, nor powers; nor things present, nor things to come; nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Oh singular power of faith! which so
firmly unites the believer unto Christ, that no torments in the world, no not
all the power of Satan, and his Angels, can separate them asunder.

Question. How does faith work this indissoluble power in cleaving unto
Christ? Answer. After this manner: It is the property of faith, to persuade
the conscience, of Gods love and favor in Christ; and upon this persuasion,
the heart begins to love God again. Now, by this love does faith work, and
make a man able to bear all torments that can be inflicted for religions sake:
for, Love suffers all things, 1. Cor. 13.7. even that love wherewith one man
loves another: how much more then shall this love wherewith we love God in
Christ, make us to suffer any thing for his names sake? Hence it is, that love
is said to be strong as death: and the coals thereof are fiery coals, and a
vehement flame: Cant. 8.6.
yea, much water cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it; that is,
grievous persecutions and torments cannot extinguish the same. Nay, such is the
power of love to GOD when it is fervent, that it makes a man so zealous of Gods
glory, that if there were no other way to glorify God, than by sufferings; the
child of God would rather yield himself to endure the torments of the damned,
than suffer God to lose his glory. This we may see in Paul, Romans 9.3: I would
wish my self (says he) to be separate from Christ for my brethren that are my
kinsmen, according to the flesh: that is, the Israelites; meaning for the
advancement of Gods glory in their calling and salvation. Such zeal likewise
we may see in Moses: for, thinking that God should lose his glory, if the
Israelites were destroyed, he prays the Lord to pardon their sin: But if
thou will not, then (says he) raze me out of the book which thou have
written. Exodus 32.32.


This being the fruit of faith, To make a man able and willing to suffer any
thing for Christ's sake; we must hereby be moved to labor for true faith: for,
tribulation may come; nay, some affliction will come on every child of God,
more or less. Now, without faith we shall never be able to glorify God under
the cross. The just must live by faith in this estate, Heb. 10.38; as, here
they endure racking, burning, hewing asunder, etc. and all by faith.

Secondly, out of all these sufferings here endured by faith, note the mind
and disposition of ungodly men toward Gods Church and people; they are most
bitterly and bloudily bent against them: for, here they put in execution upon
Gods children, whatsoever cruelty the devil could suggest into their hearts.
And this has been their disposition and behavior, not only before Christ's
incarnation, but also ever since: as may appear by the manifold strange
tortures, devised against Christians in the Primitive Church; and both then and
since inflicted upon them. Behold it in the Church of Rome, especially in
their late Inquisition: whereby, beside the cruel racking of the conscience by
unjust inquiries, they put the Protestants to most cruel torments.

The consideration of this cruel disposition in the wicked, against the godly,
is of special use. First, it proves unto us, that the religion which by Gods
mercy we profess, contained in the books of the old and new Testament, is no
politic device of man, but the sacred ordinance of the everliving God. For,
if it were the invention of man, it would so fit their humor, and accord with
their nature, that generally it would be loved and embraced, and not one of an
hundred would mislike it. But, we see it is generally detested; This Sect is
every where spoken against, Acts 28.22: natural men reject it, and persecute
it, and the professors of ^t unto the death. This they do, because true
religion is contrary to their nature, as light is to darkness; and condemns
those ways and courses which they best like of. This reason shall justify
true religion, to be Gods own ordinance, even to the conscience of the worldly
Atheist: his devilish malice against it, proves Gods divine truth to be in it.

Secondly, do the wicked hate the godly, because of their religion and
profession? then on the contrary, we must learn to love religion, because it
is religion; and the professors of it, for their professions sake. This is
Christ's instruction, to love a disciple because he is a disciple; Mat. 10.
Indeed we must love all men; but especially those that embrace the Gospel of
Christ, and be of the household of faith: for, all such are brethren, having
one Father, which is God; and brethren ought to love one another. But alas this
lesson is not learned: for, the world generally is given to mocking, and
scoffing, and the matter of their mocking is religion, and the professers
thereof. This ought not to be so: for, howsoever men may fail both in
knowledge and practice, yet the professers of religion should not be so
despised. This abuse is grown to such a height, that many refrain the
diligent hearing of the word preached, least they should be mocked. But let
these mockers know, that herein they shake hands with the devil, and with the
persecuters of Gods Church; for, mocking is a kind of persecution. Young
Christians should not be so dealt with; but rather encouraged, for the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ. Thus dealt our Savior Christ with those
that gave any testimony of the sparks of grace: when the young man said, He
had from his youth kept Gods commandments, the Text says, Jesus beheld him
and loved him, Mark 10.21: and, hearing a Scribe answer discreetly, he said
unto him; Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God, Mark chapter 12. ver.
34: Now, we must be followers of Christ, and walk in love, judging and
speaking the best of all professors, accounting none for hypocrites, till GOD
make their hypocrisy known. It is a note of a Christian to love a man,
because he loves religion: on the contrary, to hate a man, because he is a
Christian, is a note of a persecuter, and an enemy to Christ. And thus much in
general.

Now we come in particular to the several kinds of sufferings, which these
believers endured by faith: the first whereof, is racking; in these words:
others also were racked: or, as some translate it; And others were beaten with
clubbes. For, the words in the original will bear either translation: and,
both of them fitly agree to this kind of suffering. For, in these times, the
enemies of GODs Church, used to set the bodies of them that were to be
tormented, upon rackes, and engines; whereon, they stretched out every joint,
and then did beat the whole body thus racked* with clubs, till the party were
stark dead. An example of this kind of suffering, we have in Eleazer a Jew,
1. Mac. 6. who under Antiochus was first racked, and then beaten on every part
of his body, unto the death; because he refused to eat swines flesh.

But some will say, This cannot be any commendation of faith, to be racked and
beaten to death: for, malefactors and traitors are so used. Ans. To prevent
this objection, the holy Ghost adds these words; and would not be delivered:
or, would not accept deliverance: to show, that this suffering was a notable
commendation of true faith. The meaning of the words is this; That whereas some
Jews in the old Testament, were condemned to death for their religion, by
persecutors: and yet, had life and liberty offered unto the^, if they would
recant, and forsake their religion; This proffer of life they refused, and
would not be delivered, upon such a condition.

In this example of faith, we are taught to hold fast true religion, and to
prefer the enjoying of it, before all the pleasures and commodities in the
world; yea, before life it self. This point, Paul urges in sundry
exhortations; saying, Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he
fall: 1. Co. 10.12. forbidding us to preserve our outward peace, by
communicating with idolaters. And again, Stand fast in the faith: 1. Cor.
16.13. Yea, this is one maine point that Paul urges to Timothy, in both his
Epistles; to keep faith, and a good conscience. And our Savior Christ in one
of his parables, Math. 13.44. compares the kingdom of heaven, to a treasure hid
in the field; which, when a man finds, he hides it, and goes home and sels
al he has, to buy the field. Whereby he would teach us, that every ones duty,
who would enjoy the Kingdom of heaven, is this; In regard of it, to forgo and
forsake all things else, esteeming them to be dross and dongue, as Paul did,
Philip. 3.8. What though a man had all the riches and pleasures of the world,
and al things else for this life, that his heart could wish? yet, if he want
religion, and a good conscience, all he has is nothing: for, so he wants the
love and favor of God, and shall lose his soul; for the ransom whereof, all
the world can do nothing. Wherefore, we must hereby be admonished, to have
more care to get and maintain true religion, and a good conscience, than any
thing in the world besides.

Now, because nature will judge it a part of rashness, to refuse life, when it
is offered; therefore, to prevent this conceit, against these believers, the
holy Ghost sets down a notable reason of this their fact: to wit, They refused
deliverance, that they might receive a better resurrection. Many interpreters
understand these words, of the resurrection at the day of judgment simply; as
though the holy Ghost had said, These Martyrs therefore refused to be delivered
from death; because, they looked to receive, at the day of judgment, a greater
measure of glory: even for this, that in obedience to God, for the maintenance
of true religion, they were content to lay down their lives. This (no doubt)
is the truth of God, that the more we humble our selves, in suffering for the
name of Christ in this life; the greater shall our glory be, at the general
resurrection: for, our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes
unto us, a far more excellent, and eternal weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4.17.
And yet (as I take it) that is not the meaning of these words: but, their
resurrection at the last day, is here termed better, than the temporal
deliverance offered unto them. For, being in torments on the rack, they were
but dead men; and, when life was offered unto them, it was (as it were) a kind
of resurrection, and in regard of the enemies of the Church* a good
resurrection: but, for that, they would not lose the comfort of resurrection to
life, at the last day.

Here then, are two resurrections compared together. The first, is a
deliverance from temporal death: the second, is a rising to life everlasting
at the last day of judgment. Now, of these two, the later is the better; and
that in the judgment of Gods servants, and Martyrs. So then, the true meaning
of these words, is this: These servants of God, refused deliverance from
temporal tortures and punishments; because their care and desire was, that
their bodies might rise again to life everlasting, at the day of judgment:
which rising again to life at that day, they judged far better, than to rise
to a temporal life, for a while in this world.

This reason, well observed, may teach us these two special duties: First, to
be careful above all things, for assurance in our consciences (as these
servants of God had) that our bodies shall rise again to life everlasting, at
the last day. True it is, we make this confession with our mouths, among the
articles of our Faith; but, we must labor to be settled and resolved
effectually in our hearts, that these our bodies (be they never so miserably
tormented here) shall one day rise to life and glory, by Jesus Christ. All the
true Martyrs of Christ, knew, and were resolved of this: and this it was, that
made them so confident in their sufferings. And, if we can attain unto it, we
shall find great use hereof, both in life and death. For our lives, this will
move us to embrace true religion from our hearts, and in all things to
endeavor to keep a good conscience. This Paul testifies, Act. 24.15, 16: for,
having made profession of his hope in the resurrection, both of just and
unjust; he says, And herein I endeavor my self to have always a clear
conscience both toward God, and toward men. And for death, this persuasion
also is of great use; for, it will notably stay the heart, against the natural
fear of death. It is a wonder to see, how terrible the thoughts of death are
to many a one. Now, this fear arises hence, that they are not in heart
resolved of their resurrection, to life and glory at the last day: for, if they
were, they would endeavor themselves with patience and with comfort, to
undergo the pangs thereof, though never so terrible.

Secondly, hence we must learn so to lead this temporal life, that when we
are dead, our bodies may rise again to life eternal. These Martyrs are a
notable precedent herein unto us: for, they are so resolute to hold that
course of life, which has the hope of glory, that they will rather lose
temporal life, then leave that course. And, indeed this duty is so necessary,
that unless we order well this temporal life, we can never have hope to rise
to glory. Quest. How should we lead this temporal life, that we may rise to
glory, after death? Answer. This, S. John teaches us, Revel. 20, 6* Blessed
and holy is he that has his part in the first resurrection: for, on such the
second death has no power. We must therefore labor earnestly to have our
part herein. This first resurrection is spiritual, wrought in the soul by
the holy Ghost; causing him that is by nature dead in sin, to rise to
newness of life: whereof whosoever is truly partaker, shall undoubtedly rise
to glory. For, they that are quickened in Christ from the death of sin, are made
to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.5.6. Natural death
may sever soul and body for a time: but it can never hinder the fruition of
eternal life. Wherefore, as we desire this life which is eternal when we are
dead: so let us frame our natural lives to die unto sin while we are alive.

Verse 36. And others have been tried by mockings, and scourgings: yea,
moreover by bonds and prisonment. The second kind of suffering, wherewith the
servants of God were then tried, is mocking. Touching the which, we may observe
diverse points: First, whence it came. No doubt it came from ungodly persons,
that were enemies to Gods Church, and true religion; for, here it is made a
part of the trial of Gods Church, by the enemies thereof.

Here, then behold the state of mockers and scoffers at the servants of God:
they are here accounted wicked wretches, and enemies to God, and to his truth.
So Saint Jude, speaking of certain false Prophets, which were crept into the
Church, calls them ungodly men, Jude 4: which he proves afterward, by their
black mouth in evil speaking, verse 8.10. And Ismaell is accounted a
persecuter, by the holy Ghost, for mocking Isaac, Galatians chapter 4. verse
29. And David reckoning up the degrees of sinners, makes the chair of the
scornful, the third and highest, Psalm 1.1. All these places show the
haynousnesse of this sin: and therefore if any of us, young or old, high or
low, have been overtaken with it heretofore, let us now repent and leave it;
for, it is odious in Gods sight. Thou, that art a scoffer, may flatter thy
self, and think all is well, let the matter prove how it can, words are but
wind. But know, thy case is fearful; for, as yet thou want the fear of
God, and art an enemy to Christ and his religion: and one day thou shall be
judged, not only for thy wicked deeds, but for all thy cruel speakings, Jude
verse 15.

Secondly, whereas these servants of God were tried by mockings, it shows that
Gods Church in this world, is subject to this affliction. It is not a thing
newly begun in this age of ours, but has been always in Gods Church from
the beginning. Genesis chapter 21. verse 9, Ismaell mocked Isaac; and Isay
brings in Christ complaining thus: Isay chapter 8. verse 18, Behold, I and my
children whom the Lord has given me, are as signs and wonders in Israel. And
Jeremy says, I am in derision daily: every one mocketh me, Jeremy chapter
20. verse 7: Yea, our Savior Christ upon the Cross, when he was working the
blessed work of man's redemption, was even then mocked by the spiteful Jews,
Mat. 27.41. And Paul was mocked of the Athenians, for preaching Christ and the
resurrection. Acts 17.18.

Now, if this have been the estate of Christ our head, and of his most worthy
Prophets and Apostles, to be mocked and scorned; then must no child of God at
this day think to escape: for, if they have done this to the green tree, what
will they do to the dry? Wherefore, if we belong to Christ, we must prepare for
it, and arm our selves with patience to undergo this trial. The Disciple is
not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord. If they have called the
Master of the house Beelzebub* how much more them of the house? Mat. 10.24, 25*

Thirdly, whereas these servants of God were tried by mockings, and did endure
the same, by faith; here we learn how to behave our selves, when we are subject
to mocking and derision, especially for religions sake. We must not return
mock for mock, and taunt for taunt: but with meekness of heart learn to bear
the same. When Christ was upon the Cross, the Jews most shamefully mocked
him: yet even then did Christ pray for them. And the same was David's behavior,
as we may read notably, Psalm. 38. verse 12, 13, 14, When his enemies spoke
evil of him, what did he? Did he rail on them again? No; He was as a
deaf man, and heard not; and as a dumb man which opens not his mouth; even
as a man that hears not; and in whose mouth are no reproves. This was a rare
thing in David, that he could thus bridle his affections in the case of
reproach: but, read the 15. verse, and we shall see the cause; He trusted in
the Lord his God: also, he considered the hand of God in their reproaches, as
2. Samuel chapter 16. ver. 10: and these things made him silent. This example
we must look upon, and learn hereby with patience to possess our souls
under reproach.

The third kind of suffering, is Scourging. They were not only mocked for
religion, but also whipped and scourged. The fourth, is Bonds and imprisonment.
The fifth is stoning verse 37, They were stoned. The sixth, is this, They were
hewn asunder. These were all worthy fruits of faith, being endured for
religions sake: but the particular points might here be observed, have been
handled before; and therefore I pas^e them over.

The seventh kind of suffering, is this: they were tempted. These words, by
the change of a letter in the original, may be read thus. They were burned.
And some do so translate it; thinking, that they that writ or copied out this
Epistle at the first, did put one letter for another. Their reason is, because
examples of grievous punishments are mentioned both before and after this: and
therefore they think this should be burning, which is a sore and grievous
death. But we may safely and truly read the words thus; They were tempted:
conceiving hereby, that they were enticed and allured by fair promises of
life, to forsake their religion. So, the same word is used by Saint James,
saying; Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own
concupiscence, and is enti^ed, James 1.14. If any ask, why this kind of
trial in tempting, should be placed among such cruel torments? I answer,
because it is as great a trial as any can be. For, it is as dangerous a
temptation to overthrow religion and a good conscience, as any punishment in
the world. This appears plainly in Christ's temptations by the Devil: for, in
those three, Satan bewraies his malice and craft against Christ and his Church
most notably. Now Satan, not prevailing with the two first, makes his third and
last assault from the glory and dignity of the world: for, showing unto Christ
all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, he says, All these
will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, Math. 4.9. Indeed,
Christ's holy heart would not yield unto it: but, that it was a grievous
temptation, appears by Christ's answers. For, in the former temptations, he
only disputed with Satan out of Scripture: but when this temptation comes,
Christ bids him (as it were in passion) avoid Satan; signifying thereby not
only his abhorring of that sin, but also the danger of that assault by the
world. And indeed, these temptations on the right hand (as we may call them)
will most dangerously creep into the heart, and cause shipwreck of faith and
a good conscience. All David's troubles and persecutions could not bring him to
so grievous sins, as did a little ease and rest. A huge great Army cannot so
soon give entrance to an enemy into a City, as riches and fair promises:
neither can bodily torments so soon prevail against a good conscience, as
will worldly pleasures and fair promises. In regard whereof, we must take
heed that we be not deceived by the world: for, the view of the glory and
pomp thereof, will sooner steal from a man both religion and good conscience,
then any persecution possibly can do. And indeed, who do so often change their
religion when trialls come, as they that have the world at will?

The eight example of suffering is this, They were slain with the sword. There
can be nothing said of this, which has not been spoken in the former
examples: and therefore I omit it.

The ninth and last example of suffering, is this; They wandered up and down in
sheep skins, and Goats skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented:
That is, being either banished, or constrained by flight to save their lives,
they wandered up and down in base attire, and were destitute of ordinary food
and comfort; and so in great affliction and torment.

Here we see these servants of GOD, were driven from their own Country,
friends, and families, by persecution. Whence we observe, that in time of
persecution, a Christian man may lawfully fly for his safety, if he be not
hindered by the bond of private or public calling. For, these servants of God,
here commended for their faith, did fly when they were persecuted; and that by
faith: therefore the action is lawful, as I might prove at large, but that I
have spoken of it heretofore. When our Savior Christ knew that the
Pharisees heard of the multitude of Disciples which he made, Ioh. 4.1.3. he
left Judea, where they had greatest jurisdiction, and came into Galile, for his
safety. The Prophet in the old testament did fly: as, Elias from Iezabel: 1.
King. 19.3. And, so did the Apostles in the new; and that by Christ's direction,
Math. 10.23.

Object. 1 But some will say, Persecution is the hand of God, and therefore no
man may fly from it; for, so he should seem to fly from God himself. Ans.
We must consider persecution two ways: first, as it is the hand of God:
seco^condly, as it is the work of the wicked enemies of Gods Church. For, them
God uses sometimes a^ instruments, in laying his hand upon his Church, either
for chastisement, or for trial. Now, a Christian being persecuted for the
truth, and having liberty to fly, cannot be said to fly from Gods hand;
unless he went away contrary to Gods command, as Jonas did, being sent to
Niniue: and beside, he knows that is impossible. But, his intent is to fly
from the wrath of his enemies, to save his life, for the further good of Gods
Church. Again, the reason is not good, To say persecution is the hand of God:
therefore a man may not fly from it. For, so might a man conclude, that non^
ought to fly from sickness, or from war: both which, a man may do with a
safe conscience, not being hindered by some special calling.

Object. 2 But every one is bound to testify his faith and religion, before
his enemies; and therefore may not fly in persecution. Answ. True indeed: a
Christian man must so testify his faith, if he be called thereto of God: but
if God give him liberty, and opportunity to fly, then he will not have him,
at that time, to justify his religion by that means.

Object. 3 But, if it be lawful to fly, how then comes it to pass, that some
of Gods children, when they might have fled, would not; but, have stood to
justify their profession unto death. Ans. We must judge reuere^tly of the^,
and think they did it by some special instinct and motion of Gods spirit; as
appears by their patience and constancy in their greatest torments. Examples
hereof, we have in our English Acts and Monuments, in men worthy of notable
commendations for their constancy, and zeal for the truth of the Gospel.

Quest. If flight in persecution, may be an action of faith; Whether may not
the minister of Gods word fly in time of persecution?

Answ. There be some cases, wherein the Minister may lawfully fly: 1 When that
particular Church and congregation, over which he is placed, is dispersed by
the Enemies* so as he has no hope to gather and call them back again: then
(no doubt) he may fly, till his congregation be gathered again. 2 If the
persecutors do specially aim at the Ministers life, then with the consent of
his flock, he may go apart for his own safety, for a time. So it was with
Paul: when the Ephesians were in an vproar about their Diana, Paul in zeal
would have entered in among them; but the Disciples suffered him not, Act.
19.30. This they did for Paul's safety, and the good of the Church; for, they
knew, those Idolaters would have been most fierce against Paul. And, so ought
every particular Church, to have special care of the life of their Minister.
Other cases there be, in which he may fly: but, I will not stand to recite
all; because there be so many circumstances, which may alter the case, as well
respecting his enemies, as himself, and his people: making that unlawful at
one time, and to some persons; which to others, or at another time, may be
lawful.

Secondly, whereas it is said, These servants of God wandered up and down: we
do learn, that a man may lawfully go from place to place, and travel from
country to country; if so be, he go in faith, as these men did. Again, their
going was to keep faith, and a good conscience: and, for the same end, may
any man lawfully travel from place to place. But, when men go not in faith;
nor yet, for this end, the better to keep a good conscience: there
undoubtedly, their travel is not lawful.

By this then, we have just cause to reprove the badde course of many
wanderers among us: as first, of our common beggars, whose whole life is
nothing else, but a wandering from place to place; though not in faith, nor for
conscience sake: but, they find a sweetness in their idle kind of life; and
therefore they wander, because they would not work. Now, this their course
(having no other ground, but love of idleness, and contempt of pains in a
lawful calling) cannot be but greatly displeasing unto God; who inioynes, that
every man should walk in some lawful calling, and eat his own bread. This
they do not; and therefore the curse of God pursues them: for, generally they
are given up to most horrible sins of injustice, and uncleanness: they walk
inordinately; for, they range not themselves into any families, but live liker
brute beasts, than men: they are not members of any particular congregation,
but excommunicate themselves from all churches; and so live, as though there
were no God, no Christ, nor true religion. And, herein we may see Gods hand
more heavy upon them, that they take all their delight in that course of
wandering, which in it own nature is a curse, and a punishment.

Secondly, we may here also justly reprove the course of some others among us,
who will needs be travelers; not for religions sake (for that were
commendable, if they had such need) nor yet, by virtue of their calling (which
were lawful) but, only for this end, to see fashions, and strange countries:
and, they refrain not from such places as Rome, Spain, etc. wherein, that
cruel Inquisition will hardly suffer any to pass, with safety of a good
conscience. But, shall we think that this their travel is commendable? No
surely: for, the end of lawful travel, is the preservation of faith and a
good conscience; ^r, the bond of some lawful calling. Now, these men
traveling upon no such grounds, but only upon pleasure; how shall we think
they will stand to the truth, when they thrust themselves into such needless
danger, and trial? The crazed consciences of many at their return, show
sufficiently the badnesse of that course.

Further, note the state of these believers, for their attire; it was of sheep
skins, and goat skins. The like may be observed, in other famous Prophets, and
servants of God: Eliiah wore a garment of hair, and thereby was known, 2.
King. 1.8. And so did John Baptist, Matthew. 3.4. Yea, the false Prophets went so
arraied, that they might the rather be respected of the people, Zach. 13.4.
And, our Savior Christ says, The false Prophets shall come in sheeps
clothing, like the true Prophets; when as indeed, they are ravening Woolues.
Now, the true Prophets of God, went thus basely attired; that not only by word
and doctrine, but also in life in conversation, they might preach repentance
unto the people. And indeed, every Minister of the Gospel, ought to be a
light unto his people, both in life and doctrine: and, he that preaches well,
and does not live according to his doctrine, buildes with the one hand, and
pulls down with the other. Now, whereas these servants of God, went up and
down in such base attire, as sheep skins, and goat skins: it was for
pouerties sake, being deprived of friends, goods, house, and lands; and so,
destitute of provision for better attire.

In their example, we may note that Gods servants and children may be brought
to extreme poverty, and necessity; so as they shall want ordinary food, and
raiment, and be feign to cover themselves with beasts skins. This was the
poor state and condition of godly Lazarus. Yea, Christ Jesus, for our sakes,
did undergo a mean estate; for, he had not a place whereon to lay his head:
and at his death, he had not so much ground of his own, as might serve for a
burial place; but, was laid in Joseph's toombe: which is a great comfort to any
child of God in like distress. For, why should any be dismayed with that
estate, which Christ Jesus and his dearest servants have undergone for his
example.

Here some may ask, how this can stand with that saying of David; I have
been young and am old: yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging bread, Psalm. 37. verse 25.

Answer. David's saying may be taken two ways: first, as his own observation
in his time. For, he says not, The righteous is never forsaken; but, that he
never saw it: and indeed it is a rare thing, to see the righteous forsaken.

Secondly (which I take to be David's meaning) the righteous man is never
forsaken, and his seed too. For, if God lay a temporal chasticement on any of
his servants, suffering them to want, yet he forsakes not his seed after
him; but renueth his mercy toward them, if they walk in obedience before
him: he may make trial of godly Parents by want; but, their godly children
shall surely be blessed: so, that this hinders not, but that the godly may be
in want.

Further, whereas they are said to go up and down in Sheep skins and
Goats skins, we must understand, that they did it by faith. From whence we
learn, that when all temporal blessings fail, then the child of God must by
faith lay hold upon Gods gracious promises of life eternal, and stay himself
thereon.

This point must be remembered carefully: for, say we should want all kind of
temporal benefits, must we thereupon despair and think that God has
forsaken us? God forbid: nay, when all means fail, and the whole world is
against us, yet then we must lay hold upon the promise of life eternal in
Christ, and thereupon rest our souls. Thus did these believers in this place.
And this faith did Job notably testify, when GOD had taken from him, children,
goods, health, yea, and all that he had, yet then he said, Job 13.15, Though he
kill me, yet will I trust in him. And so must we endeavor to do if that case
befall us: for, when all worldly helps and comforts fail us, this promise of
life in Christ, will be a sweet and safe refuge for our soul.

Being destitute, afflicted, and tormented.] Here the Apostle amplifieth their
misery in their wa^dring estate, by three degrees of crosses, which did
accompany the same. First, they were destitute of all temporal blessings:
secondly, they were afflicted both in body and mind: Thirdly, tormented, that
is, evil entreated. These are added for a special cause; to show that these
servants of God were laden with afflictions: They were banished and driven to
extreme poverty; they were deprived of all their goods, and of all society of
men: they were afflicted in body and in mind, and evil entreated of all men;
no man would do them good, but all men did them wrong; whereby, we see that
even waves of miseries overwhelmed them on every side.

Hence we learn, that Gods servants may be overwhelmed with manifold
calamities at the same instant, being pressed down with crosses in goods, in
body, mind, friends, and every way. This was Jobs case, a most worthy servant
of God; he was afflicted in body, in friends, goods, and children, and (which
was greatest of all) he wrestled in conscience with the wrath of God; Job
13.16. Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the
iniquities of my youth. And the like has been the state of many of Gods
children: Psalm. 88.3.7, My soul is filled with evils: thou have vexed me with
all thy waves, etc.

Question. How can this stand with the truth of Gods word, wherein are promises
of all manner of blessings both temporal and spiritual, to those that fear
him: Deuteronomy. 28. 1, 2, etc. If thou obey the voice of the Lord thy GOD, all these
blessings shall come upon thee, and overtake thee: blessed in the City, and in
the field: in the fruit of thy body, and of thy ground and cattle. Psalm.
34.10; They that seek the Lord, shall lack nothing that is good. For,
Godliness has the promises of this life, and of the life to come, 1. Tim.
4.8, And therefore David compares the godly man to the tree that is planted by
the water side, which brings forth much fruit, and is green and well
liking, Psalm 1.3. How then comes this to pass, that Gods own servants
should be thus oppressed, and laden not with one calamity or two, but with
sundry and grievous afflictions at the same time? Answer. True it is, the
Scripture is full of gracious promises of temporal blessings unto Gods
children: but they are conditional, and must be understood with an exception
to this effect; Gods children shall have such and such blessings, unless it
please God by afflictions to make trial of his graces in them, or to chastise
them for some sin: so that the exception of the cross, for the trial of
grace, or chastisement for sin, must be applied to all promises of temporal
blessings. And hence it comes to pass, that the most worthy and renowned
servants of God for their faith, are said to be afflicted and in misery. For,
his promises of temporal blessings, are not absolute, but conditional. All
things are theirs (as Paul says) 1. Cor. 3.21; and they shall have honor,
wealth, favor, etc. unless it please God to prove their faith, or to chastise
their sins by crosses and afflictions.

Question. How can Gods servants be able to bear so many and grievous crosses
at once, seeing it is hard for a man to bear one cross patiently? The answer
is here laid down, to wit, by faith; for, many and grievous were the miseries
that lay on these servants of God: and yet by believing the promise of life in
the Messiah, they were enabled to bear them all. This is a sovereign remedy
against immoderate grief in the greatest distress: and, undoubtedly the
floods of affliction shall never ouerwhelme him, that has his heart assured by
faith of the mercy of God toward him by Jesus Christ. This made David say, He
would not fear evil, though he should walk through the valley of the shadow
of death, Psalm. 23.4: and Paul speaking of tribulation, anguish, famine,
persecution, yea, and death it self* says, In all these we are more then
conquerers through him that has loved, Romans 8.37. And from this faith it was,
that he was able to endure all estates; to be hungry, to want, etc. Phil.
4.12, 13.

If this be true, that Gods children may be afflicted with manifold calamities
at once; then the opinion of natural and ungodly men is false, who judge him
to be wicked and ungodly, whom God ladeth with manifold calamities. This was
the judgment of Jobs three friends, and the ground of all their disputation
against him; that, because God had laid so great and so many crosses upon him,
therefore he was but an hypocrite. And, this is the rash judgment of natural
men in our days, especially upon those that make profession of religion: when
Gods hand of trial or correction lies upon them, they presently censure them
for hypocrites: but this is a wretched opinion; for Gods dearest children may
be pressed down with manifold calamities.

Secondly, seeing faith in Christ will support the soul under manifold
crosses, be they never so grievous; we must labor in the fear of God, to
have our hearts rooted and grounded in this faith: and when afflictions come,
we must strive to show forth the fruit and power of it, by bearing them
patiently.

And thus much of the several branches of affliction, in this last example of
believers.

VERSE 38. Whom the world was not worthy of, they wandered in the wilderness,
and mountains, and dens, and Caves of the earth.

IN these words, the holy Ghost does answer to a secret objection or surmise,
which a natural man might conceive against the believers spoken of before.
For, it being said, that they wandered up and down, Some man might think thus:
no marvel though they wandered up and down; for it may be, they were not
worthy to live in the world. This, the holy Ghost does flatly deny, and
avouches the clean contrary of them; to wit, that they wandered up and down
by faith; and the Lord caused them so to do, because the world was not worthy
of them, they were too good to live in the world.

In this answer to this surmise, we may observe what is the opinion of
natural men, concerning the children of God; to wit, that they are not worthy
to live in the world, but the earth whereon they tread, is too good for them.
This has been, is, and will be the worlds estimation of Gods children.
Matthew chapter 24. verse 9, Ye shall be hated of all nations for my names
sake. John, chapter 16, verse 2, They shall excommunicate you; yea, the time
shall come, that whosoever kills you, shall think he does God good service.
Acts chapter 22. verse 22, Away (say the Jews, of Paul) with such a follow
from the earth: it is not meet that he should live. And hence he says of
himself, and the other Apostles, 1. Corinthians chapter 4. verse 13, They were
made the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things.

In the time of the persecuting Emperors in the Primitive Church, when any
common calamity befell the people or State; as famine, dearth, pestilence, or
such like, they straightway imputed it to the Christians; saying, That they
and their wicked religion were the cause thereof. And though we have religion
maintained among us, yet the poor servants of God find the like welcome in the
world: for, thus the wicked censure them every where, That they are dissembling
hypocrites, and none so bad and vile persons as they are. Now, if any man ask,
how comes it to pass, that the world should slander them so, and think so
vilely of them; Answer. First, because they be taken out of the world, in
regard of state and condition in grace, Ioh. 15.19, therefore the world hates
them, Ioh. 15.19. Secondly, the world knows them not, 1. Io^. 3.1. and
therefore speaks evil of them, Jude, 10. Thirdly, the wicked measure others by
themselves; and therefore despise the godly, that ioyn not with them, 1. Pet.
4.3. Lastly, there is a secret enmity between the seed of the wicked, and the
seed of the Church: (1. Ioh. 3.12.) the wicked are of that evil one, the
devil; and therefore, must needs hate the godly, who are borne of God. So
that, when we shall see or hear, that ungodly persons shall in any such sort
abuse the children of God; we must not marvel, nor be troubled at it, for, it
is no new thing, it has been from the beginning: but, we must pray that God
would open their eyes, that they might turn from their sins to repentance;
and then (no doubt) they will change their conceit, and alter their behavior
toward them: as Paul did, Gal. 1.13, 15. Act. 9.1, 26.

To come to the words more particularly; the Holy Ghost says, The world was
not worthy of them: that is, the company of ungodly livers, without Christ, and
void of grace, were not worthy the society of these holy ones; and, for this
cause, did the Lord take them from among them.

Here note a singular fruit of true faith: it brings a man to that estate, and
gives him that excellency, that he is more worth, than the whole world. I
mean by the whole world, the estate of all those that live in the world, out
of Christ. If then, a man would have true and stable dignity, let him labor
for true faith: for, faith has this privilege, to advance a believer to true
honor and excellency. And therefore our Savior says, As many as received him
by faith, John 1.12.
to them he gave power, or prerogative, to be the sons of God. We take it
for a great prerogative, to be the child of an earthly prince; and so it is:
but, to be the son of God (who is King of Kings) is a pre-eminence and
dignity above all dignities; and, no tongue can express the excellency
thereof. For, what more can a man desire, than to be heir of glory in life
everlasting? and, yet true faith brings this to a believer. It is an
excellent dignity, to be matched with Angels; and no prince in the world, by
all humane wit or power can attain unto it: but yet, the child of God can*
being joined to God by faith in Christ; whereby (in some sort) he is above the
Angels themselves: for, our nature in Christ, is advanced above the nature of
angels.

Honors and dignities, in Politic or civil estates, are the good gifts of
God, and his own ordinances, whereby men are in higher places, and in account
are above another: but yet, all the dignity, honor, and pomp of the world,
severed from that dignity which faith brings to the believer, is nothing
worth. Indeed, if worldly pre-eminence be joined with faith, it is a great and
excellent prerogative; for, faith makes it acceptable unto God. but, sever
faith from worldly dignities, and what are they, but vanity of vanities? which
will turn to the greater condemnation of him that enjoys them. If a man have
favor in the Court, and yet want the Kings favor, it is nothing: and, such
are all temporal dignities, without Gods favor; for, at his indignation they
vanish away. Now, his favor without faith, can no man have; for, he that
comes unto God must believe, verse. 6.

Here, all these that are in place above others, either by birth* or special
calling, must learn above all things to labor for the dignity of faith. When
we have such things wherein we delight, we desire continuance of them.
Behold, the dignity of faith is everlasting: and besides, it sanctifies all
civil dignities, and makes the owners of them glorious, and acceptable, both
before God and man; when as otherwise, without faith, they are nothing: and,
they that have them, can do nothing but abuse them.

Again, the holy Ghost says, The world was not worthy of these men, for
another cause* and that is this. Every Christian man by his faith, brings many
blessings among those parties, and to that place where he lives: now, the
world deserves no such blessings, and therefore is unworthy of the persons by
whom they come.

Question. How do Christians bring blessings to places where they live?
Answer. First, by their presence: for, as GOD said to Abraham the Father of
the faithful, Thou shall be a blessing, Genesis 12.3, so is it with all
believers. Laban confesses that he perceived that the Lord had blessed him
for Jacobs sake, Genesis 30.27. And Potiphar saw that Joseph was a blessing in
his house: For, the Lord made all that he did to prosper, Genesis 39.2.3. While
Lot was in Sodom, the Angel could not destroy it. Gen 19.22. And if there had
been ten believers in Sodom, the Lord would have spared all for tennes
sake, Genesis 18.32. Now, bringing good things, and keeping back Gods judgments
by their presence, they are thereby blessings. Secondly, they are blessings by
their prayers. Abraham prayed for Abimelech, Genesis 20.17.18. and, God healed him
and his family of barrenness. At Moses prayer, Gods judgments were taken from
Egypt: Exodus 7.12.13.30. and his wrath appeased toward his people, Exodus 32.11,
14. And some think that Stephens prayer at his death for his persecuters, was
one means for mercy unto Saul, that then consented to his death. Acts 7, 60.
and 8.1. Thirdly, they bring blessings upon a place, by their example: for,
when men shall see godly persons, walking before them in the fear of GOD, and
making conscience of all manner of sin, it is a special means to cause
others to turn from their wicked ways, to newness of life. And therefore
Peter exhorts the Christians to have their conversation honest among the
Gentiles; that they which speak evil of them as of evil doers, might by
their good works which they should see, glorify God in the day of their
visitation. 1. Pet. 2.12. And he bids godly wives so walk, that their husbands
may be won without the word, by beholding their pure conversation which is
with fear. 1. Pet. 3.1.2. And Paul bids the Philippians, to walk blameless
in the middle of a wicked and crooked nation, as lights in the middle of the
world, Phil. 2.15, that those which were to be converted, by their good
conversation might be won to the truth. GOD sent a flood upon the world for
the greeuousnesse of man's sins. Now, why does he not still send more floods?
are not men now as wicked as they were then? Yes undoubtedly; man for his part
deserves it now, as well as they did then: and therefore our Savior Christ
says, as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the son
of man; so that every day we deserve a new flood: but yet the Lord stays the
execution of his judgments for a time, that his elect may be gathered and
converted. And so soon as that is done, heaven and earth shall go together;
and God will not stay one moment, for all the world besides. So that every
nation and people in the world have benefit by Gods children; because for their
sakes does the Lord stay his wrath, and defer his judgments, even the great
judgment of fire, wherewith the world shall be consumed at the last day. These
things the world should take notice of, as well to move them to repentance of
their sins, whereby they are made unworthy the presence of a godly man, as
also to persuade them to better behavior, and carriage toward the godly by
whom they are so many ways blessed.

The holy Ghost adds, that they wandered in wilderness* and mountains, and
donnes, and Caves of the earth. These were desolate places, and not inhabited:
and yet for the wickedness of the world, GOD will have these beleeuer^ here to
wander. We must not think, that they betook themselves voluntarily to this
solitary life; but only upon necessity being constrained by persecution to
fly into the wilderness, for the saving of their lives, and the keeping a
good conscience.

This serves to descry unto us the blind error of many ages before us, wherein
it has been thought, and is by Papists at this day, to be a state of
perfection, to live a Monk or Hermit out of all societies, in some desert
place, and there to spend the whole life in contemplation only, and that
voluntarily: and they magnify this estate so much, that hereby they think to
merit eternal life at the hands of God. But these believers did neither
voluntarily, nor with opinion of merit betake themselves to this solitary
life, but on necessity. And, indeed this kind of life has no warrant in Gods
word: for, every Christian is a member of two Kingdoms; of Christ's Kingdom of
grace, and of that particular state where he dwells: and by reason hereof
has a two-folde calling; a temporal, and a spiritual calling. In both of
which, he must walk diligently so long as he can, doing the duties both of a
child of God, and of a member of that commonwealth where he lives. Now,
when a man goes voluntarily to lead a solitary life, he forsakes his temporal
calling altogether, and performs the other but negligently; for, he
withdrawes himself from many duties of piety, whereby the people might be
furthered to Godward: which none can do with a good conscience.

Further, observe the places where they are constrained to wander, to wit, in
Wilderness, Caves, and Dens; places where wild beasts have abode and
recourse: and yet here they live, when as men will not suffer them to live
among them. Where note, that many times more mercy may be found among wild and
savage beasts, than with some men; so merciless are the wicked when God
forsakes them, and leaves them to themselves. The Lions entreat Daniel better,
than Darius Courtiers and servants do; Daniel, chapter 6. And Lazarus finds
more kindness with the dogs at Dives gates, then with him, and all his
family besides, Luke chapter 16. verse 21. The consideration whereof must teach
us to nippe sin in the head at the beginning, and not to suffer it to grow:
for, if it get a head and reign in us, it will make us worse than brute or
savage beasts, and cruel as the Devil himself; as we may see in the worlds
usage of these believers.

Thus we see the state of true believers, under many and grievous miseries:
which we must well observe, to arm our selves against the times of
adversities, which GOD may send upon us. We must not judge it a cursed
estate to be under the Cross: for, here we see, the faith of his servants
is commended for suffering nine several kinds of miseries. If we shall
think that these were but a few; we must know that in them the holy Ghost
sets down the state of his Church unto the end: for, these things were
written for ensamples unto us. And therefore if calamities come, and such
miseries befall us, as do drive vr toward distrust, as though God had forsaken
us, we must remember that God did not forsake these his children in their
calamities, and therefore also will not forsake us. And thus much for this last
example.

VERSE 39. And these all through faith obtained good report, and recei-not the
promise.

THe holy Ghost having set down at large a worthy and notable Catalogue of
examples of faith in sundry believers, that lived from the beginning of the
world, to the time of the Maccabees, does now for a further commendation of
their faith, rehearse the same things that before he had said in the 2. and 13.
verses of this chapter. In saying, that by faith, they all received good
report; his meaning is, that they did believe in the true Messiah, and looked
for salvation in him alone, whereupon they were approved of God himself; who
gave testimony hereof, partly by his word, and partly by his spirit in their
consciences, and partly by his Church* by all which they were commended, and
assured to be Gods servants. And yet, notwithstanding this good report, they
received not the promise; that is, the promise of Christ's incarnation in their
days. They received Christ truly by faith, and so saw his day; but, his
actual incarnation in the flesh, they lived not to see.

Whereas it is said, That by faith they obtained testimony; Here first observe,
that there is nothing in man, that makes him acceptable to God, but faith
only. GOD regards no man's person: he accepts not of a man, because he is a
King, or because he is wise, or rich, or strong, etc. But, if a man believe,
then the Lord is ready to give testimony of him, that he likes well of him. In
regard whereof, we must all labor diligently, above all other things, to get
true faith in Christ, that so we may have approbation at Gods hands; without
which, there is no salvation to be hoped for.

Secondly, here also learn the right way to get testimony, approbation, and
credit with men; a thing, whereof many are exceeding glad; and which, the
child of God must not contemn. Now, the way is this: He must first labor to
get approbation at GODs hands; which indeed he cannot do any other way, save
only, by a true and lively faith, as we have heard before. Now, the Lord God
approouing of him, he has the hearts of all men in his hands, inclining them
whither he will: and if it does stand with his glory, he will cause them to
like, and to speak well of him, that does believe.

Many, indeed, get great applause in the world, which little regard true
faith; but in the end, this their glory and applause, will be their shame:
for, They that honor me, will I honor, says the Lord: but he that despises
me, shall be despised, 1. Sam. 2.30.

Lastly, whereas the holy Ghost says, That all these worthy men obtained
testimony of God, and yet received not the promise. We are hereby taught, that
we which now live in the Church, are much more bound in conscience to believe,
than they that lived in the old Testament. For, we have received the promise
of Christ's incarnation: They received it not, and yet believed. Wherefore, in
the fear of God let us labor for true faith. But some will say, What should we
hear so much of faith? we do all believe. Answ. Indeed, we say so much with
our mouths: but, it is a rare thing to find true and sound faith in the
heart; for, gros^e and palpable ignorance abounds every where, and yet men will
needs be good believers which is a thing impossible: for, how should faith be
without knowledge? And, as men are ignorant, so they have no care to learn,
nor to get knowledge, that so they might come by true faith. Their hearts are
wholly taken up with the world, for matters of profit and delight; that they
can spare no time, to seek for this precious gift of faith. Again, many have
knowledge, with whom true faith is rare: for, faith purifies the heart, it is
joined with a good conscience, and shows it self by obedience, through love.
Now (to leave the heart to God) where almost is the man, that walks answerable
to his knowledge? May we not truly say of many, that as the word comes in at
the one ear, it goes out at the other? And, among those which learn, and
bear away something, there is little care to practice it in life.

But, we must know, that if we would be approved of God, we must believe.
Now, so long as we remain ignorant; or else, having knowledge, do not join
practice therewith, in obedience from a good conscience: undoubtedly, we have
no spark of true faith in us. We may make a show of faith, and so bear the
world in hand we believe: but certainly, this will prove a very dead faith;
and in the end, and finishing of all, appear to be nothing, but bare
lip-faith, and mere presumption. Now, to conclude this point, we must know,
that unless we get true faith, as these believers had (which we must show
by good fruits, as they did) even they shall rise up in judgment against us to
condemn us, at the last day. For, they believed; though they had not the
ground of faith so laid before them, as we have. Wherefore, let them that want
knowledge, labor for it; and, they which have it, let them join obedience
with their knowledge, that the faith of their hearts, may be seen by the
fruits of their lives: for, true faith cannot be hid, but will break out in
good works.

VERSE 40. God providing a better thing for us, that they without us should not
be made perfect.

BEcause some man might much marvel, that such men as received testimony of God
for their faith, should not yet receive the promise; therefore here the holy
Ghost renders a reason thereof: to wit, the good pleasure of God, appointing
that Christ should be incarnate at such a time, as was most convenient for the
perfect consummation of the whole Church, consisting of Gentiles, as well as
Jews. For, though these ancient believers, were in time long before us; yet
God provided Christ's incarnation so fitly for us, that they without us should
not have perfect consummation in glory.

The Exposition. God providing a better thing for us. The word in the
original, translated providing, signifies properly foreseeing; wherein is
likewise included, Gods decree and ordination. Now, this we must know: that it
is a peculiar prerogative, belonging to the true God alone, to be able to
foresee things to come; and that many thousand years before: no creature of
himself can do it. And, yet it is true, that this property to foresee, is
ascribed unto God, not properly; but, in regard of our capacity: for, if we
speak of God properly, God cannot be said to foresee any thing; because all
things be present to him, whether past, or to come.

This prescience, or foreknowledge in God, puts a difference between the true
God, and all false gods; yea, between the true God, and all creatures: for,
the true God foresees all things that are to come; so can no creature do.
Indeed, some creatures foresee and foretell some things; yet herein, they come
short of the divine property: for, God foresees all things by himself, without
signs, or causes, or outward means. But, creatures only foresee some things,
not of themselves; but, by means of signs, and outward causes, or by
revelation from God: otherwise can no creature foresee things to come.

Now, as we said before, this foresight in God includes his decree and
ordination: for, therefore did these things so come to pass, because God
ordained them. Whereby we see, that Gods prescience of foreknowledge is not
idle, but operative, and joined with his will: for, Math. 10.29, 30, an hair
cannot fall from our head; nor a sparrow light upon the ground, without his
will. As all things in time come to pass; so God before all worlds willed,
that is, decreed and appointed them. And, under this large extent of Gods will
or decree, we must include the sinful actions of men: for, God does not
barely foresee them, but decree the being of them, and so will them after a
sort; though not to be done by himself, yet by others. When Judas betrayed
Christ, and Pilate with the wicked Jews condemned and reviled him, they sinned
grievously; and yet herein, they did nothing, but that which Gods hand and
counsel had determined before to be done.

This point well considered, confutes their opinion, who indeed enlarge Gods
prescience or fore knowledge over all things, both good and evil; but yet
exclude sin from without the compass of his decree and ordination. But, here
we see, Gods foresight includes his decree; and nothing comes to pass simply
without his will: howsoever many things be done against his revealed will; yet
without his absolute will, can nothing come to pass. He works all things
according to the counsel of his own will: doing himself those things that
be good, and willingly permitting evil to be done by others, for good ends.

But, what did God here provide and foresee for us? Ans. A better thing: that
is, God in his eternal counsel provided a better estate for his Church in the
new testament; than he did for believers in the old.

Hence we learn, that as God has his general providence, whereby he
governs all things; so also, he has his special and particular providence,
whereby in all things, he prouides and brings to pass, that which is best for
his Church. For, in the old testament, God provided that for his Church, which
was meet for it: But, considering that the Church in the new Testament (in some
respects) was to have a better estate, than the Church in the old testament
had; therefore, he prouides for it a better state. And look, as in his
eternal wisdom he foreseeth what is best for all estates and times; so in his
providence does he accomplish and effect the same.

For us.] That is, for the Church in the new testament: where note, that Gods
Church, and the state thereof in the new Testament, is better than it was in
the old, before the coming of Christ. The holy Ghost here speaks this
plainly; and therefore, we need no further proof thereof.

Qu. How should it be better with the Church now, tha^ it was then? Ans. True
it is, that God gave the covenant of grace in the beginning, to our first
parents in Paradise: the sum whereof was this; The seed of the woman shall
break the Serpents head. And, this covenant did God renew and revive unto his
Church, from time to time, in all ages, unto this day. Both circumcision and
the Passover, were seals of this covenant; as well as our Sacraments be: so
that in substance they differ not; the free gift of grace in Christ belonged to
them as well as unto us. The believing Jews in their Sacraments, did eat the
same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink with us (as the
Apostle witnesses, 1. Corinthians chapter 10. verse 3): and believers then,
obtained the same eternal life that we do now by faith. And yet if we
regard the manner of administering the covenant of grace in Gods Church, unto
the people of God; Herein does the Church of the new Testament far surpass
the Church of GOD in the old: and, indeed herein consists the pre-eminence
of the Church under the Gospel; which stands in five things especially:

First, in the old Testament, spiritual and heavenly were propounded unto the
Church, under temporal and earthly blessings. This is plain by Gods dealing
with the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; for, the Lord promised unto
them the temporal blessings of the Land of Canaan; under which he signified
the gift of life everlasting, in the Kingdom of heaven. But, in the new
Testament, life everlasting is plainly promised to the believer, without any
such type or figure.

Secondly, in the old Test. Christ was showed and signified unto them in
ceremonies, rites and types; which were in number many, and in signification
some of them dark and obscure: but now these types and ceremonies are
abolished, the shadow is gone, and the substance come: and in stead of dark
signs and figures, we have two most plain and sensible Sacraments. More
plainly, the covenant of grace in the old Testament, was sealed by the blood
of Lambs, as signs of the blood of Christ: but now to his Church in the new
Testament, Christ himself has sealed his Testament by his own blood.

Thirdly, in the old Testament all the knowledge they had was in the Law; and
their understanding in the Gospel was obscure and very slender: but, in the new
Testament, not only the Law is made manifest, but also the supernatural
knowledge of the Gospel.

Fourthly, the Law was only committed and published to one nation and people:
but the Gospel is spread and preached to all the world.

And lastly, the Church in the old Testament believed in Christ to come: but,
now the Church believes in Christ, which is already come and exhibited: in all
which respects, the Church in the new Testament does exceed the Church of the
old.

Now, where the Text says, God provided a better thing for us, we must not
understand it of all these prerogatives, but only of the first and last,
touching the actual exhibiting of Christ in the flesh: as Christ also imports,
Luke 10.23, 24, Blessed are the eyes which see that ye see; for, I tell you,
many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things ye see, and have not
seen them: Which things we must understand of the incarnation of Christ. And
that this is such a prerogative to the new Testament, appears by old Simeon,
who when he had seen Christ in the Temple, as it was promised to him, sang
unto God this song (Luke 2.29) Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in
peace according to thy word; for, mine eyes have seen thy salvation: as if he
should say, I have now Lord lived long enough; let me now depart in peace,
seeing now I have seen thy Christ my Savior (where we see he makes it a
matter of full contentment unto his soul) which the believers under the Law
saw not.

Hence we must learn our duty: for, if our state be now better then the state
of the old Testament was, and if we enjoy privileges denied to Gods ancient
servants before and under the Law; then undoubtedly we ought to strive to go
before them in grace and obedience; for, every man's accounts shall be according
to his receites. He that receives five talents, must make account to return
more, than he that receives two: where GOD is more abundant in his mercy,
there he looks for answerable thankfulness and obedience. We go beyond the
ancient Church in five things: and therefore we must stir up our hearts to be
answerable in grace and obedience going beyond them. But if for all this, we
come short of them in these things, then surely our case is fearful, and our
punishment shall be the greater: for, they that had less prerogatives, shall
be witnesses against us, if they go beyond us in obedience.

That they without us might not be made perfect: that is, might not be fully
glorified. Here is the reason why Christ was not exhibited in their days.
Indeed all true believers before Christ, were justified, and sactified, and in
soul received to glory before us; yet, perfected in soul and body both, they
must not be before us: but we must all be perfected together. Now, his will
herein he brings thus to pass; All must be perfected in Christ: But he will
not have Christ to come and suffer, till the fulness of time came, in these
last days, Heb. 1.2. (as the Apostle speaks) that the believers living in
these last days, might have time of being in the Church to be called,
justified, and sanctified; that so they might be glorified with them that
lived before. For, put the case that Christ had suffered in the days of
Abraham or David, or there-about; then the end of the world must needs have
come the sooner: for, so it was foretold* that Christ should come in the later
ages of the world. 1. Pet* 1*20. Now, if the world had been sooner cut off,
then had there not been time of birth and calling, for all the elect that now
live and shall live: therefore for their sakes was Christ's coming deferred,
till the fullness of time. And this I take to be the meaning of the words.

Now, in that the holy Ghost here says, The members of Christ in the new
Testament must be perfected, with all the ancient believers in the old; we
must hereby be admonished to conform our selves unto these ancient Fathers in
the participation of grace and practice of obedience in this life. For, how can
we look to be glorified with them after this life, if here we be not like
them in grace. Christ tells his followers, that many should come from the East
and from the West, to sit with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of
heaven, Math, 8.11, 12, (because they were followers of these Patriarchs in the
faith) when as the children of the Kingdom, that is, many Jews by birth,
borne in the Church, should be cast into utter darkness. Now, if Christ deny
to glorify the children and posterity of these ancient believers, because they
did not follow them in grace and in obedience: how can we which are by nature
sinners of the Gentiles, look to be glorified with them, unless in grace and
obedience we conform our selves unto them? Thus much for these examples of
faith: Now something must be added out of the next Chapter; because there the
holy Ghost makes use of all these worthy examples.

A Commentary upon part of the 12. Chapter to the Hebrews.
VERSE 1. Wherefore, let us also, seeing we are compassed with so great a clowd
of witnesses, cast away every thing that presses down, and that sin that
hangs so fast on: let us run with patience the race that is set before us.


IN these words, the holy Ghost propounds a worthy exhortation to the
Christians of the new Testament; that they should labor to be constant in the
profession of the faith: that is, in holding, embracing, and beeleeuing, true
Christian religion. And his reason is framed thus; The Saints of God in the
old Testament, were constant in the faith: and therefore, you must likewise be
constant in the faith, that live in the new Testament. The first part of the
reason is laid down in all the examples of the former chapter. The conclusion
or sequel is contained in this 1. verse. Wherein, we may observe two points:
an exhortation unto constancy in true religion; and the way or means to
attain thereunto. The exhortation is inferred upon the former examples; which
are all here applied as precedents and directions unto us, for constancy and
perseverance in the faith: in these words. Wherefore, seeing we are compassed
about with such a cloud of witnesses: that is, Seeing Abel, Enoch, Noe,
Abraham, and all the rest of the holy Fathers, who are a clowd of witnesses
unto us (that is, lights, and leaders before us) were constant in true religion
(whether we respect their faith in Gods promises, or obedience to his
commandments) therefore, we also must be constant in the faith. The way or
means hereunto, stands in three duties, in the words following; Let us cast
away, etc.

For the exhortation: First in general, the very inferring of it from the
former examples, teaches us this special duty; That every one in Gods Church,
must apply unto himself those instructions, that are laid down, either
generally in doctrine, or particularly in example. And therefore the holy Ghost
here says not, Let the Galatians or the Corinthians (which were renowned
Churches) be constant in the faith; but, Let us, that is, you Hebrews, with
my self, be constant in the faith, following the example of your ancient
fathers. It is said of the ancient Jews, that many of them heard Gods word;
but it was not profitable unto them, Heb. 4.2.
because it was not mingled with faith in them. What is it to mingle the word
with faith? It is, not only to receive it by faith, believing it to be true;
but also, by the same hand of faith, to apply it to a man's own soul, to his
heart, and life. And undoubtedly, Gods word thus applied to a man's particular
person, has in it great power and fruit; whether we regard information of
judgment, or reformation of life But, it is a hard thing to do, and rare to
find a man that does sincerely apply unto himself, either general doctrines,
or particular examples. We are all prone to shift it from our selves, and to
lay it upon others, saying; This is a good Item, or a good lesson, for such a
one, or such a one, if he were here; or, if he would mark it. In the mean
while, what benefit reap we to our own souls? for, the word not applied to
our selves, does us no good: it is like Physic not taken, or food not eaten.
And, hence it coms to pass, that though we hear much; yet we profit little
by the ministry of Gods word. We must therefore learn to follow Mary's
example, who pondered Christ's words, and laid them up in her own heart. When
an exhortation is given, we must not post it off, and lay it upon others men's
shoulders; but, apply it to our selves, and lay it to our own hearts, saying,
This instruction is for me. Hereby (no doubt) we should feel greater
blessings upon the preaching of the word, than yet we do. And, to move us
hereunto, let us consider, that Satan our utter enemy (who seeks nothing but
our destruction) is most busy to hinder this application of the word, either
by the minister, or by a man's own conscience. As for example: when the
minister (by occasion out of Gods word) shall confute, either error in
judgment, or misdemeanour in life; then, men that hear, and are guilty
thereof, should say, This is mine error, or my fault; now am I confuted, or
reproved. And God (no doubt) if men would thus do, would make it effectual
unto them at the length. But, in stead of this applying to our selves (either
through our own corruption, or Satan's suggestion, or both) we shift it from
our selves, and say, Now he reprooues such a one, and such a one; and speaks
against such, and such: and indeed, Satan (by his good will) would never have a
man to apply the word rightly to himself. Therefore, seeing Satan is so busy,
and this is his deceit, to make a man shift off an exhortation or reproof from
himself, and to lay it on others; we must be as careful to apply it to our
selves, and to lay it to our own consciences: and then (no doubt) we shall
find it to be a word of power, able to reform both the misdemeanour of our
lives, and the errors of our minds.

Now, to the reason more particularly. We must be constant in the faith,
because we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses. Here the
ancient Fathers of the old Testament, which in the former chapter were
commended unto us for their faith, are compared to a cloud, and then to a
cloud compassing us. Lastly, to a cloud of witnesses.

They are compared to a cloud (as I take it) by allusion to the cloud which
directed and led the Israelites in the wilderness: for, when they came from
Egypt, and were 40. years in the Desert of Arabia; all that while, they were
directed by a pillar of cloud by day, Exodus 13.21. Now, look as this cloud
guided the Israelites from the bondage of Egypt, to the Land of Canaan: so does
this company of famous believers, direct all the true members of Gods Church
in the new Testament, the right way from the Kingdom of darkness, to the
spiritual Canaan the kingdom of heaven. And this is the true cause why these
worthy believers are compared to a cloud.

Mark further, they are called a cloud: but what a cloud? namely, compassing
us. A compassing cloud they are called, by reason of the great company of
believers; so as which way soever a man turns him, he shall see believers on
every side: and they are said to compass us, because they give us direction in
the course of Christianity, as the cloud did the Israelites in the wilderness.

Now, whereas the whole company of believers is called a cloud compassing us:
here is answered a common objection of temporizers, which argue thus against
religion; There are so many kinds of religion now a-dayes, that no man can
tell which to be of: and therefore it is good to be of no religion, till we be
certified, which is ye true religion. This carnal reason is here answered:
for, howsoever in some things, there be variety of opinions in Gods Church, yet
for the substance of religion all agree in one. For, the company of believers
in this world, resembles a cloud that goes before us, showing us the right way
which we are to walk in, to the Kingdom of heaven. Secondly, in that these
ancient believers are called a cloud compassing us, we are taught, that as ye
Israelites did follow the cloud in the wilderness from the Land of Egypt to
Canaan; so must we follow the example of these ancient believing fathers and
Prophets, to the kingdom of heaven. It is a strange thing to see how the
Israelites followed that cloud. They never went, till it went before them: and
when it stood still, they stood still also, though it were 2. years together;
and when it began to move, they moved with it. So in the same manner must we set
before our eyes, for a pattern of life, the worthy examples of believers in the
old Testament: for, whatsoever was written, was written for our learning. Romans
15.4.
We must therefore be followers of them in faith, obedience, and other graces of
God; and so shall we be directed to life everlasting, in the spiritual Canaan
the kingdom of heaven. And yet we must not follow the^ absolutely. For, all of
the^ had their infirmities, and some of the^ had their grievous faults, whereby
they were tainted* and their commendation somewhat blemished: but, we must
follow them in the practice of faith and other graces of God. The cloud that
guided the Israelites, had two parts; Exodus 14.20.
a light part and a dark. The Egyptians who were enemies to Gods people* had
not the light part before them, but the dark part: and so following that, they
rushed into the red sea, and were drowned; when as the Israelites following the
light part went through, in safety: Even so these believers had in them two
things; their sins which be their dark part, which if we follow, we cast our
souls into great danger and destruction: and faith with other graces of God,
which are their light part, which we must follow as our light; which if we do
carefully, it will bring us safe to the Kingdom of heaven. So Paul bids the
Corinthians, be followers of him; yet not absolutely in every thing, but as he
follows Christ: and so must we follow the Fathers, as they went on in faith in
Christ.

Further, they are a cloud of witnesses: that is, a huge multitude of
witnesses. And they are so called; First, because by their own blood they
confirmed the faith which they professed: Secondly, because they did all
confirm the doctrine of true religion, whereof they were witnesses, partly by
speeches, and partly by actions in life and conversation. And so is every
member of Christ a witness; as the Lord often calls the believing Israelites,
Isa. 43.9.10, 12
his witnesses. Quest. How came this to pass, that these believers should be
Gods witnesses? Answer. Surely, because they testified the truth, and
excellency of Gods holy religion, both in word and action, in life and
conversation.

Now, seeing these in the old Testament were Christ's witnesses; First, hereby
all ignorant persons must be stirred up to be careful to get faith, and to
learn true religion. If any thing will move a man to become religious, this
will; for, out of all the world, God will choose faithful men to be his
witnesses, to testify of his religion unto others. If a man were persuaded
that some worthy mighty Prince would vouchsafe to call him to bear witness of
the truth on his side, he would be wonderful glad thereof, and take it for a
great honor to him. How much more then ought we to labor for knowledge,
faith and obedience in true religion, that we may become witnesses unto the
Lord our God? if it be a dignity to be witness to an earthly Prince; oh then
what a great prerogative is this, for a silly sinful man, to become a witness
to the truth of the everliving God, who is King of Kings, and whose word needs
no confirmation? This must make us al to labor for knowledge, and for faith,
and for the power of religion: but, if we will remain still in our ignorance,
and never labor for knowledge, then shall these servants of God that believed
in the old Testament, stand up and witness against us at the day of
judgment: for, they had not such means as we have, and yet they became most
faithful witnesses.

Secondly, this must teach us to be careful, that as in word we profess
Christ, so indeed we may confess him, expressing the power of his grace in us.
For, by this true confession of Christ, we are made his witnesses: but when we
confess Christ in word only, and yet in life and practice deny him, then we
are unfaithful witnesses; for, we say and unsay. In an earthly court, if a man
should one while say one thing, and another while another thing, he would not
be accepted for a witness, but rather be excepted against, as altogether
unworthy; and so would prove a discredit to his friends cause, and a shame to
himself: so it is with us in Christ's cause; if we profess in word, and deny
indeed, we discredit Christ and his profession, and shame our selves for ever.
And therefore we must be careful not only in word and judgment, but in life
and conversation, to make a true and constant confession of Christ and of his
truth. And thus much for the exhortation.

Now follows the 2. point to be observed in this verse; namely, the manner
how Gods Church and people may put in practice this worthy exhortation of the
holy Ghost, To be constant in the faith. And this consists in three duties: 1.
They must cast away that which presses down: 2. They must cast away that sin
that hangs so fast on; or sin which so readily does compass us about: 3.
They must run the race that is set before them, with patience. Whosoever in
Gods Church either Jew or Gentile, can perform these 3. things, shall be able
no doubt to follow the counsel of the holy Ghost, and continue constant in the
faith unto ye end. Of these 3. in order.

The 1. thing then to be done, is this, We must cast away that which presses
down; or thus, Cast away the weight, or burden (for so much the word in the
original signifies) even that burden which so presses down the poor
Christian, that he cannot go on forward in the course of godliness and
Christianity. By burden or weight, here we must understand 5. things: 1. The
love of this temporal life: 2. Care for earthly things: 3. Riches and temporal
wealth: 4. Worldly honor and preferments: 5. Worldly delights and pleasures.
All these are things which lie heavy on man's soul, as weighty burdens which
press it down, especially then when the soul should lift up it self to seek
heavenly things. So in the Parable of the Sower, riches, pleasures, and cares
for the things of this life, are called thorns, which choke the word of God
in a man's heart, and make it unfruitful. And, surfeiting and drunkenness, are
said to be things which oppress the heart, and make it heavy. And, easy it
were, to show by many testimonies, that all these five things do press down
the heart; especially then, when it should be lifted up in the seeking of
heavenly things.

Now in this, that these 5. things are weighty burdens, we may learn; first,
what is the cause, that in these our days, every where the Gospel of Christ,
being published, preached, and expounded, takes so little place in men's hearts;
whether we regard knowledge and understanding, or affection and obedience. For,
Gods word, is a word of power, mighty in operation: how comes it to pass then,
that the ground is barren, where it is cast? why makes it not men learned and
religious? Ans. Surely, in every place where the word of God is preached,
especially among us, these five things possess the hearts of men, and exercise
all the thoghts of the mind, and affections of the heart. From whence it
comes to pass, that after long preaching, there is little fruit, or profit;
either for knowledge, or obedience: for, where the heart is pressed down with
the weight of these earthly things; there the word of God can take no place,
nor bring forth fruit. And, this is generally true among us; though we hear
Gods word from year to year, and thereby might increase in knowledge, and
obedience, if we would; yet in many, there is little show of either: and, the
cause is in these worldly cares, which take place in our hearts. For, this is a
most certain truth, that so long as our hearts are addicted to the greedy
seeking after these earthly things, honor, pleasures, etc. so long will the
ground of our hearts be barren. The good seed of Gods word may be sown
therein; but, little fruit shall come thereof, save briers and weeds: which
will increase our damnation.

Again, whereas the love of temporal life, and care of earthly things, etc. are
sore burdens pressing down a man's heart from heaven to earth, and making it
heavy, and sad, and dead in regard of all spiritual exercises and
contemplations. Hereby we are taught, oftentimes to give our selves to eleuate
and lift up our minds and hearts to God, partly by meditation in his word,
partly by invocation on his name, and partly by thanksgiving. And, to do these
things the better, we must remember to set apart some special time every day,
for this special work; so as we may say with David, Psalm. 25.1, Lord, I lift
up my heart unto thee, David was well acquinted with this exercise, and so was
Daniel: for, both of them used this, as we may read, Psa. 55.17. Evening and
morning (says David) and at noone will I pray, and make a noise. And Daniel
used to pray unto God 3. times a day; wherein, Dan. 6.10.
he would heartily and unfeignedly call upon God, with thanksgiving. And, great
reason we should do so; for, we live in this world, wherein are innumerable
weighty things, which press down our hearts from looking up to heaven: and
therefore, we must often practice our selves in holy meditation and prayer unto
God; that so we may lift up our souls unto God, from the things of this world.
To use a fit co^pariso^, we know that those who keep clocks, if they would have
the clock still going, must once or twice a day wind up the plu^mets which
cause the wheels to go about; because they are still drawing downward: Even so,
seeing our hearts have plummets of lead, which are worldly cares and desires,
to press them down, from seeking up to heaven; we must do with our hearts, as
the clock-keeper does with his plummets, wind them up unto God every day: and,
for this end, must set apart some particular time to do the same, in holy
duties. Why does God command the 7. day to be sanctified, and set apart, from
all bodily exercises, and worldly cares? undoubtedly, it is for this end; to
cause men to eleuate their hearts from all wordly things, to seek the things
above: else, if the mind should be always pressed down with worldly cares, it
could never attain to heavens ioys. He that has not conscience on the Lords
day, to lift up his heart to heaven, by prayer, and hearing Gods word, with
meditation thereon; cannot possibly have any soundnes in religion, nor his heart
firmly settled on heavenly things.

Thirdly, whereas the holy Ghost says, That the Hebrews must cast away the
weight that presses down; Here we are taught, in what manner, and how far
forth we must use the things of this life: as riches, honors, and lawful
pleasures; yea and all temporal blessings whatsoever: namely, so far forth,
as they will further us in the course of religion, and in the exercises of
godliness, and virtue; and no further: But (finding by experience, that these
temporal things be a burden unto us, pressing us down, and making us unfit
for spiritual exercises) we must leave the^, and abstain from them. This is
that moderation, which we must use in temporal things: for, the maine end
that every man must propound to himself in all things, is this; That God may
be glorified. Now, that a man may glorify God, it is necessary that he
should walk in the ways of godliness, and of true religion. Therefore, look
as riches and worldly commodities may further us in Christian religion, and
godliness; so far forth must we use them, and therein give glory to God:
but, when they hinder us therein, then we must leave them, and cast them off.
The Mariner that is upon the sea in a great tempest, seeing his ship too sore
laden, will cast out any of his commodities; first, that that is the heauiest,
and at last (if need be) the most precious jewels that be in his ship,
before he will see it lost: Even so must we do in the sea of this world, when
we see riches, honors, and lawful pleasures, to make us unfit and untoward
for the exercises of piety, and religion; then away with them, we must cast
them off, how dear soever they be unto us. And thus much for the first duty.

The second duty that we must perform, for constancy in religion, is this; we
must cast away the sin that hangs so fast on: or, as the words will better
bear, We must cast away the sin, that is so fit, or so ready to compass us
about every way. By sin here, we must not understand actual sin, the
practicing of ungodliness in life and conversation; but, original sin,
which is the corruption of nature, in which men are conceived and borne. Now,
this original sin, is said to be ready to compass us about; because (as
Paul says of himself) when a man would do good, it causes evil to be
present with him; so as that good thing which he would do, that he does not:
but the evil which he would not do, that does he. And, it is said to compass
us about; because, whatsoever in heart a man does desire, or affect, or purpose
to do, this original sin does corrupt and defile the same unto him: and,
whatsoever in action a man would bring to pass, it does likewise pollute it.
By reason whereof, it comes to pass, that we may truly say, that all the
thoghts, affections, wills, and purposes, yea and every action of Gods
children, are all mixed and stained with the corruption of this sin. So that
this hinders Gods dear servants and children, that they cannot go on in the
course of godliness and christianity, as they would; but, either they fall in
their journey many times: or, if they stand, yet they do often stagger, and
go very faintly and haltingly forward.

From this that the holy Ghost says, Original sin compasses the believer
about, we are to observe and learn sundry points. First, this serves notably
to confute some errors maintained and vpheld by the Church of Rome: for, they
say, that after a man is regenerate by Gods spirit, there is nothing in him
that God can justly hate; and, they do curse all other, that hold the
contrary. Now, to ratify this their doctrine, that original sin, after
regeneration, is not sin properly; They say, that after regeneration, it is
no more sin, than Tinder is fire; which in it self is no fire, but very apt
and fit upon the least occasion, to be set on fire. But, this opinion is here
overthrown, by this that the holy Ghost says; That the believing Hebrews,
that is, Gods Church must cast away this sin. Where it is plain, that after
regeneration, whereby a man receives the spirit of sanctification, and
adoption, he has sin in him; for, this sin is most apt and ready to
hinder him in the course of Christianity and godliness. Now, if sin were not
properly sin, it must lose it own nature and quality; and, if it had lost it
proper quality, it would not be so ready to hinder a man in the course of
godliness, both in thought, words, and deeds. So that here it is manifest
and plain, that in a regenerate man, there is sin properly: And, howsoever
he be free from the guilt and punishment of sin; yet the corruption
remains still in him, though greatly weakened through Sanctification.

Again, here observe, that the opinion of many men concerning their
sanctification, is erroneous: for, some there be, who have thought that a man
might be perfectly sanctified in this life, and have original sin quite
abolished. But, this is most false: for, this Church of the Hebrews had as
worthy men in it for godliness, and sanctification, as any are in these days;
yea, and the author of this Epistle was (no doubt) a man that had received a
great measure of sanctifying grace: yet, including himself among them, he
exhorts the Hebrews thus; Let us cast off the burden, and sin, that is so
ready to compass us about. What! had the Apostle, and these Christians sin
in them? Yes, or else the holy Ghost would never bid them cast it off: for, it
were a vain thing, to bid them cast off that which they had not. Therefore,
they were not perfectly sanctified; as indeed no man ever was, or shall be, in
this life, Christ only excepted. We must not marvel at this, that no man is
perfect in this life: nay, we must rather marvel at this, that God has given
to any of us, any drop of sound grace, being such miserable wretched sinners
as we are.

The Lord himself has given many reasons, why men should not be perfect in
this life. As first: If a man were perfectly sanctified in this life, then were
he perfectly just and righteous in himself even before GOD, and so should be
saved; yet not by free grace and mercy alone in Christ: and thus should Christ
not be a whole and alone Savior; but only a means to convey into a man that
saving grace whereby a man should be saved. But Christ is our whole and only
righteousness, whereby we are justified and saved; and this may our
corruption teach us, which still remains in us, not quite mortified till the
hour of death. Secondly, whatsoever grace we receive of God, it comes by
means of faith, which GOD works in us: And look how it stands with us in
regard of faith, so is it with us for all other graces. But, faith in the best
believer is imperfect in this life, and mixed with much doubting; and therefore
all other gifts and graces which come by faith, as righteousness, repentance,
and sanctification, are also imperfect in this life.

From this, that sanctification in this life is imperfect, we learn (for the
overthrowing of another error of the Church of Rome) that no man can stand at
Gods tribunal seat, justified by inherent justice or righteousness. For,
that which we call Sanctification, the Papists call the Justification of a
sinner; making two parts of justification: the first, whereby a sinner of an
evil man is made good; by the pardon of sins, and the infusion of inward
righteousness, standing in hope and charity especially: And the second, whereby
of a good man, one is made better, and more just: and this they say, may
proceed from the merit of a man's own works of grace; and hereby they hold a
man stands righteous before God. But look how it stands with grace in us in
this life, so likewise shall it stand with the same graces at the last day; if
they be imperfect now, and so not able to justify us before GOD, they shall
also be found imperfecte then to that purpose and effect* But now they are
imperfect, as has been showed, and therefore cannot then stand for our
righteousness; unless we will imagine that God will then accept of an
imperfect Justice. Wherefore, their Doctrine is erroneous, and a doctrine of
all terror and desperation: for, who dare adventure the salvation of his soul
upon his own righteousness? We deny not, but that God accepts of our
sanctification; yet not as the matter of our justification unto life: that
only is the obedience and righteousness of Jesus Christ, accepted of God for
us, and made ours by faith; for, that alone is aunswerable to the rigor of the
Law.

Thirdly, this also shows the error of those, who hold that concupiscence or
original sin, is not a quality, but an essence or substance living and
subsisting by it self. For, here we see a plain difference between a man's
body and soul, and original sin that compasses them; else the holy Ghost
would not bid us to cast off this sin: for, that which is of the substance of
man, cannot by man be cast off. And to make this more plain, we must know,
that in man descending from Adam, there be three things: 1. The substance of
his soul and body: 2. The powers and faculties in them both. 3. The corruption
or bad disposition in those powers and faculties, whereby a man is
uncomfortable to the will of his Creator, and prone to that which is evil. And
this third thing is it, which is here spoken of, different from man's substance
and faculties; and so is not a substance in man, or man's nature corrupted, but
an ill disposition therein. Fourthly, hence also we learn, what a regenerate
man does most feel in himself; namely, original sin, the corruption of his
nature: for, that hangs on fast, and hinders him in the practice of all good
duties. This, Paul knew well; and therefore confesses, that he saw another
Law in his members, rebelling against the Law of his mind, and leading him
captive unto the Law of sin, which was in his members, Romans 7.23: This caused
him to leave undone the good which he would have done; and to do the evil,
which he would not do, Verse 19. And David felt the same thing when he said;
I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart.
Why does David speak of the enlarging of his heart? Surely, he felt in himself
this original sin, which did streicten his good affections, so as he could
not put them forth so much as he would toward the Law of God. And when he
says, Psalm. 51.12, Stablish me oh Lord by thy free spirit; he would give us to
understand, that by original corruption he was restrained of his Christian
liberty, and hindered in all good affections, holy actions, and heavenly
meditations: which causes him to pray for liberty and freedom by the spirit.
So that it is plain, the servant of God feels this corruption, clogging and
hindering him from all good duties.

1. This serves to admonish all secure persons, which never felt sin to be a
clogge or burden unto them, of their fearful and dangerous estate. For, to
every child of God, original corruption is a grievous burden. Now, confer
with a natural man, and ask him what imperfections and wants he feels in
himself: his answer is; he never was hindered by any corruption in all his
life: he never felt doubting or want of love either to God or to his brethren:
he feels no pride of heart, no guile or hypocrisy, nor vainglory, etc. If
we take these men upon their words, they are Angels among men: but indeed
they are blind and ignorant, and wonderfully deceived by Satan: for, all Gods
servants in this life do continually bewail the corruption of their nature,
crying out against original sin, that it hinders them in doing the good
things which they would do; and causing them to do that evil which they
would not. These men therefore, that are never troubled with corruption, but
(to their own thinking) have grace at will, are in a fearful case, their
minds are still blinded, and their hearts hardened; they are dead in sin,
abiding in darkness unto this hour. And if they go thus on to death, they
shall find that sin will vnvizor himself, and then they shall know what
sin means, and find the terror, and feel the burden of it when it is too
late; like the foolish virgins that knew what the want of oil meant, when the
doors were shut.

Secondly, this shows unto us, what is the state and condition of the child
of God in this life; He is not here a Saint feeling no corruption, perfectly
sanctified and freed from all sin: but such a one as feels the burden of
corruption, hindering him in his Christian course; under which he sighs and
groans, laboring by all good means to be disburthened, and to cast it off.
It is indeed a matter of great comfort for a man to feel Gods graces in
himself; as faith, love, repentance, sanctification, and such like: but no
child of GOD can always or alone feel the comfort of grace; most commonly
he shall be troubled with sin, if he be Gods child. Now, if feeling it, he
dislike himself, and strive to be eased of it, this is a sure argument of his
happy estate.

Fifthly, this commandment to cast away sin that presses down, teaches
every child of GOD to labor earnestly for the government and direction of
Gods spirit: for, we have within us original corruption, that like an armed
man besets us about, and hinders us in every good thing we take in hand.
We must therefore pray unto GOD daily, that he would guide us by his good
spirit: for, by reason of the corruption of our nature, and the deceitfulness
of sin, we shall utterly fail, unless Gods spirit govern us, both in the
thoughts of our hearts, in the words of our mouths, and the actions of our
lives. This, David knew well, and therefore prays to the Lord for his good
spirit, to lead him into the Land of Righteousness. Psalm. 143.10.

Lastly, seeing we have this corruption of nature in us, we must keep our
hearts with all diligence, and set watch and ward about them. So Solomon says:
Counterguard thy heart my son, Proverbs 4.23. Why does Solomon give this
commandment? Surely, for special cause: for, every man while he lives on
earth, is compassed about with his own corrupt nature; which like a home-borne
traitor seeks to deliver the heart into the possession of Satan, and so to
defraud God of his right. Again, the heart is man's Treasury, from whence come
all actions good and badde: now, if it be well kept and guarded, the Lord will
dwell in thy heart, and thence will proceed the issues of life: but, if it be
left open, for corruption to enter and take place; then is it made an
habitation for the devil.

If a city were besieged about by bloody enemies, the inhabitants thereof
would set watch and ward in every place, to keep out the enemy: so, we
having original sin, as a fierce enemy compassing us about, for to work our
destruction some way or other, must labor to have our hearts guarded with a
watch of grace, that our corruption may not let in Satan there to dwell, or to
have any abode.

But (will some say) how shall we get a watch that may thus keep our hearts?

Answ. We must labor that the word of God may dwell plentifully in our
hearts; and there, as the scepter of Christ, to be held up by the grace of
faith, ruling our wills and affections, and bringing into subjection every
thought, to the obedience of Christ. In such a heart Christ dwells, who is
stronger than Satan: and, here can neither corruption set open the door to
Satan, nor Satan enter, but all things are in safety. Also, the actions that
proceed hence, shall be the issues of life, being holy and pleasing unto God.

And thus much of the second point.

The third duty to be performed for our continuance in the faith, is this: We
must run with patience the race that is set before us. In these words the
holy Ghost borrows a comparison from the games of men that did run a race:
and thus we may conceive it* The race that the Holy Ghost propounds us to
run, is the race of Christian Religion: the parties that must run in this
race, are all Christians, men or women, high or low; not one excepted: the
price and crown for which we run, is everlasting glory: the judge of the
runners is the Lord himself, who has appointed this race unto every Christian
in this life; who also, will give the reward to every one that runs well.

In this comparison, we may observe many good instructions: First, in that
Christian religion is compared to a race; We are taught, that every one that
professes religion must go forward therein, growing in knowledge, faith,
piety, and in every grace of God. He that runs a bodily race, must neither
stand still, nor go backward (for, then then he shall never get the price)
but, still go forward to the race end: So must every Christian go forward in
grace, following hard toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of
God. If we care not for eternal life, then we may take our ease, and let
grace alone; but, if we tender our own salvation, we must go on in the
graces of religion, as a runner does go forward in his race. This being well
observed, would rowze up our drowzie Christians, that make no progress in
religion.

Secondly, this resemblance of Christianity to a race, teaches us al to strive
to go one before another in knowledge, faith, and holy obedience: thus runners
do, that run a bodily race. Also in the world, the manner of men is, to labor
and strive to go one before another in riches, preferment, in fine apparel,
and in all bodily delights: now, shall men strive to be first in these
transitory things, and shall we neglect our duty about these spiritual
graces? wherein, the more we excel, the more acceptable we are to God, and
shall be more glorious in the world to come.

Thirdly, seeing Christianity is a race, we must remember to be constant
therein, till we come to the end of our faith; even the salvation of our
souls. It has been the manner of our people, to turn in religion with the
State and Time; and yet, to this day many thousands come to our assemblies,
that would turn to Popery, if that abomination should be set up again: for
(say they) It was a merry world, when that religion was up. But, this is not
the property of good runners: If we would have the crown of life, we must
hold true religion constantly unto the death.

Lastly, like good runners we must mind our way* and have our hearts set upon
the end of our race; which is, everlasting life. Each ordinary traveler, is
very inquisitiue of his way, and all his care is to go the nearest way he can
to his iourneys end. Behold, we are travelers, and our journey is to heaven;
we must therefore endeavor to go the straightest way we can, to come to life
everlasting: neither must we make delays in this way, but use all helps to
further us herein; for, the matter is of great importance whereabout we go.

Here some will say, We like this well; but, true religion has always many
enemies, and few hearty friends: besides, if a man run this way, he must
run alone, and suffer also many crosses and reproaches. Answ. This is most
true: and therefore the holy Ghost adds; That we must run this race with
patience: We must not be discouraged because of these crosses and afflictions;
but labor with patience to bear that part of affliction, what ever it be,
that shall light upon us in our journey. This is Christ's counsel to his
Disciples, Luke 21.19. Possess your souls in patience: as if he should say,
If you would save your souls, you must labor to bear all crosses that fall
on you, with patience. In the parable, Luke 8.15, They that receive the seed in
good ground, are they, which with an honest and good heart hear the word, and
keep it, and bring forth fruit. But how? with patience. Every one that hears
Gods word, and makes conscience thereof, shall have enemies to scoff, and
mock, and to afflict him; which the devil sets a-worke, to hinder the growth
of the word in his heart: but, must he therefore cease to bring forth fruit?
no, he must bring forth fruit with patience. And so must we do in the race
of true religion: for, crosses, afflictions, and mockings will come; but these
storms must not turn us back: nay, the more they beat upon us, the more
must we arm our selves with patience, by which we shall be able to bear them
all. And thus much for this third duty; as also of the exhortation unto
Constancy in the faith, after the example of all these godly Fathers.

FINIS.
The Printers Advertisement.
CHristian Readers, in most part of these printed Books, ye shall find the
faults heereunder set down, already amended to your hands: only, in some few
of the Copies (wherein they past us, unespied) they had need to be corrected
with your Pen: viz.

Page 160, line 20, sin for son: p: 358, line 24, they jolly for the jolly:
p. 359, line 30, Ismael for Israel.

And in all the Copies, there is a vvrong Title escaped in the Page 384, viz.
Moses faith, for Moses Parents faith.


