A golden Chain: OR, THE DESCRIPTION OF Theology, containing the order of the
causes of Salvation and Damnation, according to Gods word. A view whereof is to
be seen in the Table annexed.

Hereunto is adjoined the order which M. Theodore Beza used in comforting
afflicted consciences.



Printed by JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1600.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader,
there are at this day four several opinions of the order of Gods
predestination. The first is, of the old and new Pelagians; who place the
cause of Gods predestination in man; in that they hold, that God did ordain
me^ either to life or death, according as he did foresee, that they would by
their natural freewill, either reject or receive grace offered. The second of
them, who (of some) are termed Lutherans; which teach, that God foreseeing,
how all mankind being shut up under unbelief, would therefore reject
grace offered, did hereupon, purpose to choose some to salvation of his mere
mercy, without any respect of their faith or good works, and the rest to
reject, being moved to do this, because he did eternally foresee that they
would reject his grace offered them in the Gospel. The third Semipelagian
Papists, which ascribe Gods predestination, partly to mercy, and partly to
men's foreseen preparations and meritorious works. The fourth, of such as
teach, that the cause of the execution of Gods predestination, is his mercy in
Christ, in them which are saved; and in them which perish, the fall and
corruption of man: yet so, as that the decree and eternal counsel of God,
concerning them both, has not any cause beside his will and pleasure. Of these
four opinions, the three former I labor to oppugn, as erroneous, and to
maintain the last, as being truth, which will bear weight in the balance
of the Sanctuary.

A further discourse whereof, here I make bold to offer to thy godly
consideration: in reading whereof, regard not so much the thing it self,
penned very slenderly, as mine intent and affection: who desire among the rest,
to cast my mite into the treasury of the Church of England, and for want of
gold, pearl, and pretions stone, to bring a rams skin or twain, and a
little Goats hair, to the building of the Lords tabernacle. Exodus 35.23.

The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ grant that according to the riches of his
glory, thou may be strengthened by his spirit in the inner man, that
Christ may dwell in thy heart by faith; to the end that thou being rooted and
grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and height thereof; and to know the love of Christ which
passes knowledge, that thou may be filled with all fulness of God. Amen.

Farewell. Iulie 23. the year of the last patience of Saints. 1592. Thine in
Christ Jesus, W. P.

A GOLDEN CHAIN: OR, THE DESCRIPTION OF Theology. THE CONTENTS.
1 Of the body of Scripture, and Theology. page 1 2 Of God and the nature of
God. ibid. 3 Of the life of God. page 3 4 Of Gods glory and blessedness. page 5
5 Concerning the persons of the Godhead. page 6 6 Of Gods works and his
decree. page 8 7 Of Predestination and creation. page 10 8 Of Angels. page 11 9
Of Man and the state of innocence. page 12 10 Of sin and the fall of angels.
page 13 11 Of man's fall and disobedience. page 15 12 Of Original sin. page
16 13 Of Actual sin. page 19 14 Of the punishment of sin. page 22 15 Of
Election and of Jesus Christ the foundation thereof. page 23 16 Of the union of
the two natures in Christ. page 25 17 Of the distinction of both natures. page
27 18 Of Christ's nativity and office. page 27 19 Concerning the outward means
of executing the decree of Election, and of the Decalogue. page 36 20 Of the
first commandment. page 38 21 Of the second commandment. page 42 22 Of the
third commandment. page 54 23 Of the fourth commandment. page 61 24 Of the
fifth commandment. page 66 25 Of the sixth commandment. page 73 26 Of the
seventh commandment. page 82 27 Of the eight commandment. page 88 28
Concerning the ninth commandment. page 95 29 Of the tenth commandment. page
100 30 Of the use of the Law. page 101 31 Of the Covenant of grace. page 102 32
Of the Sacraments. page 103 33 Of Baptism. page 107 34 Of the Lords Supper.
page 111 35 Of the degrees of executing Gods decree in election. page 113 36
Conce^ning the first degree of the declaration of Gods love. page 114 37
Concerning the second degree of the declaration of Gods love. page 121 38
Concerning the third degree of the declaration of Gods love. page 124 39 Of
Repentance and the fruit thereof. page 128 40 Of Christian warfare. page 129 41
Of the first Assault. page 130 42 Of the second Assault. page 131 43 Of the
third Assault. page 134 44 Of the patient bearing of the Cross. page 136 45 Of
the calling upon God. page 138 46 Of Christian Apology and Martyrdom. page
139 47 Of edification and Alms among the faithful. page 140 48 Of the fourth
degree of the declaration of Gods love, and of the estate of the Elect after
this life. page 141 49 Of the estate of the Elect at the last day of judgment.
page 143 50 Of the estate of the Elect after judgment. page 144 51 Concerning
the order of the causes of Salvation according to the doctrine of the Church of
Rome. page 146 52 Concerning the decree of Reprobation. page 163 53 Concerning
the ex^^^tion of the decree of Reprobation. page 164 54 Concerning a new
devised doctrine of Predestination, taught by some new and late Divines. page
167 55 Of the state and condition of the Reprobates when they are dead. page
175 56 Of the state of the Reprobates in hell. page 176 57 Of the Application
of Predestinanation. ibid.
AN EPOSITION OF THE SYMBOL OR Creed of the Apostles. THE CONTENTS.
The Creed. page 185 Faith. page 187 God. page 198 The three persons. page 202
The Father. page 205 Gods omnipotency. page 212 The creation. 217. 221 Gods
counsel. page 218 The creation of heaven. page 228 The creation of Angels.
page 231 The creation of Man. page 236 Gods providence. page 242 Adams fall and
Original sin. page 252 The covenant of grace. page 259 The title, Jesus.
page 262 The title, Christ. page 266 The title, Son. page 271 The title,
Lord. page 278 The incarnation of Christ. page 279 Christ's humiliation. page
295 Christ's passion. page 297 Christ's arraignment. page 300 Christ's execution.
page 328 Christ's sacrifice. page 350 Christ's triumph. page 356 Christ's burial.
page 376 The descension of Christ. page 372 Christ's exaltation. page 370
Christ's resurrection. page 379 Christ's ascension. page 396 Christ's sitting at,
etc. page 407 Christ's intercession. page 409 Christ's kingdom. page 417 The
last judgment. page 420 The holy Ghost. page 436 The Church. 451.488
Predestination. page 453 The mystical union. page 483 The communion of Saints.
page 500 The forgiveness of sins. page 506 The Resurrection of the body. page
509 Life everlasting. page 516
AN EXPOSITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER. THE CONTENTS.
The exposition of the Lords prayer. page 525 The use of the Lords prayer. page
561 Of the circumstances of praying. page 562 Of Gods hearing our prayers. page
563 The prayers of Paul. page 564
A TREATISE TENDING UNTO a declaration, whether a man be in the estate of
damnation, or in the estate of grace. THE CONTENTS.
1 How far a Reprobate may go in Christian religion. page 574 2 The estate
of a true Christian in this life: which also shows how far the Elect being
called, go beyond all reprobates in Christianity. page 584 3 A Dialogue to
the same purpose, gathered out of the sauorie writings of M. Tyndal and
Bradford. page 617 4 How a Reprobate may perform all the religion of the
church of Rome. page 642 5 The conflicts of Satan with a Christian. page 756 6
How the word of God is to be applied aright unto the conscience. page 663 7
Consolations for the troubled consciences of weak Christians. page 666 8 A
Declaration of certain spiritual Desertions. page 674
A case of Conscience. THE CONTENTS.
A case of conscience resolved out of the word of God; How a man may know
whether he be the child of God or no. page 685 A Discourse taken out of the
writings of Hier. Zanchius, wherein the aforesaid Case of conscience is
disputed, and resolved.
A Direction for the government of the tongue according to Gods word. THE
CONTENTS.
1 The general means of ruling the tongue. page 713 2 The matter of our
speech. page 714 3 The manner of our speech, and what must be done before our
speech. page 716 4 What is to be done in speaking, and of wisdom. ibid. 5 Of
truth and reverence in speech. page 718 6 Of modesty and meekenes. page 722 7
Of sobriety, vrbanitie, fidelity, and care of others good name. page 725 8 Of
the bonds of truth. page 729 9 What is to be done when we have spoken. page
730 10 Of writing. ibid. 11 Of silence. page 731 12 An exhortation to keep the
tongue.
TWO TREATISES:
I. Of the nature and practice of Repentance. THE CONTENTS.
1 What Repentance is. page 738 2 Of the causes of Repentance. page 740 3 How
Rep^ntance is wrought. page 741 4 Of the parts of Repentance. page 742 5 Of
the degrees of Repentance. page 743 6 Of the persons which must repent. ibid. 7
Of the practice of repentance. ibid. 8 Of l^gall motives to Repentance. page
752 9 Of motives Evangelical. page 755 10 Of the time of Repentance. page 756
11 Of c^rtaine cases in repentance. page 758 12 Of the contraries to
repentance. page 757 13 Of corruptions in the doctrine of repentance. page 761
II. Of the combat of the flesh and Spirit. page 762 The treatise of Dying
well. p. 773. The treatise of the right knowledge of Christ crucified. p. 815.
A Discourse of Conscience. THE CONTENTS.
1 What conscience is. page 831 2 The actions or duties of conscience where the
point is handled, How any thing is said to bind the conscience. page 832 3
The kinds and differences of conscience, where is handled liberty of
conscience, and the question disputed whether a man may in conscience be
infallibly certain of his salvation. page 867 4 Man's duty touching conscience,
which is to get and keep it. page 900
A Reformed Catholic: OR, A DECLARATION Showing how near we may come to the
present Church of Rome in sundry points of Religion: and wherein we must for
ever depart from them. THE CONTENTS.
1 Of free will. page 910 2 Of Original sin. page 915 3 Assurance of
salvation. page 918 4 Justification of a sinner. page 925 5 Of merits. page 940
6 Of satisfactions for sin. page 945 7 Of Traditions. page 950 8 Of Vows.
page 955 9 Of Images. page 961 10 Of real presence. page 966 11 The sacrifice
of the Mass. page 972 12 Of Fasting. page 977 13 Of the state of perfection.
page 980 13 Of the worshipping of saints departed. page 985 15 Of Implicit
faith. page 991 16 Of Purgatory. page 995 17 Of the supremacy. page 996 18 Of
the efficacy of the sacraments. page 1000 19 Of Faith. page 1003 20 Of
Repentance. page 1006 21 The sins of the Roman Church. page 1014 An
advertisement to Roman Catholics. page 1018
The foundation of Christian Religion, gathered into six principles. p. 1029.
A Grain of Musterd-seede. THE CONTENTS.
A man that does but begin to be converted, is even at that instant the very
child of God, though inwardly he be more carnal then spiritual. page 1046 2.
Conclusion. The first material beginning of the conversion of a sinner, or the
smallest measure of renewing grace, have the promises of this life, and the
life to come. page 1047 3. Conclusion. A constant and earnest desire to be
reconciled to God, to believe and to repent, if it be in a troubled heart, is
in acceptance with God, as reconciliation, faith, repentance it self. page
1048 4. Conclusion. To see and feel in our selves the want of any grace, and
to be grieved therefore, is the grace it self. page 1053 5. Conclusion. He that
has begun to subject himself to Christ and his word, though as yet he be
ignorant in most points of religion: yet if he have care to increase in
knowledge, and to practice that which he knows, he is accepted of God, as a
true believer. page 1053 6. Conclusion. The aforsaide beginnings of grace are
counterfeite, unless they increase. page 1054
The body of holy Scripture is distinguished into sacred sciences, whereof One
is principal. Theology is a science of living well and blessedly for ever.
Other attendants or handmaids. I. Ethiques, a doctrine of living honestly and
ciuilly. II. Oeconomickes, a doctrine of governing a family well. III.
Politiques, a doctrine of the right administration of a common weal. IIII.
Ecclesiastical discipline, a doctrine of well ordering the Church. V. The
Jews commonweal, In as much as it differs from Church government. VII.
Academie, the doctrine of governing Schools well: especially those of the
Prophets.



CHAP. 1. Of the body of Scripture and Theology.
THe body of Scripture, is a doctrine sufficient to live well.

It comprehends many holy sciences, whereof one is principal, others are
handmaids or retainers.

The principal science is Theology.

Theology, is the science of living blessedly for ever. Blessed life
consists in the knowledge of God. Ioh. 17:3. This is life eternal, that they
know thee to be the only very God and whom thou have sent Christ Jesus. Esai
53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant (viz. Christ) justify many.
And therefore it consists likewise in the knowledge of our selves, because we
know God by looking into our selves.

Theology has two parts: the first of God, the second of his works.

CHAP. 2. Of God, and the nature of God.
THat there is a God, it is evident: 1. by the course of nature: 2. by the
nature of the soul of man: 3. by the distinction of things honest and
dishonest: 4. by the terror of conscience: 5. by the regiment of civil
societies: 6. the order of all causes having ever recourse to some former
beginning: 7. the determination of all things to their several ends: 8. the
consent of all men well in their wits.

God is Jehovah Elohim. Exodus 6.2. And Elohim spoke unto Moses, and said unto
him, I am Jehovah: and I appeared unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, by the
name of God almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them. Exodus
3.13. If they say unto me, What is his name? What shall I say unto them? And
God answered Moses, I am that I am: Also he said, thus shall thou say unto the
children of Israel, I am has sent me unto you. And God spoke further to Moses,
Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, Jehovah Elohim, etc. has sent
me unto you. In these words, the first title of God, declares his Nature, the
second his Persons.

The Nature of God, is his most lively and most perfect essence.

The perfection of the nature of God, is his absolute constitution, by the
which he is wholly complete within himself Exodus 3. 13. I am that I am. Act.
17.24. God that made the world, and all things that are therein, seeing that he
is the Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with hands,
neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he
gives to all life and breath and all things.

The perfection of his Nature, is either Simplenes, or the Infinitenes thereof.

The Simpleness of his nature, is that by which he is void of all Logical
relation. He has not in him, subject or adiunct. Ioh. 5.26. As the Father has
life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in himself:
conferred with Ioh. 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and the life. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
But if we walk in light, as he is in light: conferred with v. 5. God is light,
and in him is no darkness. Hence it is manifest, that to have Life, and to be
Life: to be in Light, and to be Light, in God are all one. Neither is God
subject to generality, or specialtie: whole, or parts: matter, or that which
is made of matter: for so there should be in God diverse things, and one more
perfect then another. Therefore, whatsoever is in God, is his essence, and all
that he is, he is by essence. The saying of Augustine in his 6. book and 4.
chap. of the Trinity, is fit to prove this: In God (says he) to be, and to
be just, or mighty, are all one: but in the mind of man, it is not all one to
be, and to be mighty, or just: for the mind may be destitute of these
virtues, and yet a mind.

Hence it is manifest, that the Nature of God is immutable and Spiritual.

Gods immutabilitie of nature, is that by which he is void of all composition,
division, and change. Iam. 1. 17. With God there is no variableness nor
shadow of changing. Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord and am not changed. Where it is
said, that God repents, etc. Genesis 6.6. the meaning is, that God changes the
action, as men do that repent: therefore repentance, it signifies not any
mutation in God, but in his actions, and such things as are made and changed
by him.

Gods Nature, is spiritual in that it is incorporall, and therefore invisible.
Ioh. 4.24. God is a spirit. 2. Cor. 3. 17. The Lord is the spirit. 1. Tim.
1.17. To the King eternal, immortal, invisible, only wise God, be glory and
honor for ever and ever. Col. 1.15. Who is the image of the invisible God.

The infiniteness of GOD, is twofolde: his Eternity, and Exceeding greatness.

Gods eternity, is that by which he is without beginning and ending, Psalm. 90.
2. Before the mountains were made, and before thou had formed the earth and
the round world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art our God. Revel.
^. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, that is, the beginning and ending, says the Lord,
Which is, Which was, and Which is to come.

Gods exceeding greatness, is that by which his incomprehensible nature is every
where present, both within and without the world. Psalm. 145.3. Great is the
Lord, and worthy to be praised, and his greatness is incomprehensible. 1. King.
8.27. Is it true indeed that God will dwell on the earth? behold the heavens,
and the heavens of heavens are not able to contain thee: how much less is
this: house that I have built? Ier. 23. 24. Do not I fill the heaven and
earth, says the Lord? Hence it is plain:

First, that he is only one, and that indivisible, not many. Ephesians. 4.5. One
Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. Deuteronomy. 4. 35. Unto
thee it was showed, that thou might know that the Lord he is God, and that
there is none but he alone. 1. Cor. 8.4. We know that an idol is nothing in
the world, and that there is none other God but one. And there can be but one
thing infinite in nature.

Secondly, that God is the knower of the heart. For nothing is hidden from that
nature, which is within all things, and without all things, which is included
in nothing, nor excluded from any thing. Because 1. King. 8. 39. the Lord
searches all hearts, and understands every work of the mind. Psalm.
139.1,2. Thou know my sitting down, and my rising up, thou understand my
cogitation a far off.

CHAP. 3. Of the life of God.
HItherto we have spoken of the perfection of Gods nature. Now follows the
life of God, by which the Divine Nature is in perpetual action, living, and
moving in it self, Psalm. 42. 2. My soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God, when shall I come and appear before the presence of God? Hebr. 3.
12. See that there be not at any time in any of you an evil heart to depart
from the living God.

The divine Nature, is especially in perpetual operation by three attributes,
the which do manifest the operation of God toward his creatures. These are
his Wisdom, Will, and Omnipotency.

The wisdom or knowledge of God, is that by the which God does not by certain
notions abstracted from the things themselves, but by his own essence, nor
successively and by discourse of reason, but by one eternal and immutable act
of understanding, distinctly and perfectly know himself, and all other things,
though infinite, whether they have been or not. Matthew. 11.27. No man knows
the Son but the Father, nor the Father but the Son, and he to whom the
Son will reveal him. Hebr. 4. 13. There is nothing created, which is not
manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and open to his eyes, with
whom we have to do. Psalm. 147.5. His wisdom is infinite.

Gods wisdom has these parts: his foreknowledge, and his counsel.

The foreknowledge of God, is that by which he most assuredly foreseeth all
things that are to come. Act. 2.23. Him have ye taken by the hands of the
wicked, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God,
and have crucified and slain. Romans 8. Those things which he knew before, he
also predestined to be made like to the image of his son. This is not
properly spoken of God, but by reason of men, to whom things are past or to
come.

The counsel of God, is that by the which he does most straightly perceive the
best reason of all things that are. Prove. 8. 14. I have counsel and wisdom, I
am understanding, and I have strength.

The will of God, is that by the which he both most freely and justly with one
act wills all things. Romans 9. 18. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will hardens. Ephesians. 1.5. Who has predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus
Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. Iam. 4. 15.
For that which you should say, if the Lord will, and we live, we will do this
or that.

God wills that which is good, by approouing it; that which is evil, in as
much as it is evil, by disallowing and forsaking it. And yet he voluntarily
does permit evil: because it is good that there should be evil. Act. 14.16.
Who in time past suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own ways. Psalm.
81.12. So I gave them up to the hardness of their heart, and they have walked in
their own counsels.

The will of God, by reason of diverse objects, has diverse Names, and is either
called Love and Hatred, or Grace and Justice.

The Love of God is that, by the which God approoueth first himself, and then
all his creatures, without their desert, and the^ does take delight. 1 Ioh. 4.
16. God is love, and who so remains in love, remains in God, and God in
him. Ioh. 3.16. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
etc. Romans 5.8. God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were
yet sinners, Christ died for us.

The Hatred of God, is that by the which he disliketh and detesteth his
creature offending, for his fault. 1. Cor. 10.5. But many of them the Lord
misliked, for they perished in the wilderness. Psalm. 5. 5. Thou hate all the
workers of iniquity. Psalm. 44.8. Thou have loved justice and hated iniquity.

The Grace of God, is that by which he freely declares his favor to his
creatures. Rom 11.6. If it be of grace, it is no more of works: otherwise
grace is not grace, but if it be of works, it is no more grace. Tit. 2. 11.
The saving grace of God shined to all men, teaching us to deny impiety, etc.

The Grace of God, is either his Goodness, or his Mercy.

The Goodness of God, is that by which he being in himself absolutely good,
does freely exercise his liberality upon his creatures. Matthew. 19.17. Why
call thou me good, there is none good but one, even God. Math. 5. 45. He
makes his sun to shine upon the good and bad, and he raineth upon the just
and unjust.

Gods mercy, is that by which he freely assisteth all his creatures in their
miseries. Esai 30. 18. Yet will the Lord wait, that he may have mercy upon
you. Lament. 3.22. It is the Lords mercies, that we are not consumed, because
his compassions fail not. Exodus 39.19. I take pity on whom I take pity, and
am merciful on whom I am merciful.

Gods Justice, is that by which he in all things wills that which is just.
Psalm. 10. The just Lord loves justice. Psalm. 5.4. For thou art not a God that
loves wickedness.

Gods justice is in word or deed.

Justice in word, is that truth by which he constantly, and indeed wills
that which he has said. Romans 3.4. Let God be true, and every man a liar.
Matthew. 24.25. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass
away. Hence it is, that God is just in keeping his promise. 1. Ioh. 1.9. If we
confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive our sins. 2. Tim.
4. 8. Henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day.

Justice indeed, is that by which he either disposes or rewards.

Gods disposing justice, is that by which he, as a most free Lord orders
rightly all things in his actions. Psalm. 45.17. The Lord is righteous in all his
ways.

Gods rewarding justice, is that by which he renders to his creature according
to his work. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. It is justice with God, to render affliction to
such ^^ afflict you, but to you which are afflicted, releasing with us. 1. Pet.
1.17. Therefore if you call him Father, which without respect of person judges
according to every work, pass the time of your dwelling here in fear. Ierem.
51. 56. The Lord that recompenseth shall surely recompense.

The Justice of God, is either his Gentleness, or Anger.

Gods Gentleness, is that by which he freely bestows upon his creature a
reward. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Which is a token of the righteous judgment of God,
that ye may be counted worthy the kingdom of God, for the which ye also
suffer. Matthew. 10. 41, 42. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, shall have a Prophets reward: and he that receives a righteous man in
the name of a righteous man, shall receive the reward of a righteous man. And
whosoever shall give unto one of these little ones to drink a cup of cold
water only in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall not
loose his reward.

Gods Anger, is that by which he punishes the transgression of his creature.
Romans 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness,
and unrighteousness of men, which withhold the truth in unrighteousness. Ioh.
3.36. He that obeys not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him.

Thus much concerning the will of GOD. Now follows his omnipotency.

Gods omnipotency, is that by which he is most able to perform every work.
Math. 19.29. With men this is impossible, with God all things are possible.

Some things notwithstanding are here to be excepted. First, those things whose
action argues an impotencie, as to lie, to deny his word. Titus 1. 2. which
God, that cannot lie, has promised. 2. Tim. 2. 13. He cannot deny himself.
Secondly, such things as are contrary to the Nature of God, as to destroy
himself, and not to beget his Son from eternity. Thirdly, such things as
employ contradiction. For God cannot make a truth false, or that which is,
when it is, not to be.

Gods power, may be distinguished into an absolute and actual power.

Gods absolute power, is that by which he can do more, then he either does, or
will do. Matthew. 3.9. I say unto you, God is able of these stones to raise up
children to Abraham. Philip. 3. 21. According to the working, whereby he is
able to subdue even all things unto himself.

Gods actual power, is that by which he causes all things to be, which he
freely will. Psalm. 135. 6. All things which God will, those he does in heaven
and in earth, and in all depths.

CHAP. 5. Of Gods glory, and blessedness.
OVt of the former attributes, by which the true Jehovah is distinguished from
a fained god, and from idols, arise the glory of God, and his blessedness.

Gods glory or majesty, is the infinite excellency of his most simple and
most holy divine Nature. Hebr. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his glory,
and the ingraued form of his person, etc. Dan. 3. Thou art only God, and
glorious upon the earth.

By this we see, that God only can know himself perfectly. Ioh. 6.46. Not
that any man has seen the Father, save he which is of God, he has seen the
Father. 1. Tim. 6. 16. Who only has immortality, and dwells in the light,
that none can attain unto, whom never man saw, neither can see. Exodus 33.18.
Thou can not see my face.

Notwithstanding there is a certain manifestation of gods glory: partly more
obscure, partly more apparent.

The more obscure manifestation, is the vision of Gods majesty in this life by
the eyes of the mind, through the help of things perceived by the outward
senses. Esa. 6.1. I saw the Lord sitting upon an high throne, and lifted up,
and the lower parts thereof filled the temple. Exodus ^3.22. And while my glory
passes by. I will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with
my hand whiles I pass by: after I will take away mine hand, and thou shall see
my back parts, but my face shall not be seen. 1. Cor. 13. 12. Now we se as
through a glass darkely.

The more apparent manifestation of God, is the contemplation of him in heaven
face to face. 1. Corinthians. 13. 12. But then shall we see face to face. Dan. 7.
9, 10. I beheld till the thrones were set up, and the ancient of days did fit,
whose garment was white as snow, etc. Matthew. 19.16.

Gods blessedness, is that by which God is in himself, and of himself all
sufficient, Genesis 17.1. I am God all sufficient, walk before me, and be thou
upright. Col. 2.2.9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the godhead
bodily. 1. Tim. 6.5. Which in due time he shall show, that is blessed and
Prince only, etc.

CHAP. 5. Concerning the persons of the Godhead.
THe persons are they, which subsisting in one Godhead, are distinguished by
incommunicable properties. 1. Ioh. 5.7. There are three that bear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. Genesis
19.24. Then Jehovah reigned upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah, brimstone, and fire
from Jehovah in heaven. Ioh. 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and that Word was God.

They therefore are coequall, and are distinguished not by degree, but by order.

The Constitution of a person is, when as a personal propriety or the proper
manner of subsisting is adjoined to the Dietie, or one divine nature.

Distinction of persons, is that, which albeit every person is one and the same
perfect God, yet the Father is not the Son or the holy Ghost, but the Father
alone; and the holy Ghost is not the Father or the Son, but the holy Ghost
alone: neither can they be divided, by reason of the infiniteness of their most
simple essence, which is all one in number, and the same in the Father, the
same in the Son, and the same in the holy Ghost: so that in these there is
diversity of persons, but unity in essence.

The communion of the persons, or rather union, is that by which each one is in
the rest, and with the rest, by reason of the unity of the Godhead: and
therefore every each one does possess, love, and glorify another, and work
the same thing. Ioh. 4.10. Beleeuest thou not that I am in the Father, and the
Father is in me? the words that I spoke unto you, I speak not of my self,
but the father that dwells in me, he does the works. Prove. 8.22. The Lord
has possessed me in the beginning of his way: I was before the works of old.
And verse. 20. Them was I with him as a nourisher, and I was daily his delight,
reioicing alwaie before him. Ioh. 1. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and that Word was God. and chap. 5.19. The Son can do
nothing of himself, save that he sees the Father do: for whatsoever things he
does, the same does the Son also.

There be three persons: the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, Matthew.
3.16.17. And Jesus when he was baptized, came straight out of the water, and
lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John saw the Spirit of God,
descending like a dove, and lighting upon him: and lo, a voice came from
heaven, saying, This is my belooued son, in whom I am well pleased.

The father, is a person without beginning, who from all eternity begat the
Son, Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of the glory, and the ingraued form
of his person. Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

In the generation of the Son, these properties must be noted: I. He that
begets, and he that is begotten are together, and not one before another in
time. II. He that begets does communicate with him that is begotten, not
some one part, but his whole essence. III. The Father begot the Son not out
of himself, but within in himself.

The incommunicable property of the Father, is to be unbegotten, to be a
Father, and to beget. He is the beginning of actions, because he begins
every action of himself, effecting it by the Son and the holy Ghost. 1. Cor.
8.6. Yet unto us, there is but one God, which is the Father of whom are all
things and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and
we by him. Romans 11.^6. For of him, and through him, and for him are all things.

The other two persons have the Godhead, or the whole divine essence, of the
Father by communication, namely, the Son and the holy Ghost.

The Son is the second person, begotten of the Father from all eternity.
Heb. 1.5. For unto which of the Angels said be at any time, Thou art my Son,
this day begat I thee? Col. 1.15. Who is the image of the invisible God, the
first borne of every creatur^. Ioh. 1.14. And we saw the glory thereof as the
glory of the only begotten son of the father. Romans 8.32. He who spared not
his own son.

For this cause he is said to be sent from the father. Ioh. 8.42. I proceeded
forth and came from God, neither came I of my self, but he sent me. This
sending takes not away the equality of essence and power, but declares the
order of the persons. Ioh. 5^18. Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill
him, not only because he had broken the Sabbath: but said also that God was
his Father, and made himself equal with God. Phil. 2.6. Who being in the
form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.

Although the Son be begotten of his Father, yet nevertheless he is of and by
himself very God: for he must be considered either according to his essence or
according to his filiatio^ or Sonship. In regard of his essence, he is ((...))
i. of and by himself very God: for the Deity which is common to all the t^ree
persons is not begotten. But as he is a person, and the son of the Father, he
is not of himself, but from another: for he is the eternal Son of his
father. And thus he is truly said to be very God of very God.

For this cause also he is the WORD of the father, not a vanishing, but an
essential word; because as a word is, as it were, begotten of the mind, so is
the Son begotten of the Father; and also, because he brings glad tidings
from the bosom of his Father. Nazian. in his Oration of the Son. Basil in
his preface before John's Gospel.

The property of the Son, is to be begotten.

His proper manner of working, is to execute actions from the Father, by the
holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 8. 6. Our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and
we by him. Ioh. 5.19. Whatsoever things he does, the same does the Son also.

The holy Ghost, is the third person, proceeding from the Father and the Son.
Ioh. 15. 26. But when the Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from
the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds of the Father, he shall
testify of me. Romans 8. 9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit,
seeing the spirit of God dwells in you. But if there be any that has not the
spirit of Christ, he is not his. Ioh. 16.13,14. But when the Spirit of truth
shall come, he shall conduct you into all truth: for he shall not speak of
himself, but whatsoever he hears, he shall speak, and shall declare unto
you such things as are to come. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of
mine, and show it unto you.

What may be the essential difference betwixt proceeding, and begetting,
neither the Scriptures determine, nor the Church knows.

The incommunicabl^ property of the holy Ghost, is to proceed.

His proper manner of working, is to finish an action, effecting it, as from
the Father and the Son.

And albeit the Father and the Son are two distinct persons, yet are they
both but one beginning of the holy Ghost.

CHAP. 6. Of Gods works, and his decree.
THus far concerning the first part of Theology: the second follows, of
the works of God.

The works of God, are all those, which he does out of himself, that is, out
of his divine essence.

These are common to the Trinity, always reserved the peculiar manner of
working to every person.

The end of all these, is the manifestation of the glory of God. Romans 11.36.
For him are all things, to him be glory for ever.

The work, or action of God, is either his decree, or the execution of his
decree.

The decree of God, is that by which God in himself, has necessarily, and yet
freely, from all eternity determined all things. Ephesians. 1. 11. In whom also we
are chosen when we were predestinate, according to the purpose of him, which
wor^eth all things after the counsel of his own will. and verse. 4. As he has
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world. Matthew. 10.29. Are not two
sparrowes sold for a farthing, and not one of them falls on the ground
without your Father? Rom 9. 21. Has not the potter power on the clay, to make
of the same lump one vessel ^^ dishonor, and another to honor.

Therefore the Lord, according to his good pleasure, has most certainly
decreed every both thing and action, whether past, present, or to come,
together with their circumstances of place, time, means, and end.

Yea, he has most justly decreed the wicked works of the wicked. For if it
had not so pleased him, they had never been at all. And albeit they of their
own nature, are and remain wicked; yet in respect of Gods decree, they are to
be accounted good. For there is not any thing absolutely evil, 1. Pet. 3.17.
For it is better (if the will of God be so) that ye suffer for well doing, then
for evil doing.

The thing which in the own nature is evil, in Gods eternal counsel comes in
the place of a good thing; in that it is some occasion and way to manifest the
glory of God in his justice, and his mercy.

God his foreknowledge, is conjoined with his decree; and inde^^e is in nature
before it: yet not in regard of God, but us; because knowledge goes before the
will, and the effecting of a work. For we do nothing, but those things that
we have before willed, neither do we will any thing which we know not before.

God his foreknowledge in it self, is not a cause why things are, but as it is
conjoined with his decree. For things do not therefore come to pass, because
that God did foreknow them; but because he decreed and willed them: therefore
they come to pass.

The execution of Gods decree, is that by which all things in their time are
accomplished which were foreknowne, or decreed, and that even as they were
foreknowne and decreed.

The same decree of GOD, is the first and principal working cause of all
things, which also is in order, and time before all other causes. For with Gods
decree is always his will annexed, by the which he can willingly effect that
he has decreed. And it were a sign of impotencie, to decree any thing which
he could not willingly compass. And with Gods will is conjoined an effectual
power, by which the Lord can bring to pass, whatsoever he has freely decreed.

This first and principal cause, howbeit in it self it be necessary, yet it
does not take away freedom of will in election, or the nature and property of
second causes, but only brings them into a certain order, that is, it
directs them to the determinate end: whereupon the effects and events of
things are contingent or necessary, as the nature of the second cause is. So
Christ according to his Fathers decree died necessarily, Act. 17.3. but yet
willingly, Math. 25. 39. And if we respect the temperature of Christ's body, he
might have prolonged his life; and therefore in this respect may be said to
have died contingently.

The execution of Gods decree, has two branches, his operation, and his
operative permission.

Gods operation, is his effectual producing of all good things, which either
have being or moving, or which are done.

Gods operative permission, is that by which he only permits one and the
same work to be done of others, as it is evil; but as it is good, he
effectually works the same. Genesis 50.20. You indeed had purposed evil
against me, but God decreed that for good, that he might, as he has done this
day, preserve his people alive. And Genesis 45.7. God has sent me before you to
preserve your posterity in this land. Esai 10. 5, 6, 7. Woe unto Asshur, the
rod of my wrath, and the staff in their hands is mine indignation. I will send
him to a dissembling nation, and I will give him a charge against the people of
my wrath to take the spoil, and to take the pray, and to tread them under
feet like the mire in the street. But he thinks not so, neither does his
heart esteem it so: but he imagines to destroy, and to cut off not a few
nations.

God permits evil, by a certain volun^arie permission, in that he
forsakes the second cause in working evil. And he for^aketh his creature,
either by detracting the grace it had, or not bestowing that which it wants.
Romans 1.26. For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections. 2. Tim. 2.25,
26. Instructing them with meekenes that are contrary minded, proouing if God
at any time will give them repentance, that they may know the truth, and that
they may come to amendment out of the snare of the devil, which are taken of
him at his will:

Neither must we think God unjust, who is indebted to none, Romans 9.15. I will
have mercy on him to whom I will show mercy. Yea, it is in Gods pleasure to
bestow how much grace and upon whom he will. Matthew. 20.15. Is it not lawful
for me to do as I will with mine own?

That which is evil, has some respect of goodness with God: first, in that it
is the punishment of sin: and punishment is accounted a moral good, in that
it is the part of a just Judge to punish sin. Secondly, as it is a mere
action or act. Thirdly, as it i^ a chastisement, a trial of ones faith,
martyrdom, propitiation for sin, as the death and passion of Christ. Act.
2.23. and 4.24. And if we observe these caueats, God is not only a bare
permissiue agent in an evil work, but a powerful effectour of the same, yet
so, as he neither instilleth an aberration into the action, nor yet supporteth,
or inte^deth the same, but that he most freely suffers evil, and best
disposes of it to his own glory. The like we may see in this similitude: Let
a man spur forward a lame horse; in that he moves forward, the rider is the
cause; but that he halteth, he himself is the canse. And again, we see the
sun beams gathering themselves into a sun glass, they burn such things
as they light upon: now, that they burn, the cause is not in the sun, but in
the glass. The like may be said of Gods action in an evil subject.

CHAP. 7. Of Predestination and Creation.
GOds decree, in as much as it concerns man, is called Predestination: which
is the decree of God, by the which he has ordained all men to a certain and
everlasting estate: that is, either to salvation or condemnation, for his own
glory. 1. These. 5.9. For God has not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain
salvation by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 9.13. As it is written,
I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau. and verse. 22. What and if God would, to
^hewe his wrath, and to make his power known, suffer with long patience the
vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, and that he might declare the riches
of his glory upon the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory?

The means of accomplishing Gods Predestination are two fold:

The creation, and the fall.

The creation, is that by which God made all things very good, of nothing, that
is, of no matter which was before the creation, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God
created the heaven, etc. to the end of the chapter.

Gods manner of creating, as also of governing, is such as that by his word
alone, he, without any instruments, means, assistance, or motion produced al
sorts of things. For to will any thing with God, is both to be able^ and to
perform it, Heb. 11.3. By faith we understand, that the world was ordained by
the word of God, so that the things which we see, are not made of things which
did appear. Psalm. 148.5. Let them praise the name of the Lord, for he
commanded and they were created.

The goodness of the creature, is a kind of excellency, by which it was void of
all sin, that is, free from punishment and transgression.

The creation, is of the world, or inhabitants in the world.

The world, is a most beutifull palace, framed out of a deformed substance, and
fit to be inhabited.

The parts of the world, are the heavens and earth.

The heavens are threefold: the first is the air, the second the sky, the
third an invisible and incorporall essence, created to be the seat of all the
blessed, both men, and Angels. This third heaven is called Paradise, 2. Cor.
13.4.

The inhabitours of the world, are reasonable creatures made according to Gods
own image: they are either Angels or men, Genesis 1. 26. Furthermore, God said,
Let us make man in our own image, according to our likeness. Job. 1.6. When the
children of God came and stood before the Lord, Satan came also among them.

The image of God, is the integrity of the reasonable creature, resembling God
in holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. And put on the new man which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.

CHAP. 8. Of Angels.
THe Angels each of them being created in the beginning, were settled in an
upright estate. In whom these things are to be noted. First their nature.
Angels are spiritual and incorporall essences. Heb. 2. 16. For he in no sort
took the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham. Heb. 1.7. And of the
Angels he says, he makes the spirits his messengers, and his ministers a
flame of fire.

Secondly, their qualities. First, they are wise, 2 Samuel 14.18. My lord the
king is even as an Angel of God in hearing good and badde. 2. They are of great
might, 2. These. 1.7. When the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with
his mighty Angels. 2. Sam. 24. David saw the Angel that smote the people. 2.
King. 19.35. The same night the Angel of the Lord went out and smote in the
camp of Ashur, an hundredth, fourscore, and five thousand. 3. They are swift
and of great agilitie, Esaias, 6,6, Then flew^ one of the Seraphims unto me with
an hot cole in his hand. Dan. 9.21^ The man Gabriel whom I had seen before
in a vision, came flying and touched me. This is the reason why the Cherubins
in the Tabernacle were painted with wings.

Thirdly, they are innumerable, Genesis 3.2. Now Jacob went forth on his journey,
and the angel of God met him. Dan. ^0.7. Thousand thousands ministered unto him,
and ten thousand thousands stood before him. Matthew. 26.25. Think thou I
cannot pray to my father, and he will give me more then twelve legions of
Angels? Heb. 12. 22. To the company of innumerable angels.

Fourthly, they are in the highest heaven, where they ever atte^d upon God, and
have society with him. Mark. 18.10. In heaven their Angels always behold the
face of my Father which is in heaven. Psalm. 68.17. The chariots of God are
twenty thousand thousand Angels, and the Lord is among them. Mark. 12.25. But
are as Angels in heaven.

Fifthly, their degree. That there are degrees of Angels, it is most plain.
Colos. 1.16. By him were all things created which are in heaven and in earth,
things visible and invisible: whether they be thrones or dominions, or
principalities, or powers. Romans 8.38. Neither Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers etc. 1. These. 4.16. The Lord shall descend with the voice of the
Aarchangel, and with the trumpet of God. But it is not for us to search, who,
or how many be of each order, neither ought we curiously to enquire how they
are distinguished, whether in essence, or qualities. Coloss. 2. 18. Let no man
at his pleasure bear rule over you by humblenes of mind, and worshipping of
Angels, advancing himself in those things which he never saw.

Sixthly, their office. Their office is partly to magnify God, and partly to
perform his commandments. Psalm 103. verse. 20. 21. Praise the Lord, ye his
Angels that excel in strength, that do his commandment in obeying the voice
of his word. Praise the Lord, all ye his hosts, ye his servants that do his
pleasure.

Seventhly: The establishing of some Angels in that integrity, in which they
were created.

CHAP. 7. Of man, and the estate of innocence.
MAn, after he was created of God, was established in an excellent estate of
innocence. In this estate seven things are chiefly to be regarded.

I. The place. The garden of Heden, that most pleasant garden. Genesis 2. 15. Then
the Lord took the man, and put him into the garden of Heden. II. The
integrity of man's nature. Which was Eph^ 4.24. Created in righteousness and
true holiness. This integrity has two parts.

The first is wisdom, which is true and perfect knoweledge of God, and of his
will, in as much as it is to be performed of man, yea, and of the counsel of
God in all his creatures. Coloss. 3. 10. And have put on the new man, which is
renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him. Genesis chap. 2.19.
When the Lord God had formed on the earth every beast of the field, and every
foul of the heaven, he brought them unto the man, to see how he would call
them: for howesoeuer the man called the living creature, so was the name
thereof.

The second is Justice, which is a conformity of the will, affections, and
powers of the body to the will of God.

III. Man's dignity, consisting of four parts. First, his communion with God,
by which as God reioiced in his own image, so likewise man was incensed to love
God: this is apparent by Gods familiar conference with Adam, Genesis 1.29. And God
said, Behold, I have given unto you every herb bearing seed etc. that shall
be to you for meat. Secondly, his dominion over all the creatures of the
earth, Genesis 2. 19. Psalm. 8.6. Thou have made him Lord over the works of thine
hands, and have set all things under his feet, etc. Thirdly, the decency, and
dignity of the body, in which, though naked, as nothing was unseemly, so was
there in it imprinted a princely majesty. Psalm. 8. Thou have made him little
lower then then God, and crowned him with glory and worship. Genesis 2.25. They
were both naked; and neither ashamed. 1. Cor. 12.22. Upon those members of the
body, which we think most dishonest, put we more honesty on, and our uncomely
parts have more comelines on. Fourthly, labor of the body without pain or
grief. Genesis 3. 17,19. Because thou have obeyed the voice of thy wife, etc.
cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days
of thy life, etc. IV. Subjection to God, whereby man was bound to perform
obedience to the commandments of God: which were two. The one was concerning
the two trees: the other, the observation of the Sabbath.

Gods commandment concerning the trees, was ordained to make examination, and
trial of man's obedience. It consists of two parts: the first, is the giving
of the tree of life, that as a sign, it might confirm to man his perpetual
abode in the garden of Heden, if still he persisted in his obedience. R^uel. 2.
7. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is
in the midst of Paradise of God. Prove. 3.18. She is a tree of life to them
which lay hold on her: and blessed is he that retains her. The second, is the
prohibition to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, together
with a commination of temporal and eternal death, after the transgression of
this commandment. Genesis 2.17. Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
thou shall not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
die the death. This was a sign of death, and had his name of the event,
because the observation thereof would have brought perpetual happiness, as the
violation gave experience of evil, that is, of all misery, namely of
punishment, and of guiltiness of sin.

Gods commandment concerning the observation of the Sabbath, is that, by which
God ordained the sanctification of the Sabbath. Genesis 2.3. God blessed the
seventh day, and sanctified it.

V. His calling, which is his service of God, in the observation of his
commandments, and the dressing of the garden of Heden. Prove. 16.4. God made
all things for himself. Genesis 2.15. He placed him in the garden of Heden, to
dress and keep it. VI. His diet was the herbs of the earth, and fruit of
every tree, except the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Genesis 1.29. And
God said, Behold, I have given unto you every herb bearing seed, which is
upon all the earth, and every tree, wherein is the fruit of a tree bearing
seed, that shall be to you for meat. and chap. 3.17. But of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat. VII. His free choice, both to
will, and perform the commandment concerning the two trees, and also to
neglect and violate the same. Whereby we see that our first parents were
indeed created perfect, but mutable: for so it pleased God to prepare a way to
the execution of his decree.
CHAP. 10. Of sin, and the fall of Angels.
THe fall, is a reuolting of the reasonable creature from obedience to sin.

Sin, is the corruption, or rather deprivation of the first integrity. More
plainly, it is a falling or turning from God, binding the offendour by the
course of Gods justice, to undergo the punishment.

Here a doubt may be moved, whether sin be a thing existing, or not. The
answer is this: Of things which are, some are positive, other primitive.
Things positive, are all substances together with those their properties,
effects, inclinations, and affections, which the Lord has created and
imprinted in their natures. The thing is called privative which grants or
presupposes the absence of some such thing, as ought to be in a thing. Such a
thing is sin, the which properly and of it self is not any thing created,
and existing; but rather the absence of that good which ought to be in the
creature.

Sin has two parts: A defect, or impotencie; and is a confusion or
disturbance of all the powers and actions of the creature.

Impotencie is nothing else, but the very want or loss of that good, which God
has ingrafted in the nature of his creature.

The fall was effected on this manner. First, God created his reasonable
creatures good indeed, but withal changeable, as we have showed before. For
to be unchangeable good, is proper to God alone. Secondly, God tried their
obedience in those things about which they were conversant. Deu. 13.13. Thou
shall not hearken to the words of the Prophet, or unto that dreamer of
dreams: for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord
your God, with all your heart, and with all your soul. Thirdly, in this trial
God does not assist them with new grace to stand, but for just causes forsakes
the^. Lastly, after God has forsaken them, and left them to themselves, they
fall quite from God: no otherwise, then when a man staying up a staff from the
ground, it stands upright: but if he never so little withdraw his hand it
falls of it self.

The fall, is of men, and Angels.

The fall of Angels, is that by which the understanding, pointing at a more
excellent estate, and of it own accord approouing the same, together with the
will making especial choice thereof, they, albeit they might freely by their
integrity, have chosen the contrary, were the sole instruments of their fall
from God. 2. Pet. 2.4. If God spared not the angels which sinned, but cast them
down into hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be kept unto
damnation, etc. Iud. 6. The Angels which kept not their first estate, but left
their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains, etc. Ioh. 8.44.
He was a murderer from the beginning, and continued not in the truth: for
their is no truth in him.

In the fall of Angels, consider: First, their corruption, arising from the
fall, which is the deprauation of their nature; and is either that fearful
malice and hatred, by which they set themselves against God, or their
insatiable desire to destroy mankind; to the effecting whereof, they neglect
neither force nor fraud. 1. Ioh. 3.8. He that commits sin, is of the
devil, because the devil sinned from the beginning. For this cause was the
Son of God revealed, to dissolve the works of the devil. 1. Pet. 5.8. Your
adversary the devil goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may
devour. Ephesians. 6.12. You strive not against flesh and blood but against
Principalities, and powers, and wordly governors, the princes of darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are in supercelestiall
things.

II. Their degree, and diversity: for of these Angels, one is chief, and the
rest attendants. The chief is Beelzebub, prince of the rest of the devils and
the world, far above them all in malice. Matthew. 25.41. Away from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. 2. Cor.
4.4. Whose minds the god of this world has blinded. Revel. 12. 7. And there
was war in heaven, Michael, and his Angels fought with the dragon, and the
dragon and his angels fought.

Ministering angels, are such as wait upon the devil, in accomplishing his
wickedness.

III. Their punishment. God, after their fall, gave them over to perpetual
torments, without any hope of pardon. Jude verse. 6.2. Pet. 2.4. God spared not
the Angels that had sinned, but cast them down into hell, and delivered them
into chains of darke^es, to be kept unto damnation. This he did: first, to
admonish men, what great punishment they deserved. Secondly, to show, that
grievous sins must more grievously be punished.

The fall of Angels was the more grievous, because both their nature was more
able to resist, and the devil was the first founder of sin.

Their punishment is easier, or more grievous.

Their easier punishment is double. The first, is their deiection from heaven.
2. Pet. 2.4. God cast the Angels that sinned into hell. The second, is the
abridging and limitation of their power, Job. 1. 12. The Lord said unto Satan,
Behold, all that he has is in thine hand, only upon him lay not thine hand.

The more grievous pain, is that torment in the deep, which is endless and
infinite, in time and measure. Luke 8.31. And they besought him, that he would
not command them to go down into the deep.

CHAP. 11. Of man's fall and disobedience.
Adams fall, was his willing reuolting to disobedience by eating the forbidden
fruit. In Adams fall, we may note the manner, greatness, and fruit of it.

I. The manner of Adams fall, was on this sort. First, the devil, having
immediately before fallen himself, insinuates unto our first parents, that
both the punishment for eating the forbidden fruit was uncertain, and that
God was not true in his word unto them. Secondly, by this his legerdemain, he
blinded the eyes of their understanding. Thirdly, being thus blinded, they
begin to distrust God, and to doubt of Gods favor. Fourthly, they thus
doubting, are moved to behold the forbidden fruit. Fifthly, they no sooner see
the beauty thereof, but they desire it. Sixthly, that they may satisfy their
desire, they eat of the fruit, which by the hands of the woman, was taken from
the tree: by which act they become utterly disloyal to God. Genesis
3.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8.

Thus without constraint, they willingly fall from their integrity, God upon
just causes leaving them to themselves, and freely suffering them to fall. For
we must not think that man's fall was either by chance, or God not knowing it,
or barely winking at it, or by his bare permission, or against his will: but
rather miraculously, not without the will of God, but yet without all
approbation of it.

II. The greatness of this transg^^^^^^ must be esteemed, not by the external
object, or the baseness of an apple, but by the off^n^^ it contains against
Gods majesty. This offense appears by many trespasses committed in that
action. The 1. is doubting of Gods word. 2: want of faith. For they believe not
Gods threatening, [ In that day ye eat thereof, you shall die the death:] but
being bewitched with the devils promise, [ ye shall be like gods] they cease to
fear Gods punishment, and are inflamed with a desire of greater dignity. 3.
Their curiosity, in forsaking Gods word, and seeking other wisdom. 4. Their
pride, in seeking to magnify themselves, and to become like God. 5. Contempt
of God, in transgressing his commandments against their own conscience. 6. In
that they prefer the devil before God. 7. Ingratitude, who, in as much as in
them lies, expel Gods spirit dwelling in them, and despise that blessed union.
8. They murder both themselves and their progeni^.

III. The fruit or effects. Out of this corrupt estate of our first parents,
arose the estate of infidelity or unbelief, whereby God has included all men
under sin, that he might manifest his mercy in the salvation of some, and
his justice in condemnation of others. Romans 11.32. God has shut up all men in
unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should
be given to them that believe.


In this estate, we must consider sin, and the punishment of sin. Sin is
threefold.

The first, is the participation of Adams both transgression and guiltiness:
whereby in his finne, all his posterity sinned. Romans 5. 12. As by one man
sin enered into the world, and by sin death: so death entered upon all men,
in that all men have sinned. The reason of this is ready. Adam was not then a
private man, but represented all mankind, and therefore look what good he
received from God, or evil elsewhere, both were common to others with him. 1.
Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all men die, so in Christ all men rise again.

Again, when Adam offended, his posterity was in his loins, from who^ they
should by the course of nature, issue: and therefore take part of the guiltines
with him. Hebr. 7.9,10. And to say as the thing is, Levi etc. paid tithes to
Melchisedec: for he was yet in the loins of his father Abraham, when
Melchisedec met him.

CHAP. 12. Of Original sin.
OVt of the former transgression arises another, namely Original sin, which
is corruption engendered in our first conception, whereby every faculty of
soul and body is prone and disposed to evil. Psalm. 1.1. I was borne in
iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. Genesis 6. 5. Tit. 33. We our
selves were in times past unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts and
diverse pleasures, living in maliciousnes and envy, hateful, and hating one
another. Hebr. 12.1. Let us cast away every thing that presses down, and the
sin that hangs so fast on.

By this we see, that sin is not a corruption of man's substance, but only of
faculties: otherwise neither could men's souls be immortal, nor Christ take
upon him man's nature.

All Adams posterity is equally partaker of this corruption: the reason why it
shows not it self equally in all, is because some have the spirit of
sanctification, some the spirit, only to bridle corruption, some neither.

The propagation of sin, from the parents to the children, is either because
the soul is infected by the contagion of the body, as a good ointment by a
fustie vessel; or because God, in the very moment of creation and infusion of
souls into infants, does utterly forsake them. For as Adam received the image
of God, both for himself and others: so did he loose it from himself and
others.

But whereas the propagation of sin is as a common fire in a town, men are
not so much to search how it came, as to be careful how to extinguish it.

That we may the better know original sin in the several faculties of
man's nature, three circumstances must be considered.

1. How much of Gods image we yet retain. 2. How much sin man received from
Adam. 3. The increase thereof afterward.

I. In the mind. The remnant of Gods image, is certain notions concerning
good and evil: as, that there is a God, and that the same God punishes
transgressions: that there is an everlasting life: that we must reverence our
superiors, and not harm our neighbors. But even these notions, they are both
general and corrupt, and have none other use, but to bereave man of all excuse
before Gods judgment seat. Romans 1.19,20. That which may be known concerning
God, is manifest in them: for God has showed it unto them. For the invisible
things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the
creation of the world, being considered in his works, to the intent they should
be without excuse.

Men's minds received from Adam: 1. Ignorance, namely, a want, or rather a
deprivation of knowledge in the things of God, whether they concern his
sincere worship, or eternal happiness. 1. Cor. 2.14. The natural man
perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnes unto
him, neither can he know the^, because they are spiritually discerned. Romans
8.7. The wisdom of the flesh is enimitie with God, for it is not subject to
the law of God, neither indeed can be.

II. Impotencie whereby the mind of it self is unable to understand
spiritual things, though they be taught. Luke 24.45. Then opened he their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. 2. Cor. 3.5. Not that
we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves: but our
sufficie^cie is of God.

III. Vanity, in that the mind thinks falsehood truth, and truth
falsehood. Ephesians. 4.7. Walk no more as other Gentiles, in the vanity of your
understanding. 1. Cor. 1.21. It pleased God by the foolishnes of preaching, to
save those which believe. 23. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a
stumbling block, but to the Grecians foolishnes. Prou. 14.12. There is a way
which seems good in the eyes of men, but the end thereof is death.

IV. A natural incl^nation only to conceive and devise the thing which is
evil. Genesis 6.5. The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great upon earth,
and all the imaginations of the thoughts of the heart were only evil
continually, Iere. 4. 22. They are wise to do evil, but to do well they have
no knowledge.

Hence it is apparent, that the original, and as I may say, the matter of all
heresies, is naturally ingrafted in man's nature. This is worthy the
observation of students in divinity.

The increase of sin in the understanding, is 1. a reprobate sense, when God
withdraws the light of nature. Ioh. 12.40. He has blinded their eyes, and
hardened their hearts, least they should see with their eyes, and understand
with their hearts, and I should heal them, and they be converted. Romans 1.28. As
they regarded not to know God, so God delivered the^ up unto a reprobate mind,
to do those things which are not convenient. 2. The spirit of slumber, Romans
11.8. God has given them the spirit of slumber, etc. 3. A spiritual
drunkenness, Esaias 29.9. They are drunken, but not with wine, they stagger, but
not with strong drink. 4. Strong illusions. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. God shall send
them strong illusions, and they shall believe lies.

The remnant of Gods image in the conscience, is an observing and watchful
power, like the eye of a keeper, reserved in man, partly to reprove, partly to
repress the unbridled course of his affections. Romans 2.15. Which show the
effect of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing
witness, and their thoughts accusing one another or excusing.

That which the conscience has received of Adam, is the impurenes thereof.
Titus 1.15. To them that are defiled a^^ unbelieving nothing is pure, but even
their minds and consciences are defiled. This impuritie has three effects:
the first, is to excuse sin; as, if a man serve God outwardly, he will excuse
and cloak his inward impiety. Mark 10.19,20. Thou know the commandments.
Thou shall not, etc. Then he answered, and said, Master, all these things have
I observed from my youth. Again, it excuses intents not warranted in Gods
word, 1. Chron. 13.9. When they came to the threshing floor of Chidon, Vzza
put forth his hand to hold the Arc, for the ox did shake it.

The second, is to accuse and terrify for doing good. This we may see in
superstitious idolators, who are grieved when they omit to perform counterfeit
and idolatrous worship to their gods. Colos. 2.21,22. Touch not, taste not,
handle not, which all perish with using, and are after the commandments and
doctrines of men. Esaias 29.13. And their fear toward me was taught them by the
precepts of men.

The third, is to accuse and terrify for sin. Genesis 50. 15. When Joseph's
brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, It may be that Joseph will
hate us, and will pay us again all the evil, which we did unto him. Ioh. 8.9.
And when they heard it, being accused by their own consciences, they went out
one by one. 1. Ioh. 3. 20. If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our
heart. Though the conscience shall accuse a man truly, yet that will not argue
any holiness in it: which appears, in that Adam in his innocence had a God,
yet no accusing conscience.

Impurenes increased in the conscience, is first such a senseles numnesse, as
that it can hardly accuse a man of sin. Ephesians. 4.19. Who being past feeling
have given themselves to wantonness, to work all uncleanness, even with
greedines. 1. Tim. 4.2. Having their consciences burned with an hot iron. This
senselesnes springs from a custom in sinning. 1. Sam. 25.37. Then in the
morning when the wine was gone out of Nabal, his wife told him those words, and
his heart died within him, and he was like a stone.

II. Some grievous horror, and terror of the conscience, Genesis 4.14. (...) hold
thou have cast me this day from the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid.
And ver. 13. My punishment i^ greater, then I can bear. The Symptoms of this
disease, are blasphemies, trembling of body, fearful dreams. Act. 24.26. And
(...) h^ disputed of righteousness, and temperance and the judgment to come,
Felix tr^mled etc. Dan. 5.9. Then the kings co^ntenance was changed and his
thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his
knees smote one against the other.

In the will, the remnant of Gods image, is a free choice. First, in every
natural action, belonging to each living creature, as to nourish, to engender,
to move, to perceive. Secondly, in every humane action that is, such as belong
to all men; and therefore man has freewill in outward actions, whether they
concern manners, a family, or the commonwealth, albeit both in the choice
and refusal of them it be very weak. Romans 2.14. The Gentiles which have not
the law, by nature do those things which are of the law.

The will received. I. An impotencie, whereby it cannot will, or so much as
lust after that, which is indeed good, that is, which may please and be
acceptable to God. 1. Cor. 2.14. The natural man perceives not the things of
the spirit of God for they are foolishnes unto him neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. Romans 5.6. Christ when we were yet of
no strength, at his time died for the ungodly. 2. Tim. 2.26. Phil. 2.13. It is
God which works in you both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure.

II. An inward rebellion, whereby it utterly abhors that which is good,
desiring and willing that alone which is evil.

By this it appears, that the will is no agent but a mere patient in the
first act of conversion to God, and that by it self it can neither begin that
conversion, or any other inward and sound obedience due to Gods law.

That which the affections receive, is a disorder, by which they therefore are
not well affected, because they eschew that which is good, and pursue that
which is evil. Galat. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts thereof. Romans 1.26. Therefore God gave them over
to filthy lusts. 1. King. 22.8. The king of Israel said unto Iehosophat, yet is
there one of whom thou may take counsel, but him I hate, etc. and 21.4.
therefore Achab came home to his house discontented and angry for the word
which Naboth spoke unto him; and he laid himself on his bed, turning away his
face least he should eat meat.

That which the body has received, is I. fitnes to begin sin. This does the
body in transporting all objects and occasions of sin to the soul. Genesis
3.6. The woman seeing that the tree was good for meat, and pleasant to the
eyes, etc. took of the fruit thereof, and did eat. II. A fitness to execute
sin, so soon as the heart has begun it. Romans 6. Neither give your members
as weapons of injustice to sin, and verse. 19. As you have given your members
as servants to uncleanness and iniquity, to commit iniquity, etc.

CHAP. 13. Of actual sin.
A After original sin in Adams posterity, actual transgression takes place.
It is either inward or outward. Inward, is of the mind, will, and affections.

The actual sin of the mind, is the evil thought or intent thereof,
contrary to Gods law. Examples of evil thoughts: God (the only knower of the
heart) has in diverse places set down in his word. I. That there is no God,
Psalm. 10.4. The wicked is so proud, that he seeks not for God, he thinks
always there is no God. Psalm. 14. 1. The fool says in his heart, there is no
God. II. That there is neither providence nor presence of God in the world.
Psalm. 10.11. He has said in his heart, God has forgotten: he hides away his
face and will never see. verse. 13. Wherefore does the wicked centemne God? he
says in his heart, thou will not regard. III. It imagines safeguard to it
self from all perils. Psalm. 10. 6. He says in his heart, I shall never be
moved nor be in danger. Revel. 18.7. She says in her heart, I sit being a
Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no mourning. IV. It esteems it self
more excellent the^ other. Apoc. 18.7. I sit as a queen. Luke 18.11. The
Pharisie standing thus, prayed to himself, I thank thee, O God, that I am not
as other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, nor yet as this Publi^an. verse.
12. I fast twice in the week, and give tithe of all my possessions. V. That
the Gospel of Gods kingdom is mere foolishnes. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The natural
man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnes
unto him. VI. To think uncharitably and maliciously of such as serve God
sincerely. Math. 12.24. When the Pharisees heard that, they said, he casts
not out devils but by the prince of devils. Psalm. 74.2. They said in their
hearts^ Let us destroy them altogether. VII. To think the day of death far
off. Esaias 28.15. Ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with
hell we are at agreement, though a scourge run over and pass through, it
shall not come at us. VIII. That the pains of hell may be eschewed, in the
place before mentioned, they say, With hell have we made agreement. IX. That
God will defer his both particular and last general coming to judgment.
Luke 12. 19. I will say unto my soul, soul thou have much goods laid up for
many years. and verse. 45. If that servant say in his heart, my master will
defer his coming, etc.

Many carnal men pretend their good meaning: but when God opens their eyes,
they shall see these rebellious thoughts rising in their minds, as sparkles out
of a chimney.

The actual sin of both will and affections, is every wicked motion,
inclination, and desire. Gal. 5. The flesh lusts against the spirit.

An actual outward sin, is that, to the committing whereof, the members of
the body do, together with the faculties of the soul, concur. Such sins
as these are infinite. Psalm. 40. 12. Innumerable troubles have compassed me, my
sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up: yea, they
are more in number then the hairs of mine head.

Actual sin, is of omission or commission: Again, both these are in words or
deeds.

In the sin of commission, observe these two points. The degrees in
committing a sin, and the differences of sins committed.

The degrees, are in number four. James 1. 14, 15. Every man is tempted, when
he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is entised: Then when lust
has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished,
brings forth death.

The first degree, is temptation, whereby man is allured to sin. This does
Satan by offering to the mind that which is evil. Ioh. 13.2. The devil had
now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot Simons son to betray him. Act. 5.3.
Peter said to Ananias, Why has Satan filled thine heart that thou should
lie? etc. 1. Chr. 21. 1. And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David
to number Israel. This also is effected upon occasion of some external object,
which the senses perceive. Job 31.1. I have made a covenant with mine eyes, why
then should I look upon a maid?

Tentation has two parts: abstraction, and inescation.

Abstraction, is the first cogitation of committing sin; whereby the mind is
withdrawn from Gods service, to the which it should be always ready pressed.
Luke 10.27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all thy
soul, with all thy thought.

Inescation, is that whereby an evil thought conceived, and for a time
retained in the mind by delighting the will and affections, does as it were,
lay a bait for them to draw them to consent.

The second degree, is conception, which is nothing else but a consent and
resolution to commit sin. Psalm. 7. 14. He shall travail with wickedness, he
has conceived mischief, but he shall bring forth a lie.

The third degree, is the birth of sin, namely, the committing of sin, by
the assistance both of the faculties of the soul, and the powers of the body.

The fourth degree, is perfection, when sin being by custom perfect, and,
as it were ripe, the sinner reapeth death, that is, damnation.

This appears in the example of Pharaoh: wherefore custom in any sin is
fearful.

Sin actually committed, has five differences.

First, to consent with an offendour, and not actually to commit sin. Ephesians.
5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove
them rather. This is done three manner of ways.

I. When as a man in judgment somewhat allows the sin of another. Numb.
20.6,10. Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock,
and Moses said unto them, Hear now ye rebels: shall we bring you water out of
the rock? verse. 12. The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, because ye believed me
not, to sanctify me in the presence of the children of Israel into the land
which I have given them. II. When the heart approoueth in affection and
consent. Hither may we refer both the Ministers and the Magistrates
concealing and winking at offenses. 1. Sam. 2. 23. Ely said, Why do ye such
things? for of all this people I hear evil of you. Do no more my sons,
etc. Now that Elies will agrees with his sons sins, it is manifest, verse.
29. Thou honor thy children above me. III. Indeed, by counsel, presence,
entisement. Romans 1. 31. They do not only do the same, but also favor them
that do them. Mark. 6.25, 26. She said unto her mother, What shall I ask:
and she said, John Baptists head, etc. Act. 22. 20. When the blood of thy
Martyr Steven was shed, I also stood by, and consented unto his death, and kept
the clothes of them that slew him.
The second difference, is to sin ignorantly, as when a man does not expressly
and distinctly know whether that which he does, be a sin or not, or if he
knew it, did not acknowledge and mark it. 1. Tim. 1.23. I before was a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and an oppressor: but I was received to mercy,
for I did it ignorantly through unbelief. Nomb. 35.22, 23, 24. If he pushed
him unadvisedly and not of hatred, or cast upon him any thing without laying of
wait, or any stone (whereby he might be slain) and saw him not, or caused it
to fall upon him, and he die, and was not his enemy, neither sought him any
harm: then the congregation shall judge between the slayer and the auenger of
blood, according to these laws. 1. Cor. 4 4. I know nothing by my self, yet
am I not thereby justified. Psalm. 19:13. Cleanse me from my secret sins.

The third difference, is to sin upon knowledge, but of infirmity, as when a
man fearing some imminent danger, or amazed at the horror of death, does
against his knowledge deny that truth, which otherwise he would acknowledge
and embrace. Such was Peter's fall, arising from the overmuch rashness of the
mind, mingled with some fear.

Thus all men offend, when the flesh, and inordinate desires so ouerrule the
will and every good endeavor, that they provoke man to that, which he from
his heart detesteth. Romans 7.19. I do not the thing which I would, but the
evil which I would not, that do I.

The fourth difference, is presumptuous sinning upon knowledge. Psalm. 19. 13.
Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins: let them not reign over me.
Hitherto belongs, I. every sin committed with an high hand, that is, in
some contempt of God. Numb. 15.30. The person that does presumptuously, etc.
shall be cut off from amongst his people: because he has despised the word of
the Lord, and and has broken his commandment. II. Presumption of Gods mercy
in doing evil. Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in
them to do evil. Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulnes,
etc. not knowing that the bountifulnes of God leads thee to repentance, etc.

The fifth difference, is to sin upon knowledge and set malice against God,
and to this is the sin against the holy Ghost referred.

CHAP. 14. Of the punishment of sin.
HItherto we have entreated of sin, wherewithal all mankind is infected: in
the next place succeeds the punishment of sin, which is threefold. The
first is in this life, and that diverse ways. The first concerns the body,
either in the provision with trouble for the things of this life, Genesis 3. 17.
or a pronenesse to disease, Matthew. 9.2. Son be of good comfort, thy sins be
forgiven thee. Ioh. 5. 14. Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, least a
worse thing fall upon thee. Deuteronomy. 28.21,22. The Lord shall make the pestilence
cleave unto thee, until he has consumed thee from the land, etc. Or shame of
nakedness, Genesis 3.7. Or in women's pains in childbirth. Genesis 3. 16. Unto the
woman he said, I will greatly increase thy sorrows, and conceptions: in sorrow
shall thou bring forth children.

II. The soul is punished with trembling of conscience, care, trouble,
hardness of heart, and madness. Deuteronomy. 28.28. The Lord shall smite thee with
madness, and with blindness, and with astonying of heart.

III. The whole man is punished, 1. with fearful subjection to the regiment
of Satan. Col. 1.13. Which freed us from the power of darkness, and translated
us into the kingdom of his beloved Son. Heb. 2. 14. He also himself took
part with them, that he might destroy through death, him that had power of
death, that is, the devil. 2. A separation from the fellowship of God, and
trembling at his presence. Ephesians. 4. 18. Having their cogitation darkened, and
being strangers from the life of God. Genesis 3. 10. I heard thy voice in the
garden, and was afraid, because I was naked, therefore I hid my self. 3. Upon
a man's goods, diverse calamities and damages. Deuteronomy. 28.29. Thou shall ever be
oppessed with wrong, and be pouled, and no man shall succor thee, etc. to the
end of the chapter. To this place may be referred distinction of Lordships:
and of this comes a care to enlarge them, and bargaining with all manner of
civil seruitudes. 4. The loss of that Lordly authority, which man had over
all creatures; also their vanity, which is not only a weakening, but also a
corrupting of that excellency of the virtues and powers which God at the first
put into them. Romans 8.20, 21. The creature is subject to vanity, not of it
own will, but by reason of him, which has subdued it under hope, etc. 5. In a
man's name, infamy and ignominy sometimes after his death. Ierem. 24.9.

The second, is at the last gasp, namely death, or a change like unto death,
Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death.

The third is, after this life, even eternal destruction from Gods presence,
and his exceeding glory. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Who shall be punished with everlasting
perdition, from the presence of God, and the glory of his power.

CHAP. 15. Of Election, and of Jesus Christ the foundation thereof.
PRedestination has two parts: Election, and Reprobation. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. God
has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by the means of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Election, is Gods decree, whereby on his own free will, he has ordained
certain men to salvation, to the praise of the glory of his grace. Ephesians. 1.4,
5, 6. He has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, according
to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace.

This decree, is that book of life, wherein are written the names of the
Elect. Revel. 20.12. Another book was opened, which is the book of life, and
the dead were judged of those things, that were written in the books,
according to their works. 2. Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God remains sure,
and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his.

The execution of this decree, is an action, by which God, eue^ as he purposed
with himself, works all those things, which he decreed for the salvation of
the Elect. For they whom God elected to this end, that they should inherit
eternal life, were also elected to those subordinate means, whereby, as by
steps, they might attain this end, and without which, it were impossible to
obtain it. Romans 8. 29, 30. Those which he knew before, he also predestinate to
be made like to the image of his Son, that he might be the first borne
amongst many brethren: Moreover, whom he predestinate, them he called, whom
he called, them ^ee justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified.

There appertain three things to the execution of this decree. First, the
foundation. Secondly, the means. Thirdly, the degrees.

The foundation is Christ Jesus, called of his father from all eternity, to
perform the office of the Mediator, that in him, all those which should be
saved, might be chosen. Heb. 5.5. Christ took not to himself this honor, to
be made the high Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this
day begat I thee, gave it him etc. Esa. 42.1. Behold my servant: I will stay
upon him, mine elect, in whom my soul delights: I have put my spirit upon
him, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen
us in him, meaning Christ.

Question. How can Christ be subordinate unto Gods election, seeing he
together with the Father decreed all things? Answ. Christ as he is Mediator, is
not subordinate to the very decree it self of election, but to the execution
thereof only. 1. Pet. 1.20. Christ was ordained before the foundation of the
world. Augustine in his book of the Predestinaiion of the Saints, chap. 5.
Christ was Predestinate that he might be our head.

In Christ we must especially observe two things, his incarnation, and his
Office.

To the working of his Incarnation, concur: First, both his Natures.
Secondly, their Union. Thirdly, their distinction.

Christ's first Nature, is the Godhead, in as much as it belongs to the Son,
whereby he is God. Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God. Ioh. 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and that Word was God.

It was requisite for the Mediator to be God; 1. That he might the better
sustain that great misery, wherewith mankind was overwhelmed; the greatness
whereof, these four things declare: I. The grieuousnesse of sin, wherewith
Gods majesty was infinitely offended. II. Gods infinite anger against this
sin. III. The fearful power of death. IV. The devils tyranny who is prince
of this world. 2. That he might make his human nature both of ple^tifull
merit, and also of sufficient efficacy, for the work of man's redemption. 3.
That he might instill into all the elect eternal life, and holiness. Esa.
43.12. I am the Lord, and there is none besides me a Savior, I have declared,
and I have saved, and I have showed, when there was no strange god among you:
therefore ye are my witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God.

I say, the Godhead, in as much as it is the Godhead of the Son, is Christ's
divine Nature: not as it is the Godhead of the Father, or the holy Ghost, for
it is the office of the Son, to have the administration of every outward
action of the Trinity, from the Father to the holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 6.8. And he
being by nature the Son of the father, bestowet^ this privilege on those
that believe, that they are the Sons of God by adoption. Ioh. 1.12. As many
as received him, to them he gave to be the sons of God.

If either the Father or the holy Ghost, should have been incarnate, the title
of Son should have been given to one of them, who was not the Son by
eternal generation; and so there should be more sons then one.

Christ's other nature, is his humanity, whereby he, the Mediator, is very ma^^
1. Tim. 2.5. One God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Ie^^s.

It was necessary that Christ should be man. First, that God might be pacified
in that nature, wherein he was offended. Secondly, that he might undergo
punishment due to sin, the which the Godhead could not, being void and free
from all passion.

Furthermore, Christ, as he is man, is like unto us in all things, sin only
excepted. Heb. 2.17. In all things it became him to be made like unto his
brethren. 1. Cor. 13.4.

Christ therefore is a perfect man, consisting of an essential and true soul
and body, whereunto are joined such faculties and properties, as are
essential unto both. In his soul, is understanding, memory, will, and such
like: in his body, length, breadth, and thickness: yea, it is comprehended in
one only place, visible, subject to feeling, neither is there any thing
wanting in him, which may either adorn or make for the being of man's nature.

Again, Christ in his humanity, was subject to the infirmities of man's
nature, which are these: I. to be tempted. Matthew. 4.1. Jesus was carried by the
spirit into the desert, to be tempted of the Devil. II. To fear. Heb. 5.7.
Who in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications with
strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and
was also heard in that which he feared. III. To be angry. Mark. 3.5. Then he
looked round about on them angerly, mourning also for the hardness of their
hearts, and said unto the man, Stretch forth thine hand. IV. Forgetfulness of
his office imposed upon him, by reason of the agony astonishing his senses.
Matthew. 26.39. He went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed,
saying, O Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless,
not as I will, but as thou will.

We must hold these things concerning Christ's infinitenes; I. They were such
qualities, as did only affect his humane nature, and not at all constitute the
same: and therefore might be left of Christ. II. They were such as were common
to all men; as to thirst, to be weary, and to die: and not personal, as are
agues, consumptions, the leprosy, blindness, etc. III. He was subject to these
infirmities, not by necessity of his human nature, but by his freewill and
pleasure, pitying mankind: therefore in him, such infirmities were not the
punishment of his own sin, as they are in us, but rather part of that his
humiliation which he did willingly undergo for our sakes.

CHAP. 16. Of the Union of the two natures in Christ.
Now follows the Union of the two natures in Christ, which especially
concerns his Mediation, for by it his humanity did suffer death upon the
cross in such sort, as he could neither be overcome, nor perpetually
overwhelmed by it. Three things belong to this uniting of Natures.

I. Conception, by which his human nature was by the wonderful power and
operation of God, both immediately, that is, without man's help, and
miraculously framed of the substance of the Virgin Marie. Luke 1.35. The holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall ouershadow
thee.

The holy Ghost cannot be said to be the father of Christ, because he did
minister no matter to the making of the humanity, but did only fashion and
frame it of the substance of the Virgin Marie.

II. Sanctification, whereby the same humane nature was purified, that is,
altogether severed by the power of the holy ghost, from the least stain of
sin, to the end that it might be holy and be made fit to die for others. Luke
1.35. That holy thing which shall be borne of thee shall be called the Son of
God. 1. Pet. 3.18. Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust. 1. Pet. 2.22. Who did not sin, neither was there guile found in his
mouth. III. Assumption, whereby the Word, that is, the second person in
Trinity, took upon him flesh, and the seed of Abraham, namely that his human
Nature, to the end that it being destitute of a proper and personal
subsiste^ce, might in the person of the Word obtain it: subsisting, and, as it
were, being supported of the Word for ever. John 1.14. That Word was made
flesh. Heb. 2.16. He took not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of
Abraham.
In the assumption, we have three things to consider: I. The difference of the
two natures in Christ. For the divine nature, as it is limited to the person of
the Son is perfect and actually subsisting in it self: the other not. II.
The manner of union. The person of the Son did by assuming the humane Nature,
create it, and by creating, assume it. III. The product of the Vnio^. Whole
Christ, God and man, was not made a new person of the two natures, as of
parts compounding a new thing; but remained still the same person. Now
whereas the ancient Fathers termed Christ a compound person, we must
understand them not properly, but by proportion. For as the parts are united in
the whole, so these two natures do concur together in one person, which is
the Son of God.

By this we may see, that Christ is one only Son of God, not two: yet in two
respects is he one. As he is the eternal Word, he is by nature the Son of the
Father. As he is man, the same Son also, yet not by nature or by adoption,
but only by personal union. Luke 1.35. Matthew. 3.17. This is my beloved Son, etc.

The phrase in Scripture agreeing to this Union, is the communion of
properties, concerning which, observe two rules.

I. Of those things, which are spoken or attributed to Christ, some are only
understood of his divine nature. As that Ioh. 8.58. Before Abraham was, I am.
And that Coloss. 1.15. Who is the image of the invisible God, the first borne
of every creature. Some again agree only to his humanity, as borne, suffered,
dead, buried, etc. Luke 2.52. And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and
in favor with God and man. Lastly, other things are understood, only of both
natures united together. As Matthew. 17.5. This is my beloved Son, in whom only
I am well pleased, hear him. Ephesians. 1.22. He has made subject all things under
his feet, and has appointed him over all things to be the head to the Church.
II. Some things are spoken of Christ, as he is God, which must be interpreted
according to his humane nature. Act. 20.28. To feed the Church of God, that is,
Christ, which he (according to his manhood) has purchased with his own blood.
1. Cor. 2.8. If they had known this, they would never have crucified the Lord
of glory. Contrarily, some things are mentioned of Christ, as he is man, which
only are understood of his divine nature. Ioh. 3.13. No man ascended up to
heaven, but he that has descended from heaven, the son of man which is in
heaven. This is spoken of his manhood, whereas we must understand, that only
his Deity came down from heaven. Ioh. 6.62. What if ye should see the son
of man, (vz. Christ's humane nature) ascend up, where he (vz. his Deity) was
before.
Lastly, by reason of this Union, Christ, as he is man, is exalted above every
name: yea, he is adored, and has such a great (though not infinite) measure of
gifts, as far surpass the gifts of all Saints and Angels. Ephesians. 1.21. And set
him at his right hand in heavenly places ^^^re above all principality, and
power, and might, and domination, and every name that is named, not in this
world only, but in that also that is to come. Heb. 1.6. When he brings his
first begotten Son into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God
worship him. Col. 2.3. In whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are
hidden. Phil. 2.9, 10. Therefore god exalted him on hie, and gave him a name
above all names, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow (namely,
worship, and be subject to him) both of things in heaven, and things in earth,
and things under the earth.

CHAP. 17. Of the distinction of both Natures.
THe distinction of both Natures, is that, whereby they, with their properties
and effects, remain, without composition, mingling, or conversion, distinct.
Ioh. 10.17,18. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life,
that I may take it again. No man takes it from me, but: I lay it down of my
self. I have power to lay it down, and have power to take it again. Ioh.
13.31, 32. Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God
be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself. Here we may
observe, that there is one will in Christ, as God: another, as man. Matthew.
26.39. Not as I will but as thou will. This also approoueth that sentence of
the Chalcedon Creed. We confess, that one and the same Christ Jesus, both
Son, Lord, only begotten, is known and preached to be in two natures without
confusion, mutation, distinction, or separation.

Lastly, hereby it is manifest, that Christ, when he became that which he was
not (namely man) continued still that which he was (very God.)

CHAP. 18. Of Christ's Nativity and Office.
THus much concerning Christ's incarnation, the clear declaration thereof was
by his nativity.

The nativity of Christ, is that whereby Mary a Virgin, did after the course of
nature, and the custom of women, bring forth Christ that Word of the father,
and the Son of David: so that those are much deceived, which are of opinion
that Christ, after a miraculous manner, came into the world, the womb of the
Virgin being shut. Luke 2.23. Every man child which first opens the womb,
shall be called holy to the Lord. The which place of scripture is applied to
Mary and our Savior Christ. Hence is it, that the Virgin Marie is said ((...))
to bring forth god albeit she is not any way mother of the Godhead. For Christ
as he is God, is without mother, and as man, without Father.

It is convenient to be thought; that Mary continued a Virgin until her dying
day, albeit we make not this opinion any article of our belief. I. Christ
being now to depart the world, committed his mother to the tuition and
custody of his disciple John, which it is like he would not have done, if she
had had any children, by whom, as custom was, she might have been provided
for. Ioh. 19. 26. II. It is likely that she who was with child by the holy
Ghost, would not after know any man. III. It is agreed of by the Church in all
ages.

Christ being now borne, was circumcised the eight day, that he might fulfill
all the righteousness of the law: and b^^^g thirty years of age, he was
baptized, that he being publicly and solemnly invested into the office of
his Mediatorship, might take upon him the guilt of our sins. He was both
circumcised and baptized, that we might learn: I. That the whole efficacy of
the Sacraments, depend alone and wholly upon him. II. That he was Mediator of
mankind, both before and after the Law, as also under grace. III. That he is
the knot and bond of both covenants.

His Office follows, to the perfect accomplishing whereof, he was anointed
of his Father, that is, he was sufficiently furnished both with gifts and
authority. Hebr. 1.9. Therefore God, even thy God anointed thee with the oil
of gladness above thy fellows. Esa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord was upon me,
therefore be anointed me. Ioh. 3.34. God gives him not the Spirit by measure.

If any man enforce this as a reason, that Christ could not perform the Office
of a Mediator, being not the mean or middle betwixt God and man, but the
party offended, and so one of the extremes: we must know that Christ is two
ways said to be the middle or mean. I. Betwixt God and all men: for being
both God and man, he does participate with both extremes. II. Betwixt God and
the faithful only: first, according to his humanity, whereby he received the
Spirit without measure. Secondly, according to his divine nature, namely, as he
is the Word. Now the Word is middle, betwixt the Father and the faithful: I.
In regard of order, because the Word was begotten of the Father, and by it we
have access unto the Father. This subordination, which is of the Son to the
Father, is not in the divine essence, severally and distinctly considered, but
in the relation or manner of having the essence. And after this manner those
things which are subordinate, cannot be unequal, if they have one and the same
singular essence. II. In regard of his office, the which, being imposed on him
by his Father, he did willingly undergo, and of his own accord.

Christ does exercise this office according to both natures united in one
person, and according to each nature distinct one from the other. For in
reconciling God and man together, the flesh performs some things distinctly,
and the Word other things distinctly. Again, some other things are done not by
the Word or flesh alone, but by both together.

This office is so appropriate to Christ, that neither in whole, or in part,
can it be translated to any other. Hebr. 7.24. This man because he endures for
ever, has an everlasting priesthood, or a priesthood that cannot pass from
one to another.

Therefore Christ, as he is God, has under him, Emperors, Kings, Princes to be
his Vicegerents; who therefore are called Gods. Psalm. 82.1. But as he is
Mediator, that is, a Priest, a Prophet, and King of the Church, he has no
Vicegerent, Vicar, or Lieuetenant, who, in his either Kingly or Priestly
office, in both, or but one, can be in his stead.

Christ's office is threefold, Priestly, Prophetical, Regal, Psalm.
110.1,2,3,4. Esai 42.1.

Christ's Priesthood, is an office of his, whereby he performed all those things
to God, whereby is obtained eternal life. Heb. 5.9. And being consecrate, was
made the author of eternal salvation, unto all them that obey him: and is
called of God an high Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Chap. 7.
24,25. This man because he endures for ever, has an everlasting Priesthood,
wherefore he is able also perfectly to save all them that come unto God by him.

His Priesthood, consists of two parts. Satisfaction, and Intercession.

Satisfaction, is that, whereby Christ is a full propitiation to his Father for
the Elect. Job. 23.23. If there be a messenger with him, or an interpreter, one
of a thousand, to declare unto man his righteousness, then will he have mercy
upon him, and will say, Deliver him that he go not down into the pit, for I
have found a reconciliation. Romans 3.24. And are iustisied freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. v. 25. Whom God has set forth
to be a reconciliation thorough faith in his blood. 1. Ioh. 2. 2. He is a
propitiation for our sins.

Christ satisfied Gods anger for man's offense, according to his humanity, by
performing perfect obedience to the will of God, according to his Deity, by
ministering such especial dignity to his perfect obedience, as was both full
of merit and efficacy before God, for the salvation of the Elect. Ioh. 17.19.
For their sakes sanctify I my self, that they also may be sanctified through
the truth. Act. 20.28. To feed the flock of God, which he has purchased with
his own blood. 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, and reconciled the world to
himself, not imputing their sins unto them.

Satisfaction, comprehends his passion, and fulfilling the Law.

His passion, is the first part of satisfaction, by which, he having undergone
the punishment of sin, satisfied Gods justice, and appeased his anger for the
sins of the faithful. His passion was on this manner.

Mark. 4.32. Matthew. 26.38.
Somewhat before his death, partly fear arising from the sense of Gods wrath
imminent upon him, partly grief possessing, as it were, each part of him, so
disturbed his sacred mind, Ioh. 12.27, Mark. 14.35.
that inwardly for a while it stroke into him a strange kind of astonishment,
or rather oblivion of his duty imposed upon him: and outwardly Matthew.
26.37,42. Ioh. 12. 29. Hebr. 5.7.
made him pray unto his Father (if he would) to remove that cup from him,
the which he did express with no small cry, many tears, and a bloody sweat,
Luke 22.44.
trickling from his body unto the ground. But when he came again unto
himself, Hebr. 9.5. 1. Cor. 5.5,7. Esa. 53.10,11.
he freely yielded himself unto his Father to satisfy upon the cross for the
transgression of man. After this his agony was ouerpassed, Matt. 26.47.
by Judas his treachery Christ is apprehended, and Ioh. 18.13,14.
first he is brought to Annas, after to Caiaphas, where Peter denies him: Ioh.
18.29.
from Caiaphas is he lead bound to Pilate, Luke 2^.7,8.
Pilate posteth him over to Herod, Luke 23. 15.
he transposteth him back again to Pilate, Matthew. 27.24, 26.
who acknowledges his innocence, and yet condemns him as an offender. This
innocent thus condemned, is the same place.
pitifully scourged, crowned with thorns, scoffed, spitted at, spitefully
adjudged to the death of the cross; Ioh. 19.18.
on which his hands and feet are fastened with nails. Here stayed not his
passions, but after all these, Gal. 3. 13.
he became accursed to God the Father, that is, God poured upon him, being
thus innocent, such a sea of his wrath, as was equivalent to the sins of the
whole world. He now being under this curse, through the sense and feeling of
this strange terror, Matthew. 27.35,46.
complains to his Father, that he is forsaken: who notwithstanding,
encountering then with Satan and his Angels, did utterly vanquish Coloss.
1.24,15.
and overcome them. When this was ended, his heart Ioh. 19.34.
was pierced with a spear, till the blood gushed out from his sides, and he
gave up Heb. 9.15,16.
the ghost: and Luke 23.43,46.
commended his spirit to his Fathers protection, the which immediately went
into Paradise. His body, Ioh. 19. 33,42.
whereof not one bone was broken, was buried, and three days was Act. 1. 13.
ignominiously captiuated of death.

In this description of Christ's passion, we may note five circumstances
especially.

I. His Agony, namely, a vehement anguish, arising upon the conflict of two
contrary desires in him: The first, was to be obedient to his Father. The
second, to avoid the horror of death. Luke 22.44. Being in an agony, be
prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling
down to the ground. Hebr. 5.7. In the days of his flesh did offer up prayers
and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him, that was able to save
him from death, and was also heard in that which he feared. II. His Sacrifice,
which is an action of Christ's, offering himself to God the Father, as a
ransom for the sins of the Elect. Hebr. 9.26. Now in the end of the world
has he appeared once to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself.

In this sacrifice, the oblation was Christ, as he was man. Heb. 10.10 By the
which will we are sanctified, even by the offering of Jesus Christ once made.

The Altar also was Christ, as he was God. Heb. 13.10. We have an Altar,
whereof they have no authority to eat which serve in the Tabernacle. Hebr.
9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternal
spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead
works, to serve the living God? Hence it is that Christ is said to sanctify
himself, as he is man, Ioh. 17.19. For their sakes sanctifi^ I my self. Math.
23.17. As the altar, the gift, and the temple, the gold. Math. 23.17.

Christ is the Priest, as he is God and man. Heb. 5.6. Thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedec. 1. Tim. 2.5,6. One Mediator between God
and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all men, to be a
testimony in due time.

III. God the fathers acceptance of that his sacrifice in which he was well
pleased. For, had it been that God had not allowed of it, Christ's suffering
had been in vain. Matthew. 3.17. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. Ephesians. 5.1. Even as Christ loved us and gave himself for us to be an
offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God. IV. Imputation of
man's sin to Christ, whereby his Father accounted him as a transgressour,
having translated the burden of man's sins to his shoulders. Esai 53. 4. He
has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: yet we did judge him as
plagued and smitten of God, and humbled: But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, etc. and v. 12. He was
counted with the transgressors, and he bare the sins of many. 2. Cor. 5.21.
He has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we should be
made the righteousness of God in him. V. His wonderful humiliation, consisting
of two parts: I. In that he made himself of small or no reputation in respect
of his Deity. Philip. 2.7,8. He made himself of no reputation, etc. he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the
cross.
We may not think, that this debasing of Christ came, because his divine
nature was either wasted or weakened, but because his Deity did, as it were,
lay aside, and conceal his power and majesty for a season. And as Irenaeus
says, The Word rested, that the humane nature might be crucified, and dead.

II. In that he became execrable, which is, by the law accursed for us. Gal.
3.10. Cursed is every one that remains not in all things written in the book
of the Law to do them.

This accursednesse, is either inward or outward.

Inward is the sense of Gods fearful anger upon the cross. Revel. 19. 15. He
it is that treads the winepresse of the fiercenes and wrath of Almighty God.
Esai 53.5. He is grieved for our transgressions, the chastisment of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes we were healed. This appeared by those
drops of blood, which issued from him, by his cryings to his Father upon the
cross, and by sending of Angels to comfort him. Hence was it, that he so much
feared death, which many Martyrs entertained most willingly.

His outward accursednes, stands in three degrees. I. Death upon the cross,
which was not imaginary, but true, because blood and water issued from his
heart. For seeing that water and blood gushed forth together, it is very like,
the casket or coat which inuesteth the heart called Pericardion, was pierced.
As Columbus observes in his Anatomy, 7. book. Ioh. 19^4.

His death was necessary, that he might confirm to us the Testament, or
Covenant of grace promised for our sakes. Heb. 19.15,16. For this cause is he
the Mediator of the new Testament, that through death, etc. they which were
called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance: for where a
testament is there must be the death of him that made the testament, etc. ver.
17.

II. Burial, to ratify the certentie of his death.

III. Descension into hell, which we must not understand that he went locally
into the place of the damned, but that for the time of his abode in the grave
he was under the ignominious dominion of death. Act. 2.24. Whom God has
raised up and loosed the sorrows of death; because it was impossible that he
should be holden of it. Ephesians. 4.9. In that he ascended, what was it but that
he also he descended first into the lowest part of the earth?

It was necessary that Christ should be captiuated of death, that he might
abolish the sting, that is, the power thereof. 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death where is
thy sting! O hell where is thy victory!

Thus we have heard of Christ's marvelous passion, whereby he has abolished
both the first and second death, due unto us for our sins, the which (as we
may further observe) is a perfect ransom for the sins of all and every one of
the Elect. 1. Tim. 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all men. For it was
more, that Christ the only begotten Son of God, yea, God himself for a
small while should bear the curse of the Law, then if the whole world should
have suffered eternal punishment.

This also is worthy our meditation, that then a man is well grounded in the
doctrine of Christ's passion, when his heart cease to sin, and is pricked
with the grief of those sins, whereby, as with spears he pierced the side
of the immaculate lamb of God. 1. Ioh. 3.6. Who so sins, neither has seen
him, nor known him. Zach. 12.10. And they shall look upon him, whom they
have pierced, and they shall lament for him, as one lamenteth for his only
son, and be sorry for him, as one is sorry for his first borne.

After Christ's passion, follows the fulfilling of the Law, by which he
satisfied Gods justice in fulfilling the whole Law. Romans 8. 3,4. God sent his
own Son, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled by us.

He fulfilled the Law, partly by the holiness of his humane nature, and partly
by obedience in the works of the Law. Romans 8.2. The Law of the spirit of life,
which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the Law of sin, and of death.
Matthew. 3. 15. It becomes us to fulsill all righteousness, etc. Ioh. 17.19.

Now succeeds the second part of Christ's priesthood, namely, intercession,
whereby Christ is an Advocate, and intreater of God the Father for the
faithful. Romans 8.34. Christ is at the right hand of God, and makes request
for us. Christ's intercession is directed immediately to God the Father. 1. Ioh.
2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ
the just. Now as the Father is first of the Trinity in order, so if he be
appeased, the Son and the holy Ghost are appeased also. For there is one and
the same agreement and will of all the persons of the Trinity.

Christ makes intercession according to both natures. First, according to his
humanity, partly by appearing before his Father in heaven, partly by desiring
the salvation of the Elect. Hebr. 9.24. Christ is entered into very heaven to
appear now in the sight of God for us. and chap. 7. 25. He is able perfectly
to save them that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. Secondly, according to his Deity, partly by applying
the merit of his death; partly by making request by his holy Spirit, in the
hearts of the Elect, with sighs unspeakable. 1. Pet. 1.2. Elect according to
the foreknowledge of the Father to the sanctification of the Spirit. Romans 8.^6.
The Spirit helps our infirmities: for we know not what to pray as we ought,
but the Spirit it self makes request for us with sighs which cannot be
expressed.

We are not therefore to imagine or surmise, that Christ prostrateth himself
upon his knees before his Fathers throne for us, neither is it necessary,
seeing his very presence before his father, has in it the force of an humble
petition.

The end of Christ's intercession is, that such as are justified by his merits,
should by this means continue in the state of grace. Now Christ's intercession
preserves the elect in covering their continual slipps, infirmities, and
imperfect actions, by an especial and continual application of his merits.
That by this means man's person may remain just, and man's works acceptable to
God. 1. Ioh. 2.2. He is a reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but for the sins of the whole world. 1. Pet. 2.5. Ye as lively
stones, be made a spiritual house and holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Revel. 8.3,4. And another Angel
came and stood before the altar, having a golden censer, and much odours was
given unto him that he should offer with the prayers of all Saints upon the
golden altar, which is before the throne, and t^^ smoke of the odors with the
prayers of the Saints, went up before God out of the Angels hand.

Thus far concerning Christ's priesthood; now follow his Prophetical and
Regal offices.

His Prophetical office, is that, whereby he immediately from his Father,
renealeth his word and all the means of salvation comprised in the same. Ioh.
1.18. The Son, which is in the bosom of his father, he has declared unto you.
Ioh. 8.26. Those things which I hear of my father, I speak to the world.
Deuteronomy. 18.18. I will raise them up a Prophet, etc.

The word was first revealed, partly by visions, by dreams, by speech; partly
by the instinct and motion of the holy ghost. Heb. 1.1. At sundry times, and in
diverse manners, God spoke in old time to our Fathers the Prophets: in these
last days he has spoken to us by his son. 2. Pet. 1.21. Prophecy came not
in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved
by the holy ghost.

The like is done ordinarily only by the preaching of the word, where the holy
ghost does inwardly illuminate the understanding. Luke 24.45. Then opened he
their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. v. 21.15. I I
will give you a month and wisdom, where against all your adversaries shall not
be able to speak, nor resist. Act. 16.14. Whose heart the Lord opened that
she attended on the things that Paul spoke. For this cause, Christ is called
the Doctor, Lawegiuer, and Counselor of his Church. Matthew. 23.10. Be ye not
called D^ctors, for one is your Doctor, Jesus Christ. Iam. 4.12. There is one
Lawgiuer which is able to save and to destroy. Esa. 9.6. He shall call his name
Counselor, etc. Yea, he is the Apostle of our profession. Heb. 3.1. The
Angel of the covenant. Malac. 3.1. And the Mediator of the new covenant. Heb.
9.15. Therefore the sovereign authority of expou^ding the Scripture, only
belongs to Christ: and the Church has only the ministry of judgment and
interpretation committed unto her.

Christ's Regal office, is that, whereby he distributeth his gifts, and
disposes all things for the benefit of the elect. Psalm. 2. and 110.31.2. The
Lord said unto my Lord, sit t^ou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies
thy footestoole.

The execution of Christ's Regal office, comprehends his exaltation.

Christ's exaltation, is that, by which he, after his humiliation, was by little
and little exalted to glory; and that in sundry respects according to both
his natures.

The exaltation of his divine nature, is an apparent declaration of his divine
properties in his humane nature, without the least alteration thereof. Romans 1.
4. Declared mightily to be the son of God, touching the spirit of
sanctification by the resurrection from the dead. Act. 2.36. God has made him
both lord and Christ, whom ye have crucified.

The exaltation of his humanity, is the putting off from him his servile
condition, and all infirmities, and the putting on of such habitual gifts;
which albeit they are created and finite; yet they have so great and so
marvelous perfection, as possibly can be ascribed to any creature. The gifts
of his mind, are wisdom, knowledge, joy, and other unspeakable virtues of
his body, immortality, strength, agilitie, brightness. Philip. 3.21. Who
shall change our vile bodies, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body. Math. 17.2. He was tra^sfigured before them, and his face did shine as
the sun, and his clothes were as white as the light. Heb. 1.9. God even thy
God has anointed the with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Ephesians. 1.20.22.

Christ's body, although it be thus glorified, yet is it still of a solid
substance, compassed about, visible, palpable, and shall perpetually remain in
some certain place. Luke 24.39. Behold my hands, and my feet, it is even I,
touch me, and see: a spirit has no flesh and bones, as ye se me have.

There be three degrees of Christ's exaltation.

I. His resurrection, wherein by his divine power he subdued death, and raised
up himself to eternal life. 2. Cor. 13.4. Though he was crucified concerning
his infirmity, yet lives he through the power of God. Matthew. 28.6. He is not
here, for he is risen, as he said, Come see the place where the Lord was laid.

The end of Christ's resurrection, was to show that his satisfaction, by his
passion and death, was fully absolute. For one only sin would have detai^ed
the Mediator under the dominion of death, though he had fully satisfied for
all the rest. 1. Cor. 15.17. If Christ be not raised, your faith is in vain:
ye are yet in your sins. Romans 4.25. Who was delivered to death for our
sins, and is risen again for our justification.

II. His ascension into heaven, which is a true, local, and visible
translation of Christ's humane nature from earth into the highest heaven of the
blessed, by the virtue and power of his Deity. Act. 1.9. When he had spoken
these things, while they beheld, he was taken up: for a cloud took him up out
of their sight: and while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went
behold, two men stood by the^ in white apparel: which also said, Ye men of
Galile, why stand ye gazing into heaven, this Jesus which is taken up from you
into heaven, shall come as ye have seen him go into heaven. Ephesians. 4.10. He
ascended far above all the heavens.

The end of Christ's ascens^on was, that he might prepare a place for the
faithful, give them the holy ghost, and their eternal glory. Ioh. 14.2. In
my fathers house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you: I
go to prepare a place for you. c. 16.7. If I go not away, the Comforter will
not come unto you: but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

III. His sitting at the right hand of God the father, which metaphorically
signifies that Christ has in the highest heavens actually all glory, power,
and dominion. Heb. 1.3. By himself he has purged our sins, and sits at
the right hand of the majesty in the highest places. Psalm. 110.1. The Lord
said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
footstool. 1. Cor. 15.25. He must reign till he has put all his enemies
under his feet. Act. 7.55. He being full of the holy Ghost looked steadfastly
into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God. Mark. 20.22.


His regal office has two parts. The first is, his regiment of the kingdom
of heaven, part whereof is in heaven, part upon the earth, namely the
congregation of the faithful.

In the government of his Church, he exercises two prerogatives royal. The
first is, to make laws. James 4.12. There is one Lawgiuer which is able to
save and to destroy. The second is, to ordain his ministers. Ephesians. 4.11. He
gave some to be Apostles, others Prophets, others Evangelists, some Pastors
and teachers, etc. 1. Cor. 12.28. God has ordained some in the Church, as
first, Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly teachers, then them that do
miracles, after that the gifts of healing, helpers, governors, diversity of
tongues.

Christ's government of the Church, is either his collection of it out of the
world or conservation being collected. Ephesians. 4.12. Psalm. 10.

The second part of his Regal office, is the destruction of the kingdom of
darkness. Col. 1.13. Who has delivered us from the kingdom of darkness. Psalm.
2.9. Thou shall crus^ them with a scepter of iron, and break them in pieces
like a potters vessel. Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies, that would not that I
should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

The kingdom of darkness, is the whole company of Christ's enemies.

The prince of this kingdom, and of all the members thereof, is the devil.
Ephesians. 2.2. Ye walked once according to the counsel of the world, and after the
prince that rules in the air, enen the prince that now works in the
children of disobedience. 2. Cor. 4.4. The God of this world has blinded the
eyes of the infidels. 2. Cor. 6.15. What concord has Christ with Belial, or
what part has the believer with the infidel.

The members of this kingdom, and subjects to Satan, are his angels, and
unbelievers, among whom, the principal members are Atheistes, who say in
their heart, there is no God. Psalm. 14.1. And Magitians, who bargain with the
devil, to accomplish their desires. 1. Sam. 28.7. Psalm. 58.5. Idolatours, who
either ador^ false Gods, or the true God in an idol 1. Cor. 10.7.20. Turks and
Jews are of this bunch; so are Heretics, who are such as err with pertinacie
in the foundation of religion. 2. Tim. 2. 18. Apostates, or reuolters from
faith in Christ Jesus. Heb. 6.6. False Christ's, who b^are men in hand, they are
true Christ's. Matthew. 24.26. There were many such about the time of our Savior
Christ his first coming, as Josephus witnesses, book 20. of Jewish
antiquities, the 11,12. and 14. chapters. Lastly, that Antichtist, who, as it
is now apparent, can be none other but the Pope of Rome. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Let no
man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come, except there come a
departing first, and that that man of sin be disclosed, even the son of
perdition, which is an adversary, and exalts himself against all that is
called God, or that is worshipped: so that he does sit as God in the temple of
God, showing himself that he is God. Revel. 13.11. And I beheld another beast
coming out of the earth, which had two horns like the Lamb, but he spoke
like the dragon: And he did all that the first beast could do before him, and
he caused the earth, and them that dwell threin, to worship the beast, whose
deadly wound was healed.

There were then, first, Antichrists at Rome, when the Bishops thereof would
be entitled Universal, or supreme governors of the whole world, but then
were they complete, when they, together with Ecclesiastical censure usurped
civil authority.

After that Christ has subdued all his enemies, these two things shall ensue:
I. The surrendering over of his kingdom to God the Father, as concerning the
regiment: for at that time shall cease both that civil regiment, and spiritual
policy, consisting in word and spirit together. II. The subjection of Christ,
only in regard of his humanity, the which then is, when the Son of God shall
most fully manifest his majesty, which before was obscured by the flesh as a
veil, so that the same flesh remaining both glorious and united to the Son
of God, may by infinite degrees appear inferior.

We may not therefore imagine, that the subjection of Christ, consists in
diminishing the glory of the humanity, but in manifesting most fully the
majesty of the Word.

CHAP. 19. CONCERNING THE OVTWARD MEANS of executing the decree of election,
and of the Decalogue.
AFter the foundation of Election, which has hitherto been delivered, it
follows, that we should entreat of the outward means of the same.

The means are Gods Covenant, and the seal thereof.

Gods covenant, is his contract with man, concerning life eternal, upon
certain conditions.

This covenant consists of two parts: Gods promise to man, Man's promise to
God.

Gods promise to man, is that, whereby he binds himself to man to be his
God, if he break not the condition.

Man's promise to God, is that, whereby he voweth his allegiance unto his Lo^d,
and to perform the condition between them.

Again, there are two kinds of this covenant. The covenant of works, and the
covenant of grace. Ierm. 31.3^.42.43. Behold the days come, says the Lord,
that I will make a now cou^nant with the house of Israel, and with the house of
Judah, not a^cording to the covenant I made with their fathers, when I tocke
them ^y the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; the which my covenant
they brake; al^hough I was an husband to them, says the Lord. But this shall
be the covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel: after those days,
says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

The covenant of works, is Gods covenant, made with condition of perfect
obedience, and is expressed in the moral law.

The Moral Law, is that part of Gods word, which commands perfect obedience
unto man, as well ^n his nature, as in his actions, and forbids the
contrary. Romans 10.5. Moses thus describes the righteousness which is of the
Law, that the man, which does these things, shall live thereby. 1. Tim. 1.5.
The end of the commandment; is love out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. Luke 16.27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. Romans 7. We
know that the law is spiritual.

The Law has two parts. The Edict, commanding obedience, and the condition
binding to obedience. The condition is eternal life to such as fulfill the
law: but to transgressors, everlasting death.

The Decalogue or ten Commandments, is an abridgement of the whole Law, and
the covenant of works. Exodus 34.27. And the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou
these words, for after the tenor of these words, I have made a covenant with
thee, and with Israel. And was there with the Lord forty days and forty
nights, and did neither eat bread, nor drink water, and he wrote in the
Tables the words of the covenant, even the ten Commandments. 1. King. 8.9.
Nothing was in the Arc, save the two Tables of stone, which Moses had put
there at Horeb, where the Lord made a covenant with the children of Israel,
when he brought them out of the land of Egypt. Matthew. 22.40. On these two
commandments hangs the whole Law and the Prophets.

The true interpretation of the Decalogue, must be according to these rules.

I. In the negative, the affirmative must be understood: and in the
affirmative, the negative. II. The negative binds at all times, and to all
times: and the affirmative, binds at all times, but not to all times: and
therefore negatiues are of more force. III. Under one vice expressly
forbidden, are comprehended all of that kind, yea, the least cause, occasion,
or entisement thereto, is as well forbidden, as that 1. Ioh. 3.15. Whosoever
hates his brother, is a manslayer. Matthew. 5.21. to the end. Evil thoughts
are condemned, as well as evil actions. IV. The smallest sins are entitled
with the same names, that that sin is, which is expressly forbidden in that
commandment, to which they appertain. As in the former places, hatred is
named murder, and to look after a woman with a lusting eye, is adultery. V.
We must understand every commandment of the law so, as that we annex this
condition: unless God command the contrary. For God being an absolute Lord,
and so above the law, may command that which his law forbids: so he
commanded Isaac to be offered, the Egyptians to be spoiled, the brazen Serpent
to be erected which was a figure of Christ, etc.
The Decalogue, is described in two Tables.

The sum of the first Table, is, that we love God with our mind, memory,
affections, and all our strength. Matthew. 22. 37. This is the first, (to wit, in
nature and order) and great commandment, (namely, in excellency, and dignity.

CHAP. 20. Of the first commandment.
THe first table has four commandments.

The first, teaches us to have and choose the true God for our God. The words
are these.

I am Jehovah thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and out of
the house of bondage. Thou shall have none other God but me.

The Resolution.
I am] If any man rather judge, that these words are a preface to all the
commandments, then a part of the first, I hinder him not: nevertheless, it is
like, that they are a persuasion to the keeping of the first commandment: and
that they are set before it, to make way unto it: as being more hard to be
received, then the rest. And this may appear, in that the three commandments
next following have their several reasons.

Iehouah] This word signifies three things: I. Him who of himself, and in
himself, was from all eternity. Revel. 1.8. Who is, who was, and who is to
come. II. Him which gives being to all things, when they were not, partly by
creating, partly by preserving them. III. Him which mightily causes that those
things which he has promised, should both be made, and continued. Exodus 6.1.
Romans 4. 17.

Here begins the first reason of the first commandment, taken from the name
of God: it is thus framed.

He that is Jehovah, must alone be thy God.

But I am Jehovah:

Therefore I alone must be thy God.

This proposition is wanting: the assumption is in these words ( I am Jehovah)
the conclusion is the commandment.

Thy God] These are the words of the covenant of grace. Ier. 32.33. whereby the
Lord promises to his people, remission of sins, and eternal life. Yea these
words are as a second reason of the commandments, drawn from the equality of
that relation, which is between God and his people.

If I be thy God, thou again must be my people, and take me alone for thy God.

But I am thy God:

Therefore thou must be my people, and take me alone for thy God.

The assumption, or second part of this reason, is confirmed by an argument
taken from Gods effects, when he delivered his people out of Egypt, as it were,
from the servitude of a most tyrannous master. This delivery was not
appropriate only to the Israelites, but in some sort to the Church of God in
all ages: in that it was a typ^ ^f a more surpassing delivery, from that
fearful kingdom of darkness. 1. Cor. 10.1,2. I would not have you ignorant,
brethren, that all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through
the red sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea.
Coloss. 1.13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated
us into the kingdom of his dear son.

Other Gods or strange gods] They are so called, not that they by nature are
such, or can be, but because the corrupt, and more then devilish heart of
carnal man esteems so of them. Phil. 3.19. Whose God is their belly. 1.
Cor. 4.4. Whose minds the God of this world has bewitched.

Before my face] That is, (figuratively) in my sight or presence, to whom the
secret imaginations of the heart are known: and this is the third reason of
the first commandment, as if he should say. If thou in my presence reject me,
it is an heinous offense: see therefore thou do it not. After the same manner
reasons the Lord. Genesis 17.1. I am God almighty, therefore walk upright.

The affirmative part.
Make choice of Jehovah to be thy God.

The duties here commanded, are these: I. To acknowledge God, that is, to know
and confess him, to be such a God, as he has revealed himself to be in his
word, and creatures. Col. 1.10. Increasing in the knowledge of God. Ierem. 24.
7. And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall
be my people, and I will be their God: for they shall return unto me with their
whole heart. In this knowledge of God must we glory. Ierem. 9.24. Let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me: for I am the
Lord which show mercy, judgment, and righteousness in the earth. II. An union
with God, whereby man is knit in heart with God. Josh. 23. 8. Stick fast unto
the Lord your God, as ye have done unto this day. Act. 11.23. He exhorted all,
that with purpose of heart, they would cleave to the Lord. Man cleaves unto
God three manner of ways: in affiance, in love, and fear of God.


Affiance, is that, whereby a man acknowledging the power and mercy of God,
and in him, against all assaults whatsoever, does steadfastly rest himself. 2.
Chro. 20.20. Put your trust in the Lord your God, and ye shall be assured,
believe his Prophets and ye shall prosper. Psalm. 27.1. God is my light, and my
salvation, whom should I fear? God is the strength of my life, of whom should
I be afraid? v. 3. Though an host pitched against me, mine heart should not be
afraid: though war be raised against me, I will be secure.

Hence rises patience, and alacrity in present perils. Psalm. 39.19. I should
have been dumb, and not opened my mouth, because thou did it. 2. Sam. 16.10.
the King said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? If he cursed,
because the Lord said, Curse David, what is he that dare say, Why do thou
so? Genesis 45.5. Be not sad neither grieved with your selves, that ye sold me
hither: for God did send me before you for your preservation. v. 8. Now then,
you sent me not, but god himself. 2. King. 6.16. Fear not, for they that be
with us, are more, the^ they that be with the^.

This affiance engenders hope, which is a patient expectation of Gods presence
and assistance in all things that are to come. Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way unto
the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass. verse. 7. Wait
patiently upon the Lord, and hope in him. Prou. 16.3. Commit thy work unto the
Lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed.

The love of God, is that, whereby man acknowledging Gods goodness and favor
toward him, does again love him above all things. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength.

The marks of the true love of God are these: I. To hear willingly his word.
II. To speak often to him. III. To think often of him. IV. To do his will
without irkesomnes. V. To give body, and all for his cause. VI. To desire his
presence above all, and to bewail his absence. VII. To embrace al such things
as appertain to him. VIII. To love and hate that which he loves and hates.
IX. In all things to seek to please him. X. To draw others unto the love of
him. XI. To esteem highly of such gifts and graces, as he bestows. XII. To
stay our selves upon his counsels revealed in his word. Lastly, to call upon
his name with affiance.

The fear of God, is that whereby man, acknowledging Gods both mercy and
justice, does as it were a capital crime fear to displease God. Psalm. 103. 3.
With thee is mercy, that thou may be feared. Habak. 3.16. When I heard it,
my belly trembled, my lips shook at the voice: rottennes entered into my bones,
and I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble, when he
comes up against the people to destroy them. Psalm. 4.4. Tremble, and sin
not.

Hence arises the godly man's desire, to approve himself in all things to his
God. Genesis 5.22. And Henoch walked with God, after that, etc. Genesis 17. 1. God
said to him, I am all-sufficient, walk before me and be thou perfect.

Out of these three former virtues, proceeds humility, whereby a man
acknowledging Gods free bounty, and prostrating himself before him, does
ascribe unto him all praise and glory. 1. Cor. 1.31. Let him that glories,
glory in the Lord. 1. Pet. 5.5. Deck your selves inwardly with lowliness of
mind: for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. v. 6. Humble
your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in
due time. 1. Chro. 29. 10,11. And David said, Blessed be thou, O Lord God of
Israel our father for ever, and thine, O Lord, is greatness and power, and
glory, and victory, and praise: for all that is in heaven, and in earth is
thine, etc. and v. 14. But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be
able to offer willingly on this sort: for all things come of thee, and of thine
own hand we have given thee, etc.

The negative part.
Account not that as God, which is by nature no God.

In this place are these sins forbidden: I. Ignorance of the true God and his
will, which is not only not to know, but also to doubt of such things, as God
has revealed in his word, Ierem. 4. 22. My people is foolish, they have not
known me: they are foolish children, and have none understanding: they are wise
to do evil, but to do well, they have no knoweledge. Ierem. 9.3. They
proceed from evil to worse, and have not known me, says the Lord. II.
Atheism, when the heart denies either God, or his attributes: as, his
Justice, Wisdom, Providence, Presence. Psalm. 14. 1. The fool has said in his
heart there is no God. Ephesians. 2. 12. Ye had no hope, and were without God in the
world. Malach. 1.2. I love you, says the Lord, yet ye say, wherein have we
spoken against thee? v. 14. Ye have said, it is in vain to serve God: and what
profit is it, that we have kept his commandments, and that we walked humbly
before the Lord of hosts? III. Errors concerning God, the persons of the
Deity, or the attributs. Here is it to be reproved Hellenisme, which is the
acknowledging and adoring of a multiplicitie of Gods. August in his 6. book of
the City of God. chap. 7.

Again, Iudaisme is here condemned, which worshippeth one God without Christ.

The like may be said of the heresies of the Maniches, and Marcian, who deny
God the Father: of Sabellius, denying the distinction of three persons: and
Arrius, who says, that Christ the Son of God, is not very God.

IV. To withdraw, and remove the affections of the heart, from the lord, and
set them upon other things. Esaias 29.13. The Lord said, this people draws
near me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but their heart is
far from me. Ierem. 12.2. Thou art near in their mouth, and far from their
reins. The heart is many ways withdrawn from God. I. By distrust in God.
Heb. 10.38. The just shall live by faith, but if any withdraw himself, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him. From this diffidence arise; I. Impatience
in suffering afflictions. Ierem. 20. 14. Cursed be the day wherein I was borne,
and let not the day wherein my mother bare me, be blessed. v. 13. Cursed be the
man, that showed my father, saying, a man child is born^ unto thee, and
comforted him. v. 18. How is it that I came forth of the womb, to see labor
and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame? II. Tempting of God,
when such as distrust, or rather contemn him, seek signs of Gods truth and
power. Matthew. 4.7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. 1. Corinthians. 10.6.
Neither let us tempt God, as they tempted him, and were destroyed by serpents.
v. 10. Neither murmr ye, as some of the^ murmured, and were destroyed of the
destroyer. III. Desperation. Genesis 4. 13. Mine iniquity is greater then can be
pardoned. 1. These. 4. 13. Sorrow ye not, as they which have no hope. IV.
Doubtfulnes, concerning the truth of Gods benefits present, or to come. Psalm.
116.11. I said in mine have, all men are liars. II. Confidence in creatures,
whether it be in their strength, as Ierem. 17.5. Cursed is the man that has
his confidence in man, and makes flesh his arm, but his heart slideth from
the Lord. Or riches. Matthew. 6.24. Ye cannot serve God and riches. Ephesians. 5.5. No
coueto^s person, which is an idolater, has inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ and of God. Or defenced places. Iere. 49. 16. Thy fear, and the pride
of thine heart has deceived thee, that thou dwell in the clefts of the
Rock, and keep the height of the hill: though thou should make thy nest
as high as the Eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, says the Lord. Or
pleasure, and dainties: to such their belly is their God. Phil. 3. 14. Or in
physicians, 2. Chron. 6. 12. And Asa in the nine and thirtieth year of his
reign, was diseased in his feet, and his disease was extreme, yet he sought
not the Lord in his disease, but to the Physicians. Briefly, to this place
principally may be adjoined that devilish confidence, which Magitians, and all
such as take advise at them, do put in the devil, and his works. Leuit. 20.
6. If any turn after such as work with spirits, and after soothsayers, to go
a whoring after them, then will I set my face against that person, and will cut
him off from among this people. III. The love of the creature, above the love
of God, Math. 10.37. He that loves father or mother more then me, is not
worthy of me, and he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy
of me. John 12. 43. They loved the praise of man, more then the praise of God.
To this belongs self-love. 2. Tim. 3.2. IV. Hatred and contempt of God, when
man flies from God, and his wrath, when he punishes offenses. Romans 8.7. The
wisdom of the flesh, is enmity with God. Romans 1. 30. Haters of God, doers of
wrong. V. Want of the fear of God. Psalm. 36.1. Wickedness says to the wicked
man, even in mine heart, that there is no fear of God before their eyes. VI.
Fear of the creature, more then the Creator. Rev. 21.8. The fearful and
unbelieving, shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone. Matthew. 10.28. Fear not them which kill the body, but fear him
that can cast both body and soul into hell fire. Ierem. 10.2. Be not afraid
of the signs of heaven, though the heathen be afraid of such. VII. Hardness of
heart, or carnal service, when a man, neither acknowledging Gods judgments,
nor his own sins, dreameth he is safe from Gods vengeance, and such perils,
as arise from sin. Romans 2.5. Thou after thine hardness, and heart that can
not repent, heapest to thy self wrath against the day of wrath. Luke 21.34.
Take heed to your selves, least at any time, your hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and least that day come on
you as unawares.



These all do jointly engender pride, whereby man ascribes all he has that
is good, not to God, but to his own merit, and industry, referring and
disposing them wholly unto his own proper credit. 1. Cor. 4.6. That ye might
learn by us, that no man presume above that which is written, that one swell
not against another, for any man's cause. verse. 7. For who separateth thee? or
what have thou, that thou have not received? if thou have received it, why
reioycest thou, as though thou had not received it? Genesis 3.5. God does know,
that when ye shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as
Gods, knowing good and evil. The highest stayre of prides ladder, is that
fearful presumption, by which many clime rashly into Gods seat of majesty,
as if they were gods. Act. 12. 22, 23. The people gave a shout, saying, The
voice of God, and not of man: but immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him,
because he gave not glory unto God, so that he was eaten up of worms, and
gave up the ghost. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Which is an adversary, and exalts himself
against all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he does sit as
God in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God.

CHAP. 21. Of the second Commandment.
HItherto have we entreated of the first Commandment, teaching us to
entertain in our hearts, and to make choice of one only God. The other three
of the first Table, concern that holy profession, which we must make toward
the same God. For first, it is necessary to make choice of the true God.
Secondly, to make profession of the same God.

In the profession of God, we are to consider the parts thereof, and the time
appointed for this profession.

The parts are two: The solemn worship of God, and the glorifying of him.

The second Commandment, describes such holy and solemn worship, as is due
unto God. The words of the Commandment are these:

Thou shall make thee no graven image, neither any similitude of things which
are in heaven above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the
waters under the earth: thou shall not bow down to them, neither serve them,
for I am the Lord thy God, a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, upon the third generation, and upon the fourth of them that
hate me, and show mercy unto thousands, upon them that love me and keep my
Commandments.

The Resolution.
Thou shall not make] This is the first part of the commandment, forbidding to
make an idol: Now an idol is not only a certain representation, and image of
some fained God, but also of the true Jehovah. The which may be proved against
the Papists by these arguments. The first is, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Take therefore
good heed unto your selves: for ye saw no image in the day that the Lord
spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire, that ye corrupt not
your selves, and make you a graven image or representation of any figure:
whether it be the likeness of male or female. Out of the words uttered by
Moses, a reason may be framed thus: If ye saw no image (namely of God) ye shall
make none:

But ye saw no image, only heard a voice:

Therefore ye shall make no image of God.



The second reason: That idolatry which the Israelites committed, the very
same is prohibited in this commandment.

But the Israelites idolatry was the worship of God in an image, Hos. 2. 16.
At that day, says the Lord, thou shall call me no more Baali, but shall call
me Ishi.

The golden calfe was an image of God: for when it was finished, Aaron
proclaimed that to morrow should be a feast to Jehovah. Exodus 32.5. And the
same calfe is termed an idol. Act. 7.41.

Therefore the worshipping of God in an image, is here prohibited.

Any graven image] Here the more special is put for the more general, namely,
a graven image for all counterfeit means of Gods worship.

The first part of the commandment is here illustrated, by a double
distribution. The first is drawn from the causes. Thou shall not make thee any
idol, whether it be engraven in wood, or stone: or whether it be painted in a
table. The second, is taken from the place. Thou shall not make thee an idol of
things in heaven, as stars and birds: or in the earth, as of man, woman,
beasts: or under the earth, as fishes.

This place is so expounded by Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. 14. to the 20. verse.

Thou shall not bow down to them] This is the second part of the commandment,
forbidding all men to fall down before an idol. In this word, Bow down, is
again the special put for the general: for in it is inhibited all fained
worship of God.

For I] These words are a confirmation of this commandment, persuading to
obedience, by four reasons.

The Lord] (which is strong) The first reason, God is strong, and so able to
revenge idolat^ie: Heb. 10.31.

A jealous God] This speech is taken from the estate of wedlock: for God is
called the husband of his Church. Esaias 54.5. Ephesians. 5.26,27. And our spiritual
worship, is, as it were, a certain marriage of our souls, consecrated unto
the Lord. Ier. 2. 2. I remember thee with the kindness of thy youth, and the
love of thy marriage, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land
that was not sown. Here is another argument drawn from a comparison of things
that be like. Gods people must alone worship him, because they are linked to
him, as a wife is to her husband, unto whom alone she is bound: therefore if
his people forsake him, and betroth themselves unto idols, he will undoubtedly
give them a bill of diuorcement, and they shall be no more espoused unto him.

Visiting] To visit, is not only to punish the children for the fathers
offenses, but to make notice, and apprehend them in the same faults: by reason
they are given over to commit their fathers transgressions, that for them they
be punished. And this is the third reason drawn from the effects of Gods anger.

Hate me] It may be, this is a secret answer, the objection whereof is not here
in express words set down, but may be thus framed. What if we use Idols to
inflame and excite in us a love and remembrance of thee. The answer is this by
the contrary: You may think that your use of idols kindles in you a love of
me, but it is so far from that, that all such as use them cannot choose but
hate me.

Show mercie] The fourth reason derived from the effects of Gods mercy to such
as observe this commandment. Here may we first observe, that Gods mercy
exceeds his justice. Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy,
slow to anger, and of great kindness. verse. 17. The loving kindness of the Lord,
endures for ever. verse. 9. He will not always chide, neither keep his anger
for ever. Secondly, we may not surmise, that this excellent promise is made to
every one particularly, who is borne of faithful parents. For godly Isaak had
godless Esau to his son, and godless Saul, had godly Jonathan.

The negative part.
Thou shall neither worship false gods, nor the true God with false worship.

Many things are here forbidden: I. The representation of God, by an image. For
it is a lie. Habak. 2. 18. What profits the image? for the maker thereof has
made it an image and a teacher of lies. Zach. 10.2. The idols have spoken
vanity. Ierem. 10. 8. The stock is a doctrine of vanity. The Eliber Council
in the 39. canon has this edict. We thought it not meet to have images in
Churches, least that which is worshipped and adored, should be painted upon
walls. Clement. book 5. ad Jacob. Dom. That serpent by others is wont to speak
these words: We in honor of the invisible God, are accustomed to adore visible
images, the which out of all controversy, is very false. August. in his
treatise upon the 113. Psalm.

The image also of the cross and Christ crucified, out to be abolished out of
Churches, as the brazen serpent was, 2. King. 18.4. Hezekiah is commended for
breaking in pieces the brazen serpent to which the children of Israel did then
burn incense. This did Hezekiah, albeit at the first this serpent was made by
the Lords appointment. Numb. 21.8. and was a type of Christ's passion. Ioh.
3.14. Origin in his 7. book against Celsus. We permit not any to adore Jesus
upon the altars in images, or upon Church walls: because it is written, Thou
shall have none other gods but me.

Epiphanius^ in that epistle which he wrote to John Bishop of Jerusalem, says,
It is against the custom of the Church, to see any image hanging in the
church, whether it be of Christ, or any other saint, and therefore even with
his own hands rent he asunder the veil, wherein such an image was painted.

Some object the figure or sign, which appeared to Constantine, wherein he
should overcome: but it was not the sign of the cross (as the Papists do
triflinly imagine) but of Christ's name: for the thing was made of these two
greek letters (...) conjoined together, Eusebius. in the life of Constant. book
1. chap. 22,25.

Neither serve the Cherubims, which Solomon placed in the temple, for the
defense of images: for they were only in the holy of holiest, where the people
could not see them. And they were types of the glory of the Messiah, unto
whom the very Angels were subject: the which we have now verified in Christ.

If any man reply, that they worship not the image, but God in the image: let
him know, that the creature cannot comprehend the image of the Creator; and if
it could, yet God would not be worshipped in it, because it is a dead thing:
yea, the work of man's hands, not of God: and therefore is more base then the
smallest living creature, of the which we may lawfully say, it is the work of
God. This euinceth, that no kind of divine worship belongs to an image,
either simply or by relation, whatsoever the sophistical schoolmen iangle to
the contrary.

If any man be yet desirous of images, he may have at hand the preaching of the
Gospel, a lively image of Christ crucified. Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who
has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, to whom Jesus Christ
before was described in your sight, and among you crucified? The like may be
said of the two Sacraments. And that saying of Clemens is true, in his fifth
book of Recognit. If you will truly adore the image of God, do good unto man,
and ye shall worship his true image: for man is the image of God.

II. The least approbation of idolatry. Hos. 13.2. They say one to another
whilst they sacrifice a man, let them kiss the calves. Now a kiss, is an
external sign of some allowance of a thing. Genesis 48.11.

Therefore it is unlawful to be present at Mass, or any idolatrous service,
though our minds be absent. 1. Cor. 6,20. Ye are bought with a price,
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirits, which are Gods. Romans
11.4. What says the Scripture? I have reserved unto my self seven thousand
men, which have not bowed the knee to Baal. Eusebius. 3. book. The Martyrs, when
they were haled unto the temple of idols, cried out, and with a loud voice in
the midst of their tortures testified that they were not idolatrous
sacrificers, but professed and constant Christians, rejoicing greatly that they
might make such a confession.

That which may be objected of Naaman the Syrian, who worshipped in the temple
of Rimmon, is thus answered, that he did it not with purpose to commit
idolatry, but to perform that civil obeisance, which he was wont to exhibit
to the Kings majesty. 2. King. 5.17,18.

And for this cause, are utterly forbidden all such processions, plays, and
such feasts, as are consecrated to the memorial, and honor of idols. Exodus
32.6. They rose up the next day in the morning, and offered burn^ offerings^
and brought peace offerings: also the people sat them down to eat and
drink, and rose up to play. 1. Cor. 10.7. Neither be ye idolaters as some of
them were, as it is written, etc. And Paul (1. Cor. 8.4. to the end) earnestly
dehorteth the Corinthians from sitting at table in the idols temple; albeit
they know that an idol is nothing in the world. Tripartite history, book 6.
chap. 30. Certain soldiers refused to ado^e, as the custom was, the banner
of Julian, in which were painted the images of Jupiter, Mercury, and Mars:
others bring again the rewards, which they, after they had burned incense on
an altar in the Emperors presence, had received. Crying, that they were
Christians, and world live and die in that profession: and as for their former
fact, it was of ignorance^ yea though they had polluted hands with idolatry of
the Painyms, yet they kept their consciences clean.

III. All relics and monuments of idols: for these^ after the idols
themselves are once abolished, must be rased out of all memory. Exodus 23.13.
To shall make no mention of the name of others gods, neither shall it be heard
out of thy mouth. Esai 30.22. And ye shall pollute the covering of the images
of silver, and the rich ornament of the images of gold, and cast them away as a
menstruous cloth, and thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence. IV. Society
with infidels, is here unlawful, serves not only to maintain concord, but
also to join men in brotherly love. Of this society there are many branches.

The first, is marriage with infidels. Genesis 6.2. The sons of God saw the
daughters of men that they were fair, and they took them wives of all that
they liked. Mal. 2.11. Judah has transgressed, and an abomination is committed
in Israel, and in Jerusalem: for Judah has defiled the holiness of the Lord,
which he loved, and has married the daughters of a strange god. Ezra 9.14.
Should we return to break thy commandments, and join in affinity with the
people of such abomination? 2. King. 8.18. He walked in the ways of the Kings
of Israel, as did the house of Ahab: for the daughter of Ahab was his wife: and
he did evil in the sight of the Lord.

The second, is the league in war: namely a mutual confederacy to assist
one another in the same war, and to have one and the same enemies. This is
sundry ways impious: I. If it be unlawful to crave assistance of Gods
enemies, it is likewise unlawful to indent with them, that we will assist
them. II. It obscureth Gods glory, as though he himself, either would not, or
could not aid his Church. III. It is a thousand to one least we be infected
with their idolatry, and other impieties. IV. It endangereth us to be made
partakers of their punishments. 2. Chron. 19. 2. And Iehu the son of Hanani
the Seer, went out to meet him, and said to King Iehosaphat, Would thou
help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore for this thing is
the wrath of the Lord upon thee.

The third, is Traffic: as when a man wittingly and willingly, does, in hope
to enrich himself, make sale of such things as he knows must serve to an
idolatrous use. This condemns all those merchants, which tra^sport wares to
idolatours, and sell them frankencense, wax, cloth, or other such things as
help them in the service of their idols.

The fourth, is trial of suites in law before Judges which are infidels, when
Christian courts may be frequented: but if they cannot, and we have to deal
with infidels, we may appeal to infidels. 1. Cor. 9.6. Brother goes to law
with brother, and that under infidels. Act. 25.11. Paul appealeth to Caesar.

The fifth, is the worshipping of the beast, and receiving his mark. Rev. 14.
9. If any man worship the beast, and his image, and receive the mark in his
forehead, or in his hand. verse. 10. The same shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God. This beast is the Church of Rome, I mean not that old, but this
new Rome, now no better then an heretical and apostaticall Synagogue.

V. Will worship, when God is worshipped with a naked and bare good intention,
not warranted by the word of God. Colos. 2.23. Which things indeed have a show
of wisdom in voluntary religion, and humbleness of mind, and in not sparing
the body: neither have they it in estimation to satisfy the flesh. 1. Sam.
13. 9,10. And Saul said, Bring a burnt offering to me, and peace offerings: and
he offered a burnt offering. And as soon as he had made an end of offering
the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came, and verse. 13. said to Saul, Thou have
done foolishly, thou have not kept the commandment of the lord thy God, which
he commanded thee. Hitherto may we add popish superstitions in sacrifices,
meats, holidaies, apparel, temporary and bead-ridden prayers, indulgences,
austere life, whipping, ceremonies, gestures, gate, conversation, pilgrimage,
building of altars, pictures, Churches, and all other of that rabble.

To these may be added consort in music in divine service, feeding the ears,
not edifying the mind. 1. Cor. 14.15. What is it then? I will pray with the
spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also. I will sing with the
spirit, but I will sing with the understa^ding also. Justinius Martyr in his
book of Christian quest. and Ans. 107. It is not the custom of the Churches,
to sing their meeters with any such kind of instruments, etc. but their manner
is only to use plaine-song.

Lastly, monastical vows, which I. repugne the law of God: as that unchaste
vow of single life, and proud promise of poverty do plainly euince: for he
that labors not, must not eat, says Paul: And it is better to marry, then
to burn in lust, says the same Paul. II. They are greater then man's nature
can perform: as in a single life, to live perpetually chaste. III. They
disanull Christian liberty, and make such things necessary, as are
indifferent. IV. They renew Iudaisme. V. They are idolatro^s, because they make
them parts of Gods worship, and esteem them as meritorious. VI. Hypocrisy,
which gives to God painted worship, that is, if you regard outward behaniour,
great sincerity: if the inward and hearty affections, none at all. Matthew.
15.7. Hypocrites, well has Esaias prophesied of you, saying, This people
comes near me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but their
heart is far from me. Psalm. 10.4. The wicked man is so proud, that he seeks
not for God.

The effects of hypocrisy are these: 1. To seek the pomp and glory of the
world, and by all means to enrich it self, notwithstanding it make a glorious
show of the service of God. 2. It is sharp sighted, and has eagles eyes to
observe other men's behavior, when in the regarding its own, it is as blind
as beetle. 3. To be more curious in the observation of ancient traditions, then
the statutes and commandments of almighty God. 4. To stumble at a straw, and
skip over a block, that is, to omit serious affairs, and hunt after trifles.
Matthew. 23.4. 5^ To do all things that they may be seen of men. Matthew. 6.5.

Popish fasting, is mere hypocrisy: because it stands in the distinction of
meats, and it is used with an opinion of merit.

External abstinence from meats, without internal and spiritual fasting
from sin, and unlawful desires. Esai 58.5,6. Is this such a fast, as I have
chosen, that a man should afflict his soul for a day, and bow down his head
as a bulrush, and lie down in sack^loth and ashes? will thou call this a
fasting, or an acceptable day unto the Lord? Is not this the fasting that I
have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens,
and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?

VII. Contempt, neglect, and intermission of Gods service. Rev. 3.15,16. I know
thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou werest cold or
hot. Therefore because thou art luk^warme, and neither cold nor hot, it will
come to pass, that I shall spew thee out of my mouth. VIII. Corrupting of Gods
worship, and that order of government, which he has ordained for his Church:
the which is done, when any thing is added, detracted, or any way, against his
prescript, mangled. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Every thing which I command you, that do:
neither add to it, nor detract from it. This condemns that popish elevation
of bread in the Lords Supper, and the administration of it alone to the people
without wine, together with that fearful abomination of the Mass.

By this we may learn to reject all popish traditions, Matthew. 15.9. In vain
do they worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's precepts. Now it is manifest,
that all popish traditions, they either on their own nature, or others abusing
of them, serve as well to superstition and false worship, as to enrich that
covetous and proud Hierarchy: whereas the Scriptures contained in the Old and
New Testament, are all-sufficient, not only to confirm doctrines, but also to
reform manners. 2. Tim. 3.16. The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable to teach, to improoue, and to correct, and to instruct
in righteousness: that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works.

The Romish Hierarchy is here also condemned, from the parratour to the Pope:
the government whereof, is an express image of the old Roman Empire, whether
we consider the regiment it self, or the place of the Empire, or the large
circuit of that government. Revel. 13.15. And it was permitted to him, to give
a spirit to the image of the beast, so that the image of the beast should
speak, and should cause that as many as would not worship the image of the
beast, should be killed.

IX. A religious reverence of the creature, as when we attribute more unto it,
then we ought. Revel. 22.8. When I had heard and seen, I fell down to wors^ip
before the feet of the Angel, which showed me these things. But he said unto
me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellow servant. Act. 10. 25. As Peter
came in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet, and wors^ipped him.
But Peter took him up, saying, Stand up, for even I my self am a man.

If then it be so heinous a thing, to reverence the creature much more to pray
unto it, whether it be Saint or Angel. Romans 10.14. How shall they call upon
him, in whom they have not believed. Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Neither may we pray unto Christ, as he is only man, but as he is God and man:
for we direct not our prayers unto the humanity, but to the deity, to which
the humanity is knit by an hypostaticall union.

This teaches us plainly, that invocation of any creature is unlawful: for
we must pray to them, that are able to know the secrets of the heart, and
discern the wisdom of the spirit: now none is able to do that, but such a
nature as is omnipotent. Romans 8.27. He that searches the hearts, knows what
is the meaning of the spirit: for he makes request for the Saints, according
to the will of God.

Nevertheless such as are Saints indeed, are to be honored by an approbation
of Gods gifts in them, and by an honorable mention of them, and also by
imitation of their manners and lives, being as patterns for us to walk after.

X. Worship of devils: I. Magique, which is a mischievous art, accomplishing
wonders by Satan's assistance. For it is appropriate to God to do miracles; for
he alone both beyond, and against the course of nature, does wonderful
things. Now the instruments which God uses in producing miracles, are only
they, who do in the true Church of God, make profession of the faith.


Albeit the devils cannot work miracles, yet may they effect maruailes, or
wonders, and that, not by making a new thing, which before was not at all: but
rather by moving, transporting, and applying natural things diversely, by
causing a thin body, as the air, to be thick and foggie, and also by
bewitching the senses of men.

The foundation of Magique, is a covenant with Satan.

A covenant with Satan, is such a contract, by which Magitians have mutually to
do with the devil. In this observe:

The original of this mutual contract: I. Satan makes choice of such men to
be his servants, as are by nature either notorious badde persons, or very
silly souls. II. He offers unto them diverse means, either by other
Magitians, or by some books written by such: Satanicall means, I call those,
which are used in the producing of such an effect, to the which they neither by
any express rule out of Gods word, nor of their own nature were ever
ordained. Such are concealed speeches, words of the Scripture wrested, and
abused, to the great contumely and disgrace of the Lord God; holy, or rather
unholy water, sieues, seals, glasses, images, bowings of the knee, and such
like diverse gestures. III. When the wicked see these means offered unto them,
they presently are not a little glad, and assuredly believe, that in those
things there is virtue to work wonders by. IV. They declare this their
satanicall confidence, by their earnest desire, practicing, and abusing the
means. V. Then the devil is at their elbowes, being thus affected; that he
may both assist them, and in them show diverse tricks of his legerdemaine;
because he alone does by means void of all such virtue, effect that, which
his wicked instrument intended.

Again, observe Satan's counterfeiting of God. He is Gods Ape, and takes upon
him, as though he were God. I. As God has his word, his Sacraments, and faith
due unto h^m^ so has the devil his Word; and to seal it unto the wicked, he
annexeth certain signs, namely characters, gestures, sacrifices; etc. as it
were sacraments, that both he may signfie his devilish pleasure to his
Magitians, and they again may testify their satanicall both obedience and
confidence to him. II^ As God hears such as call upon, trust in, and obey
him: so the devil is greatly delighted with magical ceremonies and
invocations; because by them God is dishonored, and he magnified: therefore,
if God cut him not short, he is ready pressed to assist such, as shall use such
ceremonies or inuocations.

The covenant is either Secret, or Express.

Secret, or implicit, when one does not expressly compact with Satan, yet in
his heart aloweth of his means, assuredly and upon knowledge believing, that
if such means were used, there might indeed that great wonder be wrought which
he desired.

Express, when one does not only put his confidence in Satan, but couenanteth
with him upon conditions, that he, giving himself wholly over to the devil,
may again, by observing certain ceremonies, accomplish his desire.

Magique, is either coniecturall, or operative.

Coniecturall, whereby things are by Satan's direction prophesied of before. Of
prophesies, some are done with means, others without.

Prophesies done with means, are these.

I. Soothsaying, divination by the flying of birds. Deuteronomy. 18.11. II. The kind
of divination, which is, by looking into beasts entrals. Ezech. 21.21. The king
of Babel, etc consulted with idols, and looked in the liver. III. Necromancie,
or coniuring: by which the devil, in the form of some dead man, is sought unto
for counsel. 1. Sam. 28. 11. Then said the woman; Whom will thou I call up
unto thee? And ^e said, Call up Samuel unto me. verse. 13. Then said he unto
her, Fear not, but what saw thou? And the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods
ascending out of the earth. v. 14. Then said he unto her, What fashion is he
of? and she answered, An old man comes up lapped in a mantle. And Saul knew
that it was Samuel, and he inclined his face to the ground, and bowed himself.
And Samuel said to Saul, why have thou disquieted me, to bring me up? The^ Saul
answered, I am in great distress: for the Philisti^^s make war against me,
etc. This Samuel, was not that true Prophet of God, who anointed Saul King
over Israel: for, 1. the souls of the Saints departed, are far from the
devils claws and dominion. 2. That good Samuel, if it had been he indeed,
would never have permitted Saul to worship him. 3. He faith to wicked Saul, To
morrow shall thou be with me, v. 14. Neither could this be a bare illusion,
and, as I may say, legerdemeine of the witch, for he plainly foretold Saul's
destruction, which an ignorant woman could not know, much less durst she
constantly avouch any such matter to the king. It remains then, that this
Samuel, was a mere illusion of Satan.
Divining without means is, when such as are possessed with an unclean
spirit, use immediately the help of the same spirit, to reveal secrets. Act.
16. 16. A certain maid having a spirit of divination, met us, which gate her
master much vantage with divining. Esaias. 94.4. Thy voice shall be out of the
ground, like him that has a spirit of divination, and thy talking shall
whisper out of the dust.

Magique operative, has two parts: Iuggling, and Enchantments.

Iuggling, whereby, through the devils conueiance, many great and very hard
matters, are in show effected. Exodus 7.10.11,12. Aaron cast forth his rod
before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it was turned into a serpent: then
Pharaoh called also for the wise men, and sorcerers, and those charmers also of
Egypt did in like manner with their enchantments: for they cast down every man
his rod, and they were turned into serpents: but Aarons rod devoured their
rod.

Enchantment, or charming, is that, whereby beasts, but especially young
children, and men of riper years, are by Gods permission infected, poisoned,
hurt, bounden, killed, and otherwise molested; or contrarily, sometimes cured
of Satan, by mumbling up some few words, making certain characters and
figures, framing circles, hanging amulets about the neck, or other parts, by
herbs, medicines, and such like trumperie, that thereby the punishment of the
faithles may be augmented, in reposing their strength upon such rotten staves,
and the faithful may be tried, whether they will commit the like abomination.
Psalm. 18.4. Their poison is even like the poison of a serpent: like the deaf
adder that stops his ear, which hear not the voice of the enchanter;
though he be most expert in charming. Eccles. 10. 11. If the serpent bite when
he is not charmed, etc.

Thus have we heard Magique described out of gods word, the which, how as yet,
common it is, in those especially which are without God in the world, and
whom Satan by all means strongly deludeth, the lamentable experience which
many men, and most places have thereof, can sufficiently prove unto us. And
surely, if a man will but take a view of all popery, he shall easily see, that
the most part is mere Magique.

They which spread abroad by their writing or othewise, that witches are
nothing else, but melancholic doting women, who through the devils delusion,
suppose that they themselves do that, which indeed the devil does alone:
albeit they endeavor cunningly to cloak this sin, yet by the same means
they may defend murder, adultery, and what other sin soever.

II. Those which do consult with Magitians, they do also worship the devil:
for they revolt from God to the devil, howesoeuer they plaster up their
impiety with untempered mortar, that they seek Gods help, though by the
means of Magitians. 1. Sam. 28.13. The woman said to Saul, I saw gods
ascending from the earth. Leu. 20.6. If any turn after such as work with
spirit^, and after soothsayers, to go a whoring after them, then will I set my
face against that person, and will cut him off from among his people. Esaias
8.19, 20. When they shall say to you, Enquire at them which have a spirit of
divination, and at the soothsayers, which whisper and murmr. Should not a
people enquire as their God? from the living to the dead? to the law, and to
the testimony.

The affirmative part.
Thou shall worship God in spirit and truth. John 4. 24. God is a spirit,
and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. For so soon
as any man begins to worship God after an overthwart and unlawful manner,
he then adoreth an idol, howsoever he seems to color his impiety. Paul
therefore Romans 1.23. says, that such as worshipped the creature, and turned
the glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of a corruptible man,
did forsake the Creator. v. 25. and 1. Cor. 10.20. Those things which the
Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not unto God.

To this part therefore appertain such things, as respect the holy and solemn
service of God.

I. The true and ordinary means of Gods worship, as calling upon the name
of the Lord by humble supplication, and hearty thanksgiving: and the ministry
of the Word, and Sacraments. Act. 2.41,42. They that gladly received his word,
were baptized: and the same day there were added to the Church about three
thousand souls. And they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship,
and breaking of bread, and of prayers. 1. Tim. 2.1. I exhort you especially,
that prayers and supplicatio^s be made for all men, for kings, and all in
authority. Act. 20.7. The first day of the week, the Disciples being come
together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the
morrow, and continued the preaching unto midnight. Tertul. Apolog. chap. 39. We
come into the assembly and congregation, that with our prayers, as with an
army, we might compass God. This kind of violence offered to God, is
acceptable to him. If any man so offend, that he must be suspended from the
public place of prayer, and holy meetings, all ancient men, that be of any
account, bear rule, being advanced to this honor, not by bribes, but by their
good report, etc. read the rest. II. An holy use of the means. First, in the
ministers, who ought to administer al things belonging to Gods worship,
according to his word. Math. 28. 20. Teaching them to observe all things, which
I have commanded. 1. Corinthians 11. 23. I have received of the Lord that
which also I have delivered. Secondly, in the rest of the assembly: whose
duty is in praying unto God, in hearing the word preached and read, and in
receiving the Sacraments to behave themselves outwardly in modesty, and
without offense. 1. Corinthians. 14.40. Let all things be done honestly, and by
order. Inwardly, they must take heed, that their hearts be well prepared to
serve God. Eccles. 4.17. Take heed to both thy feet, when thou entrest into
the house of God, etc. and chap. 5.1. Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let thine
heart he hasty to utter a thing before God. Again, we must look that we
approach near God in confidence of his mercy, together with a contrite and
repentant heart for all our sins. Heb. 4. 2. The word that they heard
profited not, because it was not mixed with faith in those that heard it. Psalm.
26.6. I will wash mine hands in innocence; O Lord, and so come before thine
altar. III. The helps and furtherances of the true worship, are two; Vows and
Fasting: and they are not to be taken, as the worship of God it self. For we
may not obtrude any thing to God, as good service, and as though it did bind
the conscience, except he have ordained it for that end and purpose.

A vow, in the New Testament, is a promise to God, with a full intent to
observe some corporal and external duties, which a Christian has on his own
accord, without iniunction, imposed upon himself, that he may thereby the
better be excited unto repentance, meditation, sobriety, abstinence, patience,
and thankfulness toward God. Genesis 28.20. Then Iaakob vowed a vow, saying, If
God will be with me, and will keep me in this journey, which I go, and will
give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, so that I come again to my
fathers house in safety: then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone which I
have set up as a pillar, shall be Gods house, and of all that thou shall give
me, I will give the tenth to thee.

In vowing, we have these things to observe: 1. We must not vow that which is
unlawful. 2. We ought not to vow the performance of that, which is contrary
to our vocation. 3. Vows must be of that which we can do. 4. They must be
far from so much as a conceit of merit, or worship of God. 5. We must so
perform our vows, as that they encroch not upon Christian liberty, given us
in Christ: for we are bounden to pay our vows, no longer then the causes
thereof either remain, or are taken away. Deuteronomy. 23.18. Thou shall neither
bring the hire of a whore, nor the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord
thy God, for any vow. v. 21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God;
thou shall not be slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will surely require it
of thee: but when thou abstainest from vowing, it shall be no sin unto thee,
etc. v. 23. Psalm. 66.14. I will pay thee my vows which my lips have promised.

Fasting, is when a man perceiving the want of some blessing, or suspecting and
seeing some imminent calamity upon himself, or other, abstaineth not only
from flesh for a season, but also from all delights and sustenance, that he
thereby may make a more diligent search into his own sins, or offer most
humble prayers unto God, that he would withhold that, which his anger
threatened: or bestow upon us some such good things as we want. Matthew 9.15. Can
the children of the marriage chamber mourn, so long as the bridegroom is with
the^? 1. Cor. 7.5. Defraud not one another, except for a time, that ye may the
better fast and pray. Joel 2.12. Wherefore even now, says the Lord, be ye
turned unto me, with all your heart, with fasting and prayer. verse. 13. Rent
your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for he is
gracious and merciful, long ^uffering, and of great kindness, that he might
repent him of this evil. verse. 15. Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast,
call a solemn assembly. verse. 16. Gather the people, sanctify the
Congregation, gather the Elders, assemble the children, and those that suck
the breasts. Let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of
her bride chamber. verse. 17. Let the Priests the ministers of the Lord, weep
between the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O God, etc.

A fast, is sometime private, sometimes public. 2. Chron. 20.3. Iehosaphat
feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout
all Judah. Hest. 4. 16. Fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink for the
space of three days and nights. I also and my maids will fast.

A fast is either for one day alone, or for many days together. Each of them
is as occasion serves, an abstinence from meat at dinner alone, or supper
alone, or both dinner and supper. Judge. 20.23. The children of Israel had gone
up and wept before the Lord unto the evening, etc. Dan. 10.3. I Daniel was in
heaviness for three weeks of days, I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh
nor wine in my mouth, etc.

IV. Leagues of amity among such as fear God according to his worde^ are
lawful: as, contracts in matrimony, league in war, especially if the war
be lawefull, and without confidence in the power of man. 2. Chro. 19.2. Mal.
chap. 2. verse. 11.
To these may be added, that covenant which the magistrate and people make
among themselves, and with God, for the preservation of Christian religion. 2.
Chr. 15.12. And they made a covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers
with all their heart, and with all their soul, etc. v. 14. And they swear unto
the Lord with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with
cornets.

CHAP. 22. Of the third commandment.
THe third commandment concerns the glorifying of God in the affairs of our
life, without the solemn service of God.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

The Resolution.
Name] This word properly signifies Gods title: here figuratively it is used
for any thing, whereby God may be known, as men are by their names: so it is
used for his word, works, judgments. Act. 9.15. He is an elect vessel, to
convey my name among the Gentiles. Psalm. 8.1. O Lord our God, how great is thy
name through all the world! which set thy glory above the heavens.

Take] That is, usurp: this word is translated from precious things, which may
not be touched without license. And in truth, men, which are no better then
worms creeping on the earth, are utterly unworthy to take, or, as I may say,
touch the sacred name of God with mind, or mouth: nevertheless God of his
infinite kindness permits us so to do.

In vaine] Namely, for no^cause, any matter, and upon each light and fond
occasion.

For] The reason of this commandment is taken from the penalty annexed. He
that abuses Gods name, is guilty of sin before Gods judgment seat: and
therefore is most miserable. Psalm. 32.1,2. Blessed is the man whose iniquity
is forgiven, and whose sin is covered: blessed is the man to whom God
imputes not s^nne.

Guiltlesse] That is, he shall not be unpunished.

The negative part.
Thou shall not bereave God of that honor that is due unto him.

Here is included each several abuse of any thing, that is used in the course
of our lives, out of the solemn service of God.

I. Perjury, when a man performs not that, which he on his own accord swear
to do. Math. 5. 33. Thou shall not forswear thy self, but perform thine
oath to the Lord.

Perjury contains in it four capital sins. 1. Lying. 2. False invocation
on Gods name, because a forswearer calls on God to confirm a lie. 3.
Contempt of Gods threatenings, that he will most grievously punish perjury. 4.
A lie in his covenant with God, for the forswearer binds himself to God, and
lies unto God.

II. To swear that which is false. This is to make god and the devil both
alike. Ioh. 8.44. Ye are of your father the devil, etc. when he speaks a lie,
he speaks of himself, because he is a liar, and the father of lies. Zach.
5.4. It shall enter into the house of him, that swears falsely by my name.
III. To swear in common talk. Matthew. 5.37. Let your communication be yea,
yea, and nay, nay: for whatsoever is more then these comes of evil. IV. To
swear by that which is no God. Matthew. 5. 34, 35. But I say unto you, swear
not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne: neither by the earth, for
it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great
king. 1. King. 19.2. Iesabel sent a messenger to Elias, saying, Thus do the
gods, and so let them deal with me, if I by to morrow this time, make not thy
life, as is the life of every one of them. Iere. 12.16. They taught my people
to swear by Baal. Iere. 5.7. Thy sons forsake me, and swear by them which
are no gods.

This place condemns that usual swearing by the mass, faith, and such like.
Matthew. 23.22. He that swears by heaven, swears by Gods throne, and him that
sits thereon.

But for a man to swear by Christ's death, wounds, blood, and other parts of
his, is most horrible: and is as much, as to crucify Christ again with the
Jews, or account Christ's members, as God himself.

V. Blasphemy, which is a reproach against God; and the least speech, that
sauoureth of contempt to his majesty. Leuit. 24.15, 16. Whosoever curses his
God, shall bear his sins. And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord,
shall be put to death. 2. King. 19.10. So shall ye say to the king of Judah:
let not thy God deceive thee, in whom thou trustest, saying, Jerusalem shall
not be given into the hand of the King of Ashur. Ajax in the Tragedy, has
this blasphemous speech, that every coward may overcome, if he have God on his
side: as for him, he can get the victory without Gods assistance. That sly
taunt of the Pope is likewise blasphemous, wherein he calls himself the
servant of all Gods servants: when as in truth, he makes himself Lord of
Lords, and God subject to his vain fantasy. VI. Cursing our enemies: as, Go
with a vengeance: or, the devil go with thee: Or, our selves; as, I would I
might never stir: or, as God shall judge my soul, etc. To this place we may
refer the execrations of Job 3. Ier. 15. VII. To use the name of God
carelessly in our common talk: as, when we say, Good God! good Lord! O Jesus!
or, Jesus God! etc. Phil. 2.10. At the name of Jesus, shall every knee bow, of
things in heaven, things in earth, and things under the earth. Esay^ 45.23.
Every knee shall bow unto me, and every tongue shall swear by me. VIII.
Abusing Gods creatures: as, when we either deride the workma^ship of God, or
the manner of working: again, when we debase the excellency of the work,
obscure Gods gifts in our brother, or disco^mend such meats as God has sent us
to eat: finally, when as we in the contemplation of any of Gods creatures,
give not him the due praise and glory. 1. Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or
drink, or whatsoever ye do else, see that ye do all to the glory of God.
Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows
his handie work. IX. Lots, as when we search what must be (as they say) our
fortune, by dice, bones, books, or such like. For we are not to use lots, but
with great reverence: in that the disposition of them immediately comes from
the Lord, and their proper use is to decide great controversies. Prou. 16.33.
The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is in the
Lord. Prou. 18.18. The lot causes contentions to cease, and makes a partition
among the mighty. For this cause the land of Canaan was divided by lots. Josh.
14. and 15. chap. By which also both the high priests, and the kings were
elected: as Saul, 1. Sam. 10. And Matthias into the place of Judas Iscariot.
Act. 1.23. X. Superstition, which is an opinion conceived of the works of Gods
providence: the reason whereof, can neither be drawn out of the word of God,
nor the whole course of nature. As for example, that it is unlucky for one in
the morning to put on his shoe awry, or to put the left shoe on the right foot,
to sneeze in drawing on his shoes, to have salt fall toward him, to have an hare
cro^se him, to bleed some few drops of blood, to burn on the right ear.
Again, that it is contrarily good luck to find old iron, to have drink
spilled on him, for the left ear to burn, to pare our nails on some one day
of the week, to dream of some certain things. The like superstition, is to
surmise that beasts may be tamed by verses, prayers, or the like; that the
repetition of the creed or the Lords prayer, can infuse into herbs a faculty
of healing diseases. Deuteronomy. 18.11. Here also is Palmestrie condemned, when by
the inspection of the hand, our fortune is foretold.

These and such like, albeit they have true events, yet are we not to give
credence unto them: for God permits them to have such success, that they
which see and hear such things^ may be tried, and it may appear what
confidence they have in God. Deuteronomy. ^3.

XI. Astrology, whether it be in casting of natiuities, or making of
Prognostications. This counterfeit art is nothing else, but a mere abuse of the
heavens, and of the stars 1. The twelve houses, which are the ground of all
figures, are made of the fained signs of a supposed Zodiac, in the highest
sphere commonly called the first Mooueable: and therefore to these houses a
man cannot truly ascribe any influence or virtue. 2. This art arises not
from experience, because it never happens that the same position of all
stars is twice together observed: and if it were, yet could there not
certain ground arise from thence, in that the efficacy and influence of the
stars is confusedly mixed both in the air and in the earth, as if all herbs
were mingled together in one vessel. 3. This art withdraws men's minds from
the contemplation of Gods providence, when as they hear, that all things fall
out by the motion, and disposition of the stars. 4. Stars were not ordained
to ^oretell things to come, but to distinguish days, months, and years. Genesis
1. 14. Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven, to separate the day
from the night: and let them be for signs and for seasons, and for days and
for years. Esaias. 47.13. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels: let
now the Astrologers, the star gazers, and Prognosticators stand up and save
thee from these things, that shall come upon thee. verse. 14. Behold, they shall
be as stubble: the fire shall burn them, etc. Dan. 2.2. The king commanded to
call the Inchanters, Astrologers, Sorrers, and Chaldeans, to show the king his
dreams. Act. 19.19. Many of the^ which used curious arts, brought their
books and burned them before all men. 5. Astrological predictions are
conversant about such things, which either simply depend on the mere will and
disposition of God; and not on the stars: or else such, as depending upon man's
free will, are altogether contingent: and therefore can neither be forseene,
not foretold. 6. It is impossible by the bare knowledge of such a cause, as is
both common to many, and far distant from such things as it works in,
precisely to set down particular effects: but the stars are such causes as
are both common to many, and far distant from all things done upon earth: and
therefore a man can no more surely foretell what shall ensue by the
contemplation of the stars, then he which sees an hen sitting, can tell
what kind of chickens shall be in every egg.

Question. Have then the stars no force in inferior things?

Answer. Yes undoubtedly, the stars have a very great force, yet such as
manifests it self only in that operation which it has in the four
principal qualities of natural things, namely in heat, cold, moisture, and
dryness: and therefore in altering the state, and disposition of the air, and
in diversely affecting compound bodies, the stars have no small effect. But
they are so far from enforcing the will to do any thing, that they cannot so
much as give unto it the least inclination. Now to define how great force the
stars have, it is beyond any man's reach. For albeit the effects of the Sun,
in the constitution of the four parts of the year, are apparent to all, and
the operation of the Moon not very obscure; yet the force and nature both of
planets and fixed stars, which are to us innumerable, are not so manifest.
Therefore seeing man knows only some stars, and their only operation, and
not all, with their forces, it cannot be that he should certainly foretell
future things, although they did depend on the stars. For what if the
position of such and such certain stars, do demonstrate such an effect to
ensue? may not the aspects of such as thou yet know not, hinder that, and
produce the contrary?

Question. Is then the use of Astrology utterly impious?

Answer. That part of Astrology, which concerns the alteration of the air,
is almost all both false and frivolous; and therefore in a manner all
predictions grounded upon that doctrine are mere toys, by which the silly
and ignorant people are notably deluded. As for that other part of Astrology,
concerning natiuities, reuolutions, progressions, and directions of natiuities,
as also that which concerns election of times, and the finding again of
things lost, it is very wicked; and it is probable, that it is of the same
brood with implicit and close Magique. My reasons are these: I. The word of
God reckoning Astrologers amongst Magitians, adiudgeth them both to one and the
same punishment. II. But the Astrologer says, he foretells many things,
which, as he said, come so to pass: be it so: But how, I demand? and by what
means? He says by art, but that I deny. For the precepts of his art will
appear to such as read them not with a preiudicate affection, very ridiculous.
Whence then, I pray you, does this curious diuiner foreshew the truth, but by
an inward and secret instinct from the devil? This is Augustines opinion in
his 5. book and 7. chapt. of the City of God. If we weigh all those things,
says he, we will not without cause believe, that Astrologers, when they do
wonderfully declare many truths, work by some secret instinct of evil
spirits, which desire to fill men's brains with erroneous and dangerous
opinions of starrie destinies, and not by any art, derived from the inspection
and consideration of the Horoscope, which indeed is none.

XII. Popish consecration of water and salt, to restore the mind unto health,
and to chase away devils. The reformed Missal. page 96. XIII. To make jests of
the Scripture phrase. Esai 66.2. I will look, even to him that is poor, and
of a contrite spirit, and which trembles at my words. We have an example of
such scoffing in the Tripart. hist. chapter 36. book 6. The heathen did
grievously oppress the Christians, and inflicted sometimes upon their bodies
corporal punishments. The which when the Christians signified unto the
Emperor, he disdained to assist them, and sent them away with this scoff: You
are to suffer injuries patiently, for so are ye commanded of your God. XIIII.
Lightly to pass over Gods judgments, which are seen in the world. Matthew.
26.34. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, this night before the cock crow, thou
shall deny me thrice. verse. 35. Peter said unto him, Though I should die with
thee, I will not deny thee. Luke 13.1,2,3. There were certain men present at
the same season, that showed him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had
mingled with their own sacrifices. And Jesus answered, and said unto them,
Suppose ye that these Galileans were greater sinners, then all the other
Galileans, because they have suffered such things? I tell you nay, but except
ye amend your lives, ye shall likewise perish. XV. A dissolute conversation.
Matthew. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before me^, that they seeing your good
works may glorify your Father which is in heaven. 2. Sam. 12.14. Because that
by this deed, thou have made the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child
that is borne unto thee, shall surely die.
The affirmative part.
In all things give God his due glory. 1. Cor. 10.13. To this appertain: I.
Zeal of Gods glory above all things in the world besides. Numb. 25.8. When
Phineas the son of Eleazer saw it, he followed the man of Israel into his
tent, and thrust them both through: to wit, both the man of Israel and the
woman through her belly. Psalm. 69.22. The zeal of thine house has eaten me
up, and the reproaches of the scornful have fallen upon me. II. To use Gods
titles only in serious affairs, and that with all reverence. Deuteronomy. 28.58. If
thou will not keep and do all the words of this law (that are written in this
book) and fear this glorious and fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD. Romans 9.5.
Of whom are the fathers, and of whom, concerning the flesh, Christ came, who
is God over all, blessed for ever, Amen. III. An holy commemoration of the
creature, whereby we, in the contemplation and admiration of the dignity and
excellency thereof, yield an approbation when we name it, and celebrate the
praise of God, brightly shining in the same. Psalm. 64.9,10. And all men shall
see it, and declare the work of God, and they shall understand what he has
wrought: but the righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and trust in him: and all
that are upright of heart shall rejoice. Luke 2. 18,19. And all they that heard
it, wondered at the things that were told them of the shepherds: but Marie
kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart. Ierem. 5.12. Fear ye
not me, says the Lord? or will ye not be afraid at my presence, which have
placed the sands for the bounds of the seas, by the perpetual decree, that it
cannot pass it, and though the waves thereof rage, yet can they not prevail,
though they rore, yet can they not pass over. IV. An oath, in which we must
regard: 1. How an oath is to be taken. 2. How it is to be performed. In taking
an oath, four circumstances must be observed. I. The matter or parts of an oath:
the parts are in number four. 1. Confirmation of a truth. 2. Invocation of God
alone, as a witness of the truth, and a revenger of a lie. 3. Confession that
God punishes perjury, when he is brought in as a false witness. 4. An
obligation, that we will undergo the punishment at Gods hand, if we perform
not the condition. II. The form. We must swear 1. truly, least we forswear.
2. Justly, least we commit impiety. 3. In judgment, for fear of rashness.
Ierem. 4.2. Thou shall swear, the Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and
righteousness. Esa. 48. 1. Which swear by the name of the Lord, and make
mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth nor in righteousness, etc.
Therefore the oath of drunken, furious, and frantic men, also oaths of
children, they do not impose an observation of them, but by law are no oaths.
III. The end, namely to confirm some necessary truth in question. Hebr. 6.
16. Men swear by him that is greater then themselves: and an oath for
confirmation, is among them an end of all strife. I call that a necessary
truth, when some doubt, which must necessarily be decided, can none other way
be determined then by an oath: as when Gods glory, our neighbors body or
goods, or the credit of the party for whom the oath is ministered, are
necessarily called into question. Romans 1.9. God is my witness (whom I serve in
my spirit in the Gospel of his Son) that without ceasing I make mention of
you. 2. Cor. 1. 23. I call God for a record into my soul, that to spare you, I
came not as yet unto Corinth. IV. The diverse kinds or sorts of oaths. An oath is
public, or private.

Public, when the Magistrate, without any peril to him that swears, does
upon just cause exact a testimony together with an oath.

A private oath is, which two or more take privately. This, so that it be
sparingly, and warily used, is lawful. For if in serious affairs, and matters
of great importance, it be lawful in private to admit God as a Judge, why
should he not as well be called to witness? Again, the examples of holy men
show the practice of private oaths, as not unlawful. Jacob and Laban confirmed
their covenant one with an other by private oath: the like did Booz in his
contract with Ruth.

To this place may be added an asseueration, the which albeit it be like an
oath, yet indeed is none: and is nothing else, but a constant assertion of our
mind, intersetting sometimes the name of a creature. Such was Christ's
assertion, Verily, verily, I say unto you. And Paul's, I call God to record in
my spirit. Where is both an oath and an asseueration. 1. Cor. 15.31. By your
rejoicing which I have in Jesus Christ, I die daily. 1. Sam. 20.3. Indeed, as
the Lord lives, and as my soul lives, there is but a step between me and
death. And surely in such a kind of asseueration there is great equity: for
albeit it be unlawful to swear by creatures, least Gods honor and power
should be attributed unto them: yet thus far may we use them in an oath, as
to make pledges, and as it were cognisances of Gods glory.

The performance of an oath, is on this manner. If the oath made be of a lawful
thing, it must be performed, be it of much difficulty, great damage, and
extorted by force of him that made it. Psalm. 15.4. He that swears to his own
hinderance and changes not, he shall dwell in Gods tabernacle. Yet may the
Magistrate, as it shall seem right and convenient, either annihilate or
moderate such oaths.

Contrarily, if a man swear to perform things unlawful, and that by
ignorance, error, or infirmity, or any other way, his oath is to be recalled.
For we may not add sin unto sin. 1. Sam. 25.21. And David said, Indeed I
have kept all in vain, that this fellow had in the wilderness, etc. verse. 22.
So and more also do God unto the enemies of David: for surely I will not leave
of all that he has, by the dawning of the day, any that pisseth against the
wall. verse. 33. David said, Blessed be thy counsel and blessed be thou, which
have kept me this day from coming to shed blood; and that mine hand has not
saved me. 2. Sam. 19.23. David promises that Shimei should not die: but 1.
King. 2.8,9. David says to Solomon, Though I swear so, yet thou shall not
count him innocent, but cause his hoare head to go down to the grave with
blood.

V. Sanctification of Gods creatures and ordinances, the which is a separation
of them to an holy use. Thus ought we to sanctify our meats and drinks, the
works of our calling, and marriage.

The means of this sanctification are two: Gods word, and prayer. 1. Tim. 4.4.
All which God has created is good, and nothing must be rejected, if it be
received with thanksgiving: for it is sanctified by the word and prayer.

By the word we are instructed; first, whether God allows the use of such
things, or not: secondly, we learn after what holy manner, in what place, at
what time, with what affection, and to what end we must use them. Heb. 11.6.
Without faith it is impossible to please God. Psalm. 119.24. Thy testimonies are
my delight, they are my counselors. Josh. 22.19,29. 1. Sam. 15.23.

Prayer, which sanctifies, is petition and thanksgiving.

By petition, we obtain of Gods meiestie, assistance by his grace, to make an
holy use of his creatures, and ordinances. Col. 3. 17. Whatsoever ye shall do
in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God
even the Father by him. 1. Sam. 17.45. Then said David to the Philistim, Thou
come to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to
thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the host of Israel, whom
thou have railed upon. Mich. 4. 5. We must walk in the name of the Lord our
God, for ever and ever. Here may we observe prayer made upon particular
occasion. 1. For a prosperous journey. Act. 21.5. When the days were ended, we
departed, and went our way, and they all accompanied us with their wives and
children, even out of the city: and we kneeling down on the shore prayed,
etc. 2. For a blessing upon meats at the table. Ioh. 6.11. Then Jesus took the
bread, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to his Disciples, and the
Disciples to them that were set down: and likewise of the fishes as much as
they would. Act. 27.35. He took bread, and gave thanks to God, in presence of
them all, and brake it, and began to eat. 3. For issue in childbirth. This did
Anna, 1. Sam. 1.14. And Zachary, Luke 1.13. 4. For good success in business,
Genesis 24. 12. Abraham's servant prayed.

Thanksgiving is the magnifying of Gods name, even the Father through Christ,
for his grace, aid, and blessing in the lawful use of the creatures. Phil.
4.6. In all things let your requests be showed unto God, in prayer, and
supplication, and giving of thanks. 1^ Thessalonians. 5. 18. In all things give thanks:
for this is the will of God in Christ toward you. This we may read used, 1.
after meat, Deuteronomy. 8.10. When thou have eaten and filled thy self, thou shall
bless the Lord thy God, for the good land which he has given thee. 2. After
the loss of outward wealth. Job 1.21. And Job said, Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I return again: the Lord has given, and the
lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord for evermore. 3. For
deliverance out of servitude. Exodus 18. 10. Iethro said, Blessed be the Lord,
who has delivered you out of the hands of the Egyptians, and out of the hand
of Pharaoh, who also has delivered the people from under the hand of the
Egyptians. 4. For children. Genesis 29.35. She conceived again and bare of
son, saying, Now will I praise the Lord: therefore she called his name
Judah. 5. For victory. 2. Sam. 22.1. And David spoke the words of this song
unto the Lord, what time the Lord had delivered him out of the hands of all his
enemies, and out of the hand of Saul, and said, The Lord is my rock, and my
fortress, etc. 6. For good success in domestical affairs. Abraham's servant,
Genesis 24.12. blessed the Lord of his master Abraham.





CHAP. 23. Of the fourth Commandment.
THe fourth Commandment concerns the Sabbath: namely, that holy time
consecrated to the worship and glorifying of God. The words are these: Remember
the Sabbath to keep it: six days shall thou labor, and do ^ll thy work:
but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no
manner of work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man servant, nor
thy maid, nor thy beast, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates. For in
six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, the sea and all that in them
is, and rested the seventh day: therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day,
and hallowed it.

The Resolution.
Remember] This clause does insinuate, that in times past there was great
neglect in the observation of the Sabbath: and would that all degrees and
conditions of men should prepare themselves to sanctify the same: especially
those that be governors of families, in corporations, and cities, to whom
this commandment is directed.

To keep it holy, or, to sanctify it] To sanctify it, is to sever a thing
from common use, and to consecrate the same to the service of God. Here are
described the two parts of this commandment: the first where of, is rest from
labor: the second, sanctification of that rest.

Six daies] These words contain a close answer to this objection. It is much
to cease from our callings one whole day. The answer (together with a first
reason to enforce the sanctification of the Sabbath) is in these words, which
is taken from the greater to the less. If I permit thee to follow thy calling,
six whole days, thou may well, and must leave one only to serve me.

But the first is true. Therefore the second.

The first proposition is wanting: the second, or assumption are these words,
Six days, etc. The conclusion is the commandment it self.

Here may we see, that God has given us free liberty to work all the six
days. The which freedom no man can annihilate. Nevertheless, upon
extraordinary occasions, the Church of God is permitted to separate one day
or more of the seven, as need is, either to fasting, or for a solemn day of
rejoicing, for some benefit received. Joel 2.15.

The seventh day] The second reason of this commandment taken from the end
thereof.

If the Sabbath were consecrated to God, and his service, we must that day
abstain from our labors.

But it was consecrated to God, and his service.

Therefore we must then abstain from our labors.

The assumption is in these words ( the seventh day, etc.) where we must note,
that God alone has this privilege, to have a Sabbath consecrated unto him:
and therefore all holy days dedicated to what soever either Angel or Saint,
are unlawful: howsoever the Church of Rome have imposed the observation of
them upon many people.

In it thou shall doe] This is the conclusion of the second reason, illustrated
by a distribution from the causes. Thou, thy son, thy daughter, thy servant,
thy cattle, thy stranger, shall cease that day from your labors.

Any worke] That is, any ordinary work of your callings, and such as may be
done the day before, or left well undone till the day after. Yet for all this
we are not forbidden to perform such works even on this day, as are both holy
and of present necessity.

Such are those works, which do upon that day preserve and maintain the
service and glory of God, as I. a Sabbath days journey. Act. 1.12. Which is
now Jerusalem, containing a Sabbath days journey. II. The killing and
dressing of sacrificed beasts in the time of the law. Matthew. 12.5. Have ye not
read in the law, how that on the Sabbath days, the Priests in the Temple
break the Sabbath, and are blameless? III. Iourneys unto the Prophets, and
places appointed unto the worship of God. 2. King. 4.23. He said, Why will thou
go to him this day? it is neither new moon, nor Sabbath day. Psalm. 84.7. They
go from strength to strength, till every one appear before God in Zion.

Such also are the works of mercy, whereby the safety of life or goods is
procured: as that which Paul did, Act. 20. 9. As Paul was long preaching,
Eutychus overcome with sleep, fell down from the third loft, and was taken up
dead: but Paul went down and laid himself upon him, and embraced him, saying,
Trouble not your selves: for his life is in him. verse. 12. And they brought the
boy alive, and they were not a little comforted. II. To help a beast out of a
pit. Luke 14.5. Which of you shall have an ox, or an ass fallen into a pit,
and will not straightway pull him out on the Sabbath day? III. Provision of
meat and drink. Matthew. 12.1. Jesus went through the corn on a Sabbath day,
and his Disciples were an hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and
to eat. In provision, we must take heed that our cooks, and household
^eruants break not the Sabbath. The reason of this is framed from the lesser
to the greater, out of that place, 2. Sam. 25.15. David longed, and said, Oh
that one would give me to drink of the water of the well of Beth-lehem, which
is by the gate. verse. 16. Then the three mighty brake into the host of the
Philistims, and drew water out of the well of Beth-lehem that was by the gate,
and took and brought it to David, who would not drink thereof, but powered it
for an offering unto the Lord. verse. 17. And said, O Lord, be it far from me
that I should do ^his: is not this the blood of the men, that went in
ieopardie of their lives? therefore would he not drink. The reason stands
thus. If David would not have his servants adventure their corporal lives for
his provision, nor drink the water when they had provided it: much less ought
we for our meats to adventure the lives of our servants. IV. Watering of
cattle. Math. 12.11. The Lord answered, and said, Thou hypocrite, will not any
of you on the Sabbath days, loose his ox or ass out of the stable, and bring
him to the water? Upon the like present and holy necessity, Physicians, upon
the Sabbath day, may take a journey to visit the diseased, Mariners their
voyage, Shepherds may tend their flock, and Midwiues may help women with
child. Mark. 2.27. The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.

Within thy gates] This word gate, signifies by a figure, jurisdiction and
authority. Math. 16.18. The gates of hell shall not overcome it. Let this be a
looking glass, wherein all Inholders, and intertainers of strangers may look
into themselves, and behold what is their duty.

For in six daies] The third reason of this commandment from the lik^
example.

That which I did, thou also must do,

But I rested the seventh day and hallowed it:

Therefore thou must do the like.

God sanctified the Sabbath when he did consecrate it to his service; men
sanctify it when they worship God in it. In this place we are to confider the
Sabbath, how far forth it is ceremonial, and how far forth moral.

The Sabbath is ceremonial, in respect of the strict observation thereof,
which was a type of the internal sanctification of the people of God, and that
is, as it were, a continual resting from the work of sin. Exodus 31.1.3.
Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, and say, Notwithstanding keep ye
my sabbath: for it is a sign between me and you in your generation, that ye
may know that I the Lord do sanctify you. The same is recorded, Ezech. 20.12.

It signified also that blessed rest of the faithful, in the kingdom of
heaven: Esai 66. 23. From month to month, and from sabbath to sabbath, shall
all flesh come to worship before me, sa^^h the Lord. Heb. 4.8,9, 10. If Jesus
had given them a rest, etc.

The Sabbath is likewise ceremonial, in that it was observed the seventh day
after the creation of the world, and was then solemnized with such ceremonies.
Numb. 28.9. But on the sabbath day ye shall offer two lambs of a year old
without spot, and two tenth deals of fine flower for a meat offering, ^ingled
with oil, and the drink offering thereof. 10. This is the burnt ^ffering of
every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering and drink offering thereof.

But now in the light of the Gospel, and the Churches professing the same, the
ceremony of the Sabbath is ceased. Col. 2.16. Let no man condemn you in meat
and drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the
Sabbath: 17. which are but shadows of things to come, but the body is Christ.
The obser^ation of the Sabbath was translated by the Apostles from the seventh
day, to the day following. Act. 20. 7. The first day of the week, the
Disciples being come together to break bread, Paul preached to them. 1. Cor.
16.1,2. Concerning the gathering for the Saints, as I have ordained in the
Churches of Galatia, so do ye also every first day of the week, let every one
of you put aside by himself, and lay up ^s God has prospered him, that then
there be no gatherings when I come. This day, by reason that our Savior did
upon it ri^e again, is called the Lords day. Revel. 1.10. I was ravished in
the spirit on the Lords day.

The observation of the Sabbath thus constituted by the Apostles, was
nevertheless neglected of those Churches which succeeded them, but after was
revived and established by Christian Emperors, as a day most apt to celebrate
the memory of the creation of the world, and to the serious meditation of the
redemption of mankind. Leo and Anton. Edict. of holy days.

The observation of the Sabbath is moral, in as much as it is a certain
seventh day, preserves and conserueth the ministry of the word, and the
solemn worship of God, especially in the assemblies of the church. And in this
respect we are upon this day, as well enjoined a rest from our vocations, as
the Jews were. Esai 58.13. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from
doing thy will on mine holy day, and call my Sabbath a delight, to consecrate
it, as glorious to the Lord, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways,
etc.

Finally, it is moral, in that it freeth servants and cattle from their
labors, which on other days do service unto their owners.

The affirmative part.
Keep holy the Sabbath day. This we do, if we cease from the works of sin,
and our ordinary calling: performing those spiritual works, which we are
commanded in the second and third Commandment.

I. To arise early in the morning, that so we may prepare our selves to the
better sanctifying of the Sabbath ensuing. This preparation consists in
private prayers and taking account of our several sins. Mark. 1.35. In the
morning very early before day, Jesus arose and went into a solitary place,
and there prayed. The day following was the Sabbath, when he preached in the
Synagogues. 39. Exodus 32. 5, 6. Aaron proclaimed, saying, To morrow shall be the
holy day of the Lord: so they rose up the next day early in the morning.
Eccles. 4. verse. last. Take heed to thy feet when thou entrest into the house
of God. II. To be present at public assemblies, at ordinary hours, there to
hear reverently and attentively the word preached and read, to receive the
Lords Supper, and publicly with the congregation, call upon and celebrate the
name of the Lord. 1. Tim. 1.2,3. Act. 20.7. 2. King. 4.22,23. Act. 13.14, 15.
When they departed from Perga, they came to Antiochia, a city of Pisidia, and
went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat down. And after the
lecture of the Law and Prophets, the rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them,
saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people,
say on. III. When public meetings are dissolved, to spend the rest of the
Sabbath in the meditation of Gods word, and his creatures. Psalm. 29. from the
beginning to the ending. Act. 17. 11. These were also more noble men, then they
which were at Thessalonica, which received the word with all readiness, and
searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so. We must also
exercise then the works of charity: as, to visit the sick, give alms to the
needy, admonish such as fall, reconcile such as are at jar and discord
amongst themselves, etc. Nehem. 8.12. Then all the people went to eat and to
drink, and to send away part, and to make great joy.
The negative part.
Pollute not the Sabbath of the Lord.

This is a grievous sin, Matthew. 24.20. Pray that your flight be not in
winter, nor on the Sabbath day. Lament. 1.7. The adversaries saw her, and did
mock at her Sabboths. Leuit. 19.30. Ye shall keep my Sabboths, and reverence
my Sanctuary, I am the Lord. In this part are these things forbidden: I. The
works of our calling, wherein if we do ought, it must be altogether in regard
of charity, and not in regard of our own private commodity. II. Unnecessary
iourneyes. Exodus 16.29. Tarry every man in his place, let no man go out of
his place the seventh day. By this reason, the master of the family must that
day remain at home, to sanctify the Sabbath with his household. III. Faires
upon the Sabbath day, Nehem. 3.19. When the gates of Jerusalem began to be
dark before the Sabbath, I commanded to shut the gates, etcharged that they
should not be opened till after the Sabbath, and some of my servants, set I at
the gate, that there should no burden be brought in on the Sabbath day. read v.
15,16,17,18. IV. All kind of husbandry; as plowing, sowing, reaping, mowing,
bringing home harvest, and other the like. Exodus 34. 21. In the seventh day
shall thou rest, both in earing time, and in harvest shall thou rest. V. To use
iestes, sports, banqueting, or any other thing whatsoever, which is a means to
hinder, or withdraw the mind from that serious attention, which ought to be in
Gods service: for if the works of our calling must not be exercised, much
less these, whereby the mind is as well distracted from Gods service, as by
the greatest labor. VI. An external observation of the Sabbath, without an
internal regard of godliness. Esa. 1.14,15. My soul hates your new moons,
and your appointed feasts, they are a burden unto me, I am weary to bear
them: and when you shall stretch forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from
you, and though you make many prayers, I will not hear: for your hands are
full of blood. 2. Tim. 3.5. Which have a show of godliness, but deny the force
thereof, such therefore avoid. VII. The manifest profanation of the Sabbath,
in pampering the belly, surfeting, adultery, and other like profaneness,
which is nothing else, but to celebrate a Sabbath to the devil, and not to God.


CHAP. 24. Of the fifth commandment.
HItherto we have spoken of the commandments of the first table: now
follows the second table, which concerns the love of our neighbor. Romans
13.9. Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not
steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not covet: and if there
be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely,
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Our neighbor is every one, which is of our own flesh. Esa. 58.7. When thou
see the naked cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh.

The manner of loving is so to love our neighbor as our selves, to wit,
truly and sincerely: when as contrarily, the true manner of louiug God, is to
love God without measure.

The second table contains six Commandments: whereof the first, and, in the
order of the ten commandments, the fifth, concerns the preservation of
dignity and excellency of our neighbor.

The words are these:

Honor thy Father and thy mother, that they may prolong thy days in the
land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.

The Resolution.
Honour] This Word, by the figure, signifies all that duty, whereby our
neighbors dignity is preserved, but especially our Superious. This dignity
proceeds of this, that every man bears in him some part of the image of
God, if we respect the outward order and decency, which is observed in the
Church and common wealth. In the Magistrate there is a certain image of the
power and glory of God. Dan. 2.37. O King, thou art a King of Kings, for the
God of heaven has given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.
Hence is it, that Magistrates are called Gods. Psalm. 82. 1. In an old man is
the similitude of the eternity of God: in a father, the likeness of his
fatherhood. Math. 2^.9. And call no man your father upon the earth: for there
is but one, your Father which is in heaven. In a man is the image of Gods
providence and authority. 1 Cor. 11.7. For a man ought not to cover his head,
because he is the image of the glory of God: but the woman is the glory of her
husband. Finally, in a learned man, is the likeness of the knowledge and
wisdom of God. Now therefore that person, in whom even the least title of
the image of God appears, is to be be honored and reverenced.

Thy father] By a figure, we must here understand, all those that are our
superiors: as, Parents, and such like of our kindred, or aliance which are to
us in stead of Parents: Magistrates, Ministers, our Elders, and those that do
excel us in any gifts whatsoever. The kings of Gerar were called Abimelech, my
father the king. Genesis 20.2. Genesis 45.8. God has made me a father unto Pharaoh,
and Lord over all his house. 1. Cor. 4.15. For though ye have ten thousand
instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have
begotten you. 2. King. 5.13. But his servants came, and spoke unto him, and
said, Father, if the Prophet had commanded thee a great things would thou
not have done it? 2. King. ^.12. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My Father,
my Father, my Father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof.

And thy mother] This is added, least we should despise our mothers, because of
their infirmities, Prou. 23.22. Obey thy father which has begotten thee, and
despise not thy mother when she is old.

Here we are put in mind to perform due honor to our stepmothers and fathers
in law, as if they were our proper and natural parents. Ruth. 3. 1. and 5.
Afterward Naomi her mother in law said unto her, My daughter, shall not I
seek rest for thee, that thou may prosper? And she answered her, All that
thou biddest me, I will do. Exodus 18.17. But Moses father in law said unto him,
The thing which thou do is not well. 19. Hear now my voice, I will give
thee counsel, and God shall be with thee. 24. So Moses obeyed the voice of his
father in law, and did all that he had said. Mich. 7.6. For the son reuileth
the Father, the daughter rises up against her mother, the daughter in law
against her mother in law.

That they may prolong] Parents are said to prolong the lives of their
children, because they are Gods instruments, whereby their childrens lives are
prolonged: for oftentimes the name of the action is attributed to the
instrument, wherewith the action is wrought. Luke 16.9. Make you friends with
the riches of iniquity, that when ye shall want, they may receive you into
everlasting habitations. 1. Tim. 4.16. For in doing so, tho^ shall both save
thy self and them that hear thee.

But Parents do prolong the lives of their children in commanding them to
walk in the ways of the Lord, by exercising justice and judgment, Genesis
18.19. For being become godly, they have the promise both of this life, and
the life to come. 1. Tim. 4.8.

Further, they effect the same thing by their prayers made in the behalf of
their children. Hereby it plainly appears, that the usual custom of
children saluting their parents, to ask them their blessing, is no light or
vain thing.

Moreover, in these words, the reason to move us to the obedience of this
commandment, is drawn from the end, which reason is also a promise, yet a
special promise. Ephesians. 6. 2. Honor thy father and thy mother, which is the
first commandment with promise, (I say, special) because the promise of the
second commandment is general, and belongs to all the rest of the
commandments.

And God promises long life not absolutely, but so far as it is a blessing.
Ephesians. 6.3. That it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on
earth. For we must think that long life is not alwaie a blessing, but that
sometime it is better to die then to live. Esaias 57.1. The righteous perishes,
and no man considers it in heart: and merciful men are taken away, and no
man understands that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.

But if at any time the Lord gives a short life to obedient children, he
rewards them again with eternal life in heaven, and so the promise fails
not, but changes for the better.

The affirmative part.
Preserve the dignity of thy neighbor.

Under this part is commanded:

First, reverence toward all our superiors: the actions whereof, are;
reverently to rise up before any man which passes by us. Leu. 19.32. Rise up
before the hoorehead, and honor the person of the old man, and dread thy God:
I am the Lord. To meet him that comes toward us. Genesis 18.2. And he lifted
up his eyes, and looked: and lo, three men stood by him, and when he saw them,
he ran to meet them from the tent door. 1. King. 2. 19. When Bethsheba
came to speak to king Solomon, the king rose to meet her, and bowed himself
unto her. To bow the knee. Mark. 10.17. And when he was gone out of the way,
there came one running, and kneeled to him. Genesis 18.2. He ran to meet them,
and bowed himself to the ground. To stand by those that sit down, Genesis 18.8.
And he took butter, and milk, and the calfe that he had prepared, and set
before them, and stood himself by them under the tree, and they did eat.
Exodus 18.13. Now on the morrow, when Moses sat to judge the people, the
people stood about Moses from morning unto even. To give the chief seat. 1.
King. 2.19. And he sat down on his throne, and he caused a seat to be set
for the kings mother, and she sat down at his right hand. Luke 14. 7,8,9. He
spoke also a parable unto the guests, when he marked how they chose out the
chief rooms, and said unto them, When thou shall be bidden of any man to a
wedding, set not thy self down in the chiefest place, least a more honorable
man then thou be bidden of him, and he that bade both him and thee, come and
say to thee, Give this man room, and thou then begin with shame to take the
lowest room. Genesis 43.33. So they sat before him, the eldest according to his
age, and the youngest according to his youth, and the men marueiled among
themselves. To let our Superiors speak before us. Job. 32.6,7, 17. To keep
silence in courts and judgment places, until we be bidden to speak. Act. 24.
10. Then Paul after that the Governor had beckened unto him that he should
speak, answered. To give them such their right and just titles, as declare our
reverence when we speak unto them. 1. Pet. 3.6. As Sarah obeyed Abraham and
called him Lord: whose daughters ye are, whiles ye do well. Mar. 10. 17. Good
Master, what shall I do, that I may possess eternal life? 20. Then he
answered, and said unto him, Master, all these things have I observed from my
youth. 1. Sam. 1.14, 15. And Eli said unto her, How long will thou be dru^ken?
Put away thy drunkenness from thee: then Hannah answered and said, Nay my Lord,
but I am a woman troubled in spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong
drink.

Secondly, toward those that are our superiors in authority: and first,
obedience to their commandments. Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher power.

We are to be admonished to obedience: because every higher power is the
ordinance of God, and the obedience which we perform to him, God accepts it
as though it were done to himself and to Christ^ Romans 13.2. Whosoever
therefore, resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that
resist, shall receive to themselves judgment. Col. 3.23. And whatsoever ye
do, do it heartily, as unto the Lord, and not unto them. 24. Knowing that of
the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord
Christ. Obedience is to be performed to our superiors with diligence and
faithfulness. Genesis 24.2. Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house,
which had the rule over all that he had: put now thy hand under my thigh, and I
will make thee swear by the Lord God of heaven, and God of the earth, that
thou shall not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites,
amongst whom I dwell. 10. So the servant took ten Camels of his master, and
departed. 12. And he said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, I beseech thee send
me good speed this day, and show mercy unto my master Abraham. 33. Afterward
the meat was set before him, but he said, I will not eat, until I have said
my message: And Laban said, Speak on. 56. But he said, Hinder me not, seeing
the Lord has prospered my journey: send me away that I may go to my master.
Genesis 31.38. This twenty years have I been with thee, thine ewes and thy
goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not
eaten. 39. Whatsoever was torn of beasts, I brought it not unto thee, but made
it good my self: of mine hand did thou require it, were it stolen by day,
or stolen by night. 40. I was in the day consumed with heat, and with frost in
the night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

Furthermore, we must yield obedience to our Superiors: yea, although they be
cruel and wicked, but not in wickedness. 1. Pet. 2.18. Servants, be subject
to your masters with all fear, not only to the good and courteous, but also
to the froward. Act. 4.19. Whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey you
rather then God, judge ye.

Subjection in suffering the punishments inflicted by our Superiors. Genesis
16.6. Then Abraham said to Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thine hand, do with
her as it pleases thee: then Sarai dealt roughly with her: wherefore she
fled from her. 9. Then the Angel of the Lord said unto her, Return unto thy
dame, and humble thy self under her hands.

And although the punishment should be unjust, yet must we suffer it, until we
can get some lawful remedy for the same. 1. Pet. 2.19. For it is
thanke-worthie, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. 20. For what praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults,
ye take it patiently? but and if, when ye do well, ye suffer wrong, and take
it patiently, this is acceptable to God.

III. Thankfulness in our prayers. 1. Tim. 2.1, 2. I exhort you therefore, that
first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be
made for all men, for kings, and for all that be in authority, that we may
lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. 1. Tim. 5.17.
Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor. Genesis 45.9. Haste you, and
go up to my Father, and tell him, Thus says thy son Joseph, God has made
me lord over all Egypt, come down to me, tarry not. 10. And thou shall dwell
in the land of Goshen. 11. Also I will nourish thee there, for yet remain five
years of famine, least thou perish through poverty, thou and thy household,
and all that thou have.

Thirdly, toward those that excel us in gifts: our duty is to acknowledge
the same gifts, and speak of them to their praise. 1. Cor. 8.22,23.

Fourthly, toward all our equals: to think reverently of them. Phil. 2.3. Let
nothing be done through contention or vaineglorie, but in meeknes of mind, let
every man esteem other better then himself.

In giving honor, to go one before an other, and not in receiving it. Romans
12. 10. Submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God. To salute
one an other with holy signs, whereby may appear the love which we have one
to another in Christ. 1. Pet. 5.14. Greet ye one another with the kiss of
love. Romans 16. 16. Salute one another with an holy kiss. Exodus 18.7. And Moses
went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance and kissed him. Ruth.
2.4. And behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the Reapers, the Lord
be with you. And they answered, The Lord bless thee.

Fifthly, the duties of all Superiors toward their inferiors: to yield to
them in good matters, as to their brethren. Deuteronomy. 17. 20. That his heart be not
lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not from the commandment, to
the right hand, or to the left. Job. 31.13. If I did contemn the judgment of
my servant, and of my maid. 2. King. 5.13. And his servant came and spoke unto
him, and said. 14. Then he went down, and washed himself seven times in
Jordan, etc. To shine before their inferiors by an ensample of a blameless
life. Titus 2.2. That the elder men be sober, honest, discreet, sound in the
faith, in love, and in patience. 3. The elder women likewise, that they be in
such behavior as becomes holiness, not false accusers, not given to much
wine, but teachers of honest things. 1. Pet. 5.3. Not as though ye were Lords
over Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock. Phil. 4.9. To
show forth gravity joined with dignity, by their countenance, gesture,
deeds and words. Tit. 2. 3,4,5,6,7. Job. 29.8. The young men saw me and hid
themselves, the aged arose, and stood up.

Sixthly, toward inferiors in obedience, that is, toward their subjects. 1. To
rule them in the Lord, that they do not offend. 1. Pet. 2.13. Submit your
selves unto all manner of ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be
unto kings as unto superiors, 14. or unto governors, as unto them that are
sent of the king, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well. Deuteronomy. 17.19. And it shall be with him (namely the book of the
law) and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to
fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this law, and those
ordinances to do them. Col. 4. 1. Ye masters do unto your servants, that
which is just and equal: knowing that ye also have a master in heaven. 2. To
provide such things as shall be to the good of their subjects, whether they
belong to the body or to the soul. Romans 13.4. For he is the minister of god
for thy wealth. Esa. 49.23. And kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens
shall be thy nurses. Psalm. 132.1. Lord remember David with all his troubles. 2.
Who swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God of Iaacob, saying, 3. I
will not enter into the tabernacle of mine house, nor come upon my pallet or
bed, 4. nor suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eye lids to slumber, 5. until
I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.
3. To punish their faults, the lighter by rebuking, the greater by correction,
that is, by inflicting real or bodily punishment.

There is an holy manner of punishing the guilty, whereunto is required: I.
After diligent and wise examination be had, to be assured of the crime
committed. II. To show forth of Gods word, the offense of the sin: that the
conscience of the offender may be touched. III. It is convenient to defer or
omit the punishment, if thereby any hope of amendment may appear. Eccl. 7.23.
Give not thy heart also to all the words that men speak, least thou do hear
thy servant cursing thee. 24. For oftentimes also thine heart knows, that
thou likewise have cursed others. 1. Sam. 10. verse. 27. But the wicked men
said, How shall he save us? so they despised him, and brought him no presents:
but he held his tongue. IV. To inflict deserved punishment, not in his own
name, but in Gods name, adding the same holily and reverently. Josh. 7. 19.
Then Joshua said unto Achan, My son, I beseech thee, give glory to the Lord
God of Israel, and make confession unto him, and show me now what thou have
done, hide it not from me. 20. And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I
have sinned against the Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done. 25.
And Joshua said, In as much as thou have troubled us, the Lord shall trouble
thee this day: and all Israel threw stones at him, and burned them with fire,
and stoned them with stones. V. and lastly, When thou punishest, aim at this
one only thing, that the evil may be purged and amended, and that the
offender by sorrowing for his sin, may unfeignedly repent for the same. Prou.
20.30. The blewnesse of the wound serves to purge the evil, and the stripes
within the bowels of the belly.

Seventhly, and lastly, there is a certain duty of a man to be performed
toward himself, which is, that a man should preserve and maintain with
modesty, the dignity and worthiness, which is inherent in his own person.
Phil. 4.8. Furthermore, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any
virtue, or if there be any praise, think on these things.

The negative part.
Diminish not the excellency, or dignity, which is in the person of thy
neighbor.

Hither are referred these sins:

First, against our superiors: I. Vnreuerent behavior and contempt of them.
The sins hereof, are, deriding our superiors. Genesis 9. 22. And when Ham the
Father of Canaan saw the nakedness of his father, he told his two brethren
without. Prou. 20.17. The eye that mocketh his father, and despises the
instruction of his mother, let the ravens of the valley pick it out, and the
young eagles eat it. To speak evil of, or revile our superiors. Exodus
21.17. And he that curses his father or his mother, shall die the death.

II. Disobedience, whereby we contemn their just comma^dements. Romans 1.30.
Disobedient to Parents. 2. Tim. 3.3. No striker, but gentle, no fighter. The
sins hereof, are, To make contracts of marriage, without the counsel and
consent of the Parents. Genesis 6. 2. Then the sons of God saw the daughters of
men that they were fair, and they took them wives of all that they liked.
Genesis 28.6,9. And Esau seeing that the daughters of Canaan displeased Izhac his
father, then went Esau to Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had,
Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's son, the sister of Nabaioth, to be
his wife. The eye service of servants. Coloss. 3.22. Seruant^ be obedient to
them that are your masters according to the flesh, in all things, not with eye
service as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart, fearing God. Ephesians. 6.6. Not
with service to the eye, as men pleasers Answering again, when they are
reprehended. Tit. 2.9. Let servants be subject to their masters, and please
them in all things, not answering again. Deceitfulness and wasting their
Masters goods. Titus 2. 10. Neither pikers, but that they show all good
faithfulness. To flee from the power of their superior. Genesis 16.6. Then Sarah
dealt roughly with her, wherefore she fled from her. To resist the lawful
authority of their Superiors. 1. Pet. 2.20. To obey them in things vnlawfull^
Act. 4. 19. To extol themselves above their betters: this is the sin of
Antichrist. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4. Which (man of sin) exalts himself against
all that is called God. Lastly, the freedom of the Papists, whereby they free
children from the government of their parents: and subjects from the authority
of their Princes: so that they make it lawefull for them to pretend and
procure their death. 1. Sam. 26.8,9. Then said Abishai to David, God has
closed thine enemy into thine hand this day: now therefore I pray thee, let me
smite him once with a spear to the earth, and I will not smite him again: And
David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can lay his hand on the Lords
Anointed and be guiltless?

III. Ingratitude, and want of a loving affection toward Parents. Matthew.
15.5,6. But ye say, whosoever shall say to father or mother, By the gift that
is offered by me, thou may have profit, though he honor not his father or
mother, shall be free. 1. Tim. 5.4.

Secondly, we offend against our equals, in preferring our selves before them,
in talking or in sitting down. Matthew. 20.20. Then came unto him the mother of
Zebedeus children, with her sons, worshipping him, and desiring a certain
thing of him. 21. And he said, What would thou? And she said to him,
Grant, that these my two sons may sit, the one at thy right hand, and the
other at thy left hand in thy kingdom. 24. And when the other ten heard this,
they disdained at the two brethren.

Thirdly, toward our inferiors: I. Through negligence in governing them, and
providing for their good estate. Hagg. 1.4. Is it time for your selves to dwell
in your fieled houses; and this house to lie wast? Dan. 3.28. This condemns
those mothers, which put forth their children to be nursed, having both
sufficient strength and store of milk themselves to nurse them. 1. Tim. 5.10.
If she have nourished her children. II. By too much gentleness and lenity in
correcting the^. 1. King. 1.5. Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted
himself, saying, I will be king. 6. And his father would not displease him
from his childhood, to say, Why have thou done so? 1. Sam. 2. 22. So Eli was
very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all Israel, and how they lay
with the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the
congregation. 23. And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for of all
this people I hear evil reports of you. 24. Do no more, my sons for it is
no good report that I hear, namely, that ye make the Lords people to
trespass. 25. Notwithstanding they obeyed not the voice of their father,
because the Lord would slay them. III. By overmuch cruelty and threatenings.
Ephesians. 6.4. And ye fathers provoke not your children to wrath. 9. And ye masters
do the same things unto them, putting away threatenings.

Fourthly and lastly, a man offends against himself, when through his
naughty behavior, he does obscure and almost extinguish those gifts which God
has given him. Math. 25.2. 16. Or contrarily, when he is too wise in his own
conceit. Romans 12.3. For I say through the grace that is given unto me, to every
one that is among you, that no man presume to understand, above that which is
meet to understand.

CHAP. 25. Concerning the sixth commandment.
THou shall not kill.

The Resolution.
Kill] The part is here set for the whole, by a Synecdoche: for killing
signifies any kind of endamaging the person of our neighbor.

The equity of this commandment appears by this, that man was created after
the likeness of God. Genesis 9.6. He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed: for in the image of God has he made man. Again, all men are
the same flesh. Esaias 58.7. When thou see the naked cover him, and hide not
thy face from thine own flesh.

Neither ought we to be ignorant of this also, that it is unlawful for any
private person, not called to that duty, to kill another, but a public
officer may, that is, if he be warranted by a calling. So did Moses, Exodus 2.
12. And he looked round about, and when he saw no man, he slew the Egyptian,
and hid him in the sand. Act. 7.25. For he supposed his brethren would have
understood, that God by his hand should give them deliverance. And Phinehas.
Nomb. 25. 8. And he followed the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust them
both through (to wit, the man of Israel and the woman) through her belly: so
the plague ceased from the children of Israel. 31. Phinehas the son of
Eleazar, has turned mine anger away from the children of Israel, while he was
zealous for my sake among them: therefore I have not consumed the children in
my jealousy. And Elijah. 1. King. 18.40. And Eliiah said unto them, Take the
Prophets of Baal, let not a man of them escape: and they took them, and Elijah
brought them to the brook of Kishon; and slew them there. And soldiers in
battles, waged upon just causes. 2. Chro. 20.15. Fear ye not, neither be
afraid of this great multitude: for the battle is not yours, but Gods.

The negative part.
Thou shall neither hurt, nor hinder, either thine own, or thy neighbors
life.

The sins then that are referred to this part are such, as are committed
against our neighbor, or our selves.

Against our neighbor, are these following: I. In heart; as ^. Hatred against
him. 1. Ioh. 3.15. Who so hates his brother, is a manslayer. 2. Unadvised
anger, Matthew. 5.22. I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother
unadvisedly, is in danger of judgment. 3. Envy. Romans 1.29. Full of anger,
murder, contention. 4. Grudges. Iam. 3.14. If ye have bitter envying and
strife in your hearts rejoice not. 5. Want of compassion, and sorrow at our
neighbors calamities. Amos 6.5,6. They sing to the sound of the Viole, etc.
but no man is s^rry for the affliction of Joseph. 6. Frowardnes, when we will
not be reconciled to our neighbor. Romans 1.30. Such as can never be appeased,
unmerciful. 7. Desire of revenge. Psalm. 5.6. The Lord will abhor the bloody
man and deceitful.

II. In words: 1. Bitterness in speaking. Prou. 12. 18. There is that speaks
words, like the prickinges of a sword: but the tongue of wise men is health.
2. Reproaches and railing, which is a casting of a man's sins in his teeth
which he has committed, or an obiecting unto him some inherent infirmities,
Matthew. 5.22. Whosoever says unto his brother, Raca, shall be worthy to be
punished by the council:^ And whosoever shall say, Fool, shall be worthy to
be punished with hell fire. 2. Sam. 6.16. As the Ark of the Lord came into the
city of David, Michal Saul's daughter looked through a window, and saw king
David leap and dance before the Lord, and she despised him in her heart, 20.
And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, O how
glorious was the King of Israel this day, which was uncovered to day in the
eyes of the maidens of his servants, as a fool uncovers himself. 3.
Contentions, when two or more strive in speech one with another, for any kind
of Superiority. 4. Brawlings in any conference. 5. Crying, which is an
unseemly elevation of the voice against ones adu^rsarie. Gal. 5.19. The works
of the flesh are manifest, which are, 20. emulations, wrath, contentions,
seditions. Ephesians. 4. 31. Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, crying and
evil speaking be put away from you, with all malitiousnes. 32. Be courteous
one to another. Genesis 16. 11. He (vz. Ismael) shall be a wild man, his hand shall be
against every man, and every man's hand against him. 6. Complaints to every one
of such as offer us injuries. Iam. 5.9. Grudge not one against another,
brethren, least ye be condemned.

III. In countenance and gesture, all such signs, as evidently decipher the
malicious affections lurking in the heart. Genesis 4.5,6. His countenance fell
down: and the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou so wrath? Math. 27.39. They
that passed by rayled on him, nodding their heads.

Hence is it, that derision is termed persecution. Genesis 21. 9. Sarai saw the
son of Hagar the Egyptian mocking, etc. Gal. 4.29. He that was borne after
the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the spirit.

IV. In deeds: 1. To fight with, or to beat our neighbor, and to maime his
body. Leuit. 24. 19, 20. If any man cause any blemish in his neighbor: as he
has done, so shall it be done to him, breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth
for tooth. 2. To procure any way the death of our neighbor, whether it be by
the sword, famine, or poison. Genesis 4.8. Cain rose up against his brother, and
slew him. 3. To exercise tyrannous cruelty in inflicting punishments. Deuteronomy.
25.3. Forty stripes shall he cause him to have, and not past, least if he
should exceed, and beat him above that with many stripes, thy brother should
appear despised in thy sight. 2. Cor. 11. 24. Of the Jews I received five
times forty stripes save one. 4. To use any of Gods creatures hardly.
Proverb. 12.10. A righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the
mercies of the wicked are cruel. Deuteronomy. 22.6. If thou find a birds nest in the
way, in any tree, or on the ground, whether they be young, or eggs, and the
damme sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shall not take the damme
with the young, but shall in any wise let the damme go, and take the young to
thee, that thou may prosper and prolong thy days. 5. To take occasion by our
neighbors infirmities, to use him discourteously, and to make him our laughing
stock, or tanting recreation. Leuit. 19.14. Thou shall not curse the deaf,
nor put a stumbling block before the blind. 2. King. 2. 23. Little children
came out of the city, and mocked him, and said unto him, Come up thou
baldhead, come up thou baldhead. 6. To injury the impotent, feeble, poor,
strangers, fatherless or widows. Exodus 22.21,22. Thou shall not do injury
to a stranger, neither oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land of
Egypt. Ye shall not trouble any widow or fatherles child. 25. Thou shall not
be an usurer unto the poor. We then injury these: 1. If we pay not the
labourer his hire. Deuteronomy. 24.14. Thou shall not oppress an hired servant that
is needy and poor, neither of thy brethren, nor of the stranger that is
within thy gates. 15. Thou shall give him his hire for his day: neither shall
the sun go down upon it: for he is poor, and therewith sustaineth his
life: least he cry against thee to the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. 2. If
thou restore not the pledge of the poor. Exodus 22.26,27. If thou take thy
neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall restore it unto him before the sun
go down: for that is his garment only, and his covering for his skin. 3. If
we withdraw corn from the poor. Prou. 11.26. He that withdraws the corn,
the people will curse him: but blessing shall be upon the head of him that
sells corn.

Again, this law is as well transgressed by not killing, when the law charge
to kill, and by pardoning the punishment due unto murder, as by killing when
we should not. Nomb. 35.16. If one smite another with an instrument of iron,
that he die, he is a murderer, and the murderer shall die the death. 33. The
land can not be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood
of him that shed it.

By this place also are combats of two men hand to hand, for deciding of
controversies, utterly unlawful. 1. Because they are not equal means
ordained of God, to determine controversies. 2. In that it falls out in such
combats that he is conqueror before man, who indeed is guilty before God.

This also condemns Popish Sanctuaries, and places of privilege: as
Churches, and the like, wherein murderers shelter and shroud themselves from
the danger of the law. For God expressly commands (Exodus 21.14.) that such
an one shall be taken from his altar, that he may die. And Ioab 1. King. 2.24.
touching the horns of the altar, was slain in the Temple.

Hitherto in like sort belong such things as concern the soul of our
neighbor. 1. To be a scandale or offense to the soul of our neighbor, either
in life or doctrine. Math. 18.7. Woe be to the world because of offenses: it is
necessary that offenses should come: but woe be to them by whom they do come.

2. To minister occasions of strife and discord. The which we then do: 1. When
we cannot be brought to remit somewhat of our own right. 2. When we return
snappish and crooked answers. 3. When we interpret every thing amiss, and take
them in the worst part. 1. Sam. 25. 25. Nabal is his name, and folly is with
him. 2. Sam. 10.3. And the Princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanun their
Lord, Think thou that David does honor thy father, that he has sent
comforters to thee? has not David rather sent his servants unto thee, to
search the city, to spy it out, and to overthrow it? wherefore Hanun took
David's servants, and shaued off the half of their beards, and cut off their
garments in the middle, even to their buttockes, and sent them away.

3. The Ministers sin against their neighbors, is this, not to preach the
word of God to their charge, that they thereby might be instructed in the ways
of life. Prou. 29.18. Where there is no vision the people decay, but he that
keeps the Law is blessed. Esai 56. 10. Their watchmen are all blind, they
have no knowledge, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark: they lie and
sleep, and delight in sleeping. And these greedy dogs can never have
enough: and these shepherds they cannot understand: for they all look to
their own way, every one for his advantage, and for his own purpose. Ezech.
3. 18. When I shall say to the wicked, Thou shall surely die, and thou give
him not warning, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood
will I require at thy hands.

And not only not to preach at all, but to preach negligently, is utterly
condemned. Ier. 48.10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently. Revel. 3.16. Because thou art lukewarm, and neither hot nor
cold: it will come to pass that I shall spew thee out of my mouth. This
reprooueth nonresidencie of ministers, which is an ordinary absence of the
minister from his charge: namely, from that particular congregation committed
unto him. Esai 62.6. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which
all the day and all the night continually shall not cease: ye that are
mindful of the Lord keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he repair,
and till he set up Jerusalem the praise of the world. Act. 20.28,29,30,31. Take
heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost
has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchasedwith his own blood. For I know this, that after my departing, shall
grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Moreover, of your
selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw disciples after them.
Therefore watch and remember, that by the space of three years, I ceased not
to warn every one night and day with tears. 1. Pet. 5.2,3. Feed the flock
of God, which depends upon you, caring for it, not by constraint but
willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: not as though ye were
Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock. Ezech.
34.4. and 33. The Council of Antioch, the 17. Can. If any Bishop by imposition
of hands inducted into a charge, and appointed to govern a people, and he
neglect to take upon him that office, but delaieth to go unto the congregation
allotted unto him: such an one shall be prohibited from the Lords table, till
he be enforced to attend upon that charge, or at the least somewhat be
determined by a complete assembly of the Ministers of that Province. The
Council of Sardice, the 14. Canon. We remember that our brethren in a former
assembly decreed, that if any layman remaining three Sabboths or Lords days,
that is, three weeks in a city, did not in the same city frequent the Church
assemblies, he should be excommunicated: If then such things are not allowable
in laymen, much less in Ministers, for whom it is neither lawful nor
convenient, without urgent necessity, to be absent from his parish Church
longer then the time above mentioned. To this decree there was not one non
placet, but every one said, It likes us well. The Counsel held at Constable. in
the 24. Canon decreed that Ministers ought not to have their substitutes, or
vicars, but in their own persons, with fear and cheerfulness, perform all
such duties, as are required of them in the service of God. The Canon law does
conclude the same things, did. 39. Canon. si quis vult. debent indesinenter,
etc. The Bishops (says the Canon) ought to be continually resident in Gods
tabernacle, that they may learn somewhat of God, and the people of them,
whilst they read often and meditate upon Gods word. Again, in the Canons
entitled Pontifices, and siquis in clero. Episcopos, qui dominici gregis
suscipiunt curam, etc. The Bishops which take upon them to feed Gods flock,
ought not to depart from their duty, least they loose that excellent talent
which God has bestowed upon the^, but rather strive with that one talent, to
get three more talents. And in the 80. Can. of those which are termed the
Canons of the Apostles, there is an express mandate that such, whether Bishop
or Senior, who attends not upon their office in the Church, shall forthwith
be removed from that place. The Chalcedon Council, Canon. 10. Let no man be
ordained Minister of two Churches, in two several cities, but let him remain
in that, unto which he was first called. And if for vain glory, he shall
afterward go to a greater congregation, let him immediately be recalled to his
first charge, and in that only exercise his ministry. But if one be called
to another charge, let him simply give over the former, and have no interest in
the same, etc. For this thing, look to the decree of Damasus, and the Council
of Trent, sect. 7. Can. 8.

There are, notwithstanding the former testimonies, some cases, wherein it is
permitted to the Minister that he may be absent: if by his absence the
congregation be not endammaged: I. Sickness: the Council of Men^z, 25. Canon.
If a Bishop be not at home, or be sick, or upon some exigent, cannot be
present at his parish, let him procure one, who upon Sabbothes and festival
days, will preach unto his charge. Augustine testifies, epist. 138. that he
was absent on the like occasion.

II. Allowance of the Church, to be absent for a time upon some necessary and
public commodity for the same. Coloss. 1.7. Epaphras is their minister, but
chap. 4.12. he being absent saluteth them. And Ambrose though he were Bishop
of Millaine, yet went he twice Ambassador into France, to make agreement
betwixt Maximus and Valentinian. Ambrose 5. book. and 27. epist. to
Valentinian the Emperor.

III. If by reason of persecution he be enforced to flee, and see no hope to
procure the safety of his people. This made Cyprian to be absent from
Carthage, as he testifies in his epistles.

Thus much concerning sins against our neighbor. Now follow such sins, as
a man commits against his own person; as when a man does hurt, kill, and
endanger himself. Matthew. 16.24. If any man will follow me, let him deny
himself, take up his cross, and follow me. Matthew. 4. 6. He said unto him, If
thou be the son of God, cast thy self down headlong: for it is written, He
shall give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall lift
thee up, least at any time thou should dash thy foot against a stone. 7.
Jesus said unto him: It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God. Therefore for a man to be his own executioner, though to escape a most
shameful death, is utterly unlawful and ungodly.

The affirmative part.
Thou shall preserve the life of thy neighbor. Hitherto may we refer these
duties: I. Such as appertain to the person of our neighbor, and concern,
first his welfare both of body and mind; as, to rejoice with them that
rejoice. Romans 12.15. Mark. 10.20. Then he answered and said unto him, All these
things I have observed from my youth. And Jesus beheld him, and loved him.
Secondly, his miseries, to be grieved with him for them. Romans 12.15. Mourn
with those that mourn. Esa. 24.16. And I said, My leanness, my leanness, woe
is me, the transgressors have offended, yea the transgressors have grievously
offended. Psalm. 119. verse. 136. Mine eyes gus^ out with water, because men
observe not thy law. Again, we must help him as much as in us lies. Job
29.15. I was as an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame. 2. Cor. 8. 2. To
their power, yea beyond their power, they were willing. And that we do, we
must do speedily. Prove. 3.28. Say not to thy neighbor, Go and come again to
morrow, and I will give thee, if thou now have it. Levit. 19.17. Thou shall
plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer him to sin.

Thirdly, concerning such injuries, as he offers unto thee: I. Thou shall not
be angry against him, upon a small occasion. Nomb. 12. 3. Moses was a meek
man above all that lived upon the earth. Prove. 9.11. The discretion of a man
deferreth his anger, and his glory is to pass by an offense. II. Thou must be
slow to wrath, and never angry, but for a most just cause. Mark. 3.5. Then he
looked round about on them angerly, mourning also for the hardness of their
hearts. Prove. 14.29. He that is slow to wrath, is of great wisdom: but he that
is of an hasty mind exalts folly. III. Thine anger must be but for a
while. Ephesians. 4. 26. Be angry and sin not, let not the sun go down upon
thy wrath. IV. Forgive freely an injury, and revenge it not. Ephesians. 4. 32. Be ye
courteous one to another, and tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as
God for Christ's sake forgave you.

Fourthly, his wants and infirmities: 1. Avoid occasions whereby they may be
stirred and laid open. Genesis 13.8. Then said Abraham to Lot, Let there be no
strife I pray thee, between thee and me, neither between thy heardsmen and
mine: for we are brethren. 9. Is not the whole land before thee? depart, I pray
thee, from me: If thou will take the left hand, I will take the rights or if
thou go to the right hand, I will take the left. Genesis 27.44. And tarry with
him a while until thy brothers fierceness be assuaged, 45. And till thy
brothers wrath turn away from thee, and he forget the things which thou have
done to him. 2. Depart sometimes from thine own right. Mat. 17.25,26. What
think thou Simon? of who^ do the kings of the earth take tribute, or poll
money? of their children, or of strangers? Peter said unto him, Of strangers.
Then said Jesus unto him, Then are the children free. 27. Nevertheless, lest we
should offend the^, go to the sea, and cast in an angle, and take the first
fish that comes up, and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a
piece of twenty pence: that take and give it unto them for me and thee. 3. To
appease anger kindled: which is done, I. by ouercomming evil with goodness.
Romans 12.21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with goodness. II. By
following after peace. 1. Pet. 3.11. Decline from evil, and do good, seek
peace, and follow after it. III. By courteous answers. Prou. 15. 1. A soft
answer puts away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger. 1. Sam. 1.14. Eli
said unto her, How long will thou be drunken? put away thy drunkenness from
thee. 15. Then Hannah answered, and said, Nay my Lord, but I am a woman
troubled in spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have
poured out my soul, before the Lord. Philem. v. 15. It may be that he
therefore departed for a season, that thou should receive him for ever. IV.
By ouerpassing some wants and infirmities in men's words and deeds. Prou.
19.11. It is a man's honor to pass by infirmities. V. By covering the^ with
silence. 1. Pet. 4.8. Above all things have fervent love amongst you, for love
covers a multitude of sins. Prou. 17.9. He that covers transgression,
seeks love: but he that repeateth a matter, separateth the Prince. VI. By
taking every thing (if it be possible) in the best part. 1. Cor. 13. 5. Love
thinks none evil.

This shows the lawfulnes of truces, covenants, and other agreements
concerning peace, being made to avoid injuries, maintain ancient bounds,
procure security in traffic, possessions, and iournies, set pensions,
commons for cattle, liberties of hunting, fishing, or fouling, and getting
fuel, or other necessaries for public commodities, if there be no unlawful
conditions annexed unto the same. And we may make this covenant not only with
Christians, but for the maintenance of peace, with infidels also. For that
which is godly to be performed, is no less godly to be promised. But it is a
note of true godliness, to be as much as may be, at peace with all men. Therefore
to promise peace by covenant, is very godly. We may see the experience of this
in the lives of holy men. Genesis 21.22. At that same time Abimelech and Pichol
his chief captain, spoke unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that
thou do. 23. Now therefore swear unto me here by God, that thou will not
hurt me, nor my children, nor my childrens children, etc. 24. Then Abraham
said, I will swear. 27. Then Abraham took sheep and beeues, and gave them
unto Abimelech: and they two made a covenant. Genesis 31.44. Now therefore come
and let us make a covenant, I and thou, which may be a witness between me and
thee. 45. Then Laban said to Iaakob, Behold this heap, and behold the pillar,
which I have set up between me and thee. 53. The God of Abraham, and the gods
of Nahor, and the god of (...) father be judge between us: But Iaakob swear by
the fear of his father Izhak.

II. Concerning his body, we are to regard it alive and dead. Being alive, we
ought if need be: I. To minister unto it food and raiment. Math. 25.41, 42.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
devil and his angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, I
thirsted, and ye gave me no drink, etc. 45. In as much as ye did it not to one
of the least of these, ye did it not to me. II. To lend our helping hand, when
our neighbors body is in any danger. 1. Ioh. 3.16. Hereby we perceived love,
that he laid down his life for us, therefore also ought we to lay down our
lives for the brethren.

When a man is dead, we ought to commit the dead corpse to the grave, as may
appear by these arguments: I. The instinct of Nature it self. II. The
examples of the Patriarks, and other holy personages. Abraham buried Sarah.
Genesis 23.19. Iaakob is buried by his sons. Genesis 50.12. Steven by religious and
devout men. Act. 8.2. III. The Lords own approbation of burial, in that he
numbreth it amongst his benefits. For the want thereof is a curse. Ier. 22.19.
He (vz. Iehoiakim) shall be buried as an ass is buried, even drawn and cast
forth without the gates of Jerusalem. Therefore rather then Moses should be
unburied, the Lord himself did bury him. Deuteronomy. 34.5,6. Moses the servant of
the Lord died in the land of Moab, according to the word of the Lord. And he
buried him in a valley, in the land of Moab, over against Beth-peor, but no man
knows of his sepulcher unto this day. IV. There is no dead carkase so
loathsome as man is, the which both argues the necessity of burial, and how
ugly we are in the sight of God, by reason of sin. V. The body must rise
again out of the earth, that it may be made a perpetual mansion house for the
soul to dwell in. VI. The bodies of the faithful are the temples of the holy
Ghost, and therefore must rise again to glory. VII. Burial is a testimony
of the love and reverence we bear to the deceased.

A funeral ought to be solemnized after an honest and civil manner: namely,
agreeable to the nature, and credit as well of those which remain alive, as
them which are dead. Concerning the living, they must see that I. their
mourning be moderate, and such, as may well express their affection and love
to the party departed. Ioh. 11.34. He said, Where have ye laid him? they
answered, Lord, come and see. ^5. Then Jesus wept. And (verse. 36.) the Jews
said, Behold how he loved him. II. They must avoid superstition, and not
surmise that funeral ceremonies are available to the dead. Such are the rites
of the Church of Rome; as to be buried in a Church, especially under the altar,
and in a Friars cool. III. They ought to take heed of superfluous pomp and
solemnities. For of all ostentations of pride, that is most foolish, to be
boasting of a loathsome and a deformed corpse. Esai 22. 15, 16. Thus says the
Lord God of hosts, Go, get thee to that treasurer, to Shebnah the steward of
the house, and say, What have thou to do here? and whom have thou here? that
thou should here hew thee out a sepulcher, as he that heweth out his
sepulcher in an high place, or that graueth an habitation for himself in a
rock.

To this commandment belongs these duties: I. Before the vintage or harvest,
w^^ught to permit any man, for the repressing of hunger, to gather grapes, or
^^ucke off the ears of corn in the field. Deuteronomy. 23.24,25. When thou come
into thy neighbors vineyard, then thou may eat grapes at thy pleasure, as
much as thou will: but thou shall put none in thy vessel. When thou come
into thy neighbors corn, thou may pluck the ears with thine hand; but
thou shall not move a sickle to thy neighbors corn. Math. 12. 1. Jesus went
on the Sabbath day through the corn, and his Disciples were an hungered, and
began to pluck the ears of the corn, and to eat, etc. II. In the vintage,
and time of harvest, we ought neither to leave the trees naked of grapes, nor
rake up after the reaping, ears of corn: but to leave the after gatherings
for the poor. Leu. 23.22. When you reap the harvest of your land, thou shall
not rid clean the corners of thy field when thou reapest: neither shall thou
make any after gathering of thy harvest: but shall leave them unto the poor,
and to the stranger: I am the Lord your God. Ruth 2.8. Go to none other field
to gather, neither go from hence, but abide here by my maidens. 7. So she
gleaned in the field until evening.

III. Concerning the soul of our neighbor: I. We must seek all means to
win him to the profession of Christian religion. 1. Cor. 10. 33. I please all
men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that
they might be saved. Hebr. 10.24. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto
love and to good works. II. We must live amongst men without offense. 1. Cor.
10.32. Give no offense neither to the Jews, nor to the Grecians, nor to the
church of God. 1. Cor. 8.13. If meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh
while the world stands, that I may not offend my brother. III. The light of
our good life, must be as a lantern to direct the ways of our neighbors.
Act. 24.14. This I confess unto thee, that after the way (which they call
heresy) so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets, 15. And have hope toward God, that the
resurrection of the dead, which they themselves look for also, shall be both
of just and unjust. 16. And herein I endeavor my self to have always a clear
conscience toward God, and toward men. IV. If our neighbor offend, we are to
admonish him. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. We desire you, brethren^ admonish them that are
unruly: comfort the feeble minded: bear with the weak: be patient toward all
men. V. If our neighbor run the ways of Gods commandment (as David
speaks) we ought to encourage him in the same. VI. We may refer such
things unto this commandment, as appertain to the peculiar preservation of
every several man's life: 1. Recreation, which is an exercise joined with the
fear of God, conversant in things indifferent, for the preservation of bodily
strength, and confirmation of the mind in holiness. Eccles. 2.2. I said of
laughter, thou art mad, and of joy, what is this that thou do? Esaias. 5.12.
The harp, violl, timbrell, and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts, but they
regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the works of his hands. 1.
Cor. 10.7. Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them, as it is written:
The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Luke 6.25. Woe be
to you that laugh: for ye shall wail and weep. Deuteronomy. 12.7. There ye shall
eat before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that you put your
hands unto, both ye and your households, because the Lord thy God has blessed
thee. To this end has the word of God permitted shooting. 2. Sam. 1.18. He
bade them teach the children of Judah to shoot, as it is written in the book
of Iashur. And musical consort. Nehem. 7. 67. Besides their servants and
maids which were seven thousaud, three hundredth, and seven and thirty: they
had two hundredth and five and forty singing men, and singing women. And
putting forth of riddles. Judge. 14. 12. Sampson said unto the^, I will now put
forth a riddle unto you, and if you can declare it me within seven days of the
feast, and find it out, I will give you thirty sheets, and thirty change of
garments. 13. And they answered him, Put forth thy riddle that we may hear it.
14. And he said unto them, Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong
came sweetness: and they could not in t^ree days expound the riddle. And
hunting of wild beasts. Cant. 2.15. Take us the foxes, the little foxes which
destroy the vines: for our vines have small grapes. Lastly, the searching out
or the contemplation of the works of God. 1. King. 4.33. And he spoke of trees
from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon, eue^ unto the hyssop that springs out
of the wall: he spak^ also of beasts, and of fowls, and of creeping things, and
of fishes. 2. Physic, the use whereof is holy, if before the receipt of it, a
man crave remission of his sins, and repose his confidence only upon god, not
upon the means. Math. 9.2. And lo, they brought unto him a man sick of the
palsy, lying on a bed. And Jesus seeing their faith, said to the sick of the
palsy, Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. 6. The^ he
said to the sick of the palsy, Arise, take up thy bed and walk to thine
house. Ioh. 5.5. A certain man was there, which had been diseased eight and
thirty years. 8. Jesus said unto him. Take up thy bed and walk. 14. After
that Jesus found him in the temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou art made
whole: sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee. 2. Chro. 16.12. And
Asa in the nine and thirtieth year of his reign was diseased in his fecte,
and his disease was extreme: yet he sought not to the Lord in his disease, but
to the Phisitia^s. 3. Avoiding of an injury, offered by some private person:
this, if it be against an unruly and unstaid adversary, and the defense be
faultlesse, is very lawful, and is so far from a private revenge, that it is
to be accounted a just defense. The defense is then faultlesse, when a man does
so assault his adversary, as that he neither purposes his own revenge, or
his enemies hurt, but only his alone safety from that imminent danger.

A doubt. Whether may a man fly in the plague time? Answer. Such as be
hindered by their calling, may not; as, Magistrates, and Pastoures, having
charge of souls: yet free men not bound by calling, may. Reasons. I. A man may
provide for his own safety, if it be not to the hinderance of another. II. A
man may fly wars, famine, floudes, fire, and other such dangers: therefore
the plague. III. There is less danger of sickness, the more the multitude of
peeple is diminished. Objection. I. To fly, is a token of distrust. Answer.
This diffidence is no fault of the fact, but of the person. II. It is
offensive. Answer. The offense is given, not taken. III. To fly, is to forsake
our neighbor against the rule of charity. Answer. It is not, if kinsfolk and
Magistrates be present. IV. Men are to visit the sick by Gods appointment.
Answer. Lepers were excepted among the Jews: and so likewise they in these
days which are infected with a disease; answerable to the leprosy, namely, if
it be dangerously contagious.




CHAP. 26. Of the seventh Commandment.
THe seventh Commandment shows how we may preserve the chastity of our
selves, and of our neighb^ur.

The words are these: Thou shall not commit adultery.

The Resolution.
Adulterie] To commit adultery, signifies as much, as to do any thing, what
way soever, whereby the chastity of our selves, or our neighbors may be
stained. Math. 5.28.

The negative part.
Thou shall no way either hurt, or hinder thy neighbors chastity.

In this place are prohibited: I. The lust of the heart, or the evil
concupiscence of the flesh. Matthew. 5.28. I say unto you, whosoever looks on a
woman to lust after her, he has already committed adultery with her in his
heart. Colos. 3.5. Mortify your members which are on earth: fornication,
uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence. II. Burning in the
flesh, which is an inward feruencie of lust, whereby the godly motions of the
heart are hindered, overwhelmed, and, as it were, with contrary fire, burnt
up. 1. Cor. 7.9. If they cannot abstain, let them marry: for it is better to
marry then to burn. III. Strange pleasures about generation, prohibited in the
word of God: the which are many. I. With beasts. Leuit. 18.23. Thou shall not
be with any beast, to be defiled therewith, neither shall any woman stand before
a beast to lie down thereto: for it is an abomination. II. With the devil, as
witches do by their own confession. For why should not a spirit as well have
society with a witch, as to eat meat? III. With one of the same sex. Leuit.
18.22. Thou shall not lie with the male as one lies with a woman: for it is
abomination. This is a sin which they commit, whom God has given over into
a reprobate sense. Romans 1.26. For this cause God gave them up to vile
affections: for even their women did change their natural use into that which
is against nature. 27. And the men left the natural use of the women, and
burned in their lusts one toward another, and man with man wrought filthiness.
It was the sin of Sodom. Genesis 19. where it was so common, that to this day
it is termed Sodomie. IV. With such as be within the degrees of consanguinitie
or affinity, prohibited in the word of God. Leuit. 18.6. None shall come near
to any of the kindred of his flesh, to uncover her shame. I am the Lord. V. With
unmarried persons. This sin is termed fornication. Deuteronomy. 22. 28. If any man
find a maid that is not betrothed, and take her and lie with her, and they be
found. 29. Then the man that lay with her, shall give unto the maids father
fifty shekels of silver: and she shall be his wife, because he has humbled
her: he cannot put her away all his life. 1. Cor. 10.8. Neither let us commit
fornication, as some of them committed fornication, and fell in one day one and
twenty thousand. VI. With those, whereof one is married, or at the least
betrothed. This sin is called adultery: and God has inflicted by his word the
same punishment upon them, which commit this sin, after they be betrothed, as
he does upon such as are already married. Deuteronomy. 22.22. If a man be found lying
with a woman married to a man, then they shall die even both twain: to wit,
the man that lay with the wife, and the wife: so thou shall put away evil from
Israel. 23. If a maid be betrothed to an husband, and a man find her in the
town and lie with her. 24. Then shall ye bring them both out unto the gates
of the same city, and shall stone them to death with stones. This is a
marvelous great sin, as may appear in that it is the punishment of
idolatry. Romans 1.23. They turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the
similitude of the image of a corruptible man, etc. 24. Wherefore God gave them
up unto their hearts lusts, unto uncleanness. Yea, this sin is more heinous
then theft. Prou. 6.30. Men do not despise a thief, when he steals to
satisfy his soul when he is hungry: 32. But he that commits adultery
with a woman, is destitute of understanding, he that does it, destroys his
own soul. Again, the adulterer breaks the covenant of marriage, which is
Gods covenant. Prou. 2.17. Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and
forgets the covenant of her God. Adulterers dishonest their own bodies. 1.
Cor. 6.18. Flee fornication, every sin that a man does, is without the body:
but he that commits fornication, sins against his own body. And bereave
their neighbors of a great and unrecoverable benefit: namely of chastity. As
for the children which are begotten in this sort, they are shut out from that
pre-eminence, which they otherwise might obtain in the congregation. Deuteronomy.
23.2. A bastard shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord: even to his
tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of the Lord. He
makes his family a stews, as appears in David, whose adultery was punished
by Absoloms lying with his fathers co^cubines. 2. Sam. 16.21. Achitophel said
to Absalom, Go to thy fathers concubines, which he has left to keep the
house. Job. 31.9. If mine heart have been deceived by a woman, or if I have
laid wait at the door of my neighbor: let my wife grind unto another man:
and let other men bow down upon her. Man's posterity feels the smart of
this sin. Job. 31. 12. This (adultery) is a fire that shall devour to
destruction, and which shall root out all mine increase. To conclude, though
this sin be committed never so closely, yet God will reveal it. Numb. 5.
from the 12. verse to the 23. And it usually has one of these two, as
companions: namely, dullness of heart, or a marvelous horror of conscience,
Hose. 4.11. Whordome, and wine, take away their heart.

As for the Patriarchs Polygamie, or marrying of many wives, albeit it cannot
be defended, yet it may be excused: either because it served to the enlarging
of the number of mankind, when there were but few: or at the least, to the
propagation of the Church of God.

VII. With man and wife. They abuse their liberty, if they know each other so
long as the woman is in her flowers. Ezech. 22.10. In thee have they discovered
their fathers shame: in thee have they vexed her that was polluted in her
flowers. Leuit. 18.19. Thou shall not go unto a woman to uncover her shame, as
long as she is put apart for her disease. Ezekiel. 8.6. If a man has not lien
with a menstruous woman. Ambros. lib. de Philos. which Augustine cites, lib.
2. contra Julian says, that he commits adultery with his wife, who in the
use of wedlock has neither regard of seemelines, nor honesty. Hierome in his
1. book, contra Iulianum, says: A wise man ought to rule his wife in
judgment, not in affection. He will not give the bridle unto headstrong
pleasure, not headily company with his wife. Nothing (says he) is more
shameless, then to make a strumpet of his wife. VIII. Nocturnall pollutions,
which arise of immoderate diet, or unchaste cogitations, going before in the
day. Deutr. 23.10. Onans sin (Genesis 38.8.) was not much unlike these. IX.
Effeminate wantonness, whereby occasions are sought to stir up lust. Galat.
5.19. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness. Of this kind are, 1. eyes full of adultery. 2. Pet.
3.14. Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease to sin. 2.
Idleness, 2. Sam. 11. 2. When it was evening tide, David arose out of his bed,
and walked upon the roof of the kings palace: and from the roof he saw a
woman washing her self: and the woman was very beutiful to look upon. 3. And
David sent, and inquired what woman it was: and one said, Is not this Bethsheba
the daughter of Elian, wife to Vriah the Hittite? Then David sent messengers,
and took her away: and she came vnte him, and he lay with her. 3. Riotous and
lascivious attire. 1. Tim. 2.9. The women shall array themselves in comely
apparel, with shamefastnes and modesty, not with broydered hair, or gold or
pearls, or costly apparel, but (as becomes women that profess the fear of
God) with goodworkes. Esaias 3.16. Because the daughters of Zion are hautie, and
walk with stretched out necks, and with wandering eyes, walking and minsing as
they go, and making a tinkeling with their feet. 17. Therefore shall the Lord
make the heads of the daughters of Zion balde, and the Lord shall discover
their secret parts. 18. In that day shall the Lord take away the ornament of
the slippers, and the caules, and the round tyers, 19. The sweet balls, and
the bracelets, and the bonnets, 20. The tyers of the head, and the sloppes, and
the headbands, and the tablets, and the earings, 21. The rings and the
mufflers, 22. The costly apparel and the vailes, and the wimples, and the
crisping pinnes, 23. And the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoodes, and
the launes. And no marvel if the Prophet be so sharp against excessive and
wanton apparel: for this is, I. a lavish and prodigal wasting of the benefits
of God, which might well be employed upon better uses. II. It is a testimony,
and, as it were, the cognizance or ensign of pride, whereby a man would have
himself in greater reputation then an other. III. It is a note of great
idleness and slothfulness. For commonly such as bestow much time in tricking
and trimming themselves up, do quite neglect other business, and of all things,
can not away with pains.
IV. It argues leuitie, in devising every day some new fashion, or imitating
that which others devise. V. It makes a confusion of such degrees and callings
as God has ordained, when as men of inferior degree and calling, cannot be by
their attire, discerned from men of higher estate. 4. Fullness of bread and
meat, which provoke lust. Ezech. 16.45. This was the iniquity of thy sister
Sodom, pride, fullness of bread, and idleness was in her, and in her
daughters. Luke 16.19. There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in
purple and fine linen, and fared well and delicately every day. Romans 13.13.
Walk honestly, as in the day time, not in gluttony and drunkenness, neither
in chambring and wantonness. 5. Corrupt, dishonest, and unseemly talk. 1.
Cor. 15.33. Err not, evil talk corrupts good manners. Such are vain
loue-songs, ballades, enterludes, and amorous books. This is the thing we are
carefully to shun in the reading of Poets, yet so, as mariners do in
navigations, who forsake not the sea, but decline and fly from the rocks. 6.
Lascivious representations of love matters, in Plays and Comedies. Ephesians. 5.3,4.
Fornication and all uncleanness, let it not once be named among you, as it
becomes Saints, neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, neither jesting,
which are things not comely. 7. Indecent and unseemly pictures. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
22. Abstain from all appearance of evil. 8. Lascivious dancing of man and
woman together. Mark. 6.22. The daughter of the same Herodias came in and
danced, and pleased Herod, etc. 9. Company with effeminate persons. Prou. 7.
25. Let not thine heart decline to her ways: wander thou not in her paths. V.
To appoint some light or sheet-punishment for adultery, such as that Romish
Synagogue does. For this is nothing else, but to open a gap for other lewd
persons, to run headlong into the like impiety.


The affirmative part.
Thou shall preserve the chastity of thy neighbor.

Chastity is the purity of soul and body, as much as belongs to
generation. The mind is chaste, when it is free, or at the least, freed from
fleshly concupiscence. The body is chaste, when it puts not in execution
the concupiscences of the flesh. 1 Thessalonians. 4.^. This is the will of God, even
your sanctification, and that ye should abstain from fornication. 4. That
^uery one of you should know how to possess his vessel in holiness and
honor, 5. And not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles, which
know not God. 1. Cor. 7.34. The unmarried wom^n cares for the things of the
Lord, that she may be holy both in body and spirit.

There are two especial virtues which preserve chastity, Modesty, and
Sobriety. Modesty is a virtue which keeps in each work an holy decorum, or
comelines: and it is seen, I. in the countenance and eyes, namely, when they
neither express, nor excite the concupiscence of the heart. Job. 31.1. I made
a covenant with mine eye, why then should I think on a maid? Genesis 24.64.
Rebekah lift up her eyes, and when she saw Izhak, she lighted down from the
camel. 65. So she took a veil, and covered her face. Prou. 1^.13. She caught
him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him, etc. II. In
words: when a man's talk is decent, in speaking of such things, we cannot but be
ashamed of. Genesis 4.1. Then Adam knew Heuah his wife: who, etc. Psalm. 51.1. A
Psalm of David, when the Prophet Nathan came unto him, after he had gone into
Bethsheba. Esaias 7.20. In that day shall the Lord shave with a rasor that is
hired, even by them beyond the river, by the King of Ashur, the head and the
hair of the feet, and it shall consume the beard. Judge. 3.24. When he was
gone out, his servants came: who seeing that the doors of the parlar were
shut, they said, Surely he covers his feet, (that is, he does his easement)
in his summer chamber. Again, a man's talk must be little and submisse Matthew.
12.19. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, he shall not strive, nor cry,
neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets. Prou. 10.19. In many
words there cannot want iniquity: but he that refraineth his lips is wise. And
it is a note of a strumpet to be a giglot, and loud tongued. Prou. 7.11. She
is babbling and loud. In apparel, we must observe an holy comeliness. Tit.
2.^. The elder women must be of such behavior, as becomes holiness. Holy
comeliness is that which expresses to the eye the sincerity, that is, the
godliness, temperance, and gravity either of man or woman. This decency will
more plainly appear, if we consider the ends of apparel, which are in number
five. 1. Necessity, to the end that our bodies may be defended against the
extremity of parching heat, and pinching cold. 2. Honesty, that that
deformity of our naked bodies might be covered, which immediately followed the
transgression of our first parents. 3. Commodity, whereby men, as their
calling, work, and trade of life is different, so do they apparel themselves:
and hence it is, that some apparel is more decent for certain estates of men,
then other. 4. Frugalitie, when a man's attire is proportionable to his ability
and calling. 5. Distinction of persons, as of sex, ages, offices, times, and
actions. For a man has his set attire, a woman hers, a young man apparelled on
this fashion, an old man on that. And therefore it is unseemly for a man to
put on a woman's apparel, or a woman the man's. Deuteronomy. 22.5. The woman shall not
wear that which pertains to the man, neither shall a man put on woman's
raiment: for all that do so, are an abomination to the Lord thy God.

To set down precisely out of Gods word what apparel is decent, is very
hard: wherefore in this case, the judgment and practice of modest, grave, and
sincere men, in every particular estate, is most to be followed, and men must
rather keep too much within the bounds of measure, then to step one foot
without the precincts. Concerning the purging of excrements of nature, care
must be had, that they be cast forth into some separate and close place, and
there also covered. Deuteronomy. 23.12. Thou shall have a place without the host,
whither thou shall resort. 13. And thou shall have a paddle among thy weapons,
and when thou would sit down without, thou shall dig therewith, and
returning, thou shall cover thine excrements. 14. For the Lord thy God walks
in the midst of the camp to deliver thee: therefore thine host shall be holy,
that he see no filthy thing in thee, and turn away from thee. 1. Sam. 24.4.
And he came to the sheepe-coats by the way, where there was a cave, and Saul
went in to cover his feet.

Sobriety is a virtue, which concerns the usage of our diet in holiness. For
the better observation thereof, these rules may serve: I. The chiefest at the
banquet, let him consecrate the meats to God, by saying grace. 1. Sam. 9.13.
The people will not eat, till he (that is, Samuel) came, because he will bless
the sacrifice: and then eat they, that be bidden to the feast. Mark. 6.39. He
commanded the^ to make them all sit down by companies upon the grass, etc.
41. And he took the five loaves and two fishes, and looked up to heaven, and
gave thanks. Act. 27.35. When he had thus said, he (that is, Paul) gave
thanks in the presence of them all, and when he had broken bread, he began to
eat. II. It is lawefull to furnish a table with store of dishes not only for
necessity, but also for the good entertainment of a friend, and for delight.
Luke 5. 29. Leui made him (that is, Jesus) a great feast in his own house,
where there was a great company of Publicans, and of other that sat at tabe
with him. Psalm. 104.15. He gives wine that makes glad the heart of man, and
oil to make the face shine, and bread that strengthens man's heart. Ioh.
12.2. There they made him a supper, and Martha served, but Lazarus was one of
them that sat at table with him. 3. Then took Marie a pound of ointment of
Spikenard, very costly, and anointed Jesus feet. III. Choose the lower room
at a banquet, and rather then be troublesome, sit as the master of the feast
assigns thee. Luke 14.7. He spoke a parable to the guests, when he marked
how they chose out the chief rooms, and said, 8. When thou shall be bidden
of any man to a wedding, set not thy self down in the chiefest place, least a
more honorable man then thou be bidden of him. 9. And he that bade both him
and thee, come and say, Give this man room. 10. But go and sit down in the
lowest room, that when he that bade thee, comes, he may say unto thee,
Friend, sit up higher. Prou. 25.5. Stand not in the place of great me^, etc.
IV. Man must eat at due times, not at unseasonable hours. Eccl. 10.16. Woe be
to thee, O land, when thy Princes eat in the morning. 17. Blessed art thou, O
land, when Princes eat in time. V. Man must eat and drink moderately, so
that the body may receive strength thereby, and the soul be more fresh and
lively, to perform the actions of godliness. Luke 21. 34. Take heed to your
selves, least at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and
drunkenness. Prou. 23.29. To whom is woe? etc. Even to them that tarry long
at wine, to them that go and seek mixed wine. 3. Look not thou upon the wine
when it is red, and when it shows his color in the cup, and goes down
pleasantly, etc. Prou. 25.16. If thou have found honey, eat that is sufficient
for thee, least thou be over full, and vomit. Prou. 31.4. It is not for Kings
to drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink. 5. Least he drink and forget
the decree, and change the judgment of all the children of affliction. VI. We
must then especially regard these things, when we eat at great men's tables.
Prou. 23.1. When thou sit to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what is
before thee. 2. Put the knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to thine
appetite. 3. Be not desirous of his dainty meats: for it is a deceivable
meat. VII. Godly mirth at meat is tolerable. Act. 2.46. They did eat their
meat together with gladness and singlenes of heart. VIII. Table talk (according
as occasion of talk is offered) must be such as may edify. Such was Christ's
talk at the Pharisees table. Luke 14. from the 1. verse to the 16. verse. IX.
See that after the banquet ended, the broken meat be not lost, but reserved.
John 6.12. When they were satisfied, he said unto his Disciples, Gather up the
broken meat which remains, that nothing be lost. X. At a feast leave
somewhat. Ruth. 2.14. She did eat, and was sufficed, and left thereof.

Chastity is double: one of single life, another in wedlock. They that are
single, must I. with great care keep their affections and bodies in holiness.
Psalm. 119. 9. How shall a young man purge his ways! by directing the same
after thy word. 1. Ioh. 2. 13. I write unto you fathers, because ye have known
him, that is from the beginning. I write unto you young men, because ye have
overcome that wicked one. 14. I write unto you babes, because ye have known
the Father. Eccl. 12.1. Remember thy creator in the days of thy youth, whiles
the evil days come not, nor the years approach, wherein thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them. II. They must fast often. 1. Cor. 9.27. I beat down
my body, and bring it into subjection, least by any means, after I have
preached to others, I my self should be reproved. III. They must take heed
they burn not in lust: for, 1. Cor. 7.9. It is better to marry then to burn.

Chastity in wedlock, is when the holy and pure use of wedlock is observed,
Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled: but
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. To preserve purity in wedlock,
these cautions are profitable: I. Contracts must be in the Lord, and with the
faithful only. Malac. 2.11. Judah has transgressed, and an abomination is
committed in Israel, and in Jerusalem: for Judah has defiled the holiness of
the Lord, which he loved, and has married the daughter of a strange god. 1.
Cor. 7.39. If her husband be dead she is at liberty to marry with whom she
will, only in the Lord. II. Both parties must separate themselves in the time
of a woman's disease, and at appointed fasts. Ezech. 18.6. 1. Cor. 7.5. Defraud
not one another, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give your
selves to fasting and prayer, and again come together, that Satan tempt you
not for your incontinencie. III. Wedlock must be used rather to suppress,
then to satisfy that corrupt concupiscence of the flesh, and especially to
enlarge the Church of God. Romans 13.14. Put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take
not care of the flesh to satisfy the lusts thereof. IV. It must be used with
prayer and thanksgiving. 1. Tim. 4.3,4.

CHAP. 27. Of the eight Commandment.
THis commandment concerns the preservation of our neighbors goods.

The words are these: Thou shall not steal.

The Resolution.
Steale] To steal, is properly to convey any thing closely from another. Genesis
31.^0. Iaakob stole away the heart of Laban the Aramite. In this place it
signifies generally, to wish that which is another man's, to get it by fraud,
and any way to impair his wealth.

The negative part.
Thou shall neither be wanting to preserve, nor a means to hinder or hurt thy
neighbors goods,

In this pl^ce these sins are forbidden: I. Inordinate living, whether it be
in no ^et calling, or idely, wherein by neglecting their duties, such persons
mispend their time, goods, and revenues. 2. These. 2.11. We hear that there are
some among you; which walk inordinately, and work not at all, but are busy
bodies. Genesis 3.9. In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread, till
thou return to the earth. 1. Tim. 5.8. If there be any that provides not for
his own, especially for them of his household, he denies the faith, and is
worse then an infidel. II. Unjust dealing, the which is either in heart, or
deed. Unjust dealing in heart, is named covetousness. Matthew. 15.19. Out of
the heart come evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, etc.
Covetousness is idolatry. Ephesians. 5.5. We know that no covetous person, which
is an idolatour, shall enter into the kingdom of Christ and of God. Yea, it is
the very root of all evil. 1. Tim. 6. 9. The love of money is the root of
all evil, which whilst some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows.


Unjust dealing indeed is, in bargaining, or out of bargaining. Unjust dealing
in bargaining, has many branches. 1. These. 4.6. Let no man oppress, or
deceive his neighbor in a bargain: for God is the auenger of such things.

I. To sell, or bargain for that which is not saleable. Of this kind, I. Is
the gift of the holy Ghost, which cannot be bought with money. Act. 8.18. When
Simon saw, that through laying on of the Apostles hands, the holy Ghost was
given, he offered them money, 16, Saying, give me also this power, that on
whom soever I lay the hands, he may receive the holy Ghost. 20. Then Peter
said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou think that the gift
of God may be obtained with money. II. Church goods are not saleable. Therefore
it is not to be allowed, for men to fell or alienate them from the Church.
Prou. 20.25. It is destruction for a man to devour that which is sanctified,
and after the vows to enquire. Malac. 3.8. Church goods are the possession of
the Lord. III. Whatsoever is unprofitable either to the Church, or
commonweal, must not be sold. II. All colored forgerie and deceit in
bargaining. Luke 19.8. Zaccheus stood forth, and said unto the Lord, Behold,
Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor: and if I have taken ought from
any man by forged cauillation, I restore it four fold. This deceit is used,
I. when men sell that, which is counterfeit, for good: as copper for gold, and
mingle any ways badde with good, making show only of the good. Amos 8.4,5,6.
Hear this, ye that swallow up the poor, saying, when will the new month be
gone, etc. that we may sell the refuse of the wheat. II. When men falsify
measures and weights. Deuteronomy. 25.13. Thou shall not have in thy bag two manner
of weights, a great and a small. 14. But thou shall have a right and a just
weight: a perfect, and a just measure shall thou have. Leuit. 10.35. Ye shall
not do unjustly in judgment, in line, in weight, or in measure. 36. Ye shall
have just balances, true weights; a true Epha, and a true Hin. Amos 8.4. Hear
this, ye that say, When will the Sabbath be gone, that we may sell corn, and
make the Epha small, and the shekell great, and falsify the weights by deceit.
III. When the buyer concealeth the goodness of the thing, or the seller the
faults of it, and blindfoldeth the truth with counterfeit speeches. Matthew. 7.
12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do to them: for
this is the Law and the Prophets. Prou. 20.14. It is naught, it is naught,
says the buyer: but when he is gone apart, he boasts. IV. When in buying and
selling the people are oppressed. And this is, 1. When the just price of things
is raised. For in bargaining, it is not lawful to purse one penny, without
the giving of a penniworth. 2. Sale upon a set day, which is, when day is
given, that the price may be inhanced. For what is this, I pray you, but to
sell time, and to take more of our neighbor, then right? 3. To ingrosse, which
is to buie up all of one commodity into thine own hands, that when no other
has any of the same, thou may sell it at thine own price. 4. To become
bankcrupt, that thou may be enriched by the damages, and goods of other men.
5. Not to restore that, which was lent to one, pledged to him, or found by him.
Ezech. 18.7. Neither has oppressed any, but has restored the pledge to his
debte^: he that has spoiled none by violence, etc. 6. To delay any kind of
restitution, from one day to another. Proverb. 3. 28. Say not to thy neighbor,
Depart, and come again, to morrow I will pay you, when thou may do it then.
Psalm. 37.21. The wicked man boroweth, and paieth not again, but the righteous
is merciful, and lends. 7. To practice usury. Psalm. 15.5. Which has not
put his money to usury. Exodus 22. 25. If thou lendest money to my people, to
the poor man which dwells with thee, be not to him as an usurer, lay not
usury upon him.
Usury is a gain exacted by covenant, above the principal only in lue, and
recompense of the lending of it. Usury being considered as it is thus
described, is quite contrary to Gods word, and may very fitly be termed
biting lucre. Exodus 22.14. If any man has borrowed anything of another,
whatsoever is hurt or dies, if the owner of the thing be not present, let him
be recompensed. 15. If he be present, recompense him not: if it be hired for a
price, it is sold for the same price. Ezekiel. 18.8. He has not given to usury,
neither has taken increase. 2. Cor. 8.13. Neither is it that other men should
be eased, and you grieved, 14. But upon like condition at this time, your
abundance supplieth their lack; that also their abundance may be for your
lack: that there may be equality.

And this usury, positive laws do not only restrain, but not allow.
Quest. Is it not lawful to take at some time above the principal? Answer.
Yes surely, with these conditions: I. If a man take heed that he exact nothing,
but that which his debtor can get by good and lawful means. II. He may not
take more then the gain, nay not all the gain, nor that part of the gain
which drinks up the living of him that uses the money. III. He must
sometimes be so far from taking gain, that he must not require the
principal, if his debtor be by inevitable and just casualities brought
behind, and it be also plain that he could not make, no not by great
diligence, any commodity of the money borrowed. The reasons why a man may take
sometimes above the principal, are; 1. That which the debtor may give, having
himself an honest gain besides, and no man any ways endomaged, that the
creditor may safely receive. 2. It is convenient, that he which has money lent
him, and gains by it, should show all possible gratitude to him, by whose
goods he is enriched. 3. It is often for the benefit of the creditor, to have
the goods in his own hands which he lent.

Object. Money is not fruitful, therefore it is unlawful to receive more then
we lent out. Answ. Albeit money in it self be not fruitful, yet it is made
very fruitful by the borrowers good use, as ground is, which is not fruitful
except it be tilled.

Last of all, when a man detaineth the laborers wages. Iam. 5.4. Behold, the
hire of the laborers (which have reaped your fields, which is of you kept
back by fraud) cries, and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered
into the ears of the Lord of hosts.

Unjust dealing out of bargaining, is likewise manifold: I. To pronounce false
sentence or judgment for a reward, either proffered, or promised. Esai 1. 23.
Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loves gifts,
and follows after rewards: they judge not the fatherless, neither does the
widows cause come before them. This is the Lawyers and Judges sin. II. To
feed, or clothe stout and lusty rogues or beggars. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. When we
were with you we enjoined you this, that if any would not labor, the same
should not eat. What then think you, must those licensed rogues and beggars
by authority, I mean all idle Monks and Abby-lubbers have? Socrates in the
Tripartite history, says plainly, that that Monk which labors not with
his hands, is no better then a thief. III. Gaming for money and gain. For
thou may not enrich thy self by impouerishing thy brother. This gaming is
worse far then usury, and in a short while will more enrich a man.

IV. To get money by unlawful arts: such are Magic, Judicial Astrology,
Stage Plays, and such like. Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that has stolen, steal no
more, but rather let him labor, working with his own hands the thing that is
good, that he may give unto him that has need. Deuteronomy. 18.11. Ephesians. 5.3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil. V. To filch or pilfer the
least pin, or point from another. Mark. 10. 19. Thou shall not steal, thou
shall not hurt any man. Romans 3.8. And (as we are blamed, and as some affirm
that we say) why do we not evil, that good may come thereof? whose damnation
is just. VI. To remove ancient bounds. Prou. 22. 28. Thou shall not remove
the ancient bounds which thy fathers have made. Hos. 5. 8. The Princes of Judah
are like them which remove the bounds. VII. To steal other men's servants, or
children, to commit sacrilege, or robbery. 1. Tim. 1. 10. To whoremongers,
buggerers, and menstealers. Josh. 7.19. Achans theft. 1. Cor. 6.10. Neither
thieves, nor covetous persons, nor robbers, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of
God. For robberies, these sorts of men especially are famous: Thieves by the
Queens high ways, Pirates upon the seas, Soldiers not content with their
pay, and whosoever they be, that by maine force take that which is none of
their own. Luke 3.14. The soldiers asked him, saying, What shall we do? he
said, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any man falsely, and be content
with your wages. VIII. To conspire with a thief, whether by giving advice how
he may compass his enterprise, or by concealing his fact, that he be not
punished. Prou. 29.24. He that is partaker with a thief, hates himself, and
he that hears cursing, and discovers it not.

The punishment of theft, may at the discretion of the Judge be sometimes
aggrauated, as he sees the quality of the offense to be. Therefore thieves
sometimes are punished with death.

Now if any man object, that the Judicial law of God, does only require the
restitution thereof fourefold for such an offense: I answer, that the civil
Magistrate, when he sees some one, or many offenses to increase, he may by his
authority increase the civil punishment due to that sin. Now it is
manifest, that the sin of theft is far more grievous in our Commonweal,
then it was among the Jews. For first the inhabitants of this commonweal,
are generally by many degrees poorer then the Jews were: therefore to steal a
thing, but of some small value, from one in this country, does more endamage
him, then a thing of great value would have done the Jews.

Again, the people of this country are of a more stirring and fierce
disposition: the which makes thieves to be more outrageous, with their
robberies joining violence, and the disturbance of the public tranquillity of
the country whereof more r^gard ought to be had, then of one private man's life.

The affirmative part.
Thou shall preserve and increase thy neighbors goods.

To this are required these that follow: I. A certain calling: wherein every
man, according to that gift which God has given him must bestow himself
honestly, to his own and neighbors good. 1. Cor. 7. 24. Let every man wherein
he was called, therein abide with God. Ephesians. 4.28. 1. Pet. 4.10. According as
every man has received a gift, so let him administer to another, that ye may
be good dispensers of the manifold graces of God. Galat. 5.13. In love serve
one another. II. The true use of riches, and all the goods a man has: to which
belong two virtues; Contentation, and Thriftinesse.

Contentation is a virtue, whereby a man is well pleased with that estate,
wherein he is placed. 1. Tim. 6.6. Godliness is great gain, with a contented
mind: 7. For we brought nothing into the world, neither shall we carry any
thing out of the world. But, having food and raiment, let us be content.
Philip. 4.11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.
12. I can be abased, and I can abound, every where in all things I am
instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, and to abound, and to have
want. Math. 6.11. Give us this day our daily bread. Heb. 13. 5. Let your
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with the things which you
have: for he says, I will not forsake thee, nor leave thee.

Thriftinesse or frugalitie, is a virtue, whereby a man carefully keeps his
goods which he has gotten, and imploieth them to such uses, as are both
necessary and profitable. Prou. 5.15. Drink the water of thy cesterne, and of
the rivers out of the mids of thine own well. 16. Let thy fountains flow
forth, and the rivers of waters in the streets. 17. Let them be thine own,
yea, thine only, and not the strangers with thee. Prou. 21. 5. The thoughts of
the diligent do surely bring abundance. 17. He that loves pastime, shall be a
poor man, and he that loves wine and oil shall not be rich. Prou. 12.27. The
deceitfullman rosteth not that which he has taken in hunting: but the riches
of the diligent are precious. Ioh. 6.12.

III. To speak the truth from the heart, and to use an harmless simplicity
in all affairs. Psalm. 15.2. He that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, he that speaks the truth in his heart. Genesis 23.15. Ephron said
to Abraham, The land is worth four hundredth shekels of silver, what is that
between me and thee? bury therefore thy dead. 16. So Abraham harkned to
Ephron, and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the
audience of the Hittites, even four hundredth shekels of current money among
merchants, etc. IV. Just dealing. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Of this there are many kinds:
I. In buying and selling, in setting and hiring of Farms, tenements, lands: in
merchandise, and all manner of commodities, men must rack nothing, but keep a
just price. A just price is then observed, when as the things prized, and the
price given for them, are made equal, as near as may be. For the observation
of this equality, these four rules are to be considered: for by them all
bargains must be ordered. I. There must be a proportion and equality in all
contracts: the which will then be, when as the seller does not value the thing,
only according to his own pains, and cost bestowed upon it, but also sees
what profit it may be to the buyer, and in what need he stands of it. Leuit.
25.14. When thou sellest ought to thy neighbor, or buyest ought at his hands,
ye shall not oppress one another: 15. But according to the number of the years
after the Iubilee, thou shall buie of thy neighbor. Also according to the
number of years of thy revenues, he shall sell unto thee. ^6. According to the
number of years thou shall increase the price thereof: and according to the
fewness of years, thou shall abate the price of it: for the number of fruits
does he sell unto thee. II. They must be squared according to the law of
nature, the sum whereof Christ propounds in these words: Whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do the same unto them. III. The bond of
nature must be kept, which binds him that receives a benefit, and makes a
lawful gain of another man's goods, that he being once enriched, shall make a
proportionable and natural recompense, even above the principal. IV. Men must
communicate and make use of their goods, with that cauent which Paul gives. 2.
Cor. 8.13. not so to bestow them, as that others may be eased, and they
grieved: or contrariwise. II. Men must make ^ale of such things, as are in
their kind substantial, and profitable. III. They must use just waights and
measures Deuteronomy. 25.13. Thou shall not have in thy bag two manner of waights, a
great and a small: but thou shall have a right and just weight, a perfect and
just measure shall thou have. Ezech. 55.10. Ye shall have just balances, a
true Ephah, and a true Bath. Mich. 6.11. Shall I justify the wicked balances,
and the bag of deceitful waights? IV. He that hireth any thing, must not
only pay the appointed hire, but make that which he hired good, if ought but
good come unto it, by his default. Exodus 22.14,15. If a man borrow any thing of
his neighbor, and it be hurt, he shall surely make it good, etc. V. The pledge
or pawn ought to be redeemed, and if it be of important necessity, as that
which preserves the life of our neighbor, it must be restored to him in
continently. Exodus 22. 26. If thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge^ thou
shall restore it again before the sun go down: for that is his covering
only. Deuteronomy. 24.6. No man shall take the nether or upper millstone to pledge^
for this gage is his living. Neither may a man in a pledge be his own caruer,
but he must take such an one as is offered. Deuteronomy. 34.1^. When thou shall ask
again of thy neighbor any thing lent, thou shall not go into his house to
fetch his pledge. 11. But thou shall stand without, and the man that borrowed
it of thee, shall bring the pledge out of the doors unto thee. 12.
Furthermore, if it be a poor body, thou shall not sl^epe with his pledge. 13.
But shall restore him the pledge, etc. VI. To become surety only for men that
are honest, and very well known: and that warily, with much deliberation. Prou.
11. 15. He shall be sore vexed that is surety for a stranger. And he that
hates suretiship is sure. Proverb. 17. 18. A man destitute of understanding
touches the hand, and becomes surety for his neighbor. Prou. 22. 26. But
if it be so that a man has entangled himself by suretiship, the best way is
to crave his creditours favor, by his own humble suit, and the instant
request of his friends. Prou. 6. 1. My son, if thou be surety for thy
neighbor, and have stricken hands with the stranger. 2. Thou art snared with
the words of thine own mouth. 3. Do this now, my son, and deliver thy
self, seeing thou art come into the hand of thy neighbor, go, and humble thy
self, and solicit thy friends. 4. Give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber
to thine eye liddes. 5. Deliver thy self, as a Do from the hand of the
hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fouler. VII. All just covenants and
promises, though they be to our hindrance, must be performed. For a promise
does bind, if it be lawful, so far forth as he will, unto whom we make the
promise. Psalm. 15. 4. Which swears to his hurt, and changes not. Prou.
25.14. A man that boasts and keeps not promise, is like clouds and wind
without rain. Judge. 1.24. The spies saw a man come out of the city, and they
said unto him, Show us, we pray thee, the way into the city, and we will show
thee mercy. 25. And when he had showed them the way into the city, they smote
the city with the edge of the sword, but they let the man and all his household
depart. Therefore if after promise made, he either see that he shall be
endamaged thereby, or hindered in the performance of his promise, he may crave
release, and if it be granted, accept of it. VIII. To lend that we do, freely.
Luke 6.35. Lend, looking for nothing again, and your reward shall be great. And
when we borrow, we must be careful to make restitution, even, if need be,
with the sale of our own goods. 2. King. 4.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Here the wife of
the sons of the Prophets sells her oil which God sent by the hand of
Elisha, to pay her creditour. IX. To restore that, which is committed to our
custody without delay. Math. 21.41. He will destroy the evil husbandmen, and
let out his vineyard to others, which shall deliver him the fruits in their
season. Proverb. 3.28. But if such a thing be lost, not by our default, we are
not urged to repay it. Exodus 22.7. If a man deliver his neighbor money, or
stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of his house, if the thief be found, he
shall pay the double. 8. If the thief be not found, then the master of the
house shall be brought before the Judges, to swear whether he have put his
hand to his neighbors goods or no. X. That which a man finds, is to be kept
in his own hand, if the true owner cannot be heard of: but if he be, he must
restore it. Deuteronomy. 22.1. Thou shall not see thy brothers ox, nor his sheep go
astray, and withdraw thy self from them, but shall bring them again unto thy
brother. 2. If he be not near unto thee, or thou know him not, thou shall
bring it into thine house, and it shall remain with thee, until thy brother
seek after it, then shall thou deliver it to him again. 3. So shall thou do
with all lost things. XI. To get our own, we may, if we cannot do otherwise,
sue our neighbor in law. But we must follow our suites in an holy manner, and
with these circumstances. I. In all suites, we must not do any thing, that may
prejudice the profession of Christian religion. Therefore all suitors in law,
offend, when they trust more in man, then in God, and make their religion a
jest to worldlings, partly by striving about things of small importance: and
partly by not admitting any conditions of reconciliation. 1. Cor. 6.1. Dare any
of you, having business against another, be judged under the unjust, and not
under the Saints? II. Law must be the last remedy, as a desperate medecin is
the last remedy the Physician uses. We must assay all means possible, before
we use this, especially to a brother. 1. Cor. 6.7. There is utterly a fault
among you, because ye go to law one with another: why rather suffer ye not
wrong? why rather sustain ye not harm? III. In all suites of law, we must be
mindful of the law of charity, and not so much endeavor to maintain our
own right, as to recall our brother, which erreth, into the right way.



CHAP. 28. Concerning the ninth Commandment.
THe ninth Commandment belongs to the preservation of our neighbors good
name.

The words are these: Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

The Resolution.
Thou shall not beare] That is, answer when thou art asked before a Judge.
Deutr. 19.17. Then both the men which strive together, shall stand before the
Lord, even before the Priests and the Judges which shall be in those days. 18.
And the Judges shall make diligent inquisition, and if the witness be found
false, and has given false witness against his brother.

Witnesse] By a figure signifies every word, whereby the credit and estimation
of our neighbor is either impaired or diminished.

The negative part.
Thou shall not diminish or hurt the good name and estimation of thy neighbor.

Here is forbidden: I. Envy, disdain of others, desire of a man's own glory.
1. Tim. 6.4. He is puffed up, and knows nothing, but doteth about questions,
and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings. 1. Pet. 2.1.
Wherefore, laying aside all maliciousnes, and envy and all guile, and evil
speaking. Math. 21.15. But when the chief Priests and Scribes saw the
marueiles that he did, and the children crying in the Temple, and saying,
Hosanna the son of David, they disdained. II. Evil suspicions. 1. Tim. 6.4.
1. Sam. 17.28. And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spoke unto the men,
and Eliab was angry with David, and said, Why came thou down hither? and
with whom have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy
pride, and the malice of thine heart. Act. 28.4. Now when the Barbarians saw
the worm hang on his hand; they said among themselves. This man surely is a
murderer, whom though he has escaped the sea, yet vengeance has not suffered
to live. Here are condemned, hard censures and sinister judgments against our
neighbor. Matthew. 7. 1. Judge not; that ye be not judged. 2. For with what
judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it
shall be measured to you again. These judgments which Christ forbids, are
private and reproachful or slanderous judgments: namely, when either a good
or an indifferent action is interpreted to the worse part: or when a light
offense is made heinous through evil will, without all desire either to amend,
or to cover the same. Act. 2.13. And other mocked and said, They are full of
new wine. 14. But Peter standing with the eleven, lift up his voice, and said
unto them, Ye men of Judea, and all ye that inhabit Jerusalem, be this known
unto you, and hearken unto my words; 15. For these are not drunken, as ye
suppose, since it is but the third hour of the day. 1. Sam. 1.13. For Hannah
spoke in her heart, her lips did move only, but her voice was not heard,
therefore Eli thought she had been drunken. But we must know that there are
three kinds of judgments which are not forbidden by this commandment of
Christ. The first is, the ministry of the Gospel, which judges and
reprooueth sin. The second is, the judgment of the Magistrate. The third is,
the judgment of a friend admonishing us: as when he says, Abstain from the
company of such a man, for I know him to be a drunkard, etc. III. A relation
of the bare words only, and not of the sense and meaning of our neighbor.
Math. 26.59. Now the chief Priests, and the Elders, and all the whole
Council, sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death. 60. But they
found none, and though many false witnesses came, yet found they none: but at
the last came two false witnesses. 61. And said, This man said, I can destroy
the Temple of God, and build it in three days. Indeed Christ said some such
thing in words, as appears, Ioh. 2.19. Jesus answered and said unto them,
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up again. IV. A lie,
whereby every falsehood with purpose to deceive is signified, whether in words,
or in deeds, or concealing the truth, or any other way whatsoever; be it for
never so great a good to our neighbor. V. To pronounce unjust sentence in
judgment, to rest in one witness, to accuse another wrongfully, to bewray a
man's cause by collusion. 1. King. 21.12. They proclaimed a fast, and set
Nabaoth among the chief of the people. 13. And there came two wicked men, and
sat before him, and the wicked men witnessed against Nabaoth in the presence
of the people, saying, Nabaoth did blaspheme God and the King: then they carried
him away out of the city, and stoned him with stones that he died. Deuteronomy. 17.6.
At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall he, that is worthy of death, die:
but at the mouth of one witness he shall not die. VI. Openly to raise forged
and hurtful tales and reports of our neighbor, or privily to devise the same.
Romans 1.29. Whisperers. 30. Backbiters, haters of God, proud, boasters,
inuenters of evil things. Leuit. 19.16. Thou shall not walk about with tales
among thy people, thou shall not stand against the blood of thy neighbor: I am
the Lord. 1. Tim. 5.13. And likewise also being idle, they learn to go about
from house to house: yea, they are not only idle, but also pratlers and
busibodies, speaking things which are not comely. To spread abroad flying
tales, or to feign and add any thing unto them. Prou. 26.20. Without wood the
fire is quenched, and without a talebearer strife cease. 21. As a coal
makes burning coals, and wood a fire, so the contentious man is apt to kindle
strife. 22. The words of a talebearer are as flatterings, and they go down
into the bowels of the belly. 2. Cor. 12.20. For I fear least when I come, I
shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found to you such as I
would not, and least there be strife, envying, wrath, contentions, backbitings,
whisperings, swellings, and discord among you. To receive or believe those
tales which we hear of others. Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not receive a false
tale, neither shall thou put thine hand with the wicked, to be a false
witness. 1. Sam. 24.10. And David said to Saul, Wherefore give thou an ear
to men's words, that say, Behold, David seeks evil against thee? VII. To
accuse our neighbor, for that which is certain and true, through hatred, and
with intent to hurt him. 1. Sam. 22.9. Then answered Doeg the Edomit^ (who was
appointed over the servants of Saul) and said, I saw the son of Ishai when he
came to Nob, to Abimelech the son of Ahitub, 10. Who asked counsel of the
Lord for him, and gave him victuals, and he gave him also the sword of Goliath
the Philistim. Of this deed David thus speaks. Psalm. 52.1. Why boastest thou
thy self in thy wickedness, O man of power? the loving kindness of the Lord
endures for ever. 2. Thy tongue imagines mischeife, and is like a sharp
rasor, that cutteth deceitfully. 3. Thou do love evil more then good: and
lies, more then to speak the truth. 4. Thou love all words that may
destroy, O deceitful tongue. VIII. To open or declare our neighbors secret to
any man, especially, if he did it of infirmity. Mat. 18.15. Moreover, if thy
brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him
alone: if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother. Pro. 11.13. He that goes
about as a slanderer, discovers a secret: but he that is of a faithful
heart, concealeth a matter. IX. All babbling talk and bitter words. Ephesians. 5.3.
But fornication and all uncleanness, let it not be once named among you. 4.
Neither filthiness, neither foolish talking, neither jesting, which are not
comely, but rather giving of thanks. Ioh. 9.34. They answered and said unto
him, Thou art altogether borne in sins, and do thou teach us? so they cast
him out. This jesting, or as it is now termed, wit, which Aristotle the
Philosopher makes a virtue, is by Paul the Apostle accounted a vice: and that
not without cause; I. Such quipps as sting others, though they be a great
pleasure for some to hear, yet are they very offensive to such as are so
girded. II. It is very hard to make Christian both godliness and gravity to
agree with such behavior.

Object. But salt and tart speeches are vsull in the scriptures, 1. King. 18.
27. Eliah mocked the Priests of Baal. Esa. 14.9. Answer. Such speeches are not
spoken to please others, but are sharply deuounced against Gods enemies to his
glory.

X. Flattery, whereby we praise our neighbor above that, we know in him.
Prou. 27.6. The wounds of a lover, are faithful, but the kisses of an enemy
are to be shunned. 14. He that praises his friend with a loud voice, rising
early in the morning, it shall be counted to him as a curse. Act. 12.22. And
the people gave a shout, saying, The voice of God, and not of man. This is a
grievous sin in the ministers of the word. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5. Neither did we ever
use flattering words, as ye know, nor colored covetousness, God is record.
Ier. 6.13. For from the least of the^, even unto the greatest of them, every
one is given unto covetousness, and from the Prophet, even unto the priest,
they all deal falsely. 14. They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of
my people with sweet words, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace.
Romans 16.18. For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own bellies, and with fair speech and flattering, deceive the hearts of the
simple. XI. Foolish and over confident boasting. Prou. 27.1. Boast not thy
self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. 2. Let
another praise thee, and not thine own mouth, a stranger and not thine own
lips. XII. To accuse, or witness against one falsely. 1. King. 21.13. Naboth
blasphemed God and the king.


The affirmative part.
Preserve the good name of thy neighbor. Eccles. 7.3. A good name is better
then a good ointment.

Here is commanded: I. A reioicing for the credit and good estimation of thy
neighbor. Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the spirit, is love, joy, peace,
gentleness. Romans 1.8. First I thank my God through Jesus Christ, for you all,
because your faith is published throughout the whole world. II. Willingly to
acknowledge that goodness we see in any man whatsoever, and only to speak of
the same. Tit. 3.2. That they speak evil of no man, that they be no fighters,
but soft, showing all meekenes to all men. Moreover, we must with all desire,
receive and believe reports of our neighbors good. Act. 16.1. Then came he to
Derbe and Lystra, and behold, a certain Disciple was there, named Timotheus, a
woman's son which was a Iewesse, and believed, but his father was a Grecian.
2. Of whom the brethren which were at Lystra and Iconium, reported well. 3.
Therefore Paul would that he should go forth with him, and took and
circumcised him. Notwithstanding, this must so be performed of us, that in no
wise we approve and allow of the vices and faults of men. 2. Chron. 25.2.
And he did uprightly in the eyes of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart.
And chap. 27.2. And he did uprightly in the sight of the Lord according to all
that his father Vzziah did, save that he entered not into the temple of the
Lord, and the people did yet corrupt their ways. III. To interpret a doutfull
evil, to the better part. Cor. 13.5. Love thinks not evil. 7. It believes
all things, it hops all things. Genesis 37.31. And they took Joseph's coat, and
killed a kidde of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood. 32. So they
sent that parti-colored coat, and they brought it to their father, and said,
This have we found, see now, whether it be thy sons coat or no. 33. Then he
knew it, and said, It is my sons coat, a wicked beast has devoured him,
Joseph is surely torn in pieces.

And here observe the religion of that Joseph, which was betrothed to Mary, who
when he saw that Mary was with child, was readier to conclude that before her
betroathing she was with child by committing fornication, then after by
committing adultery. Mat. 1.19. But for all this, men must not be too too
credulous, or light of belief. Ioh. 2.24. But Jesus did not commit himself
unto them because he knew them all.

IV. Not to believe an evil report, running abroad amongst the common people,
by the whisperings of talebearers, as it were, by conduit pipes. Psalm. 15.3.
He that slaundereth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor
receives a false report against his neighbor. Ierem. 40.14. And they said
unto him, Know thou not, that Baalis the king of the Ammonites, had sent
Ishmac^ the son of Nethaniah, to slay thee? but Gedaliah the son of Ahikam,
believed him not. 16. But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, said unto Jonathan, the
son of Kareah, thou shall not do this thing, for thou speak falsely of
Ishmael. But we ought also to be angry at such whisperings. Pro. 25.23. As the
North wind drives away the rain, so does an angry countenance the
slaundering tongue. V. To keep secret the offense of our neighbor, except it
must of necessity be revealed. Prou. 10.12. Hatred stirs up contention: but
love covers all trespasses. Mat. 1.19. Then Joseph her husband being a just
man, and not willing to make her a public example, was minded to put her away
secretly.


A man would suppose, that by this means, we should be partakers of other men's
sins. But we must know, that we ought to conceal our neighbors imperfections,
least he should be provoked to offense: yet in the mean season, he must be
admonished that he may amend. Gal. 6.1. Iam. 5.19. Brethren, if any of you have
erred from the truth, and some man has converted him. 20. Let him know; that
he which has converted the sinner from going astray out of his way shall save
a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

But if the sin which is concealed, cannot thereby be taken away, then must we
in love and charity, declare the same to those, which may remove and amend
the same. Genesis 37.2. When Joseph was seventeen year old, he kept sheep with
his brethren, and the child was with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons
of Zilpah, his fathers wives: and Joseph told unto their father, their evil
sayings. 1. Cor. 1.11. For it has been declared unto me, my brethren, of you
by them that are of the house of Cloe, that there are contentions among you.
Mat. 18.16. But if he hear thee not, take with thee one or two, that by the
mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be confirmed.

To get a good name and estimation amongst men, and to keep the same, when we
have gotten it. Phil. 4.8. Furthermore, brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report,
if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things. A good
name is gotten, 1. If we, seeking the kingdom of God before all things, do
repent us of all our sins, and with an earnest desire, embrace and follow
after righteousness. Prou. 10.7. The memorial of the just shall be blessed:
but the name of the wicked shall rot. Mar. 14.9. Verily I say unto you,
wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this
also, that she has done, shall be spoken of in remembrance of her. 2. We must
have a care both to judge, and speak well of others. Mat. 7.2. With what
judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged. Eccl. 7.23. Give not thine heart also
to all the words that men speak, least thou do hear thy servant cursing
thee. 24. For oftentimes also thine heart knoweth^ that thou likewise have
cursed others. 3. We must abstain from all kind of wickedness: for one
only vice or sin, does obscure and darken a man's good name. Eccles. 10.1.
Dead flies cause to stink, and putrify the ointment of the Apothecarie: so
does a little folly him that is in estimation for wisdom, and for glory. 4.
We must in all things earnestly seek for the glory of God only, and not our
own. Matthew. 6.5. And when thou praiest, be not as the hypocrites, for they
love to stand and pray in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets,
because they would be seen of men: verily I say unto you^ they have their
reward. 6. But when thou praiest, enter into thy chamber; and when thou have
shut thy door, pray unto thy father which is in secret, and thy father which
sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.

But if^ when we seek the glory of God, honest and godly men do praise and
testify well of us, we must not despise this their testimony and
commendation: and although they never praise us nor testify of us at all, yet
must we take it in good part. 2. Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, and not in
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world, and most of all to you wards. And chap. 10.13. But we will not rejoice
of things which are not within our measure, but according to the measure of the
line, whereof God has distributed to us a measure, to attain even unto you.
Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou
shall maintain my lot. 6. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places:
yea, I have a fair heritage. 1. Cor. 1.31. He that reioiceth, let him rejoice
in the Lord.

CHAP. 29. Of the tenth Commandment.
THe tenth Commandment concerns concupiscences, committed against our
neighbor.

The words are these: Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall
not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing thy neighbor has.

The Resolution.
Couet] The cogitation or motion of the heart, is of three sorts. The first is,
some glancing or sudden thought, suggested to the mind by Satan, which
suddenly vanishes away, and is not received of the mind. This is no sin.
For it was in Christ, when he was tempted by the devil. Matthew. 4. v. 1. The
second is, a more permanent thought or motion, the which, as it were, tickleth
and inueigleth the mind with some inward joy. The third is, a cogitation
drawing from the will and affection, full assent to sin. We are to understand
this commandment of the second sort of motions only, not of the first, or of
the last, to which the five former commandments do belong.

Now then to covet, is to think inwardly, and also to desire any thing, whereby
our neighbor may be hindered, albeit, there ensue no assent of the will, to
commit that evil. For the very Philosophers condemn covetousness of the very
heart, and Ciuilians disallow a purpose only to do evil, if it be conjoined
with a manifest deliberation. And as for the concupiscence in this place
forbidden we may well think it is more close and secret, because S. Paul a
doctor of the law was altogether ignorant of it. Romans 7.7. I had not known
lust, except the Law had said. Thou shall not lust. Again, if that
concupiscence immediately going before the consent, were not prohibited in this
place, there must be a great confu^ion in the decalogue. For the seventh
commandment forbids some kind of coveting of our neighbors wife.

Hou^e] The commandment is illustrated by an argument drawn from the
distribution of the objects of concupiscence; whence it is apparent, that only
evil concupiscence is condemned in this place. Coloss. 3.5. For there is a
good concupiscence or desire: as of meat and drink, and that of the spirit.
Gal. 5.17. The spirit lusts against the flesh.

The negative part.
Thou shall not covet that which is thy neighbors.

Here are prohibited: I. Concupiscence it self, namely, original corruption,
in as much as it is hurtful to our neighbor. Iam. 1.14. II. Each corrupt and
sudden cogitation and passion of the heart, springing out of the bitter root
of concupiscence. Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit. Luke 10.27.
Thou shall love the Lord with all thy soul. To this place appertains Satan's
suggestion, if after the first offer it be entertained and received in the
closet of the heart. III. The least cogitation and motion, the which, though it
procure not consent, delights and tickleth the heart. Of this kind are these
foolish wishes: I would such an house were mine, such a living, such a thing,
etc. And hitherto may we refer all unchaste dreams, arising from
concupiscence.


The affirmative part.
Covet that only, which is available to thy neighbor.

Here are commended: I. A pure heart toward our neighbor. 1. Tim. 1.5. The
end of the commandment is love, out of a pure heart, a good conscience and
faith unfeigned. II. Holy cogitations and motions of the spirit. Paul prays,
1 Thessalonians. 5.23. that the Thessalonians may be holy, not only in body and
soul, but also in spirit. Ephesians. 4.23. III. A conflict against the evil
affections and lusts of the flesh. Romans 7.22. I rejoice in the law of God, in
regard of the inward man. 23. But I see another Law in my members, rebelling
against the Law of my mind, and making me captive to the law of sin, which
is in my members. 24. Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death? 2. Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.


CHAP. 30. Of the use of the Law.
THe use of the Law in unregenerate persons, is threefold.

The first is, to lay open sin, and make it known. Romans 3.20. By the works
of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the law comes the
knowledge of sin.

The second use is accidentarily, to effect and augment sin, by reason of the
flesh, the which causes man to decline from that which is commanded, and ever
to incline to that which is prohibited. Romans 7.8. Sin took occasion by the
commandment, and wrought in me all manner of concupiscence: for without the
Law sin is dead. 9. For I once was alive without the Law, but when the
commandment came, sin revived. 10. But I died, and that commandment, which
was ordained unto life, was found to be unto me unto death.

The third use is, to denounce eternal damnation for the least disobedience,
without offering any hope of pardon. This sentence the law pronounces against
offenders, and by it, partly by threatening, partly by terrifying, it reigns
and rules over man. Romans 3.19. We know that whatsoever the Law says, it
says it to them which are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and
all the world be culpable before God. Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the works
of the law, are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all that is written in the book of the Law to do them. 2.
Cor. 3.7. If the ministration of death written with letters, and engraven in
stones was glorious: 8. How shall not the ministration of the spirit be more
glorious? For if the ministration of condemnation were glorious, etc.

The end why sin reigns in man, is to urge sinners to fly unto Christ,
Galat. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe. 24. Wherefore
the law was our schoolmaster to Christ. Heb. 12.18,19,20.

The continuance of this power of the law is perpetual, unless a sinner
repent: and the very first act of repentance so freeth him, that he shall no
more be under the law, but under grace. 2. Sam. 12.13. Then said David to
Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord: wherefore Nathan said to David, The Lord
also has forgiven thy sin, and thou shall not die. Romans 6.14. Sin shall
not have dominion over you: for ye are not under the law, but under grace.

If therefore, thou desire seriously eternal life: first take a narrow
examination of thy self, and the course of thy life, by the square of Gods
law: then set before thine eyes the curse that is due unto sin, that, thus
bewailing thy misery, and despairing utterly of thine own power, to attain
everlasting happiness, thou may renounce thy self and be provoked to seek
and sue unto Christ Jesus.

The use of the Law in such as are regenerate is far otherwise: for it guides
them to new obedience in the whole course of their life, which obedience may be
acceptable to God by Christ. Romans 3.31. Do we therefore through faith make the
Law of none effect? God forbid: nay we rather establish the Law. Psalm. 119. 24.
Thy testimonies are my delight, they are my counselors. v. 105. Thy word is a
lantarne unto my feet, and a light unto my paths.

CHAP. 31. Of the covenant of Grace.
HItherto concerning the covenant of works, and of the Law, now follows the
covenant of grace.

The covenant of Grace, is that whereby God freely promising Christ, and his
benefits, exacteth again of man, that he would by faith receive Christ, and
repent of his sins. Hos. 2.18. In that day will I make a covenant for them,
etc. 19. And I will marry thee unto me for ever: yea, I will marry thee unto
me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in mercy, and in compassion. v.
20. I will even marry thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the
Lord. Ezech. 36.25. I will pour clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean:
yea from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you. v.
26. And I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit will I put within you.
v. 27. And cause you to walk in my statutes. Malach. 3.1. The Lord, whom ye
seek, shall speedily come to his temple: even the messenger of the covenant
whom ye desire: behold, he shall come, says the Lord of hosts.

This covenant is also named a testament: for it has partly the nature and
properties of a testament or will. First it is confirmed by the death of the
testator. Heb. 9.16. Where a testament is, there must be the death of him that
made the testament. 17. For the testament is confirmed when men are dead: for
it is yet of no force, so long as he that made it is alive. Secondly, in this
covenant we do not offer much, and promise small to God, but in a manner do
only receive: even as the last will and testament of a man, is not for the
testators, but the heirs commodity.

The covenant albeit, it be one in substance, yet it is distinguished into the
old and new testament.

The old testament or covenant is that, which in types and shadows prefigured
Christ to come, and to be exhibited.

The new testament declares Christ already come in the flesh, and is
apparently showed in the Gospel.

The Gospel is that part of Gods word, which contains a most worthy and
welcome message: namely, that mankind is fully redeemed by the blood of Jesus
Christ, the only begotten son of God, manifest in the flesh, so that now for
all such as repent and believe in Christ Jesus, there is prepared a full
remission of all their sins, together with salvation and life everlasting.
Ioh. 3.14. As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness: so must the son
of man be lift up. 15. That who so believes in him, should not perish but have
everlasting life. Act. 10.43. To him also give all the Prephets witness, that
through his name, all that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins.

The end and use of the Gospel is, first to manifest that righteousness in
Christ, whereby the whole law is fully satisfied, and salvation attained.
Secondly, it is the instrument, and, as it were, the conduit pipe of the holy
ghost, to fashion and derive faith into the soul; by which faith, they which
believe, do as with an hand apprehend Christ's righteousness. Romans 1.16. I am
not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to salvation
to as many as believe, to the Jew first, and then to the Grecian. 17. For the
justice of God is revealed by it from faith to faith. Ioh. 6. 33. It is the
spirit which quickens, the flesh profits nothing: the words which I speak
are spirit and life. 1. Cor. 1.21. It pleased God by the foolinesse of
preaching, to save such as believe.

The Gospel preached is, in the flourishing estate of Christ's Church, that
ordinary means to beget faith: but in the ruinous estate of the same, when as
by apostasy, the foundations thereof are shaken, and the clear light of the
word is darkened, then this word read or repeated, yea the very sound thereof
being but once heard, is by the assistance of Gods spirit, extraordinarily
effectual, to them whom God will have called out of that great darkness
into his exceeding light. Romans 10.14. How shall they call on him, in whom they
have not believed? and how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? Act. 11.19. And they which
were scattered abroad, because of the affliction that arose about Steven,
walked throughout till they came to Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antiochia,
preaching the word to no man, but to the Jews only. 30. Now some of them
were men of Cyprus, and of Cyrene, which when they were come into Antiochia,
spoke unto the Grecians, and preached the Lord Jesus. 21. And the hand of the
Lord was with them, so that a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord.
Ioh. 4. 28. The woman then left her water pot, and went her way into the city,
and said to the men, 29. Come, and see a man which has told me all things that
ever I did: Is not he the Christ? then they went out of the city, and came
unto him. 39. Now many of the Samaritans believed in him, for the saying of the
woman which testified, He has told me all things that ever I did. 41. And
many more believed, because of his own word. 42. And they said unto the woman,
Now we believe not because of thy saying: for we have heard him our selves,
and know that this is indeed the Christ the Savior of the world. Romans 10.18.
I demand, have they not heard? no doubt their sound went out through all the
earth, and their words into the ends of the world. Thus we may see, how many
of our forefathers, and ancestors in the midst of popery obtained eternal
life. Revel. 12. 17. The dragon was wroth with the woman, and went and made
war with the remnant of her seed, which kept the commandments of God, and
have the testimony of Jesus Christ. Romans 11.4. What says the divine Oracles?
I have reserved to me seven thousand men, which never bowed knee to Baal.

CHAP. 32. Of the Sacraments.
THus much of the preaching of the word: now follow the appendants to the same:
namely, the Sacraments.

A Sacrament is that, whereby Christ and his saving graces, are by certain
external rites, signified, exhibited, and sealed to a Christian man. Romans
4.11. He received the sign of circumcision, as the seal of the righteousness
of the faith which he had, when he was circumcised. Genesis 7.11. Ye shall
circumcise the foreskin of your flesh, and it shall be a sign of the covenant
between me and you.

God alone is the author of a Sacrament; for the sign cannot confirm any
thing at all, but by the consent and promise of him, at whose hands the
benefit promised must be received. Therefore God it is alone which appointed
^ignes of grace, in whose alone power it is to bestow grace.

And God did make a Sacrament by the sacramental word, as Augustine
witnesses, saying, Let the word come to the element, and there is made a
Sacrament. The sacramental word, is the word of institution, the which God
after a several manner, has set down in each Sacrament. Of the word there
are two parts: the commandment, and the promise. The commandment is, by which
Christ appoints the administration of the Sacraments, and the receiving of
the same. As in Baptism, Go into the whole world baptizing them in the Name,
etc. In the Lords Supper. Take, eat, drink, do ye this. The promise is the
other part of the institution, whereby God ordained elements that they might be
instruments and seals of his grace. As in Baptism, I baptize thee in the name
of the father, of the son, and of the holy Ghost. In the Supper, This is my
body given for you: and, This this is my blood of the new Testament. Therefore
this word in the administration of the Sacrament ought to be pronounced
distinctly and aloud, yea, and as occasion serves, explained also: to the
end, that all they to whom the commandment and promise appertains, may
know and understand the same. And hence it is very plain, that the ministers
impiety does not make a nullitie of the Sacrament, neither does it any whit
hinder a worthy receiver: no more then the piety of a good minister can
profit an unworthy receiver: because all the efficacy and worthiness thereof
depends only upon Gods institution, if so be that be observed.

The parts of a Sacrament are, the Sign, and the Thing of the Sacrament.

The sign, is either the matter sensible, or the Action conversant about the
same.

The matter sensible, is usually called the sign.

The mutation of the sign, is not natural, by changing the substance of the
thing; but respective, that is, only in regard of the use. For it is severed
from a common to an holy use: Therefore there is not any such either force or
efficacy of making us holy, inherent, or tied unto the external signs, as
there is naturally in bathes to purify corrupt diseases: but all such
efficacy is wholly appropriate to the holy Spirit, yet so, as it is an
inseparable companion of true faith and repentance, and to such as turn unto
the Lord, is, together with the sign exhibited. Whence it comes to pass,
that by Gods ordinance, a certain fignification of grace, and sealing thereof
agrees to the sign.

The thing of the Sacrament, is either Christ and his graces which concern our
salvation, or the action conversant about Christ.

I say, first Christ, and then his graces, because no man receives grace from
Christ, unless he be made truly partaker of his very body and blood: even as
no man can by right reap any fruit of the ground, whereof first he has no
just title and interest.

The action about Christ is spiritual, and is either the action of God, or of
Faith.

The action of God is, either the offering, or the Application of Christ and
his graces to the faithful.

The action of faith is, the consideration, desire, apprehension, and receiving
of Christ in the lawefull use of the Sacrament.

Thus much of the parts of a Sacrament: now follows the union of the parts.

This sacramental union, I. is not natural according to the place: for there
is no mutation of the sign into the thing signed; neither is the thing signed,
either included in, or fastened upon the sign. But II. it is respective,
because there is a certain agreement and proportion of the external things
with the internal, and of the actions of one with the actions of the other:
whereby it comes to pass, that the signs, as it were, certain visible
words incurring into the external senses, do by a certain proportionable
resemblance draw a Christian mind to the consideration of the things
signified, and to be applied.

This mutual, and, as I may say, sacramental relation, is the cause of so
many figurative speeches, and metonymies, which are used: as, when one thing in
the Sacrament is put for another. As, I. The sign is used for the thing
signified. Exodus 12. 11. Ye shall eat it (namely the Lamb) in have, for it is
the Lords passover. Ioh. 6. 52. I am the living bread, which came down from
heaven: if any eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread which
I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. 1. Cor.
5.7. Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. 1. Cor. 10.17. We that are
many, are one bread, and one body, because we are all partakers of one bread.
II. The name of the thing signified is given to the sign: as, The bread is
Christ's body, the cup is Christ's blood. 1. Cor. 11.24. Math. 26.28. III. The
effect of the thing signified is given to the sign, as Circumcision is a
covenant, Genesis 17. 10. Act. 7.8. The cup is the new Testament in Christ's blood.
Luke 22.16. Baptism is the washing of the new birth. Tit. 3.5. IV. That which
properly belongs to the sign, is attributed to the thing signified. Deuteronomy.
10.16. Circumcise the foreskin of your hearts. Ioh. 6.53. Unless ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you.


The end why a Sacrament was ordained, is I. for the better confirmation of our
faith: for by it as by certain pledges given, God of his great mercy, does as
it were bind himself unto us. Now a Sacrament does confirm our faith, not by
any inhere^t or proper power it has in it self, as has a sovereign medecin
received by a patient, the which whether a man sleep or wake it confirms his
strength: but rather by reasoning, and using the signs, when the holy Ghost
shall frame in our hearts such a conclusion, as this: All such as are
converted, rightly using the Sacraments, shall receive Christ and his graces:

But I am converted, and either now do, or before have rightly used the
Sacraments:

Therefore I shall receive Christ and his graces.



II. That it might be a badge and note of that profession by which the true
Church of God is distinguished from other congregations. III. That it might be
a mean to preserve, and spread abroad the doctrine of the Gospel. IV. It
serves to bind the faithful that they do continue both loyal, and
grateful to their Lord God. V. It is the bond of mutual amity betwixt the
faithful.

How a Sacrament is necessary to salvation. The covenant of Grace is
absolutely necessary to salvation: for it comprehending Christ Jesus the very
substance of the Covenant, man must necessarily either receive it, or perish
eternally: but a Sacrament is not absolutely necessary, but only as it is a
prop and stay for faith to lean upon. For it cannot entitle us into the
inheritance of the sons of God, as the covenant does, but only by reason of
faith going before, it does seal that which before was bestowed upon us. As we
see in humane contracts the bond arises from the mutual consent of the
parties: but the instrument or bill, and the setting to of the seal, they do
not make, but rather confirm the bond mutually before made: the which mutual
consent remaining firm, the contract stands still in force, though the
instrument or seal be wanting.

Therefore the want of a Sacrament does not condemn, but the contempt is that
which will condemn a man. The want of a Sacrament is, when we are justly
hindered from the receiving of the same; as, when one is prevented by death, or
lives in such a place where he cannot receive the Sacrament. And as for the
neglect of a Sacrament, albeit it be a very grievous sin, yet is it such an
one, as for which he that is heartily penitent for the same, may well hope for
pardon.

The holy use of a Sacrament is, when such as are truly converted, do use
those rites which God has prescribed unto their true ends, in the receiving of
a Sacrament. Therefore I. the reprobate, though God offer the whole Sacrament
unto them, yet they receive the signs alone without the things signified by
the signs: because the sign without the right use thereof, is not a Sacrament
to the receiver of it. So Paul says, Romans 2. 25. Circumcision verily is
profitable if thou keep the Law: but if thou be a transgressour of the Law,
thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. And Augustine has this saying, If
thou receive it carnally, yet cease it not to be spiritual, though to thee
it be not so. II. The Elect as yet not converted to the Lord, do receive in
like manner the bare signs without the thing signified; yet so, as that, that
Sacrament shall in them afterward have his good effect. For the Sacrament
received before a man's conversion, is afterward to the penitent both ratified,
and becomes profitable: and that use of the Sacrament which before was
utterly unlawful, does then become very lawful. III. The Elect already
converted, do to their salvation receive both the sign and the thing
signified together; yet so, as that for their unworthy receiving thereof, the
which comes to pass by reason of their manifold infirmities, and relapses
into sin, they are subject unto temporal punishments.

The difference betwixt a Sacrament and a Sacrifice, is, in a Sacrament God
bestows his graces upon us: but in a sacrifice, we return unto God faith and
obedience.

There are many differences betwixt the Sacraments of the Old testament, and
these of the New. I. They were many, these but few. II. They pointed at Christ
to come; these show that he is come. III. They were appropriate unto the
posterity of Abraham; but these are common to the whole Church culled out of
the Jews and Gentiles.

CHAP. 33. Of Baptism.
THere are two Sacraments. 1. Cor. 10. 1. I would not have you ignorant, that
all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea. 2. And
were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea. 3. And did all eat
the same spiritual meat, 4. And drank all the same spiritual drink: (for
they drank of the spiritual rock that followed them, which rock was
Christ.) Tertull. 4. book, contra Marcion. August. de Symbol ad Catechum. 4.
book 6. chap.

The first Sacrament is that, whereby Christians are initiated, and admitted
into the Church of God: and this is Baptism.

The second Sacrament, whereby the Church is preserved and nourished, is the
Lords Supper.

Baptism is a Sacrament, by which such as are within the covenant are washed
with water, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: that
being thus engraffed into Christ, they may have perpetual fellowship with
him. Matthew. 28.19. Go; teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Matthew. 16.16. He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved: he that believes not, shall be condemned. 1. Cor.
1.13. Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? ^i^her were ye baptized
into the name of Paul. 14. I thank God, I baptized none of you but Crispus and
Gaius. 15. Least any should say, I had baptized into mine own name.

Within the covenant are all the seed of Abraham, or the seed of the
faithful. These are either of riper years, or infants.

Those of riper years, are all such as adjoining themselves to the visible
Church, do both testify their repentance of their sins, and hold the
foundations of religion, taught in the same Church. Matthew. 3. 6. And they were
baptized of him in Jorden, confessing their sins. Act. 8.36. As they went
they came to a water: then the Eunuch said, See, here is water, what hinders
me to be baptized? 37. Then Philip said, If thou believe with all thine heart,
thou may: he said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. 38. And
they went down into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch; and he baptized
him. Exodus 12.48. If a stranger dwell with thee, and will observe the Passover
of the Lord, let him circumcise all the males that belong unto him, and then
let him come and observe it, and then he shall be as one that is borne in the
land: for none uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

Infants within the Covenant, are such, as have one at the least of their
parents faithful. 1. Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the
wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, else were your
children unclean, but now they are holy. Romans 11.16. If the first fruits be
holy, so is the whole lump: and if the root be holy, so are the branches.
Genesis 17.7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be God unto
thee, and thy seed after thee. 13. He that is borne in thine house, and he
that is bought with money, must needs be circumcised: so my covenant shall be
in your flesh for an everlasting covenant. Act. 16.31. They said, Believe in
the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thy whole household.

Quest. How are the children of faithful parents in the covenant?

Answer. Holy parents are two ways to be considered. First, as they were the
sons of the first Adam, and so are as yet partly carnal. In this estate they
in like sort do beget their sons the children of wrath. For the father
begets a son, not as he is a good man, but simply as a man; and therefore
being impure, he must needs beget that which is impure. Secondly, we must
consider the parents as they are the sons of God, engraffed into the second
Adam. In this estate though they cannot derive faith unto their posterity,
(for the sons of God are not made such by natural generation, but by the
adoption of God the Father) yet may they believe both for themselves and
others, according to the tenor of the covenant of grace: as Adam did sin
both for himself and others: and as parents in bargains do covenant both for
themselves and their heirs after them. Hence it is that Paul says, that the
parents are like unto the first fruits which do sanctify the whole lump. So
then, the faith of the parents makes those their sons to be accounted in the
covenant, which by reason of their age do not yet actually believe.

To be baptized into the name of the Father, etc. after the receipt of the
outward sign of washing, is to be made one of Gods family, which is his
church, and to be partaker of the privileges thereof. Genesis 48.16. The Angel
which has delivered me from all evil, bless the children, and let my name be
named upon them, and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Izhak, that they may
grow as fish into multitude, in the midst of the earth. Esai 4. 1. In that
day shall seven women take hold of one man, saying, We will eat our own
bread, and we will wear our own garments: only let us be called by thy name,
and take away our reproach.

By this it is manifest, that in this washing of Baptism, there is sealed and
propounded a marvelous solemn covenant and contract: first, of God with the
baptized, in that God the Father vouchsafed to receive him into favor, the
Son to redeem him, the holy Ghost to purify and regenerate him: secondly,
of the baptized with God, who promises to acknowledge, invoke, and worship
none other God, but the true Jehovah, which is the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost.

The external and visible matter of baptism, is water: for the minister may
not baptize with any other liquor, but only with natural water.

This was the judgment of the Primitive Church. For when as a certain
minister, for want of water, took sand, and baptized one with that: the
party thus besanded, was further baptized, the former being esteemed of none
effect. Niceph. histor. 3. book. 33. chapter.

The external form of baptism, is the ministers washing of the baptized,
according to the prescript rule of Gods word. Romans 10. 4.

The ancient custom of baptizing, was to dippe, and, as it were, to diue, all
the body of the baptized in the water, as may appear in Paul, Romans 6. and the
Councels of Laodicea, and Neocaesarea: but now especially in cold countries,
the Church uses only to sprinkle the baptized, by reason of childrens
weakness: for very few of ripe years are now a days baptized. We need not
much to marvel at this alteration, seeing charity and necessity may
dispense with ceremonies, and mitigate in equity the sharpnes of them.

The Sacramental union of the parts of baptism, is on this sort.

The element of water whereby the uncleanness of the body is purified by a
most convenient proportion shadoweth out the blood of Christ, and by the figure
Synecdoche, taking the part for the whole, whole Christ. 1. Ioh. 1.7. And the
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin.

The action of the Minister, is his washing of the party baptized with the
element of water. This seals and confirms a double action of God. I. The
engrafting or incorporating of the baptized into Christ. Gal. 3.27. As many as
are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. 1. Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we
are all baptized into one body. II. Our spiritual regeneration. Tit. 3.5. Not
by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy he
saved us by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost.

Of washing there be three parts. The putting into the water: the continuance
in the water: and the coming out of the water.

The putting into, or the sprinkling of water, does ratify I. the shedding of
the blood of Christ for the remission of all our sins, and the imputation of
his righteousness. Act. 22.16. Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy si^nes
in calling on the name of the Lord. 1. Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you,
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. II. The mortification of sin by
the power of Christ's death. Romans 6.3. Know ye not that all we which have been
baptized into Jesus Christ have been baptized into his death? 6. Knowing this,
that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin: for he that is dead is
freed from sin.

The continuance in the water, it notes the burial of sin; namely, a
continual increase of mortification by the power both of Christ his death and
burial. Romans 6.4. We are buried then with him by baptism into his death.

The coming out of the water does confirm our spiritual vi^ification to
newness of life in all holiness and justice, the which we attain unto by the
power of Christ's resurrection. Romans 6. 4. Like as Christ was raised up from the
dead by the glory of the Father: so we also should walk in newness of life.
5. For if we be graffed with him to the similitude of his death, even so shall
we be to the similitude of the resurrection.

The action of the party to be baptized, is twofold.

The first is, to offer himself to be baptized before the minister, and that
in the presence of the congregation. This signifies that he does consecrate
himself unto the Lord, and that he utterly renounceth the flesh, the world,
and the devil. 1. Pet. 3.21. To the which also the figure which now saves us,
even baptism agrees, (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but in
that a good conscience makes request unto God) by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ.

The second is, to receive the external washing by water: this signifies,
that the party baptized does receive the internal washing, which is by the
blood of Christ, or at the least that it is offered unto him.

Rebaptizing is at no hand to be admitted: for as in natural generation man is
once only borne; so must he be in the spiritual regeneration. Therefore they
that are baptized of a minister, which is an heretic, not yet degraded from
that calling, (if the external form of administration be observed) must not
be baptized again of the Church of God: especially, if after baptism they
have been made partakers of the Lords Supper: only they ought to be
instructed in the true faith. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 7. c. 8. says, There
was in our Province an ancient professor of the faith, yea before I was
created Bishop, nay before my predecessor Heraclas: who, when he was present
at the baptism of some, and heard what questions they were asked, and what
answer they returned, forthwith came weeping unto me, and humbling himself
before me, confessed that he was baptized by an heretic: yet in regard of that
administration which he saw in our Church, he accounted that no baptism, in
that the confession there used, was fraught with blasphemies. This also he
added, that he was for this offense so sore grieved, that he durst not so much
as lift up his eyes to heaven: wherefore he most earnestly besought me, that ^e
might be cleansed and purified with the baptism of our Church, and so receive
the gift of the holy Ghost. The which notwithstanding, I durst not presume to
administer, but said, it was sufficient for him that he had been so long a
professor amongst us, and that at the receipt of the Lords Supper, he answered,
Amen. These things I told him were of force enough to purge him. And therefore
I advised him, to rest himself in his former faith and conscience already
sufficiently purified, especially in that he so long was partaker with us in
the Sacraments. Aug. lib. 3. c. 2. contra Petil. literas.

The right use of baptism is this. When inwardly in thine heart thou sensibly
feel, that through the heat of concupiscence, thou art moved to commit some
sin, then begin to have some holy meditation of that solemn vow, which
thou did make to God in baptism.

Again, if through infirmity, thou fallest once or often into some sin,
still have recourse unto baptism, that there thou may receive courage to thy
soul. For although baptism be but once only administered, yet that once
testifies that all man's sins past, present, and to come, are washed away. 1.
Pet. 3.20. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Therefore baptism may be truly termed the
Sacrament of repentance, and, as it were, a board to swim upon, when a man
shall fear the shipwreck of his soul. Mark. 1.4. 1. Tim. 1.19. Romans 6.4,6.

Last of all, see thou never rest, till such time as thou have a feeling of
that renewing power, signified in baptism: namly, the power of Christ's death
mortifying sin, and the virtue of his resurrection, in the renouation of the
Spirit.

CHAP. 34. Of the Lords Supper.
THe Lords Supper is a Sacrament, wherewith in the signs of bread and wine,
such as are engraffed into Christ, are in him daily, in a spiritual manner,
nourished to eternal life. 1. Cor. 11.23,24,25. Romans 6.5.

The proportion of the parts of the Lords Supper, is on this wife.

The Elements of bread and wine, are signs and seals of the body and blood
of Christ.

The action of the Minister, is a note of Gods action.

The Ministers action is fourefold.

The first is, his taking the bread and wine into his own hands: this does
seal the action of God the Father, by which he, from all eternity, did
separate and elect his Son, to perform the duty of a Mediator betwixt God
and man. Ioh. 6.27. For him has the Father sealed.

The second is, his blessing of it, whereby he, by the recital of the
promises, and prayers conceived to that end, does actually separate the bread
and wine received from their common unto an holy use. This does seal that
action of God, by which he did in the fullness of time, send Christ to perform
the office of a Mediator, unto the which he was foreordained.

The third is, the breaking of the bread, and pouring out of the wine: this
does seal the passion of Christ, by which he, verily upon the cross was, both
in soul and body, bruised for our transgressions.

The fourth is, his distributing of the bread and wine into the hands of the
communicants. This seals the action of God, offering Christ unto all, yea, to
the hypocrites; but giving him indeed unto the faithful, for the daily
increase of their faith, and repentance.

The action of the receiver, is double.

The first is, his taking the bread and wine in his hand. This seals a
spiritual action of the receiver, namely, his apprehension of Christ by the
hand of faith. Ioh. 1. 1^.

The second is, his eating of the bread, and drinking of the wine, to the
nourishment of his body. This seals his application of Christ by faith, that
the feeling of his true union and communion with Christ may daily be increased.
1. Cor. 11.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion
of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ?

That doctrine of Transubstantiation, which teaches that the bread is turned
into the very body of Christ, and the wine into his blood, is a very fable:
the reasons why, are these. I. In the first institution of the Supper, which
was before Christ his passion, the body of Christ was then eaten as already
crucified. Now, how the body of Christ crucified should after a corporal
manner be eaten, he himself being not as yet crucified, it is impossible to
imagine. II. The bread after the consecration, is distributed into parts: but
the whole body of Christ is received of every singular communicant. III. The
bread is the communion of Christ's body: therefore not his very body. IV. By
this means the body of Christ should not only be made of the substance of
the Virgin Marie, but also of the bakers bread. V. Let the bread and wine be
kept for a time, and the bread will mould, and the wine turn to vinegar after
the consecration, by which we may conclude, that there did remain the
substance of bread and wine. VI. This opinion quite overthrows the
sacramental union, namely, the proportion which is betwixt the sign and the
thing signed.

The l^ke may be said of the Lutherans Consubstantiation, whereby they b^^re
men in hand that there is a coexistence, by which the body of Christ is eith^^
in, or with, or about the bread. Against this, these reasons may suffice: I.
The ^ho^^ ^ction of the Supper is done in remembrance of Christ, now what
(...)f the body of Christ were really present. II. Act. 3.21. Whom the heavens
(...) contain, until the time that all things be restored. III. This is an
essential property of every magnitude, and therefore of the body of Christ, to
be in one place, and circumscribed or compassed of one place. IV. If that
Christ's body were eaten corporally, then should the wicked as well as the
faithful be partakers of the flesh of Christ; but to eat his flesh, is to
believe in him, and to have eternal life. V. It were very absurd to think,
that Christ sitting amongst his Disciples, did with his own hands take his
own body, and give it wholly to each of his Disciples.

Such as will, in an holy sort prepare themselves to celebrate the Lords
Supper, must have:

First, a knowledge of God and of man's fall, and of the promised restoration
into the covenant by Christ. 1. Cor. 11.26. So often as ye shall eat this
bread, and drink of this cup, ye show the death of the Lord till he come.
29. and discern his body.

Secondly, true faith in Christ: for every man receives so much, as he
believes he receives. Heb. 4.2. For unto us was the Gospel preached, as also
unto them: but the word, that they heard, profited not them, because it was not
mixed with faith in those that heard it. Furthermore, true repentance of their
sins. Esai 66.3. He that kills a bullock, as if he slew a man: he that
sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck: he that offers an
oblation, as if he offered swines blood: he that remembers incense, as if he
blessed an idol: yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul
delights in their abominations. Psalm. 26.6. I wash mine hands in innocence, O
Lord, and so come before thine altar.

Thirdly, renewed faith and repentance, for daily and new sins committed upon
infirmity: because every new sin requires a new act, both of repentance and
faith: and this renouation must be seen by our reconciliation of our selves to
our neighbors, for injuries and wrongs. Mat. 5.23. If thou bring thy gift to
the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, 24.
Leave thy gift before the altar, and go, first be reconciled to thy brother,
then come and offer thy gift. If thou can come furnished with these things,
abstain not from the Lords table, by rea^^n of thy many infirmities.

If being thus prepared, thou feel that thou have a corrupt and rebellious
heart, know this: that then thou art well disposed to the Lords table, when
thou art lively touched with a sense of thy crooked disposition. Luke 4.18. The
spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should
preach the Gospel to the poor: he has sent me, that I should heal the
broken hearted, that I should preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, that I should set at liberty them that are
bruised. Mat. 15.24. He answered, and said, I am not sent, but to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. The Lords Supper is a medicine to the diseased
and languishing soul: and therefore men must as well seek to purify and
heal their hearts in it, as to bring pure and sound hearts unto it.

If thou feel in thy self some great defect and want of faith, pray unto god
earnestly, that he will vouchfafe to increase it. Mark. 9.24. The father of the
child crying with tears, said, Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief.

If thou can not do this thy self, use the aid of the faithful, which may
by their faith carry thee, as men did the sick of the palsy upon their
sholders and laid him before Christ. Mark. 2.3.

If thou come not furnished on this manner to the Lords table, thou shall be
adjudged guilty of the body and blood of Christ: as he is guilty of high
treason, who does counterfeit or clip the Princes coin. 1. Cor. 11.27. He that
eats this bread, and drinks this cup unworthily, shall be guilty of the
body and blood of Christ.

But such as feel not themselves penitent, they neither can come to the Lords
table without repentance, least they eat and drink their own damnation,
neither must they defer repentance, by which they may come, least they
procure to themselves final destruction.

CHAP. 35. Of the degrees of executing Gods decree of Election.
WE have hitherto declared the outward means, whereby Gods decree is
executed. Now follow the degrees of executing the same.

The degrees are in number two. The love of God, and the declaration of his
love. Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made
us accepted in his blood. 9. And has opened unto us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure, which he has purposed in him.

Gods love is that, whereby God does freely love all such as are chosen in
Christ Jesus, though in themselves altogether corrupt. 1. Ioh. 4. 19. We loved
him because he loved us first. Romans 5.8. God sets out his love toward us,
seeing that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. 10. For if when we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his son, much more
we being reconciled shall be saved by his life.

The declaration of gods love is twofold The first, toward infants elected to
salvation: the second, toward men of riper years.

The declaration of Gods love toward infants, is on this manner.

Infants already elected, albeit they in the womb of their mother before they
were borne, or presently after, depart this life, they, I say, being after a
secret and unspeakable manner by Gods spirit engraffed into Christ obtain
eternal salvation. 1. Cor. 12. 13. By one spirit we are all baptized into one
body, whether Jews, or Grecians, bond, or free, and have been all made to
drink into one spirit. Luke 1. 35. The Angel answered, and said unto her, The
holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall
ouershadow thee: therefore also that holy thing, which shall be borne of thee,
shall be called the son of God. 41. And it came to pass, as Elizabeth heard
the salutation of Marie, the babe sprang in her belly, and Elizabeth was
filled with the holy Ghost. 64. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his
tongue loosed, and he spoke and praised God^ 80. And the child grew, and waxed
strong in spirit. Iere. 1.5. Before I formed thee in the womb, I knew thee, and
before thou came out of the womb, I sanctified thee.

I call the manner of infants salvation secret and unspeakable, because I. they
want actual faith to receive Christ: for actual faith necessarily
presupposes a knowledge of Gods free promise, the which he that believes,
does apply unto himself: but this, infants cannot any ways possibly
perform. And surely if infants should have faith actually, they generally
either love it when they come to men's estate, or at least show no signs
thereof, both which they could not do, if before they had received actual
faith. Nay we see that in those of riper years, there are not so much as the
shadows or sparks of faith to be seen, before they be called by the
preaching of the Gospel. II. Infants are said to be regenerated only in
regard of their internal qualities and inclinations, not in regard of any
motions, or actions of the mind, will, or affections. And therefore they want
those terrors of conscience, which come before repentance as occasions thereof,
in such as are of riper years of discretion. Again, they are not troubled
with that conflict and combat betwixt the flesh and the spirit, wherewith
those faithful ones that are of more years are marueilously exercised.

CHAP. 36. Concerning the first degree of the declaration of Gods love.
THe declaration of Gods love, in those of years of discretion, has especially
four degrees. Romans 8.30. 1. Cor. 1.30.

The first degree, is an effectual calling, whereby a sinner being severed
from the world, is entertained into Gods family. Ephesians. 2.17. And came, and
preached peace unto you, which were a far off, and to them that were near.
19. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and forrainers, but citizens with
the Saints, and of the ^oushold of God.

Of this there be two parts. The first is, Election, which is a separation of a
sinner from the cursed estate of all mankind. Ioh. 15.19. If ye were of the
world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I
have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.

The second is, the reciprocal donation or free gift of God the Father,
whereby he bestows the sinful man to be saved upon Christ, and Christ again
actually and most effectually upon that sinful man, so that he may boldly sa^e
this thing, namely Christ, both God and man, is mine, and I for my benefit and
use enjoy the same. The like we see in wedlock: The husband says, this woman
is my wife, whom her parents have given unto men, so that, she being fully
mine, I may both have her, and govern her. Again, the woman may say, this man
is mine husband, who has bestowed himself upon me, and does cherish me as his
wife. Romans 8.32. He spared not his own son, but gave him for us. Esa. 9.6.
Unto us a child is born, and unto us a son is given. Ioh. 17.2. Thou have given
him power upon all flesh, that he should give eternal life to all the^ whom
thou have given him. 6. I have declared thy name to the men which thou gave
me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gave them me, and they kept
thy word. 7. Now they know that all things, whatsoever thou have given me,
are of thee. Ioh. 10.29. My father, which gave them me, is greater then all,
and none is able to take them out of my fathers hands.

Hence comes that admirable union, or coniunctio^, which is the ingraffing of
such as are to be saved, into Christ, and their growing up together with him:
so that after a peculiar manner, Christ is made the head, and every repentant
sinner, a member of his mystical body. Ioh. 17.20. I pray not for these
alone, but for them also which shall believe in me, through their word. 21.
That they all may be one, as thou, O father, art in me, and I in thee: even
that they may be also one in us. Ephesians. 2.20. We are members of his body, of his
flesh, and of his bones. Ioh. 25.1. I am that true vine, and my father is the
husbandman. 2. Every branch that bears not fruit in me, he takes away: and
every one that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more
fruit. Ephesians. 2. 20. Built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
those corner stone is Jesus Christ himself. 21. In who^ all the building
coupled together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord. 22. In whom ye are
also built together, to be the habitation of God by the spirit.

This, albeit it be a most near and real union, yet we must not think, that
it, by touching, mixture, or, as it were, by souldring of one soul with
another, neither by a bare agreement of the souls among themselves: but by the
communion and operation of the same spirit, which being by nature infinite, is
of sufficient ability to conioyne those things together, which are of
themselves far distant from each other: the like we see in the soul of man,
which conioyneth the head with the foot. Ephesians. 2.22. 2. Pet. 1.4. Whereby most
great and precious promises are given unto us, that by them ye should be
partakers of the godly nature, in that ye fly the corruption, which is in the
world through lust. Phil. 2.1. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, etc.

The things united. In this union not our soul alone is united with Christ's
soul, or our ^lesh with his flesh: but the whole person of every faithful
man, is ^erely conjoined with the whole person of our Savior Christ God and man.

The manner of their union is this. A faithful man first of all and immediately
is united to the flesh, or humane nature of Christ, and afterward by reason of
the humanity, to the Word it self, or divine nature. For salvation and life
depends on that fullness of the godhead which is in Christ, yet it is not
communicated unto us, but in the flesh, and by the flesh of Christ. Ioh. 6.5^.
Except ye eat the flesh, and drink the blood of the Son of man, ye have no
life in you. 56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in
me, and I in him.

The bond of this union. This union is made by the spirit of God applying
Christ unto us: and on our parts by faith receiving Christ Jesus offered unto
us. And for this cause is it termed a spiritual union.

Christ, because he is the head of the faithful, is to be considered as a
public man sustaining the person of all the elect. Hence is it that the
faithful are said to be crucified with Christ, and with him to die, and to be
buried. Romans 6.4, 5,6, to be quickened. Ephesians. 2.5. to be raised up, and placed
in heaven. v. 6. Col. 3.1. the which is not only in regard of the hope of the
faithful, but because they are accepted of God certainly to have done all
these things in Christ: even as in Adams first sin all his posterity
afterward was tainted of sin.

A member of Christ is diversely distinguished: and is so either before men, or
God.

Before me^ they are the members of Christ, who outwardly professing the faith,
are charitably reputed by the Church as true members. But such deceiving at
length, both themselves and the Church, may be reprobates: and therefore in
Gods presence they are no more true members, then are the noxious humors in
man's body, or a wooden leg or other joint cunningly fastened to another
part of the body.

Again, members before God, they are such, as either are decreed to be so, or
actually are so already.

Such as are decreed to be so, are they, who, being elect from all eternity,
are either as yet not borne, or not called. Ioh. 10. 16. Other sheep have I,
which are not of this fold: them also must I bring.

Actual members of Christ, are either living or dying members.

An actual living member of Christ is, every one elected, which being
engraffed by faith, and the spirit into Christ, does feel and show forth the
power of Christ in him.

An actual dying or decaying member is, every one truly engraffed into
Christ, and yet has no feeling of the power and efficacy of the quickening
spirit in him. He is like unto a benumbed leg without sense, which indeed is
a part of man's body, and yet receives no nourishment: such are those faithful
ones, who for a time do faint and are overcome under the heavy burden of
tentations, and their sins: such are also those excommunicate persons, who in
regard of their engraffing are true members, howesoeuer in regard of the
external communion with the Church, and efficacy of the spirit, they are not
members, till such time as they being touched with repentance, do begin as it
were, to live again.

God executes this effectual calling by certain means.

The first, is the saving hearing of the word of God, Ezech. 16.6. When I
passed by thee, I saw thee polluted in thine own blood, and I said unto thee,
when thou wast in thy blood, thou shall live. Esai 55.1. H^, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no silver, come, buie, and
eat: come^ I say, and buie wine and milk without silver, and without money.
Ioh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them he gave this privilege, that they
should become the sons of God: namely, to them which believed in his name.
which is, when the said word outwardly is preached, to such an one as is both
dead in his sins, and does not so much as dream of his salvation. Romans 7.7.
I knew not sin but by the Law: for I had not known lust, except the Law had
said, Thou shall not lust.
And first of all, the Law showing a man his sin, and the punishment thereof,
which is eternal death: afterward the Gospel, showing salvation by Christ
Jesus, to such as believe. 1. Ioh. 2.27. But the anointing, which ye received
of him, dwells in you: and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the
same anointing teaches you of all things, and is true, and is not lying, and,
as it is taught you, ye shall abide in him.
And inwardly the eyes of the mind are enlightened, Act. 16.14. A certain
woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of the T^yatirians, a
worshipper of God, heard us, whose heart God opened, that she attended to the
things that Paul spoke. Psal^ 40. v. 6. Thou art not delighted with sacrifice
and burnt offerings, but mine ears have thou opened. Ioh. 6.44. No man can
come unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him: and I will raise
him up at the last day. Esai 54.6. The Lord has called thee, being as a woman
forsaken, and as a young wife, when thou wast refused, says the Lord.
the heart and ears opened that he may see, hear, and understand the
preaching of the word of God.

The second, is the mollifying of the heart, the which must be bruised in
pieces, that it may be fit to receive Gods saving grace offered unto it. Ezech.
11. 19. I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within their
bowels. And I will take the stony heart out of their bodies, and will give
them an heart of flesh.

There are for the brusing of this stony heart, four principal hammers. The
first, is the knowledge of the law of God. The second, is the knowledge of
sin, both original, and actual, and what punishment is due unto them. The
third, is compunction, or pricking of the heart, namely, a sense and feeling of
the wrath of God for the same sins. The fourth, is an holy desperation of a
man's own power, in the obtaining of eternal life. Act. 2.37. When they heard
these things, they were pricked in heart, and said unto Peter, and the rest of
the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? 38. Peter said unto them,
Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus into the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. Luke
15.17. Then he came to himself, and said, How many hired servants at my
fathers have bread enough, and I die for hunger? 18. I will rise, and go to my
father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before
thee, 19. And am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy
hired servants, etc. Matthew. 15. 24. He answered, and said, I am not sent, but
to the lost sheep of Israel.

The third, is faith, which is a miraculous and supernatural faculty of the
heart, apprehending Christ Jesus, being applied by the operation of the holy
Ghost, and receiving him to it self. Ioh. 1.1,2,6.35. Jesus said unto them, I
am the bread of life, he that comes unto me shall never hunger: and he that
believes in me, shall never thirst. Romans 9.30. What shall we say then? the
Gentiles which followed not righteousness, have attained unto righteousness,
even the righteousness which is of faith.

Christ is received, when every several person does particularly apply unto
himself, Christ with his merits, by an inward persuasion of the heart, which
comes none other way, but by the effectual certificate by the holy Ghost
concerning the mercy of God in Christ Jesus. 1. Cor. 2.12. We have received,
not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of GOD, that we might
know the things that are given to us of GOD. Ezech. 12.10. I will pour the
spirit of grace upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem:
and they shall look unto me, whom they have wounded. Romans 8.16. His spirit
bears witness to our spirit, that we are the sons of God. Ephesians. 1.13. In
whom also ye have trust, after that ye heard the word of truth, even the
Gospel of your salvation, wherein also after that ye believed, ye were sealed
with the holy spirit of promise. 2. Cor. 1.22.

In the work of faith, there are four degrees, or motions of the heart,
linked and united together, and are worthy the consideration of every Christian.

The first, is knowledge of the Gospel, by the illumination of gods spirit.
Esaias 53.11. By his knowledge shall my servant justify many. Ioh. 7.3. This is
life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou
have sent Jesus Christ.

To this, in such as are truly humbled, is annexed a serious meditation of the
promises in the Gospel, stirred up by the sensible feeling of their own
beggerie.

And after the forsaid knowledge in all such as are enlightened, comes a
general faith, whereby they subscribe to the truth of the Gospel. Heb. 4.2.
Unto us was the Gospel preached, as also unto them: but the word that they
heard profited not them, because it was not mixed with faith in those that
heard it. 1. Tim. 1.19. Having faith and a good conscience, which some have put
away, and as concerning the faith, have made shipwreck. 1. Tim. 2.4. Who will
that all men should be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth.

This knowledge if it be more full and perfect, is called in Greek (...), that
is, the full assurance of vnderst^^ding. Col. 2.2. That their hearts might be
comforted, and they knit together in love, and in all riches, of the full
assurance of understanding, to know the mystery of God, even the father, and
of Christ. Romans 14.14. I know, and am persuaded through the Lord Jesus, that
there is nothing unclean of it self. Luke 1.1. For as much as many have taken
in hand to set forth the story of those things, whereof we are fully
persuaded. 1. These. 1.5. Our gospel was unto you, not in word only, but also
in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance.

The second, is hope of pardon, whereby a sinner, albeit he yet feels not
that his sins are certainly pardoned, yet he be believes that they are
pardonable. Luke 15.18. I will go unto him father, and say, Father, I have
sinned against he^uen and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
son, make me as one of thy hired servants.

The third, is an hungring and thirsting after that grace which is offered to
him in Christ Jesus, as a man hungreth and thirsts after meat and drink.
Ioh. 6.35. and 7.37. Reu. 21.6. And he said unto me, It is done. I am A and O,
the beginning and the end, I will give to him that is a thirst of the well of
the water of life freely. Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

The fourth, is the approaching to the throne of Grace, that there flying from
the terror of the Law, he may take hold of Christ and find favor with God.
Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore go boldly to the throne of grace, that we may
receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

This approaching has two parts. The first, is an humble confession of our
sins before God particularly, if they be known sins; and generally, if
unknown: this done, the Lord forthwith remitteth all our sins. Psalm. 32.5.
I thought, I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and
thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. Selah. 2. Sam. 12. 13. David said to
Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord: wherefore Nathan said to David, The
Lord has taken away thy sin, thou shall not die. Luke 15.19.

The second, is the craving pardon of some sins, with unspeakable sighs, and
in perseverance. Luke 15.21. Act. 8.22. Repent of this wickedness, and pray
God, that if it be possible, the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.
Romans 8. 26. The spirit helps our infirmities: for we know not what to pray
as we ought: but the spirit it self makes request for us, with sighs which
cannot be expressed. Hos. 14.2,3. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God, for
thou have fallen by thine iniquity: Take unto you words, and turn to the
Lord, and say to him: take away al iniquity, and receive us graciously.

The fifth arising of the former, is an especial persuasion imprinted in the
heart by the holy Ghost, whereby every faithful man does particularly apply
unto himself those promises which are made in the Gospel. Matthew. 9.2. They
brought unto him a man sick of the palsy: and when Jesus saw their faith, he
said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are
forgiven thee. Mat. 15.28. O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee as
thou desire. Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me: and
in that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God, who
has loved me, and given himself for me.

This persuasion is, and ought to be in every one, eue^ before he have any
experience of Gods mercies. Mat. 15.22. A woman, a Canaanite, came out of the
same coasts, and cried, saying unto him, Have mercy on me, O Lord, the son
of David, my daughter is miserably vexed with a devil, etc. 23,24,25,26,27.
Ioh. 20.29. Jesus said unto him, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou
beleeuest: blessed are they which have not seen, and have believed. Hebr. 11.
1. Faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things which
are not seen. In philosophy we first see a thing true by experience, and
afterward give our assent unto it: as in natural philosophy; I am persuaded
that such a water is hot, because when I put mine hand into it, I perceive by
experience an hot quality.

But in the practice of faith it is quite contrary. For first, we must consent
to the word of God, resisting all doubt and diffidence, and afterward will an
experience, and feeling of comfort follow. 2. Chron. 20.20. Put your trust in
the Lord your God, and ye shall be assured; believe his Prophets, and ye shall
prosper. They therefore do very ill, who are still in a doubt of their
salvation, because as yet, they feel not in themselves, especial motions of
Gods spirit.

Thus much concerning the way which God uses in begetting of faith. There are
beside this, two notable degrees of faith. The one is, the lowest, and as I may
speak, the positive degree: the other is the highest, or superlatiue.

The lowest degree of faith, is called (...), a little or weak faith, like a
grain of mustard seed, or smoking flax, which can neither give out heat nor
flame, but only smoke. Math. 8.25. His Disciples awaked him, saying, Save,
master, we perish. 26. And he said unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of
little faith. Math. 7.20. If ye have faith as much as a grain of mustard
seed, ye shall say unto the mountain, Move, and it shall remove. Esaias 42.3.
The smoking flax shall he not quench.

Faith is then said to be weak and feeble, when as, of those five degrees
above mentioned, either the first, which is knowledge, or the fifth, which is,
application of the promises, is very feeble, the rest remaining strong. Romans
14.2. One believes that he may eat all things, and another which is weak,
eats herbs. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and
let not him which eats not, judge him which eats: for God has received
him. The Apostles although they believed, that Christ was the Son of the
living God: yet they were ignorant of his death and his resurrection. Matthew.
16. 16. Ioh. 6.69. Matthew. 17. 22. Luke 9.49. They understood not that word: for
it was hid from the^, so that they could not perceive it. Act. 1.6. They asked
him, saying, Lord, will thou restore at this time the kingdom of Israel?

For the better knowledge of this kind of faith, we must observe these two
rules.

I. A serious desire to believe, and an endeavor to obtain Gods favor, is
the head of faith Mat 5.6. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. Reu. 21.6. I will give to him that
it is a thirst, of the well of the water of life freely. Psalm. 145.19. He will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and
will save them. For in such as begin to believe and to be renewed, the mind
will lie not idle, but being moved by the holy ghost, strive with
doubtfulnesse and distrust, and endeavor to put their assent to the sweet
promises made in the Gospel, and firmly to apply the same to themselves, and
in the sense of their weakness, desire assistance from above, and thus faith
is bestowed. II. God does not despise the least spark of faith, if so be, it,
by little and little, do increase, and men use the means to increase the
same. Luke 17.5. The Apostles said unto the Lord, increase our faith. 6. And
the Lord said, If ye had faith as much as a grain of mustard seed, and should
say unto this mulberrie tree, Pluck thy self up by the roots, and plant thy
self in the sea, it should even obey you. Man must therefore stir up his
faith, by meditation of Gods word, serious prayers, and other exercises
belonging unto faith.
The highest degree of faith, is (...), a full assurance, which is not only
certain and true but also a full persuasion of the heart, whereby a Christian
much more firmly taking hold on Christ Jesus, makes full and resolute account
that God loves him, and that he will give to him by name, Christ, and all his
graces pertaining to eternal life, Romans 4.20. Neither did be doubt of the
promise of God through unbelief, but was strengthened in the faith, and gave
glory to God. 21. Being fully assured that he, which had promised, was able
also to do it. Romans 8.38. I am persuaded, that neither life, nor death, etc.
can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. 1. Sam. 17.36.
Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: therefore this uncircumcised
Philistim shall be as one of them, seeing he has railed on the host of the
living God. Psalm. 23.6. Doubtless, kindness and mercy shall follow me all the
days of my life. Conferred with v. 1,2,3,4.

Man comes to this high degree, after the sense, observation, and long
experience of Gods favor and love.

Quest. Whether is justifying faith commanded in the law?

Answer. It is commanded in the law of faith, namely, the Gospel, but not in
the law of works, that is, in the morrall law. Romans 3.27. the reasons are
these: I. That which the law reuealeth not, that it commands not: but the
law is so far from revealing justifying faith, that it never knew it. II.
Adam had fully before his fall written in his heart the moral law, yet had he
not justifying faith, which apprehends Christ.

Object. I. Incredulity is condemned by the law.

Answer. That incredulity which is toward God, is condemned in the law, but
that incredulity which is against the Messiah Christ Jesus, is condemned by
the Gospel. For as by the Gospel^ not by the law, incredulity in the Son as
Mediator, appears to be a sin: so likewise not by the law is incredulity
in the Messiah condemned, but by the Gospel, which commands us to hear him
and to believe in him. Mat. 17.5. 1. Ioh. 3.23. Thus it is plain that this
sin, not to believe in Christ, is expressly and distinctly made manifest,
and condemned by the Gospel. And albeit the knowledge of sin be by the law,
yet not every thing which does reprove, and declare some sin, is the law of
works or belongs thereto.

Object. II. But ceremonies belong to the decalogue.

Answer. Ceremonies may be as examples referred to the decalogue, but indeed
they are appendants to the Gospel.

CHAP. 37. Concerning the second degree of the declaration of Gods love.
THe second degree, is justification, whereby such as believe, are accounted
just before God, through the obedience of Christ Jesus. 2. Cor. 5.21. He has
made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin: that we should be made the
righteousness of God in him. 1. Cor. 1.30. Romans 5.19. As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one ( that is,
Jesus Christ, v.17.) shall many also be made righteous.

Quest. Whether did Christ perform full obedience to the law, for us men
alone, or for himself also.

Answer. I. Not for himself, as some not rightly would have him: for the flesh
of Christ being hypostatically united to the Word, and so in it self fully
sanctified, was even from the first moment of conception, most worthy to be
blessed with eternal life. Therefore by all that obedience which he performed
after his conception, Christ, he merited nothing for himself. II. For us,
namely, for the faithful, he fulfilled all the righteousness of the law: and
hence is it that he is called the end of the law unto righteousness to every
one that believes. Romans 10.

Here may be objected: I. Christ as he is man, is bound to perform obedience
to the law for himself.

Answer. He is not bound by nature, but of his own accord: for he was not a
bare man, but God and man. And albeit Christ did neither suffer nor fulfill the
law, but in that flesh which he took upon him; yet by reason of the
hypostaticall union, this his passion and obedience has respect unto the whole
person, considered as God and man, and therefore his obedience was not due on
his part, and so was without merit to himself: yea, in that the flesh of
Christ is united to the person of the Word, and so exalted in dignity and
sanctity above all Angels, it may seem to be exempted from this natural
obligation of performing the law.

II. If then Christ performed the law for us, we are no more now bounden to the
observance of the same: as we do not undergo eternal punishments for our
sins, the which Christ in his person did bear upon the cross.

Answer. If we keep the same respect of performing obedience to the law, the
consequence is very true, otherwise it is not so: for Christ performed
obedience to the law for us, as it is the satisfaction of the law: but the
faithful they are bounden to obedience, not as it is satisfactorie, but as it
is a document of faith, and a testimony of their gratitude toward God, or a
means to edify their neighbors: even as Christ suffering punishments for our
sins, we also suffer punishments as they are either trialls, or chastisments
unto us.

III. The law and justice of God does not together exact both, namely,
obedience, and punishment.

Answer. In man's perfect estate, the justice of God requires only obedience:
but in his estate corrupted, he requires both obedience, and punishment.
Punishment, as the law is violated: obedience, that legal justice may be
performed. Gal. 3.10. It is therefore plain, that not only Christ's passion,
but also his legal obedience, is our righteousness before God.

Justification has two parts: Remission of sins, and imputation of Christ's
righteousness.

Remission of sins, is that part of justification, whereby he that believes,
is freed from the guilt and punishment of sin, by the merits of the passion
of Christ. Coloss. 1.21,22. You has he now reconciled in the body of his flesh
through death to make you holy, and unblameable, and without fault in his
sight. 1. Pet. 2.24. Who, in his own flesh, bare our sins in his body, on
the tree, that we being delivered from sin, should live in righteousness, by
whose stripes ye are healed.

Imputation of righteousness, is the other part of justification, whereby such
as believe, having the guilt of their sins covered, are accounted just in the
sight of God, through Christ's righteousness. 2. Cor. 5.21. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed
is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Romans 4. the
whole chapter, where the Apostle repeateth imputation eleven times. Philip.
3.9. I have counted all things loss, and do judge them to be damage, that I
might win Christ, and might be f^^^d in him, that is, not having mine own
righteousness, which is by the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith.

The form of justification, is, as it were, a kind of translation of the
believers sins unto Christ, and again Christ's righteousness unto the
believer, by means of Gods divine imputation. As is apparent in this picture
falling.



This obedience of Christ, is called the Righteousness of God, and of Christ. Of
God, I. not because it is in God, but of God: for it takes all the power and
merit it has from the deiti^ of the Son: whence it is that Jeremy says,
Jehovah our Righteousness. II. God does only accept of it for us, because
that alone makes us boldly to approach unto Gods throne of grace, that we may
have pardon for our sins, and be received to eternal life. It is also called
the Righteousness of Christ, because being out of us, it is in the humanity
of Christ as in a subject.

Object. I. No man is made just by another man's justice.

Answer. This justice is both an others, and ours also. An others, because it
is in Christ as in a subject: ours, because by means of the forenamed union,
Christ with all his benefits is made ours.

Object. II. The ancient fathers never dreamed of this imputative justice, and
it may seem too of no greater continuance then fifty years.

Ans. This is both false, and impious to affirm. August. 3. Tract. upon John,
says, All such as are justified by Christ, are just not in themselves, but in
him. Barnard in his sermon (ad milites templi cap: 11.) Mors in Christi morte
fugatur, and Christi iustitia nobis imputatur: that is, Death in Christ his
death is put to flight, and the justice of Christ is imputed unto us. And in
his 62. sermon v^on the Canticles: Where is there any rest (says he) but in
the wounds of our Savior? I will further sing, but what? mine own justice?
nay, O Lord, I will remember thy justice alone: for that is also my justice.
For thou wast made of God unto me justice: But should I fear, whether that one
justice would suffice two? nay it is not a short cloak that is not able to
cover a couple. Thy justice is justice for evermore, and will both cover thee
and me, it is largely large and eternal justice: and in me it covers the
multitude of my sins, etc. August. lib. de Spiritu and litera cap. 9. and 26.
We must understand this saying so. The doers of the Law shall be justified,
that we may know, that there are no doers of the law but such as are justified,
so that they are not first doers of the law, and then justified, but first
justified, and then doers of the law. So it is said they shall be justified, as
if it should be said, they shall be reputed just and ac^ounted just.

Justification has annexed unto it Adoption, whereby all such as are
predestinate to be adopted, receive power, to be actually accounted the sons
of God by Christ. Ephesians. 1. 5. Who has predestinate us, to be adopted through
Jesus Christ, unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

By means of adoption, God has bestowed many notable privileges upon his
children. I. They are the Lords heirs apparent. Romans 8.17. If we be children,
we be also heirs, even the heirs of God.

II. They are fellow heirs with Christ, yea kings. Romans 8. 17. Rev. 1.6. And
made us Kings and Priests, even to God his Father.

III. All their afflictions, yea even their wants, and offenses, are turned to
trials or fatherly chastisments, inflicted upon them for their good. Romans 8.28.
We know that all things work together for the best, unto them that love God.
36. It is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted
as sheep for the slaughter. 37. Nevertheless, in all these things, we are
more then conquerours thorough him that loved us. Psalm. 89.32. I will visit
their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes. 33. Yet
my loving kindness will I not take from him. 2. Cor. 12.7. There was given unto
me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, because I should
not be exalted out of measure. 2. Sam. 7. 14. I will be to him a father, and he
shall be to me a son: and if he sin, I will chasten him with the rod of
men, and with the plagues of the children of men.

IV. They have dominion over all creatures, yet so, as that in this life they
have only right to the thing; but after this life also in the same. Whence it
is apparent, that the faithful alone have the true use of the Lords goods, I.
because their persons are in Christ acceptable unto him, in whom also they have
restitution made unto them of those goods which they lost in Adam, that they
may with a good conscience use them. II. They use them with thanksgiving to
their ends appointed by God. 1. Cor. 3.22,23. Whether it be Paul, or Apollos,
or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, whether they be things present, or
things to come, even all are yours. Heb. 2.7. Thou made him little inferior
to the Angels, thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and have set him
above the works of thine hands. 8. Thou have put all things in subjection
under his feet.

Last of all, they may have the Angels as ministering spirits attending upon
them for their good. Hebr. 1.14. Are they not all ministering spirits, sent
forth to minister for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation? Psalm.
34.7. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them.

CHAP. 38. Concerning the third degree of the declaration of Gods love.
THe third degree, is Sanctification, whereby such as believe, being delivered
from the tyranny of sin, are by little and little renewed in holiness and
righteousness. 1. Ioh. 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God, sins not: for his
seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is borne of God. Romans
8.1. There is no condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus, which walk
not after the flesh but after the spirit.

Sanctification has two parts: Mortification, and Vivification.

The mortification of ^inne, is the first part of sanctification, whereby the
power of sin is abated, and crucified in the faithful. Romans 6.2. How shall
we that are dead to sin, live yet therein? 3. Know ye not that all we which
have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his death? 4.
We are buried then with him by baptism into his death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead, by the glory of the father, so we also should walk
in newnes of life. Eccles. 5.6, 7, 11, 12, 13. Galat. 5.24. They which are
Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof.

The means that work mortification, is the death and burial of Christ, from
whence, sin being by it at the first nipped in the head, proceeds such a
virtue, as does both keep under the strength that it cannot break out as it
would, and in man, as it were in a grave, does cause it to die and eke
putrify. Romans 6.6. Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed.

The power of Christ his death, is a certain power issuing into his humanity,
suffering, and dying, from his deity; whereby he did; in the ^ame his
humanity, both concerning the guilt, and also the punishment, vanquish our
sin, imputed unto him, being our surety: that in like sort, he, in us his
members, might by the same power abolish the corruption of sin.

Vivification, is the second part of sanctification: whereby inherent holiness
being begun, is still augmented and enlarged. First, we receive the first
fruits of the spirit, then a continual increase of them. Ephesians. 4.23. Be renewed
in the spirit of your mind. 24. And put on the new man which after God is
created in righteousness, and true holiness. Ephesians. 2. 1. And you, has he
quickened, that were dead in trespasses and sins. Gal. 2. 20. Thus I live, yet
not I now, but Christ in me: and in that I now live by the flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. Romans
8.23. We which have the first fruits of the spirit, even we do sigh in our
selves, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our bodies. 1. Cor.
15.45. The first man Adam was made a living soul, and the second man Adam was
made a quickening spirit.

The efficient cause of them both is the holy Ghost, who does by his divine
power convey himself into the believers hearts, and in them, by applying the
power of Christ his death; and resurrection, creates holiness. Job 3^.24, 25.
Romans 8.9. Now ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, because the spirit of
God dwells in you: but if any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is
not his. 11. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell
in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, because that his spirit dwells in you.

The preservative of vivification, is a virtue derived from Christ's
resurrection, to those that are quickened, which makes them to rise up to
newness of life. Philip. 3.10. That I may know him, and the virtue of his
resurrection.

The power of Christ's resurrection is that, whereby he first, did in his own
^lesh, as conqueror over death and sin, begin to live with God, and to be
exalted above every name: and then by it, he, in his members, sin being d^ad
and buried, does cause in them a study and purpose to live according to the
will of God.

Furthermore, this inherent holiness is to be distinguished into parts,
according to the several faculties of the body and soul of man. 1. Th. 5.23.
The very God of peace sanctify you throughout: And I pray God, that your whole
spirit, soul, and body may be kept blameless, unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

I. The holiness or renewing of the mind, which is the illumination thereof, to
the knowledge of the will of God. Coloss. 1.9. We cease not to pray for you,
and to desire that ye might be fully filled with knowledge of his will, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding. 1. Cor. 12.8. To one is given by the
spirit, the speech of wisdom, to an other the speech of knowledge, by the same
spirit.

Illumination, is either spiritual understanding, or spiritual wisdom.

Spiritual understanding, is an illumination of the mind, whereby it
acknowledges the known truth of the word of God.

Spiritual wisdom, is also an illumination of the mind, whereby the same
truth, is applied to the good ordering of particular both things and actions,
as person, place, and time require.

These two, have these effects, which follow.

I. To discern between good and evil. Heb. 5.14. Strong meat belongs to
them that are of age, which through long custom have their exercised to
discern both good and evil. Phil. 10.1. That we may discern things that
differ one from an other. II. To discern of spirits. 1. Ioh. 4.1. Dearly
beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of
God. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Try all things, and keep that which is good. Act. 17.11.
There were more noble men, then they which were at Thessalonica, which received
the word with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether these
things were so. III. To meditate upon the word and works of God. Psalm. 1.2. But
his delight is in the Law of God, and in that Law does exercise himself day
and night. Psalm. 119.15. I will meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy
ways. Psalm. 107. the whole psalm. IV. To discern and acknowledge man's own
inward blindness. Psalm. 119.33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I
will keep it unto the end^. 28. Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of
thy Law.
II. The sanctity of the memory, is an ability to keep a good thing, when
it is offered to the mind, and as need serves, to remember it. Psalm. 119.11.
I have hid thy promise in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.
Psalm. 16.7. I will praise the Lord who has given me counsel: my reins also
teach me in the nights. Luke 2.51. His mother kept all these things in her
heart.

III. The sanctity of conscience, which is a grace of God, whereby a man's
conscience excuses him for all sins, after they are forgiven him in Christ,
as also of his upright walking in the whole course of his life. 1. Tim. 1.19.
Having faith and a good conscience, which some having put away, etc. 1. Cor.
4.4. I know nothing by my self: yet am I not thereby justified. Act. 23. 1.
Paul said, I have in all good conscience, served God until this day. Act.
24.16. I endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience, toward God and
toward men. Psalm. 26. 1, 2, 3. Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine
innocence, my trust has been also in the Lord: therefore shall I not slide.
Prove me, O Lord, and try me, examine my reins and mine heart. For thy
loving kindness is before mine eyes, therefore have I walked in thy truth.

Hence, in all godly men arises the inward peace of God, and the outward
alacrity in the countenance. Phil. 4.7. The peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall preserve your hearts and minds in Jesus Christ. Prove.
28.1. The wicked flee, when none pursues: but the righteous are bold as a Lion.

IV. Sanctity of will, whereby man begins to will that which is good, and
to refuse the contrary. Therefore in this estate, the will is partly freed from
bondage, partly in bondage to sin. Phil. 2. 13. It is God which works in
you, both the will and the deed, even of his own pleasure. Romans 7. 18. I know
that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will is
present with me, but I find no means to perform that which is good, etc. v.
19, 20, 21, 22.

V. Sanctity of affections, is the right moving of them. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
Romans 7.24.

Affections of most especial note, are these: I. Hope, whereby men with
sighings, look for the accomplishing of their redemption. Romans 8.23.

This hope, when it is once strong and lively, has also her (...), that is,
full assurance, as faith has. Heb. 6.11. And we desire that every one of you
show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end. 1. Pet.
1.3, Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which, according
to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

II. Fear of offending God, because of his mercy, 1. Pet. 1.17. If ye call
him father, which without respect of person, judges according to every man's
work, pass the time of your dwelling here in fear. Psalm. 103.4. There is
mercy with thee, that thou may be feared. III. A base account of all worldly
things, in respect of Christ Jesus. Phil. 3. 7. But the things that were
advantage to me, I accounted loss for Christ's sake. 8. Yea doubtless, I
think all things but loss, for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus
my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do judge them to be
^o^^g, that I might win Christ. IV. The love of God in Christ, which is like
unto death, and as a fire that cannot be quenched. Cant. 8.6. Love is strong as
death, jealousy is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are fire coals, and
a vehement flame. V. A fervent zeal to Gods glory. Romans 9.3. I would wish my
self to be separate from Christ, for my brethren, that are my kinsmen,
according to the flesh. VI. An anguish of mind for our own sins and others
also. Psalm. 119.1^6. Mine eyes gush out with tears, because men keep not thy
law. 2. Pet. 2.7. And delivered just Lot, being vexed with the uncleanly
conversation of the wicked. 8. For he being righteous, and dwelling among
them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with
their unlawful deeds. VII. Exceeding great joy in the holy Ghost. Romans 14.17.
The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost.


VI. Sanctity of body, whereby it is a sit instrument for the soul to
accomplish that which is good. Romans 6.19. As ye have given your members
servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity, to commit iniquity: so now give
your members servants unto righteousness in holiness.

CHAP. 39. Of Repentance and the fruits thereof.
FRom sanctification, Repentance is derived, because no man can earnestly
repent, except he, denying himself, do hate sin, even from his heart, and
embrace righteousness. This no man either will, or can perform, but such an one
as is in the sight of God regenerated and justified, and endued with true
faith. Therefore albeit in such as are converted, repentance does first
manifest it self, yet regarding the order of nature, it follows both faith
and sanctification. Hence also is it evident that this repentance, legal
contrition being some occasion, and, as it were, a preparation to true
conversion, is begotten by the preaching of the Gospel.

Repentance is, when a sinner turns unto the Lord. Act. 26.20. He showed
first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and through all the coasts of
Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and
to do works worthy amendment of life. 1. Ioh. 3.3. Every man that has this
hope in him, purges himself, as he is pure.

This is performed, when as any one, by the instinct of the holy Ghost, does
purpose, will, desire, and endeavor to relinquish his former sins, and to
become a new man. Psalm. 119.112. I have applied my heart to fulfill thy
statutes always, even unto the end. 1. Ioh. 3.3. Act. 11.23. Who when he was
come, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted all, that with
purpose of heart, they would clean unto the Lord.

The fruit of Repentance is, a Christian conversation, wherein are brought
forth fruits worthy amendment of life. Matthew. 3.8. Bring ye therefore forth
fruits worthy of repentance.

A Christian conversation, is such a course of life, whereby we, following
Christ's example, do by him, perform new obedience to God. Math. 11.29. Take
my yoke on you, and learn of me, that am meek and lowly in heart: and ye
shall find rest unto your souls. 1. Pet. 4.1. For as much as Christ has
suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind,
which is, that he which has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin. 1.
Pet. 2.21. For hereunto are ye called, for Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an ensample that we should follow his steps. 1. Pet. 3.10, 11. If any man
long after life, and to see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil,
and his lips that they speak no guile. Let him eschew evil and do good,
let him seek peace and follow after it.

There are two parts of new obedience: the denial of our selves, and the
profession of Christ. Math. 16.24. If any man will follow me, let him forsake
himself, take up his cross, and follow me.

The denial of our selves, consists partly in Christian warrefare, partly in
the patient bearing of affliction.

CHAP. 40. Of Christian warfare.
CHristian warfare, is concerning the right way of fighting in the spiritual
battle.

The parts thereof, are the preparation to battle, and the combat it self.

To the preparation, we must use the complet armor of God. Ephesians. 6.13. For this
cause, take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to resist in
the evil day, and having finished all things, stand fast.

The parts hereof, are especially six. I. Truth. II. Justice. III.
Evangelical obedience. IV. Faith. V. The word of God. VI. Continual and
fervent prayer with watching. Ephesians. 6.14. Stand therefore, and your loins
girded about with verity, and having on the brestplate of righteousness. 15.
And your feet shodd with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. 16. Above
all, take the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of
the wicked. 17. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God. 18. And pray always with all manner prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseverance and
supplication for all Saints. 1. Pet. 5.8. Be sober, and watch: for your
adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walks about seeking whom he may
devour.

The combat, is a mutual conflict of them that fight spiritually.

The warriors, are the tempter and the Christian soldier. Ephesians. 6.12. For we
werestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, and against the wordly governors, the princes of the darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are in high places.

The Tempter, is the prince, or his helpers. The prince, is Satan and his
angels, which are spiritual wickednesses, in high things. His helpers are the
flesh and the world.

The conflict of all these, is temptation, whereby man is provoked to commit
such wickedness, as is hurtful to the salvation of his soul. 1. Pet. 2.11.
Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly
lusts, which fight against the soul.

In the Soldier, two things are to be considered: his resisting and his fall.

Resistance is an action, whereby the soldier does withstand temptation,
through grace working inwardly in him. 1. Ioh. 2.14. I write unto you babes,
because ye have known the father: I have written to you fathers, because ye
have known him that is from the beginning: I have written to you young men,
because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome
the wicked. 1. Pet. 5.8. Ephesians. 6.16. Psalm. 91.13. Thou shall walk upon the lion
and aspe: the young lion and the dragon shall thou tread under feet.

To confirm this, these preservatives which follow, are very necessary.

I. When thou art tempted to sin, do not only abstain from it, but
earnestly love and follow after the contrary. Ioh. 8.44. II. Never yield or
consent to Satan's words, whether he speak the truth, accuse falsely, or
flatter dissemblingly. Ioh. 8.44. Ye are of your father the devil, and the
lusts of your father ye will do: he has been a murderer from the beginning,
and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him: when he speaks
a lie, then speaks he of his own: for he is a lier and the father thereof.
Mark. 1.24. And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do with thee,
Jesus, the son of the most high God. And Jesus said, Hold thy peace and come
out of him. Act. 16.17. She followed Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men
are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
salvation, etc. August. Sermon. 241. III. One temptation is to be looked for
after another, and then especially, when our enemy after he has set his
snares, is at rest: for the devil never makes an end of his malice. 1. Pet.
5.8.
The fall is, whereby the soldier through infirmity faints, being subdued
by the power of the enemy. Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a man be fallen by occasion
into any fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one with the spirit of
meekness, considering thy self, least thou also be tempted.

To this appertains the spiritual remedy. A remedy, is a thing having
aptness to restore him which is fallen to his former estate. Gal. 6.1.

And here two things must always be thought on.

I. If there be a willing mind, every one is accepted for that grace which he
has, not for that which he has not. 2. Cor. 8.12. For if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to
that he has not II. In all these things, whosoever will lead a godly life in
Christ, the power of God is to be made perfect through their infirmity. 2.
Cor. 12.9. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my power
is made perfect through weakness: very gladly therefore will I rejoice rather
in mine infirmities, that the power of God may dwell in me. 10. Therefore I
take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
anguish for Christ's sake, for when I am weak, then am I strong.
CHAP. 41. Of the first Assault.
ASsaults are threefold.

The first is, about the Christian man's effectual calling. The temptation is,
the enterprise of the devil to blindfold man's mind, and to harden his heart,
least the word of GOD should work in him to salvation. Matthew. 13.4. And as he
sowed, some fell by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured the^ up. 5.
And some fell upon stony ground, where they had not much earth, and anon they
sprang up, because they had no depth of earth. 6. And when the Sun rose up,
they were parched, and for lack of rooting withered away. 7. And some fell
among thorns, and the thorns sprung up and choked them. 19. Whenever a man
hears the word of the kingdom, and understands it not, the evil one
comes, and catches away that which was sown in his heart: and this is he
which has received the seed by the way side.

A resistance in those that are called, is wrought by the spirit of God, that
causes men to lend their ears to hear, and does ingraffe the word in their
hearts, that the immortal seed of regeneration may spring in them. Psalm.
40.6. Ioh. 6.44. Act. 16.14. Iam. 1. 21. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness,
and superfluity of maliciousness, and receive with meeknes the word that is
graffed in you, which is able to save your souls. 1. Pet. 1.22. Seeing your
souls are purified in obeying the truth through the spirit, to love brotherly
without faining, love one another with a pure heart fervently. 1. Ioh. 3.9.
Whosoever is borne of god sins not: for his seed remains in him, neither
can he sin, because he is borne of god. A resistance in those that are to be
called, is when in a sincere heart they do join the word which they have
heard, with faith. Luke 8.15. But that which fell in good ground, are they
which with an honest and good heart, hear the word and keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience. Heb. 4.2.

Here are certain preservatives to be noted.

I. Premeditation of the power and use of the word. Eccles. 4.17. Take heed to
thy feet, when thou entrest into the house of the Lord, and be more near to
hear then to give the sacrifice of fools: for they know not that they do
evil. Chap. 5.1. Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let thine heart be hasty to
utter a thing before god: for God is in the heaven, and thou art on the earth:
therefore let thy words be few. II. Diligent attention of the mind. Act.
16.14. III. An hungring desire of the heart. Ioh. 7.37. Now in the last and
great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let
him come to me and drink. IV. Integrity of life. Psalm. 26.6 V. The casting
away of evil affections. Iam. 1.22. And be ye doers of the word, and not
hearers only, deceiving your own souls. VI. The inward consent and agreement
of the heart with the word preached. Act. 2.37. VII. An hiding of the word in
the heart, least we should sin. Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy word in mine
heart, that I might not sin against thee. VIII. A tre^bling at the presence
of God in the assembly of the Church. Esaias 66.2. For all these things has
mine hand made, and all these things have been says the Lord, and to him will
I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at
my words. Act. 10.33. Then sent I for thee immediately, and thou have well done
to come: now therefore are we all here present before God, to hear all things
that are commanded thee of God.
The fall, is either a coldness in receiving the word, and a neglect thereof,
or else a falling into errors.

The remedy for this, is subjection, which must be made to the judgment and
censure of the brethren and ministers. Reuelat. 3.15. I know thy works, that
thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou werest cold or hot. Gal. 6.2.1.
Tim. 1.20. Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto
Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme.

CHAP. 42. Of the second Assault.
THe second assault, is concerning faith.

The temptation, is an illusion which the devil casts into the hearts of
godly men: as when he says, Thou art not of the number of the elect: thou art
not justified: thou have no faith: thou must certainly be condemned for thy
sins. Mat. 4.3. Then came to him the tempter, and said, If thou be the Son
of God, command that these stones be made bread.

Helps, which the devil abuses for the strengthening of such illusions, are
these: I. Adversity: as dangers, losses, persecutions, jealousy, grievous
offenses, etc. Psalm. 73.12. Lo, these are the wicked, yet prosper they always,
and increase in riches. 13. Certainly, I have cleansed mine heart in vain, and
washed mine hands in innocence. Job. 13.23. How many are mine iniquities and
sins? show me my rebellion and my sin. 24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face,
and take me for thine enemy? 25. Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro,
and will thou pursue the dry stubble? II. The remembrance of sins past. Job.
13.26. For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the
iniquities of my youth. III. A feeling of death even already at hand.


The resistance is made by a true faith, applying Christ with all his merits
particularly, after this manner. I assuredly believe that I shall not be
condemned, but that I am elected, and justified in Christ, and am out of all
doubt that all my sins are pardoned. Esai. 53.11. He shall see the travail
of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities. Romans 8.38. For I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, 39. Nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The preservative, is in temptation, not to behold faith, but the object of
faith which is Christ. Philip. 3.12. Not as though I had already attained unto
it, either were already perfect: but I follow if that I may comprehend that,
for whose sake also I am comprehended of Christ Jesus. 13. One thing I do, I
forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self to that which is before.
14. And follow hard toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus. Ioh. 3.14. And as Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness,
so must the son of man be lift up, that he that believes in him, etc.

The falling, is doubtfulnes, and distrust of our election, and of Gods mercy.
Psalm. 77.6. I called to remembrance my song in the night: I communed with mine
own heart, and my spirit searched diligently. 7. Will the Lord absent himself
for ever? and will he show no more favor? 8. Is his mercy clean gone for
ever? does his promise fail for evermore? So David of himself says, Psalm.
22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from my
health, and from the words of my roaring.

The remedy is double.

First the operation of the holy spirit stirring up faith and increasing the
same. Phil. 1.6. I am persuaded of this same thing, that he that has begun
this good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. Luke
17.5. And the Apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith.

The second is, an holy meditation, which is manifold.

I. That it is the commandment of God that we should believe in Christ. 1.
Ioh. 3.22. This is then his commandment, that we believe in the name of his
Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave commandment. II. That the
Evangelical promises are indefinite, and do exclude no man, unless
peradventure any man do exclude himself. Esaias. 55. 1. Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no silver, come, buie, and
eat: come, I say, buie wine and milk without silver and without money. Matthew.
11.28. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you.
Ioh. 3.15. That whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal
life. Also the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, do to every one
severally apply indefinite promises, and therefore are very effectual to
enforce particular assurance or plerophorie of forgiveness of sins. III. That
doubtfulnes and despair are most grievous sins. IV. That contrary to hope,
men must under hope believe with Abraham. Romans 4.18. Which Abraham above hope
believed under hope, that he should be the father of many nations: according to
that which was spoken to him, so shall thy seed be. V. That the mercy of God,
and the merit of Christ's obedience, being both God and man, are infinite. Esai
54.10. For the mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down: but my
mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall my covenant of peace fall away,
says the Lord, that has compassion on thee. Psalm. 103.11. For as high as the
heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him.
1. Ioh. 2.1. My babes, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not: and if
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just. 2.
And he is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole world. Psalm. 130.7. Let Israel wait on the Lord:
for the Lord is mercy, and with him is great redemption. VI. That God
measures the obedience due unto him, rather by the affection and desire to
obey, then by the act and performance of it. Romans 8.5. For they that are after
the flesh, savor the things of the flesh, but they that are after the spirit,
the things of the spirit. 7. Because the wisdom of the flesh, is enmity
against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.
Romans 7.20. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the
sin that dw^lleth in me. 21. I find then by the law, that when I would do
good, evil is present with me. 22. For I delight in the law of God, concerning
the inner man. Mal. 3.17. I will spare them, as a man spares his son, that
reuerenceth him. VII. When one sin is forgiven, all the rest are remitted
also, for remission being given once, without any prescriptio^ of time, is
given for ever. Romans 11.29. For the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. Act. 10.43. To him also give all the Prophets witness, that through
his name, all that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins. VIII.
That grace and faith are not taken away by falls of infirmity, but thereby are
declared and made manifest. Romans 5.20. Moreover, the law entered thereupon, that
the offense should abound: nevertheless, when sin abounded, there grace
abounded much more. 2. Cor. 12.7. And least I should be exalted out of measure,
etc. there was given unto me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to
buffet me. 8. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart
from me. 9. He said. May grace is sufficient for thee. IX. That all the works
of God are by contrary means. 2. Cor. 12.9. My power is made perfect through
weakness.
CHAP. 43. Of the third Assault.
THe third Assault is concerning Sanctification.

The tentation, is a provoking to sin, according as the disposition of e^^ry
man, and as occasion shall offer it self. 1. Chron. 21.1. And Satan st^^d up
against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel. Ioh. 13.2. And when supper
was done, the devil had now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simons
son, to betray him.

In this tentation, the devil does wonderfully diminish and extenuate those
sins, which men are about to commit, partly by obiecting closely the mercy of
god, and partly by covering or hiding the punishment, which is due for the
sin.

Then, there are helps to further the devil in this his tentation.

First, the flesh which lusts against the spirit, sometimes by begetting
evil motions and affections, and sometimes by ouerwhelming and oppressing the
good intentents and motions. Gal. 5.17. For the flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary one to
another, so that ye cannot do the same things that ye would. 19. Moreover, the
works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness. 20. Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate,
emulations, wrath, contentions, seditio^s, heresies. 21. Envy, murders,
drunkenness, gluttony, and such like, whereof I tell you before, as I also
have told you before, that they which do such things shall not inherit the
kingdom of god. Iam. 1.14. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by
his own concupiscence, and is entised.

Secondly, the world, which brings men to disobedience, through pleasure,
profit, honor, and evil examples. Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom we also had our
conversation in time past, in the lusts of our flesh, in fulfilling the will of
the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, as well
as others. 1. Ioh. 2. 16. For all that is in the world, as the lusts of the
flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father,
but is of the world.

Resistance, is made by the desire of the spirit, which works good motions
and affections in the faithful, and drives forth the evil. Gal. 5.22. But
the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, 23. Meeknes, temperancie: against such there is no law. 24. For
they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and the
lusts thereof. 26. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one
another, envying one another.

The preservatives are these, whereby Men are strengthened in resisting.

I. To account no sin, light or small. Gal. 5.9. A little leaven does leaven
the whole lump. Romans 6.23. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of
God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. II. To avoid all
occasions of sin. To these rather agrees the proverb used of the plague:
long, tarde, cito: that is, aloof, slowly, quickly. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Abstain
from all appearance of evil. Iud. v.23. And other save with fear, pulling
them out of the fire, and hate even the garment spotted by the flesh. III. To
accustom thy self to subdue the lesser sins, that at the last, thou may
also overcome the greater. Romans 13.4. IV. To apply thy self to thy appointed
calling, and always to be busily occupied about something in the same. V. To
oppose the law, the judgments of god, the last judgment, the glorious
presence of God, and such like, against the rebellion and looseness of the
flesh. Prou. 28.14. Blessed is the man that fears always: but he that
hardens his heart shall fall into evil. Genesis 39.9. There is no man greater in
this house then I: neither has he kept any thing from me, but only thee,
because thou art his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and so
sin against God.
Here certain remedies take place.

Against unjust anger, or private desire of revenge. Here meditate, I.
Injuries; they happen unto us by the Lords appointment, for our good. 2. Sam.
16. to II. God of his great goodness forgiueth us far more sins, then it is
possible for us to forgive men. III. It is the duty of Christian love to
forgive others. IV. We must not desire to destroy them, whom Christ has
redeemed by his precious blood. V. We our selves are in danger of the wrath of
God, if we suffer our wrath to burn against our brother. Forgive (says he)
and it shall be forgiven. VI. We know not the circumstances of the facts, what
the mind was, and purpose of them against whom we swell.

Bridles, or external remedies, are these: I. In this we shall imitate the
clemency of the Lord, who for a very great season does often tolerate the
wicked. Learn of me, for I am humble and meek. II. There must be a pausing
and time of delay, betwixt our anger and the execution of the same. Athenodorus
counseled Augustus that he, being angry, should repeat all the letters of
the Alphabet, or A B C, before he, against another, did either speak or do
any thing. III. To depart out of those places where those are, with whom we are
angry. IV. To avoid contention, both in word and in deed. Do nothing
through contention.

Remedies against those bad desires of riches, and honor, I. God does eue^ in
famine quicken and revive them, which fear him. Psalm. 33.18, 19. The eye of
the Lord is upon them that fear him, to deliver their souls from death, and
to preserve them from famine. II. Godliness is great gain, if the mind of man
can be therewith content. 1. Tim. 6.6. III. We do wait and look for the
resurrection of the body, and eternal life: therefore we should not take such
carking care for this present mortal life. IV. We are servants in our fathers
house, therefore look what is convenient for us, that will he lovingly bestow
upon us. V. The palpable blindness of an ambitious mind, desires to be set
aloft, that he may have the greater downe-fall: and he fears to be humbled,
least he should not be exalted. VI. Adam when he would needs be checke-mate
with God, did bring both himself and his posterity headlong to destruction.
VII. He is a very ambitious rob-God, which desires to take that commendation
to himself, which is appropriate only to the Lord.

Preservatives against the desires of the flesh. I. He that will be Christ's
disciple, must every day take up his cross. Luke 9.23. II. They which are
according to the spirit, savor of such things as are according to the spirit.
Romans 8.5. III. We ought to behave ourselves as citizens of the kingdom of
heaven. Phil. 3.20. IV. We are the temple of god. 1. Cor. 3.6. Our members,
they are the members of Christ. 1. Cor. 6.15. And we have dwelling within us
the spirit of Christ, which we should not grieve. Ephesians. 4.30. Concerning this,
look more in the explication of the seventh commandment.

In this tentation the fall is, when a man being prevented, falls into some
offense. Gal. 6.1.

Here Satan does wonderfully aggrauate the offense committed, and does accuse
and terrify the offender with the judgments of God. Mat. 27.3. Then when
Judas which betrayed him, saw that he was condemned, he repented himself, and
brought again the thirty pieces of silver, to the chief priests and elders,
4. saying, I have sinned, betraying the innocent blood: but they said, What is
that to us? see thou to it. 5. And when he had cast down the silver pieces in
the temple, he departed, and went and hanged himself.

The remedy is, a renewed repentance, the beginning whereof is sorrow in
regard of God, for the same sin: the fruits hereof are especially seven. 2.
Cor. 7.9. Now I rejoice not that ye were sorry, but that ye sorrowed to
repentance: for ye sorrowed godly, so that in nothing ye were hurt by us. 10.
For godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of: but
worldly sorrow causes death. 11. For behold, this thing that ye have been
godly sorry, what great care has it wrought in you: yea, what clearing of
your selves: yea, what indignation: yea, what fear: yea, how great desire:
yea, what zeal: yea, what punishment: in all things ye have showed your
selves, that ye are pure in this matter.

I. A desire of doing well. II. An Apology, that is, a confession of the sin
before God, with a requiring of pardon for the offense. Psalm. 32.5. Then I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity: for I thought, I
will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest
the punishment of my sin. 2. Sam. 12. 13. Then David said unto Nathan, I have
sinned against the Lord: and Nathan said unto David, The Lord also has put
away thy sin, thou shall not die. III. Indignation against a man's self, for
his offense. IV. A fear, not so much for the punishment, as for offending the
Lord. Psalm. 130.3. If thou straightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall
stand? V. A desire to be fully renewed, and to be delivered from sin. VI. A
fervent zeal to love God, and to embrace and keep all his commandments. VII.
Revenge, whereby the flesh may be tamed and subdued, least at any time
afterward, such offenses be committed.
CHAP. 44. Of the patient bearing of the cross.
THe patient bearing of the cross, teaches how Christians should undergo the
burden.

The cross, is a certain measure of afflictions, appointed by God, to every
one of the faithful. Matthew. 16.24. If any man will follow me, let him forsake
himself, take up his cross and follow me. Col. 1.24. Now rejoice I in my
sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh, for his body sake, which is the Church.

We ought to take up this cross willingly^ even with both hands, when it shall
please God to lay it upon us.

And after we have taken it up, we must bear it with patience and
perseverance. Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all might, through his glorious
power, unto all patience and long suffering with ioyfulnes. Luke 21.19.
Possess your souls with patience.

The preservatives of patience, are: I. Strength by the holy ghost. Phil. 4.
13. I am able to do all things through the help of Christ, which strengthens
me. Phil. 1. 20. It is given to you for Christ, that not only ye should
believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. II. An holy meditation, which is
manifold.

I. That the afflictions of the faithful, come not by chance, but by the
counsel and providence of God, which disposes all things in a most excellent
sort. Genesis 45.4,5. It was God that sent Joseph into Egypt. 2. Sam. 16. 10. The
Lord bids Shemei curse David. Psalm. 119.71. It was good for me, that I was
afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. Hence it is evident, that
afflictions to the godly are inevitable. Act. 14.21. By many afflictions you
must enter into the kingdom of god. Mat. 7.14. The gate is straight, and the
way narrow that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. Ioh. 16.20.
In the world ye shall have troubles. II. That albeit afflictions are grievous,
yet are they good and profitable. For they are helps, whereby men being
humbled for their sins before god, obtain peace, and holiness of life. 2.
Cor. 1.9. We received sentence of death in our selves, because we should not
trust in our selves, but in God, which raises the dead. Esaias 26. 16. Lord, in
trouble have they visited thee, they powered out a prayer, when thy chastening
was upon them. Hos. 5.15. I will go, and return to my place, til they
acknowledge their fault, and seek me: in their affliction they will seek me
diligently. Psalm. 78.34. When he ^lue them they sought him, and they returned,
and they sought God early. Ier. 31.18. I have heard Ephraim lamenting thus,
Thou have corrected me, and I was chastised as an untamed calfe: convert thou
me, and I shall be converted. Heb. 12.11^ No chastisment for the present
seems joyous, but grievous: but afterward, it brings the quiet fruit of
righteousness unto them, which are thereby exercised. Psalm. 30.5. Weeping may
abide at evening, but joy comes in the morning. Ioh. 15.2. Every branch that
bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. 1. Pet.
1.6. Wherein ye rejoice, though now for a season (if need require) ye are in
heaviness through many tentations. 2. Cor. 1.4. The God of all comfort, which
comfort us in all our tribulations, that we may be able to comfort the^
which are in any affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are
comforted of God. Romans 5. 3. We glory in afflictions, knowing that affliction
brings patience. Heb. 2. 10. He did consecrate the Prince of their salvation
through affliction. We permit Chirurgians that they should both bind us lying
diseased, in our beds, and sear us with hot irons, yea lanch and search our
members with rasors: and lastly, we send them away usually with friendly and
kind speeches, and often with a golden fee for their thus ha^dling us. Shall we
then suffer so many things of a Chirurgian to cure a bodily disease, and will
we not give God leave to cure by afflictions the most festered diseases of our
sick ^oules?

By this also may we gather, that the afflictions of the godly are signs of
their adoption. Hebr. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and he
scourges every son that he receives. 7. If ye endure chastisement, God
offers himself unto you as unto sons.

And that they are to them, the Kings high way to heaven. Iam. 1.12. Blessed is
the man that endures t^ntation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the
crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him. 2. Cor. 4.
17. For our ^ight affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far
more excellent and an eternal weight of glory.

III. That God has promised favor, mitigation of punishment, his presence,
and deliverance. Philip. 1. 29. 1. Cor. 10. 13. God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above measure, but with tentation will give
deliverance. 2. Sam. 7.14. Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in time of trouble, and I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Psalm. 121.4. He that keeps
Israel will neither slumber nor sleep. Esa. 43.2. When thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee, and thorough the floods that they do not
ouerflow thee: when thou walk through the very fire, thou shall not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: 3. For I am the Lord thy God,
the holy one of Israel thy Savior. IV. That in all troubles of the faithful,
Christ is a companion. 1. Pet. 4.13. Rejoice, that ye are partakers of the
afflictions of Christ. 2. Cor. 4. 10. Every where we bear about in our body
the dying of Christ, that the life of Jesus might also be made manifest in our
bodies. Col. 1.21. V. That the Angels are ready to defend such as fear God.
Psalm. 34.8.2. King. 6.16. Fear not, there are more with us then against us.
CHAP. 45. Of the calling upon God.
THus much concerning the denial of our selves, now follows the profession
of Christ. In which we consider either Christ himself, or his me^b^rs: namely,
the faithful. Math. 25.40. Verily, I say unto you, in as much as ye did it to
one of the least of my brethren, ye did it unto me.

That profession which directly concerns Christ, is either continual, or
only in the time of danger.

Continual, is the calling upon the Name of God, and ought ever to be
performed of us, in the Name of Christ Jesus our Mediator. 1. Cor. 1.2. To the
Church of God which is at Corinthus, to them that are sanctified in Christ
Jesus, in every place, both their Lord and ours. Act. 9. 14. He has authority
from the high Priest, to bind all that call upon thy Name. Col. 3. 17.
Whatsoever ye shall do in word or in deed, do it in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the Father by him.

The calling upon Gods name, is by prayer or thanksgiving. Phil. 4. 6. In all
things let your requests be showed unto God, in prayer and supplication, with
giving of thanks.

Prayer has two parts: Petition, and Assent, Mark. 11.24. I say unto you,
whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it shall
be done unto you.

Petition, is the first part of prayer, whereby we, according to the rule of
Gods word, ask his help, for the obtaining of such necessaries as we want. 1.
Ioh. 5.14. This is the assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us.

In every petition, we must express two things: I. A sense of our wants. II. A
desire of the grace of God to supply those wants. 1. Sam. 1. 10. She was
troubled in her mind, and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore. Dan. 9. 4. And
I prayed to the Lord my God, and made my confession, saying, 5. We have sinned
and have committed iniquity, etc. 16. O Lord, according to thy righteousness, I
beseech thee, let thine anger and thy wrath be turned from thy city Jerusalem,
etc. to the 20. verse. Psalm. 130.1. Out of the deep I called to thee, O Lord.
1. Sam. 1.15. Then Hannah answered and said, Nay my lord, but I am a woman
troubled in spirit: I have drunken neither wine, nor strong drink, but have
powered out my soul before the Lord, etc. to the 16. verse. psalm. 143. 6. I
stretch forth mine hands unto thee, my soul desires after thee, as the
thirsty land.

Assent, is the second part of prayer, whereby we believe, and profess it
before God, that he, in his due time, will grant unto us those our requests,
which before we have made unto his majesty. 1. Ioh. 5. 14, 15. This is the
assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will,
he hears us. And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we k^^w
that we have the petitions that we have desired of him. Math. 6.13. Lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom, thine is
the power, and thine is the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

As for the faithful, howsoever they in their prayers, bewray many
infirmities: yet no doubt they have a notable sense of Gods ^auour, especially,
when they pray zealously, and often unto the Lord. Iam. 5. 16. Pray one for
another, that ye may be healed: for the prayer of a righteous man avails
much, if it be fervent. Luke 1.13. The Angel said unto him, Fear not,
Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard. Jonah. 4.1. It displeased Jonah
exceedingly, and he wa^ angry. 2. And Jonah prayed unto the Lord, and said, I
pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying, when I was yet in my country?
therefore I prevented it to flee unto Tarshish: for I knew that thou art a
gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest
thee of the evil. Romans 8.26. Genesis 19.18. Lot said unto them, Do not so, I
pray you, my lords, etc. psalm. 6.1. O lord, rebuke me not in thine anger,
neither chastise me in thy wrath, etc. v. 2,3,4,5. psalm. 8.9. psalm. 20.5. psalm.
35.9.18.28. psalm. 16.7.

Thanksgiving, is a calling upon Gods name, whereby we, with joy and gladness of
heart, do praise God for his benefits either received, or promised, psalm.
45.1. Mine heart will utter forth a good matter, I will entreat in my words of
the King: my tongue is as the pen of a swift writer. Ephesians. 5.20. Giving thanks
always for all things unto God, even the father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. psalm. 36.8,9. How excellent is thy mercy, O God? therefore the
children of men trust under the shadow of thy wings. They shall be satisfied
with the fatness of thine house, and thou shall give them drink out of the
river of thy pleasures. Coloss. 3.16.

CHAP. 46. Of Christian Apology, and Martyrdom.
THe profession of Christ in dangers, is either in word, or deed.

Profession in word, is Christian Apology, or the confession of Christ. Romans
10. 10. With the heart, man believes unto righteousness: and with the mouth,
man confesses to salvation. psalm. 22.23. I will declare thy name unto my
brethren: in the mids of the congregation will I praise thee.

Christian Apology, is the profession of Christ in word, when as we are ready
with fear and meeknes, to confess the truth of Christian religion, so often
as need requires, and the glory of God is endangered, even before
unbelievers, especially, if they be not past all hope of repentance. 1. Pet. 3.
15. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts: and be ready always to give an
answer to every man t^^t asks you a reason of the hope that is in you: 16.
And that with meekness and reverence, having a good conscience, that when they
speak evil of you as of evil doers, they may be ashamed, which blame your
good conversation in Christ. Act. 7. the whole chap. Steven there makes an
Apology for himself. Math. 7.6. Give not that which is holy to dogs, nor cast
your pearls before swine, least they tread them under their feet, and turning
again, all to rent you.

Profession, which is in deed, is called Martyrdom. Martyrdom is a part of
Christian profession, when as a Christian man does, for the doctrine of faith,
for justice, and for the salvation of his brethren, undergo the punishment of
death imposed upon him by the adversaries of Christ Jesus. Mar. 6.18, 27,28.
John told Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. And
immediately the King sent the hangman, and gave him charge that his head should
be brought: so he went and beheaded him in the prison. 2. Cor. 12. 15. I will
most gladly bestow, and be bestowed for your souls, though the more I love
you, the less am I loved.

Notwithstanding, it is lawful for Christians to fly in persecution, if they
find themselves not sufficiently resolved and strengthened by Gods spirit to
stand. Math. 10.23. When they persecute you in one city, flee into another.
Verily I say unto you, ye shall not have finished all the cities of Israel,
till the Son of man come. Ioh. 10.39. Again they studied to apprehend him,
but he escaped out of their hands. Act. 9.30. When the brethren knew it, they
brought him to Cesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus. 1. King. 18.23. Was it
not told my lord what I did, when Iesabel slew the Prophets of the Lord, how I
hid an hundred men of the Lords Prophets, by fifties in a cave, and fed them
with bread and water? Act. 20.22. Now behold, I go bound in the spirit unto
Jerusalem, and know not what things shall come unto me there.

CHAP. 47. Of Edification, and Alms among the faithful.
THat profession of Christ, which concerns his members, namely, the Saints
and faithful ones, is either Edification, or Alms.

Edification, is every particular duty toward our brethren, whereby they are
furthered either to grow up in Christ, or else are more surely united to him.
Romans 14. 19. Let us follow those things which concern peace, and wherewith one
may edify another.

To Edification, these things which follow appertain.

I. To give good example. Matthew. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
1. Pet. 2.12. Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which
speak evil of you as of evil doers, may by your good works which they shall
see, glorify God in the day of thy visitation. II. To exhort. Heb. 3. 13.
Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, least any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. Romans 1.12. That I might be
comforted together with you through our mutual faith, both yours and mine.
III. To comfort. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Comfort the feeble minded, bear with the
weak: be patient toward all men. Iam. 5. 16. Acknowledge your faults one to
another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. 20. He that
conuerteth a sinner from going astray out of his way, shall save a soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18. Comfort your
selves one another, with these words. IV. To admonish. Romans 15. 14. I my self
am persuaded of you, brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, and filled
with all knowledge: and are able to admonish one another. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. We
desire you, brethren, admonish them that are unruly.
They shall observe an holy manner of admonition, who in the spirit of meeknes,
and as it were, guilty of the like infirmity themselves, do admonish
forthwith all their brethren of such faults, as they certainly know by them, and
that out of Gods word. Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if any man by occasion be fallen
into any fault, ye, which are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of
meeknes, considering thy self, least thou also be tempted. Matthew. 5. 7. Thou
hypocrite, cast out first the beam out^ of thine own eye, and then shall thou
see to take the mote out of thy brothers eye. 2. Tim. 4.2. Preach the word: be
instant in season and out of season: improoue, rebuke, exhort, with all long
suffering and doctrine. Math. 18. 15. If thy brother trespass against thee,
go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he hear thee, thou
have won thy brother. Romans 15.14.2. Tim. 4.2. Leuit. 19.17. Thou shall not
hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor,
and suffer him not to sin.

Relief peculiar to the godly among themselves, is a duty, whereby the rich
do out of their plenty supply the wants of the poor, both according to
their ability, and sometimes beyond their ability. 2. Cor. 8.3. To their
power (I bear record) yea, beyond their power they were willing. Act. 2.44,45.
All that believed were in one place, and had all things common: and they sold
their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every one had need.

CHAP. 48. Of the fourth degree, of the declaration of Gods love: and of the
estate of the Elect, after this life.
THe fourth degree of the declaration of Gods love, is Glorification. Roman.
8.30.

Glorification, is the perfect transforming of the Saints into the image of the
Son of God. Philip. 3.21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself. 1. Cor. 15.44. It is sown a
natural body, and is raised a spiritual body: there is a natural body,
and there is a spiritual body. 45. And it is also written, The first man Adam
was made a living soul: the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. 49. And as
we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we bear the image of the
heavenly. Psalm. 17. 15. I will behold thy face in righteousness, and when I
awake, I shall be satisfied with thine image.

The beginning of Glorification, is in death, but it is not accomplished and
made perfect before the last day of judgment.

The death of the Elect, is but a sleep in Christ, 1. Cor. 15.18. If Christ be
not raised, they which are asleep in Christ, are perished. Act. 7.60. When he
had thus spoken, he slept.
whereby the body and soul is severed. The body, 1. Cor. 15.3^. O fool,
that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die.
that after corruption it may rise to greater glory, The soul, that it Reu.
21.27. There shall enter into it none unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abomination or lies: but they which are written in the Lambs book of life. Romans
7.25. I my self in my mind serve the law of God, but in my flesh the law of
sin.
being fully sanctified, may Luke 23.42. He said to Jesus, Lord, remember me,
when thou come into thy kingdom. 43. Then Jesus said to him, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. Reu. 14.13. Then I heard a voice from heaven,
saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead, which hereafter die in the Lord.
Even so says the Spirit: for they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them.
immediately, after departure from the body, be transported into the kingdom of
heaven.

Against the fear of death, note these preservatives: I. Death, it freeth the
godly from the tyranny of Satan, sin, the world, the flesh, and eternal
damnation, yea, from infinite both perils and losses, and does place us both
safe and happy, under the shadow, as it were, of Christ's wings. II. Christ by
his death, has sanctified unto us both death and the grave. III. Christ is
both in life and death, gain to the godly. Phil. 1.12. IV. Those consolations
which the spirit of Christ does suggest to the souls of the faithful, do by
many degrees surmount the dolours of death. V. The desire of that most bright
and glorious beholding of God, and the presence of those Saints which are
departed before us. VI. In stead of our bodies we shall be clothed with glory.
2. Cor. 5.1. VII. The stings of death, namely sin, is then so taken away, as
that that serpent can no more hurt us. 1. Cor. 15.55. O death, where is thy
sting! O grave, where is thy victory! Heb. 2.15. That he might deliver all
them, which for fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage.
VIII. We should not so much think of our death, as to take an exact account of
our life. For that man can not die ill, who has lived well: and he seldom
dies well, that has lived badly. IX. The Angels they stand at our elbowes,
that so soon as a Saint departs, they may with all speed, immediately
transport his soul into heaven.


Souls being once in heaven, remain there till the last day of judgment,
where they partly magnify the Name of God, and partly do wait, and pray for
the consummation of the kingdom of glory, and full felicity in body and
soul. Revel. 5.8. And when he had taken the book, the four beasts, and the
four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one harpes
and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints. 9. And
they sang a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open
the seals thereof: because thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to God by
thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. Revel. 14.
2. I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps. 3. And they sung, as
it were, a new song before the throne: and they cried with a loud voice,
saying, How long, Lord, holy and true? do not thou judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth?

CHAP. 49. Of the estate of the Elect, at the last day of judgment.
THe last day of judgment shall be on this manner.

I. Immediately before the coming of Christ, Matthew. 24. 29. Immediately after
the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be darkened, and the Moon
shall not give her light, the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of
heaven shall be shaken: 30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of
man in heaven: and then shall all the kinreds of the earth mourn, and they
shall see the Son of man come in the clouds of heaven, with power and great
glory.
the powers of heaven shall be shaken: the Sun and Moon shall be darkened,
and the stars shall seem to fall from heaven: Luke 21. 26. Men's hearts shall
fail them for fear, and for looking after those things, which shall come on
the world. 28. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up,
and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws near. 2. Tim. 4.8.
Henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto them
also that love his appearing.
at which sight the Elect then living shall rejoice, but the reprobate shall
shake every joint of them. II. Then the heavens, being all set on fire, shall
with a noise, like to that of chariot wheels, suddenly pass away, and the
elements, with the earth, and all therein, shall be dissolved with fire. 2.
Pet. 3. 12. L^^king for, and h^^sting unto the coming of the day of God, by
which the heavens being (...) shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt
with heat. 13. (...) new heavens, and a new earth, according to his promise,
wherein d(...)ousness.

At the same time, when as all these things shall come to pass, Matthew. chap.
24. verse. 31. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet. 1 Thessalonians. chap. 4. verse. 16. The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a
shout, even with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpet of God: and
the dead in Christ shall rise first.
(...) sound of the last trumpet shall be heard, sounded by the Archang^^^
Matthew. 24. 30. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Then shall we which live and remain, be
caught up with them also in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so
shall we ever be with the Lord.
And Christ shall come suddenly in the clouds, with power, and glory, and a
great train of Angels.

III. Now at the sound of the trumpet the Elect, which were dead, shall arise
with their bodies: and those very bodies which were turned to dust, and one
part rent from another, shall by the omnipotent power of God, be restored, and
the souls of them shall descend from heaven, and be brought again into those
bodies. As for 1. Cor. 15. 52. We shall not all sleep, but we shall be changed
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. 43.
them which then shall be alive, they shall be changed in the twinkling of an
eye, and this mutation shall be in stead of death. And at that time, the bodies
shall receive their full redemption: It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in
honor: it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. 44. It is sown a
natural body, it is raised ^ spiritual body, etc.
and all the bodies of the Elect shall be made like the glorious body of
Christ Jesus, and therefore shall be spiritual, immortal, glorious, and free
from all infirmity. IV. Last of all, when they are all conuented before the
tribunal seat of Christ, he will forthwith place the Elect, severed from the
reprobate, and taken up into the air, at his right hand, and to them being
written in the book of life, will he pronounce this sentence: Come ye blessed
of my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of
the world. Matthew. 25.33. He shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the
goats on the left. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Reu. 20. 12. whosoever was not found
written in the book of life, was cast into the lake of fire.
CHAP. 50. Of the estate of the Elect after judgment.
THe last judgment being once finished, the Elect shall enjoy immediately
blessedness in the kingdom of heaven.

Blessedness is that, whereby God himself is all in all his Elect. 1. Cor. 15.
28. When all things shall be subdued to him, then shall the Son also himself
be subject unto him, that did subdue all things under him, that God may be all
in all. And it is the reward of good works, not because works can merit, but
by reason of Gods favor, who thus accepts works, and that in respect of the
merit of Christ's righteousness imputed to the Elect. Romans 6.23. The wages of
sin is death, but eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. 2. Tim. 4. 8. Reu. 22. 12. Behold, I come shortly, and my reward is with
me, to give every man according as his work shall be.

Blessedness has two parts: Eternal life, and perfect glory.

Eternal life is that fellowship with God, Ioh. 14. 23. If any man love me, he
will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
dwell with him. 1. Ioh. 4. 15. Whosoever confesses that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in God. Revel. 21.3. And I heard a
voice, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them: and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be their God
with them. 23. And that city has no need of sun or moon to shine in it:
for the glory of God did light it, and the Lamb is the light of it. Revel.
22.2. In the mids of the street of it, and of either side of the river, was
the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and gave fruit every
month: and the leaves of the tree served to heal the nations with. 5. And
there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, nor light of the
sun: for the Lord gives them light, and they shall reign for evermore. 1.
Cor. 15.45. Romans 8.11. If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead,
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your
mortal bodies, because that his spirit dwells in you.
whereby God himself is, thorough the Lamb Christ, life unto the Elect. For
in the kingdom of heaven, the Elect shall not need meat, drink, sleep,
air, heat, cold, physic, apparel, or the light of the Sun and moon: b
but in place of all these, shall they have in them Gods spirit, by which
immediately they shall be quickened for ever.

Perfect glory, is that wonderful excellency of the Elect, whereby they shall
be in a far better estate then any heart can wish. This glory consists in
three points. I. In that they shall still behold the face of God, which is his
glory and majesty. Revel. 22.4. And they shall see his face, and his name
shall be in their forheads. Psalm. 17.15. I will behold thy face in
righteousness, and when I awake I shall be satisfied with thine anger. II. In
that they shall be most like to Christ, namely, just, holy, incorruptible,
glorious, honorable, excellent, beautiful, strong, mighty, and nimble. 1.
Ioh. 3.2. Dearly beloved, now are we the sons of God, but yet it does not
appear what we shall be: and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him: for we shall see him as he is. Phil. 3.21. Who shall change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
working whereby he is able even to subdue all things to himself. III. They
shall inherit the kingdom of heaven, yea, the new heavens and new earth shall
be their inheritance. 1. Pet. 1.4. God has begotten you to an inheritance
immortal and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you.
Mat. 25.34. Then shall the king say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed
of my Father, possess a kingdom prepared for you before the foundations of
the world were laid. Reu. 5.10. Thou have made us unto our God kings and
priests, and we shall reign on the earth. Revel. 21.7. He that overcomes,
shall inherit all things, and I will be his God and he shall be my son.

The fruit that comes from both these parts of blessedness, is of two sorts:
Eternal joy, and the perfect service of God. Psalm. 16.11. Thou will show me
the path of life, in thy presence is the fullness of joy: and at thy right hand
there are pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 36.8. They shall be satisfied with the
fatnes of thine house, and thou shall give them drink out of the river of thy
pleasures. 9. For with thee is the well of life, and in thy light shall we see
light.

The parts of Gods service, are Praise, and Thanksgiving. Revel. 21.3. And I
heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, behold, the Tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them: and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be their God with them. Chap. 5.12. Saying with a loud voice,
Worthy is the Lamb that was killed, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise, etc. 13. Chap. 11.17. The
four and twenty Elders which sat before God on their seats, fell upon their
faces and worshipped God, saying, We give thee thanks, Lord God Almighty,
which art, and Which wast, and Which art to come: for thou have received thy
great might, and have obtained thy kingdom.

The manner of performing this service, is to worship God by God himself
immediately. In heaven there shall neither be temple, ceremony, nor Sacrament,
but all these wants shall God himself supply together with the La^be, that is,
Christ. Revel. 21.22. I saw no temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty, and
the Lamb are the Temple of it.

This service shall be daily, and without intermission. Revel. 7.15. They are
in the presence of the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple.

A Corollarie, or the last conclusion.
THus God, in saving the Elect, does clearly set forth his justice and mercy.
His justice, in that he punished the sins of the elect, in his Sons own
person. His mercy, in that he pardoned their sin, for the merits of his
Son. Ephesians. 1. 18. That the eyes of your understanding may be lightened, that ye
may know what the hope is of his calling, and what the riches of his glorious
inheritance is in his Saints, 19. And what is the exceeding greatness of his
power toward us, which believe, according to the working of his mighty
power, 20. Which he wrought in Christ. Chap. 3.18. That ye may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height: 19. And to know the love of Christ.

All these things the Lord himself has thus decreed, and in his good time
will accomplish them, to the glorious praise of his Name. Pro. 16.4. The Lord
has made all things for his own sake: yea even the wicked for the day of
evil.

CHAP. 50. Concerning the order of the causes of salvation according to the
doctrine of the Church of Rome.
THere are two things requisite to obtained salvation: Predestination, and the
Execution thereof.

Predestination, is a foreordaining of the reasonable creature to grace in this
life, and glory in the life to come. Sebast. Cattaneus. Enchirid. tract. 1.
chap. last.

This in regard of the first effects thereof, which are vocation, election, and
ordination to eternal life, has the cause of it in God, namely his will: but
in regard of the last effect, which is, the execution of such an ordinance, and
the obtaining of eternal life, it has the cause of it from man, because
according to the common opinion, Gods predestination is by reason of works
foreseen in men, that is, God does therefore predestinate or reject some man,
because he foreseeth that he will well or badly use his grace. But for the more
evident declaration of this, these seven conclusions must be set down.

I. The Predestination, and Reprobation of God, do not constrain or enforce
any necessity upon the will of man. II. God has predestined all men, that
is, he has appointed and disposed all men, so as they might obtain eternal
salvation. III. Man is neither by necessity nor chance saved or condemned, but
voluntarily. IV. God has predestined some, other has he rejected. V. Those
whom God has predestined by his absolute predestination, which can not be
lost they shall infallibly die in grace: but they which are predestinate, by
that predestination which being according to pre^ent justice, may be lost by
some mortal sin which follows, are not infallibly saved, but oftentimes
such are condemned, and loose their crown and glory. Hence arises that
position of theirs, that he which is justified may be a reprobate, and perish
eternally. Torrensis Aug. Confess. 2. book. 4. chap. 20. Sect. Therefore
predestination is not certain, seeing it may be lost. VI. God alone does know
the certain and set number of them which are predestinate. VII. There is one
set number of them which are predestinate, or reproved, and that can neither
be increased nor diminished.
The execution of Predestination, is either in infants, or those of years of
discretion.

Concerning infants, the merit of Christ is appliyed unto them, by baptism
rightly administered: so that whatsoever in original corruption may truly and
properly be accounted for sin, it is not only, as I may say, not pared away,
or not imputed, but utterly taken away. For there is nothing that God can hate
in such as are renewed. Council. Trid. 5. sect. 5. Can.

Nevertheless they are urged to confess, that there remains yet in such as
are baptized concupiscence, or the relics of sin. The which seeing it is
left in men for them to wrestle withal, it has not power to hurt such as
yield not unto it.

The execution of predestination in such as are of riper years, has six
degrees.

The first is vocation, whereby men, not for their own merits, but by Gods
preventing grace through Christ, are called to turn unto God.

The second is, a preparation to righteousness, whereby men, through the
inherent power of free will, do apply themselves to justification, after that
the same power is stirred up by the holy Ghost. For free will is only somewhat
diminished, and not extinguished: and therefore so soon as the holy Ghost
touches and inlighteneth the heart, it works together with the same spirit,
freely assenting unto the same. This preparation has seven degrees^ Biel. 4.
book. 14. did. 2. quest.

The first is faith, which is a knowledge and an assent, whereby men agree that
those things are true which are delivered concerning God, and his will,
revealed in the word of God.

This is the foundation of justification, and prepares the heart: because it
stirs up free will that it may affect the heart, with those motions by which
it is prepared to justification.

I. The act of faith is, to apprehend the ouglines of sin and the wages thereof.
II. After this, follows a fear of Gods anger, and of hell fire. III. Then
begin men to dislike, and in some sort to detest sin.

From these arises a certain disposition, which has annexed unto it, the
merit of congruitie, yet not immediate nor sufficient, but imperfect.

IV. At the length, faith returns to the contemplation of Gods mercies, and
believes that God is ready to forgive sins by the infusion of charity into
those, which are before sufficiently prepared and disposed. V. Out of this
contemplation proceeds the act of hope, whereby faith begins to desire and
to wait on God, as the chiefest good. VI. Out of this act of hope arises
love, whereby God is loved above all things in the world. VII. After this love
follows a new dislike, and detestation of sin, not so much in regard of
fear of the punishment in hell fire, as in regard of the offense of God who is
simply loved more then all other things. VIII. After all these, follows a
purpose of amendment of life: and here comes in the merit of congruitie, that
is, sufficient: or else, the immediate, sufficient, and last disposition before
the infusion of grace.
The third degree of Predestination, is the first justification whereby men of
unjust, are made just, not only through the remission of their sins, but also
by a sanctification of the inward man, by his volu^tary receiving of grace and
gifts.

The efficient cause of this justification, is the mercy of God, and the
meritorious passion of our Savior Christ, whereby he purchased justification
for men. The isntrumental cause is baptism. The formal cause is not that
justice which was inherent in Christ, but which he infuseth into man: and that
is especially hope, and charity.

The fourth degree, is the second justification whereby men are of just, made
more just: the cause hereof is faith, joined with good works.

It is possible for such as are renewed, to keep the commandments: And
therefore it is false that a just man commits so much as a venial sin in
his best actions, much less, that he deserves eternal death for the same.

The fifth degree, is the reparation of a sinner by the sacrament of Penance.
The which is, as it were, the second board after a shipwreck. The cause why
this reparation is necessary, is, because men loose the grace of justification
by every mortal sin.

The last degree is the fruit of justification, namely, the glory of eternal
life, the which works done in grace, do ex condigno, condignly merit, of
sufficient worthiness.

Condign merit is, when as the reward is after such sort due, as that if it
be not given, injustice will be committed. This by the rigor of justice is due.

Two conditions are requisite to make a merit. I. That a reward should by some
compact or bargain be due: And this condition is in works, in regard of God.
For God in the Scriptures has promised a reward to such as work well. II. That
besides this compact whereby the debtor is bound, there should be also some
worthiness in the work, or some proportion of the work to the reward.

The worthiness or dignity of the work, depends I. on Christ, because
Christ did not only merit that his own proper actions should be meritorious,
but the actions also of his members. II. On the holy Ghost. For the holy Ghost
does inspire, excite, and move men to do. III. On an Habitual grace, which
is a certain participation of the divine essence.

Thus much concerning the degrees of executing Predestination. Now follows
the applying of Predestination particularly to the persons of men.

No man, so long as he lives in this mortal life, ought so much to presume on
the secret mystery of Gods predestination, as to determine undoubtedly that he
is in the number of them whom God has ordained to eternal happiness. For no
man, without especial revelation can know, whom God has chosen to be his
heirs. Sess. 6. c. 12.

The sum of all these, is this. God by a certain grace given freely, or
rather a grace preventing, or coming before, the which is termed an especial
aid, does move a man, that he may dispose himself unto his justifying grace,
namely, that he may believe, fear, repent, love, and propound to himself
newnes of life, etc.

Furthermore, if a sinner do by his free will yield his assent unto this divine
motion, and does consequently and accordingly rightly dispose himself, God
does incontinently forgive him his sin, and withal does infuse into him
justifying grace, by which he may do good works, and so by them merit
eternal life. Bellarmine.

Errors of the Papists in their distributing of the causes of salvation.
And thus is the doctrine of the Church of Rome, surely a very blasphemous
doctrine, and no better to be accounted of then as a gallows set up for the
torture and massacre of men's consciences. And that this may the more manifestly
appear to be so, I will set down the most principal points of popish
doctrine in this case.

The I. error.
Predestination is only of the Elect, the Reprobate they are only foreknowne.

The Confutation.
The name of Predestination, by a figure called Synecdoche, the whole for the
part, is taken indeed sometimes in the good part, and spoken of the Elect, and
faithful called, as Romans 8.30. Whom he predestined, them also he called,
and whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also
he glorified. So are the Ephesians said to be predestinate into the adoption
of the sons of God. Ephesians. 1.5. Yet may this word Predestination, nevertheless
generally be extended unto the decree of God, whether it be that of
predestination to eternal life, or the other unto eternal death. The reasons:
I. Act. 4. 27,28. They gathered themselves together against thine holy son
Jesus: to do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel had determined (or
foreordained, or predestined (...)) before to be done. II. August. de Bono
persev. chap. 17. he calls Predestination the disposition of future works:
and in his 15. book of the City of God, chap. 1. he deuideth all mankind
into two cities: whereof one is predestinate to reign with God eternally, the
other predestinate to undergo eternal punishment with the devil. And in his
Manuel to Laurentius, chap. 100. he says, That God has justly predestined
wicked men unto punishment, and mercifully predestined the good unto grace.
Thomas of Aquine 1. part. quest. 23. artic. 4. It mattereth not in regard of
the name of predestination, whether a man be said to be predestinate to life
eternal or not.

Furthermore, for a man to say that the Reprobates are foreknowne, and not
predestinate, it is very injurious: because Gods foreknowledge, may in nothing
which is to be, be severed from his will and eternal decree. For that, which
being hereafter to be, is foreknowne of God, that assuredly will come to
pass, and shall be, and that either by the will of God, or without his will:
if with his will, then no doubt he both decreed and preordained the same: if
without or against his will, how is God then said to be omnipotent? And surely
evil it self, albeit god will it not in his approouing or allowing will; yet
wills he the free, and willing-permission thereof. August. in his Manuel or
Enchiridio^ to Laure^tius, chap. 100. has an excellent saying to this purpose.
Although (says he) that those things which are evil in that they are evil
cannot be good, yet that there are not only good, but also evil things, it is
very good: to the intent that after a marvelous and unspeakable manner, that
thing may not be besides, or without his will, which also is done against his
will, because it should not be done, unless he suffered it, neither does he
suffer it, against his will, but willingly.

The II. error.
That Predestination is mutable. For, (according to the common opinion of the
Papists) whosoever is predestinate, he is contingently predestined, as well
on Gods part, as on man's: whence it follows, that he which is predestined,
that is, appointed to salvation, may be condemned, and he which is foreknowne,
that is, appointed to damnation may be saved.

The Confutation.
The contrary to this their doctrine is most true. Namely, that the decree of
God concerning every man's eternal both salvation and damnation, is from all
eternity, set down, and immutable. The reasons. I. Testimonies of scripture.
Romans 11.29. The gifts and calling of God they are, (...), such as are without
repentance. Mat. 24.24. There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets:
and shall do great signs and miracles, so that (if it were possible) they
should deceive even the elect. Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods chosen? it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? 2. Tim. 2.19.
The foundation of god stands sure, and has this seal, the Lord knows who
are his. II. Election and reprobation they are in God, not in men: now there
can be nothing in God which is not immutable. Mal. 3.6. I Jehovah am not
changed. Esaias 46.10. My counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will.
III. If this Popish conclusion should be granted, then would it follow of
necessity, that the foreknowledge of God must be made void, his power
weakened, and his will changed, each of which is impious once to dream of. For
he which changes his counsel, or his will, does therefore change it either
because he at the length sees that he might have taken better advise, or else
in that he sees that he could not bring his former purpose about as he would.
Either of these are far from our Lord God. IV. If we resolve that the
counsel of God is any ways mutable, it will by this come to pass that every
man must be uncertain whether he be predestinate to life or not: whereby that
notable stay and ground of our full assurance to be saved, is utterly shaken
and ouerturned. Wherefore let this truth be maintained of us, namely, that both
the election and reprobation of God stand immutable, so that neither the elect
can become reprobates, nor the reprobates elect; and consequently neither these
be saved, nor they condemned.

Against this doctrine, the popish sort except. If you speak in a compound
sense or meaning ( in sensu composito) it is very true that the predestinate
can not be saved, nor such as are foreknowne perish: but if in a sense divided
( in sensu diuiso) it is not so. This distinction is plain by this example.
White color in a compound meaning cannot be black, because blackenesse is
repugnant and contrary to whiteness. But in a divided sense, white color
now may afterward be made black. In like sort, one predestined to
salvation may, by reason of the free will he has, sin, and so be damned.
Ans. These are silly shifts, and mere sophismes, because such as are
predestined to the end, namely salvation, are necessarily predestinate to
the means of salvation, the which they cannot but use, and by them come to the
end it self.

The III. error.
All men are predestinate, that is, disposed and ordained of God, so as they
might attain eternal life. Sebast. Cattaneus in his Enchirid. chap. of
Predest.

The Confutation.
This is manifestly false. For I. Infants, who so son as they are borne,
depart this life, seeing for want of time they cannot in this life use the
means of salvation, albeit they may have life eternal, yet obtain they it
not by using the means unto the same. II. That which the Lord indeed actually
does, the very same has he determined to do. For he does nothing either
unadvisedly, or unwillingly: but he actually forsakes a very great part of
mankind, the which being shut up under contumacy, he does leave to it self.
Act. 14.16. Who in times past suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own
ways. Hence also is it, that Ephesians. 2. all the Gentiles are said to be (...),
without God in the world. Therefore God decreed to forsake some men in this
life, and consequently he ordained not all men to the obtaining of eternal
life. Nay, if God once but would in his secret will, that all men should be
saved, it were impossible for any to perish: because Gods willing, is his doing
of it: and if he that was ordained to salvation perish, then must God now
needs have left off to will that, which he would from all eternity, or else
begin to will that, which before he would not, the which cannot be said of
God, without blasphemy. III. Paul 2. These. 2.10. says, that there be certain
men, (...), which perish, and them he distinguishes from the elect. v. 13.
Romans 9.21,22. Has not the potter power, etc. Where there is not only mention
made of vessels of glory, and mercy, but also of certain made, and fashioned
in Gods eternal counsel, as vessels of wrath. Now look whom God has made
to wrath and destruction, them he never disposed to obtain eternal life.

The IV. error.
Predestination in regard of the last effects thereof, has this cause in man,
that is, in man's free will, and works: for they whom God had foreseen, that
they would receive grace offered in Christ, and lead their life according to
the law, the^ he predestined, not of works, but of his mercy; yet so, as
that he had respect unto works, or to deal with them according to their
works: or (as others say) to ordain them by their works foreseen: As for
example: God did from all eternity foresee and foreknow, that Peter should be
saved, and Judas condemned, because he from the same eternity did both foresee
and foreknow, that Peter would accept of the grace offered unto him, and after
use the same aright: and he did also foresee that Judas should receive the
grace offered, yet notwithstanding by reason of his perverse will, use the same
peruersly.

The Confutation.
This their forged devise of foreseen works, I. Paul does show to be
plainly counterfeit, when as he says, that the Ephesians were elected in
Christ before the foundations of the world were laid: and that not because he
did foresee that they would be holy, but that they might be holy and
unblameable before God with love. And 2. v. 10. he says, they were created to
good works in Christ, that they might walk therein. In which places, good
works they are made effects of predestination; but the effect foreseen
cannot be the cause of his cause: for that every cause, in the order both of
nature and knowledge, does go before his effect. II. Tit. 3.5. Not of works
which we have done, but according to his mercy did God elect and save us. III.
God in electing us, did not regard any thing out of himself, but in himself
did he elect us. Ephesians. 1.4. and 9. Therefore did he not regard future works.
IV. Some of the popish schoolmen confess, that Predestination does put
nothing in the party predestined, in respect of him, for which God did
predestinate him. Thom. 1. primae. quest. 23. art. 2. V. Election is only on
Gods mercy. Romans 9.16. VI. God saw no grace in man, but that which he himself
must bestow upon him: whence it is apparent, that in election the beginning
thereof proceeds from grace. VII. Seeing there is nothing either above God,
or greater then God, it must needs be impious to assign any cause of his
will, either out of, or above his majesty: and therefore that his
foreknowledge of faith and works should be accounted the impulsive cause of
his decree, concerning man's salvation, we do rightly deny.

The V. error.
By Baptism rightly administered, not only the guiltines, but also the
corruption of original sin, is so washed away as that it is not afterward
properly accounted a sin.

The Confutation.
We contrarily do thus distinguish of sin. Sin in regard of the guiltines
of Gods wrath, and also in regard of the punishment together by one act is
taken away in Baptism: but in regard of that error and corruption of nature,
it is not at the first quite taken away, but successively, and by little and
little it is extinguished; even as our renouation wrought by the holy Ghost, is
by little and little begun and increased in us. Reasons. I. Paul would not so
greatly bewail his original sin, if after Baptism it ceased any more to
be sin. I see, says he, another law in my members, rebelling against the
law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin which is in my
members. O miserable man ^ who shall deliver me from this body of death? II.
Original sin, is called a sin out of measure sinful. Romans 7.13. And Heb.
12.1. a sin that hangs fast on, or, easily compasses us about. III.
Concupiscence is the root of actual sin; and therefore even after Baptism,
it must properly be a sin. IV. Unless that concupiscence were a sin, where
would or could be that vehement and hot combat betwixt the flesh and the
spirit?

The VI. error.
Baptism is absolutely necessary to salvation, especially for children.

The Confutation.
We deny that Baptism is of absolute necessity to salvation. Reasons. I.
Sacraments do not confer grace, but rather confirm grace, when GOD has
conferred the same. The children of faithful parents are borne holy, not by
natural generation, but by the grace of God, and are not first made holy by
baptism: and as for such as are of years of discretion before they be
baptized, they cannot be baptized unless they believe. Now all such as
believe, they are both justified, and reconciled to God; and therefore, albeit
they without their own default, are deprived of the Sacraments it is
impossible for the^ to perish. II. God did precisely appoint circumcision to be
on the eight day, not on the first, or the second: now there is no doubt but
that many infants before their eight day were prevented of circumcision by
death, all which for a man peremptorily to set down as condemned, were very
absurd. III. If circumcision were of such absolute great necessity, why was it
for the space of forty years in the desert intermitted? and that only
because the Israelites being often in journey, such as were circumcised were
by it in ieopardy of death: no doubt Moses and Aaron would never have omitted
this Sacrament so long, if it had been absolutely necessary to salvation. IV.
This doctrine of the absolute necessity of Baptism was unknown to the
ancient Fathers. For the primitive Church did tolerate very godly men (though
we allow not this their fact) that they should defer their baptism many
years, yea often to the time of their death. Hence was it that Constantine the
great was not baptized till a little before his death: and Valentinian by
reason of his delay, was not at all baptized: whom notwithstanding Ambrose
pronounces to be in heaven. And Bernard in his 77. epist. disputes, that not
every deprivation of Baptism, but the contempt or palpable negligence, is
damnable.

The VII. error.
Man after the fall of Adam has free will as well to do that which is good,
as that which is evil, although it be in a diverse manner, that is, he has
free will to do^ evil simply, and without any external aid: but to do well,
none at all, but by the grace of God preventing, or guiding us: the which grace
notwithstanding every man has, and to the which grace it is in our free will
either to consent and together work with the same, or not. And therefore the
power of free will to do that which is good and acceptable to God, is only
attenuated and weakened before conversion, and therefore man can of himself
work a preparation to justification.

The Confutation.
Man not regenerated has free will to do only that which is evil, none to
do good. He being not already converted cannot so much as will to have faith,
and be converted. Reasons. I. Man is not said to be weak or sick, but dead in
sins. Ephe. 2.1. Col. 1.13. As he therefore that is corporally dead can not
stir up himself, that he may perform such works of vivification, no not
then when others help him: so he that is spiritually dead, cannot move
himself to live unto God. II. He is the servant of Satan, and bondslaue of
sin. Ephesians. 2.2. Romans 6.13. Now we know that a servant stands at the beck
and pleasure of another, and can do nothing else. III. That which no man can by
himself know and believe, the same he cannot will: but no man can know and
believe those things that appertain to the kingdom of GOD. 1. Cor. 2. verse.
14. The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God. 2. Cor. 3.
5. We are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves.
Therefore no man can will by himself, those things that appertain to Gods
kingdom. IV. That which is a deadly enemy to goodness, and is directly
repugnant thereunto the same desires not that which is good; but the will is
an enemy and directly repugnant unto goodness. Romans 8.7. The wisdom of the
flesh is hatred against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be.

Object. I. The word is near unto thee in thine heart, and in thy mouth, that
thou may do the same. Deuteronomy. 30. Answer. It is easy to perform the law
legallie, but not Euangelically: Now this is done, when as any man does fulfill
the law by a Mediator, and from him receiving the spirit of god, does endeavor
to perform new obedience.

Object. II. God gives many precepts by which we are commanded to repent,
believe, obey God, etc. Therefore to do these, we have free will. Answ. Such
places do not show us what we can do, but what we should do, and our weakness
what we cannot do: neither do they show what men can do, but what men should
do. II. They are instruments of the holy Ghost, whereby he does renew and
convert such as shall be saved. They object again. God in commanding these,
does not require things impossible. Ans. He does not indeed to men in their
innocence, but now to all such as fell in Adam he does, and that by their own
default, not Gods.

Object. III. Philip. 3. 12. Work your salvation with fear and trembling.

Answer. Paul speaks of such as are already converted, which have their will
in part freed.

Object. IV. If the will be a mere patient, it is constrained to do that,
which is good. Answ. The will both in it self, and of it self, is a mere
patient in her first conversion unto God; but if it be considered as it is
moved by the spirit of God, it is an agent. For, being moved, it moves. It
is not therefore compelled, but of a nilling will, is made a willing will.

The VIII. error.
The holy Ghost does not give grace to will, but only does unloose the will
which before was chained, and also does excite the same: so that the will by
her own power, does dispose her self to justification.

The Confutation.
It is apparently false. To will those things which concern the kingdom of
God, as faith, conversion, and new obedience, is the mere gift of Gods spirit.
Matthew. 11.28. No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to who^^ the
Son will reveal him. Luke 8. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of God. Philip. 2. It is God which works in you to will and to do.
1. Cor. 12. 13. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost.
Briefly he, who according to God is to be created to righteousness and holiness,
Ephesians. 4.24. cannot any ways dispose himself to justification, or new creation.
For it is impossible that a thing not yet created, should dispose it self to
his creation.

The IX. error.
That preparation to grace, which is caused by the power of free will, may by
the merit of congruitie deserve justification.

The Confutation.
These things smell of more then Satanicall arrogancy. For what man, but such
an one as were not in his right mind, would believe, that he, unto whom so many
millions of condemnations are due, could once merit the least dram of grace.
The prodigal son, he was not received into favor by reason of his deserts,
but by favor. Luke 15.21. His son said unto him, I have sinned against
heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

The X. error.
The faith of the godly, or that which justifies, is that whereby a man does
in general believe the promised blessedness of God, and by which also he gives
his assent to other mysteries revealed of God concerning the same.

The Confutation.
Faith is not only a general knowledge, and assent to the history of the
Gospel, but further also a certain power, both apprehending and severally
applying the promises of God in Christ, whereby a man does assuredly set down
that his sins are forgiven him, and that he is reconciled unto God. Reasons.
I. A particular assurance of the favor of god, is of the nature of faith. Ephesians.
3.12. By whom we have boldness; and entrance with confidence, by faith in him.
Romans 4.20. Neither did he doubt of the promise of God through unbelief, but
was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory unto God. 21. Being fully
assured that he which had promised, was also able to do it. Heb. 10.22. Let us
draw nere with a true heart in assurance of faith. II. Particular doubtings is
reprehended Mat. 14.^^. O thou of little faith, why did thou doubt? Luke
12.29. Hang ye not in suspense. III. That which a man prays for to god, that
must he assuredly believe to receive. Math. 11.24. But the faithful in their
prayers make request for adoption, justification, and life eternal: And
therefore they must certainly believe that they shall receive these benefits.
IV. Romans 5.1. We being therefore justified, we have peace with God. But there
can be no peace, where there is not a pa^ticu^ar assurance of Gods favor. V.
That which the spirit of God does testify unto us particularly, that must also
be believed particularly: But the spirit of God does give a particular
testimony of the adoption of the faithful. Romans 8.16. Gal. 4.6. This
therefore is in like sort to be believed.

Whereas they say, that no man has a particular assurance, but by especial
revelation, as was that which Abraham, and Paul had, it is false. For the faith
of these two is set down in Scripture, as an example which we should all
follow. For this cause Abraham is called the Father of the faithful: and Paul
testifies the very fame of himself. 1. Tim. 1.16. For this cause (says he)
was I received to mercy, that Jesus Christ should first show on me all long
suffering, unto the example of them which shall in time to come believe in him
unto eternal life. Again, whereas they say, that we have a moral assurance,
but not the assurance of faith, it is a popish devise. For, Romans 8.16. The
spirit of adoption ((...)) together bears witness to our spirits. Where we
see two witnesses of our adoption; our own spirit, and the spirit of God. Our
spirit does testify morally of our adoption, by sanctification, and the fruits
thereof: and therefore also the spirit of God witnesses after another manner,
namely, by the certainty of faith, declaring and applying the promises of God.

Object. I. We are commanded to work our salvation with fear and trembling.
Ans. This fear is not in regard of Gods mercy forgiving our sins, but in
respect of us and our nature, which is ever prone to slide away, and starting
from God.

Object. II. In respect of Gods mercy, we must hope for salvation: but in
respect of our unworthiness, we must doubt: Ans. I. We may not at all lawfully
doubt of Gods mercy, because doubtfulnes is not of the nature of faith, but
rather a natural corruption. II. If we consider our own unworthiness, it is
out of all doubt, that we must be out of all hope, and despair of our
salvation.

Object. III. There be many sins unknown unto us, and so also uncertain
whether they be pardoned unto us. Answer. He that certainly and truly knows
that but one sin is pardoned him, he has before God all his sins remitted,
whether they be known or unknown.

Object. IV. No man dare swear, or die in the defense of this proposition, I
am the child of God, or in Gods favor, and justified. Answ. They which have an
unfeigned faith, will if they be lawfully called, not only testify their
adoption by an oath, but seal it also by their blood.

Object. V. A man may have this faith which the Protestants talk of, and lie
in a mortal sin, and have also a purpose to persevere in a mortal sin.
Ans. It is far otherwise, for Act. 15.9. True faith purifieth the heart.

These Sophisters do further affirm, that this faith, which to them is
nothing but a knowledge and illumination of the mind concerning the truth of
Gods word, is the root and foundation of justification. The which if it be
true, why should not the devil be just? for he has both a knowledge of Gods
word, and thereunto by believing does give his assent; who notwithstanding he
have such a faith, yet can he not be called one of the faithful.

Here they except, and say. The devils faith is void of charity, which is the
form of faith. But this is a doting surmise of their own brain. For charity
is the effect of faith, 1. Tim. 1.5. But the effect cannot inform the cause.

The XI. error.
Man's love of God, does in order and time go before his i^stification and
reconciliation with God.

The Confutation.
Nay contrarily, unless we be first persuaded of Gods love toward us, we
never love him. For we love him, because he loved us first. 1. Ioh. 4.19.
Again, it is impossible that Gods enemy should love him: but he which is not
as yet justified, or reconciled to God, he is Gods enemy. Romans 5.9,10. Neither
is any man before the act of justification, made of Gods enemy his friend.

The XII. error.
Iufused or inherent justice, is the formal cause of i^stification, whereby
men are justified in the sight of God.

The Confutation.
We do contrarily hold, that the material cause of man's justification is, the
obedience of Christ in suffering, and fulfilling the law for us: but as for the
formal cause that must needs be Imputation, the which is an action of God the
Father accepting the obedience of Christ for us, as if it were our own.
Reasons. I. Look by what we are absolved from all our sins, and by which we
obtain eternal life, by that alone are we justified: But by Christ's perfect
obedience imputed unto us, we are absolved from all our sins, and through it
we are accepted of God to eternal life; the which we cannot do by inherent
holiness. Therefore by Christ's perfect obedience imputed unto us, are we alone
justified. This will appear to be true in the exercises of invocation on Gods
name, and also of repentance. For in tentation, and conflicts with sin and
Satan, faith does not reason thus: Now I have charity and inherent grace, and
for these God will accept of me: But faith does more rightly behold the son
of God, as he was made a sacrifice for us, and sits at the right hand of his
Father, there making intercession for us: to him, I say, does faith fly, and
is assured that for this his son, God will forgive us all our sins, and
will also be reconciled unto us, yea, and account us just in his sight, not by
any quality inherent in us, but rather by the merit of Jesus Christ. Romans
5.19. II. As Christ is made a sinner, so by proportion such as believe are made
just: But Christ was by imputation only made and accounted a sinner for us. 2.
Cor. 5. 21. For he became a surety for us, and a sacrifice for our sins,
upon which all both the guiltiness of Gods wrath, and punishment for us was to
be laid. Hence is it that he is said to become ((...)) a curse for us:
Therefore we again are made just only by imputation. III. The contrary to
condemnation is remission of sins, and justification is the opposite of
condemnation. Romans 8. 33. It is God that justifies, who shall condemn?
Therefore justification is the remission of sins. Now remission of sins
depends only upon this imputation of Christ's merits. IV. Albeit infused and
inherent justice may have his due place, his praise, and also deserts, yet as
it is a work of the holy Ghost, it is not in this life complete, and by reason
of the flesh^ whereto it is united, it is both imperfect, and infected with the
dregs of sin. Esai 64. Therefore before Gods judgment seat it cannot
claim this prerogative, to absolve any from the sentence of condemnation.

Object. I. This imputation is nothing else but a vain cogitation. Answ. I.
Yes, it is a relation or divine ordinance, whereby one relative is applied to
his correlatiue, or as the Logitians say, is as the foundation to the Terminus.
II. As the imputation of our sins unto Christ, was indeed something: so the
imputation of Christ's justice unto us, must not be thought a bare conceit. III.
Again, the Church of Rome does her self maintain imputative iustic^, namely,
when as by Ecclesiastical authority she does apply the merits and
satisfactions of certain persons, unto other members of that Church. Whence it
is apparent, that even the Popes indulgences they are imputative.

Object. II. Imputative justice, is not everlasting: but that justice which the
Messiah brings is everlasting. Ans. Although after this life there is no
pardon of sins to be looked for, yet that which is given us in this life,
shall to our salvation continue in the life to come.

Object. III. If justification be by imputation, he may before God be just, who
indeed is a very wicked man. Ans. Not so any ways: for he that is once by
imputation justified, he is also at that same instant sanctified.

The XIII. error.
There is also a second justification, and that is obtained by works.

The Confutation.
That popish device of a second justification, is a fantastical delusion. For,
I. The word of God does acknowledge no more but one justification at all, and
that absolute and complete of it self. There is but one justice, but one
satisfaction of God being offended therefore there cannot be a manifold
justification. II. If by reason of the increase of inherent justice,
justification should be distinguished into several kinds or parts, we might
as well make an hundredth kinds, or parts of justification, as two. III. That
which by order of nature does follow after full justification before God, it
cannot be said to justify: But good works do by order of nature follow man's
justification, and his absolution from sins: because no work can please God,
except the person it self, that works the same, do before please him. But
no man's person can please God, but such an one as being reconciled to God, by
the merits of Christ has peace with him. IV. Such works as are not agreeable
to the rule of legal justice: they, before the tribunal seat of God, cannot
justify, but rather both in, and of themselves are subject to Gods eternal
curse. For this is the sentence of the Law, Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things written in the book of the Law to do them. Now the works
even of the regenerate; are not squared according to the rule of legal
justice: wherefore David being, as it were stricken, with the consideration of
this, durst not once oppose, no not his best works to the judgment of God,
that by them he might plead pardon of his sins; whence it is that he cries
out and says, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord: for then no
flesh living shall be justified in thy sight. The like does Job 9.3. If he
(namely, such an one as says he is just) contend with God, he cannot answer
him one of a thousand. And Dan. 9. 18. We do not present our supplications
before thee for our own righteousness, but for thy great tender mercies. V.
Justification by works, let them be whatsoever they can be, does quite
ouerturne the foundation of our faith. Gal. 5.2. If ye be circumcised, Christ
will profit you nothing. and v. 4. Ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever are
justified by the law: ye are fallen from grace. In this place the Apostle
speaks of them, not which did openly resist Christ, and the Gospel, but of
such as did with the merit of Christ mingle together the works of the Law; as
though some part of our salvation consisted in them. Exception. This place does
only exclude such moral works of the flesh, as do go before faith, or the
works of the law of Moses. Ans. This is untrue. For even of Abraham being
already regenerated, and of those his works which were done when he was
justified, Paul speaks thus, To him, not which works, but which believes
is faith imputed. Those works which God has prepared that the regenerate
should walk in them, are moral works, and works of grace; but these are
excluded from justification, and working man's salvation. Ephesians. 2.10. And Paul
being regenerate says thus of himself, I am not guilty unto my self of any
thing, yet am, I not thereby justified. VI. The cause of the cause is the cause
of the thing caused; but grace without works is the cause of man's
predestination, the which is the cause of his justification: and therefore
grace without works shall much more be said to be the cause of justification.

Object. I. Levit. 18.5. He that keeps my statutes shall live in them. Ans.
This saving is a legal sentence: and therefore shows not what men can do,
but what they should do.

Object. II. Psalm. 119.1. Blessed are those that walk in the Law of the Lord.
Ans. Man is not here said to be blessed, because he walks uprightly, but
because the person of such: walker is, by the merits of Christ, justified
before God.

Object. III. Judge me according to my righteousness. Psalm. 7. And the fact of
Phinees was imputed to him for righteouses. Ans. These places are not meant of
that righteousness of the person, by which it is righteous before God; but of
the righteousness of some particular cause, or work. For where as David was
accused of this crime, that he did affect Saul's kingdom, he in this point does
in the words above mentioned, testify his innocence before God.

Object. IV. We are judged according to our works, therefore also by them
justified. Ans. The reason is not alike: because the last judgment is not the
justifying of a man, but a declaration of that justification which he had
before obtained. Therefore the last judgment must be pronounced and taken, not
from the causes of justification, but from the effects and signs thereof.

Object. V. Make you friends of unrighteous Mammon, etc. that they may receive
you into eternal habitations. Ans. This they do, not as authors of salvation,
but as witnesses of the same.

Object. VI. Dan. 4.24. Redeem thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquity
by mercy toward the poor. Ans. It is rather, break off thy sins, then
redeem, for so is the original: now men break off their sins, by ceasing
from them, not satisfying for them.

Object. VII. Evil works condemn: therefore good works justify. Answ. It
follows not; because good works are not perfectly good, as evil works are
perfectly evil.

Object. VIII. We are saved by hope, Romans 8. Answer. We must distinguish
betwixt justification, and salvation: salvation is the end, justification is
one degree to come to the end: but there is more required to the end then to
a degree subordinate to the end: therefore we are saved by hope and faith, but
justified by faith alone.

Object. IX. Affliction causes eternal glory, 2. Cor. 4.17. Ans. This is
does not, as by it own merit, effecting the same, but, rather as a path and
way manifesting and declaring the same.

Object. X. Iam. 2.21. Abraham was justified by works. Ans. Not as any cause
of justification, but as a manifestation thereof.

Object. XI. He that is just, let him be more just. Ans. This place must be
understood of justification before men, namely, of sanctification, or an holy
life: not of justification in the sight of God.

Object. XII. We are justified by faith, therefore by a work. Ans. We are
justified by faith, not as it is a virtue, and a work, but as it is an
instrument apprehending the justice of Christ, whereby we are justified. And in
this respect faith is said, by the figure called Metonymia, to be imputed to us
unto righteousness.

Object. XIII. The works of grace are dyed in the blood of Christ. Ans. They
are indeed dyed therein, but to the end they might the better please God, not
justify man: and whereas they are so stained as that they need dying in the
blood of Christ, therefore can they not any ways justify sinful man. And
the person of the worker, is as well died in Christ's blood, as is his work, yet
he can not say that his person does therefore justify him.

And as I have now proved that this doctrine of the Papists is very erroneous,
so I also avouch that it is most ridiculous. Because for a man to say that
inherent righteousness is, by good works, namely the fruits of righteousness,
augmented; is as if a man should say, that the vine is made more fruitful by
bearing grapes, or that the internal light of the sun is augmented by the
external emission of the beams. Luthers saying is far more true. Good
works do not make a good man, but a good man does make works good.

The XIIII. error.
Grace is quite extinguished, or rather utterly lost by any mortal sin.

The Confutation.
I. The word of God does manifestly declare that it is far otherwise, Ioh. 6.
All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me: and him that comes unto
me, I cast not away. Math. 16.16. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I
build my Church: so that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. 1.
Ioh. 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had
been of us, they would have continued with us. Romans 5. 1. Being therefore
justified we have peace with God. Now how could this be true, if he that was
before justified, could any way quite fall from grace, and so perish. II. The
elect after their very grievous fallings from God forthwith repented them of
their sins, as we may see in the example of David, Peter, etc. the which
argues that they had not quite fallen from grace, and lost the spirit of God.
III. If grace be once utterly lost, then the ingraffing of that party into
Christ is quite abolished: therefore for such as repent; there must needs
succeed a second new ingraffing into Christ: and then it will also follow, that
they must of necessity be baptized anew, which is absurd to think.

But for all this, we deny not but grace may in part, and for a time be lost,
to the end that the faithful may thereby acknowledge and know their weakness,
and for it be humbled: but that there is any total or final falling from
grace, we utterly deny.

The XV. error.
It is possible to fulfill the Law in this life.

The Confutation.
The Law is euangelically fulfilled, by believing in Christ; but not legally,
by doing the works thereof. Reason. They which are carnal cannot possibly
fulfill the law of God: but the most regenerate, so long as they live in this
life, are carnal in part. Romans 7.14. I am, says Paul of himself, carnal,
and sold under sin. Prou. 20. Who can say, Mine heart is pure, I am pure from
sin? Eccles. 7. There is none so just upon earth, which does good, and
sins not. Psalm. 130. If thou, Lord, observe what is done amiss, Lord who
shall abide it? We are daily taught to pray unto God, Forgive us our sins.
Exception. Indeed if the justice of the faithful be absolutely considered, it
is imperfect, but as God does exact it of our frailty, it is perfect. Answer.
This is but the fancy of some doting Jesuit. For this sentence of the Law is
simple, eternal, and immooueable, Cursed is every one that continues not in
all things which are written in this book to do them. Neither may we imagine,
that God will not therefore exact the full accomplishing of the law, because we
are frail. For we are creatures and debtors: now we know that the debt does
not decrease, by reason of the debtors poverty.

Object. The faithful are said to be perfect in this life. Ans. There is a
twofold perfection, the one incomplete, the which is an endeavor or care to
obey God in the observation of all his precepts; the other is termed complet,
this is that justice which the law requires, namely, a perfect and absolute
justice, according to that measure which man performed to God in his innocence.
In the first sense the faithful are said to be perfect, not in this latter.

The XVI. error.
Works done in grace do ( ex condigno) condignely merit eternal life.

The Confutation.
I. Eternal life is the free gift of God. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is
death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Christ Jesus. Therefore it
is not obtained by the merit of works. II. The merit of condignitie, is an
action belonging to such an nature as is both God and man, not to a bare
creature. For the Angels themselves cannot merit any thing at Gods hands: yea
and Adam also, if he had stood in his first innocence, could have deserved
nothing of god, because it is the bounden duty of the creature to perform
obedience unto his Creator. The merit therefore of condignitie, does only agree
unto Christ God and man, in whom each nature does, to the effecting of this
merit, perform that which belongs to it. For the humanity it does minister
matter unto the meritorious work, by suffering and performing obedience: but
the Deity of Christ, whereunto the humanity is hypostatically united does
confer full and sufficient worthiness unto the work. Hence is it that the
Father does speak thus of his son, Mat. 3.17. This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased ((...).) III. In the second commandment God does
promise eternal life to the keepers of his commandments, yet he says not
that they shall obtain it by desert, but that he will show mercy to thousands
of them that love him, and keep his commandments. IV. That a work may be
meritorious, first there must be an equal proportion betwixt it, and legal
justice, or eternal life: secondly, merit does presuppose this also, that in
God there must be a due debt toward man, for God then ought on duty, not by
favor, to accept of the person of man. But all our works, yea our most holy
works, they cannot come near unto legal righteousness. For, seeing all the
regenerate are partly carnal, and partly spiritual, all their works in like
sort are imperfectly good. For look what the causes are, and such must the
effects needs be. So then, good works do presuppose a due debt in man, none
in God. V. The ancient Fathers do not acknowledge this merit of condignitie
as current. August. in his manuel, chap. 22. My merit is Gods mercy. Bernard.
ser. 63. upon the Cant. It is sufficient to know this, that merits are not
sufficient. And ser. 61. Cant. Man's justice is Gods goodness. And epist. 190.
That the satisfaction of one may be imputed to all, as the sins of all were
borne by one. And as for ancient doctors, merit was nothing else to them but a
good work acceptable to God. Aug. epist. 105. to Sixtus. If it be grace, then
is it not bestowed by reason of any merit, but upon free mercy. What merits of
his own can he that is set at liberty brag of, who if he had his merits
should have been condemned? So the word merit does signify to do well, to be
acceptable, to please, as the old interpreter has, for (...) signifying to
please God, used this Latin word promereri, To merit.

Object. I. Works have attributed unto them reward. Answer. Reward is not so
much attributed to the work, as to the worker, and to him not for himself, but
for Christ's merits apprehended by faith. Therefore not our merit, or personal
merit, but Christ's merit, and our reward are correlatiues.

Object. II. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. It is a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulations, etc. Ans. It is righteous, not because God ought so to do of
duty, but because he promised: now for God to stand to his word. it is a part
of justice.

Object. III. Christ has merited, that works might merit. Ans. I. This takes
quite away the intercession of Christ. II. It is against the nature of a legal
work, to merit ( ex condigno) condignly: because both the law of nature and
creation do bind man to perform legal works unto God. And further, all
works are very imperfect, and mixed with sin. III. This doctrine concerning
works, does obscure and darken the merit of Christ: because that the obtaining
of eternal life is withdrawn from his death and obedience, and attributed
unto works. For they say thus, that Christ by his passion did merit indeed
for the sinner justification: but a sinner once justified, does for himself by
his own merits even condignly merit eternal life.

Object. IV. The works of the regenerate, are the works of the holy Ghost,
therefore perfect and pure. Ans. I. The works of God are all perfect, but yet
in their time, and by degrees: therefore sanctification which is a work of
god, must in this life remain incomplete, and is made perfect in the world to
come. II. The works of God are pure, as they are the works of God alone, not
of God and impure man: but now good works they do come immediately from the
natural faculties of the soul, namely, from the understanding, and the will,
(in which, they being as yet, but partly regenerated, some corrupt qualities of
sin do yet remain) and are not immediately and simply, or wholly derived
from Gods spirit. And hence it is that they are all stained with sin.

The XVII. error.
Man knows not but by especial revelation, whether he be predestined or
not.

The Confutation.
The contrary to this, is a plain truth. Reasons. I. That which a man must
certainly believe, that may he also certainly know without an especial
revelation: but every faithful man must believe that he is elected. It is Gods
commandment, that we should believe in Christ. 1. Ioh. 3.23. Now to believe in
Christ, is not only to believe that we are adopted, justified, and redeemed by
him; but also in him elected from eternity. II. That which is sealed unto us
by the spirit of God, of that we are very sure without special revelation: but
our adoption, and so consequently our election, is sealed unto us by the spirit
of God. 1. Cor. 2. 12. We have not received the spirit of the world, but the
spirit which is of God: that we might know the things that are given to us of
God. Therefore is our election certainly known unto us. Ephesians. 1.13. In whom
also ye have trusted after that ye heard the word of truth, even the Gospel
of your salvation, wherein also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the
holy spirit of promise.

Exception. The holy Ghost does seal unto us our adoption morally by works,
and therefore the knowledge of our adoption is but only probable.

Answer. It seals unto us our adoption, by begetting a special trust and
confidence. For when as we hear Gods promises, and withal think upon them,
then does the holy Ghost by the same promises move our understandings and wills
to embrace them, and in moving them, does make us both to give our assent unto
them, and in them to rest our selves: whence arises a special assurance that
we are adopted, and in the favor of God. Luke 10. 20. Rejoice rather that your
names are written in heaven. But no man can be glad for that good which he is
in doubt whether he have received it, or not. IV. 2. Pet. 1. 10. Study to make
your vocation and election sure, (...): but this is not in respect of God, but
ourselves.

Object. No man must by the Catholic faith believe any thing which God has
not revealed either in the written or unwritten word, namely tradition. But
there is no such either writing or tradition as this, namely, that such a
particular man, suppose Peter, or Henry, is predestined of God. Therefore no
man must particularly believe that he is saved. Ans. Albeit this particular
proposition, I am elected, is not expressly set down in the Scriptures, yet is
it inclusiuely comprehended in them, as the Species is in his Genus, as the
Logitians speak: so that it may by just consequent be gathered out of Gods
word, if we reason thus: They which truly believe, are elected, Ioh. 6.35. I
truly believe: therefore I am elected. The first proposition is taken from the
Scriptures: the second, from the believers conscience, and from them both the
conclusion is easily derived.

CHAP. 52. Concerning the decree of Reprobation.
THus much shall suffice for the decree of Election, now follows the decree of
Reprobation.

The decree of Reprobation, is that part of predestination, whereby God,
according to the most free and just purpose of his will, has determined to
reject certain men unto eternal destruction, and misery, and that to the
praise of his justice. Romans 9.21. Has not the potter power over the clay, to
make of the same lump one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? 1. Pet.
2.8. To the^ which stu^ble at the word, being disobedient, unto which thing
((...)) they were even ordained. Iud. v. 4. There are certain men crept in,
which were before of old ((...)) ordained to this condemnation. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.
God has not appointed us unto wrath but to salvation. In the Scriptures Cain
and Abel, Ismael and Isaac, Esau and Jacob, are propounded unto us as types of
mankind partly elected, and partly rejected.

Neither do we here set down any absolute decree of Damnation, as though we
should think that any were condemned by the mere and alone will of God,
without any causes inherent in such as are to be condemned. For unto the decree
of God it self, there are certain means for the execution thereof annexed,
and subordinate. And therefore, though we never do, or can separate Gods
decree, and the means to execute the same, yet do we distinguish them, and
do consider the purpose of God, sometimes by it self alone, and sometimes
again not by it self, but with middle causes subordinate thereto. And in this
second respect, Christ is said to be predestinate: but in the former, namely,
as the decree is considered by it self, he is not predestined, but together
with God the Father, a Predestinator.

Again, the decree of God is secret. I. Because it arises only from the good
pleasure of God, unsearchable, and adored of the very angels themselves. II.
Because it is not known but by that which is after it, namely, by the effects
thereof.

CHAP. 53. Concerning the execution of the decree of Reprobation.
IN the executing of this decree, there is to be considered, the foundation or
beginning, and the degrees or proceeding thereof.

The foundation of executing the decree of Reprobation, is the fall of Adam, by
which fall he was subject both to sin and damnation. Romans 11.32. For God has
shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. 1. Pet. 2.8. Here
we must note, that God has so decreed to condemn some, as that
notwithstanding; all the fault and guilt of condemnation remains in the men
only.

Further, whom God rejects to condemnation, those he hates: this hatred of
God is, whereby he detesteth and abhors the reprobate when he is fallen into
sin, for the same sin. And this hatred which God has to man, comes by the
fall of Adam: and it is neither an antecedent nor a cause of Gods decree, but
only a consequent and follows the decree.

Reprob^tes are either Infants or men of riper age.

In reprobate infants, the execution of Gods decree is this: as soon as they
are borne, for the guilt of original and natural sin, being left in Gods
secret judgment unto themselves, they dying are rejected of God for ever. Romans
chap. 5. ver. 14. But death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them also
that sinned not after the like manner of the transgression of Adam, which was
the figure of him that was to come. Romans 9.11. For ere the children were borne,
and when they had neither done good nor evil, that the purpose of God might
remain according to election not by works, but by him that calls.

Reprobates of riper age, are of two sorts, they that are called (namely, by an
ineffectual calling) and they that are not called.

In the Reprobates which are called, the execution of the decree of Reprobation
has three degrees, to wit, an acknowledgement of Gods calling, a falling away
again, and condemnation.

The acknowledgement of Gods calling is, whereby the Reprobates for a time, do
subject themselves to the calling of God, which calling is wrought by the
preaching of the word. Mat. 22.14. For many are called, but few are chosen.
And of this calling there are five other degrees.

The first is, an enlightening of their minds, whereby they are instructed of
the holy Ghost to the understanding and knoweledge of the word. Heb. 6.4. For
it is impossible that they which were once lightened, etc. 2. Pet. 2.20. For if
they, after they have escaped from the filthiness of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord, and of the Savior Jesus Christ, are yet tangled again
therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the beginning.

The second, is a certain penitencie, whereby the Reprobate, I. does
acknowledge his sin. II. Is pricked with the feeling of Gods wrath for sin.
III. Is grieved for the punishment of sin. IV. Does confess his sin. V.
Acknowledges God to be just in punishing sin. VI. Desires to be saved. VII.
Promises repentance in his misery or affliction, in these words, I will sin
no more. Math. 27.3. Then when Judas which betrayed him, saw that he was
condemned, he repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of
silver, to the chief Priests and Elders. Heb. 12.17. For ye know how that
afterward also when h^ would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for
he found no place to repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears. 1.
King. 21.27. Now when Ahab heard those words, he rent his clothes, and put
sackcloath upon him, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly. Numb.
23.10. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his.
Psalm. 78.32. For all this, they sinned still, and believed not his wondrous
works. 33. Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years
hastily. 34. And when he slew them, they sought him, and they returned, and
sought God early. 35. They remembered that God was their strength, and the most
high God their redeemer.

The third degree is, a temporary faith, whereby the reprobate does confusedly
believe the promises of God, made in Christ, I say confusedly, because he
believes that some shall be saved, but he believes not that he himself
particularly shall be saved, because he being content with a general faith,
does never apply the promises of God to himself, neither does he so much as
conceive any purpose, desire, or endeavor to apply the same, or any wrestling
or striving against security or carelesnes and distrust. Iam. 2. 19. Thou
beleeuest that there is one God, thou do well: the devils also believe it,
and tremble. Math. 13.20. And he that received seed in the stony ground, is he
which hears the word, and incontinently with joy receives it. 21. Yet has
he no root in himself, and dureth but a season. Ioh. 2.23. Now when he was at
Jerusalem at the Passover in the feast, many believed in his Name when they
saw his miracles which he did. 24. But Jesus did not commit himself unto them,
because he knew them all.

The fourth is, a tasting of heavenly gifts: as of Justification, and of
Sanctification, and of the virtues of the world to come. This tasting is verily
a sense in the hearts of the Reprobates, whereby they do perceive and feel
the excellency of Gods benefits, notwithstanding they do not enjoy the same.
For it is one thing to taste of dainties at a banquet, and another thing to
feed and to be nourished thereby. Heb. 6.4. For it is impossible, that they
which were once lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gifts, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost.

The fifth degree is, the outward holiness of life for a time, under which, is
comprehended a zeal in the profession of religion, a reverence and fear
toward Gods ministers, and amendment of life in many things. Mark. 6.20. For
Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man, and an holy, and reverenced
him, and when he heard him^ he did many things, and heard him gladly. Act.
18.13. Then Simon himself believed also, and was baptized, and continued with
Philip, and wondered when he saw the signs and great miracles which were done.
Hos. 6.4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat
thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the morning dew it goes
away.

The second degree of the execution of Gods counsel of reprobation, in me^ of
ripe age which are called, is a falling away again, which for the most part is
effected and wrought after this manner. First, the reprobate is deceived by
some sin. Secondly, his heart is hardened by the same sin. Thirdly, his heart
being hardened, it becomes wicked and perverse. Fourthly, then follows his
incredulity and unbelief, whereby he consents not to Gods word, when he
has heard and known it. Fifthly, an Apostasy, or falling away from faith in
Christ, does immediately follow this unbelief. Hebr. 3.12,13. Take ^eed,
brethren, least at any time there be in any of you an evil heart, and
unfaithful, to depart away from the living God. 1. Tim. 1.19.

This Apostasy, is sometimes sin against the holy Ghost. In the sin
against the holy Ghost, we have have these several points to be considered: I.
The Name; it is called a sin against the holy ghost, not because it is done
against the person, or deity of the holy Ghost (for in this respect he that
sins against the holy Ghost, sins in like sort against both the father,
and the Son) but it is so called, because it is done contrary to the
immediate action, namely, the illumination of the holy Ghost. For albeit this
be an action common to the whole Trinity, yet the Father and the son do
effect the same by the holy Ghost. II. The efficient cause of it; which is a
set and obstinate malice against God, and against his Christ. Therefore when a
man does in the time of persecution, either for fear, or rashly deny Christ,
he does not commit this sin against the holy Ghost, as may appear by the
example of Peter who denied Christ. Mat. 26.73.74.75. Neither does he which
persecuteth Christ and his Church upon ignorance fall into this sin. Paul
persecuted the Church of Christ, and yet God had mercy on him, because he did
it ignorantly. 1. Tim. 1.13. Many of the Jews crucified our Savior Christ,
who afterward, because they committed that grievous fact upon ignorance,
repenting at Peter's sermon, they did obtain remission of their sins. Act.
3.17. 37. III. The Object, namely God himself, and the Mediator Christ Jesus.
For the malice of this sin is directed against the very majesty of God
himself, and against Christ. Hebr. 10.29. Of how much sorer punishment suppose
ye shall he be worthy, which treads underfoot the Son of God, and
counts the blood of the Testament as an unholy thing, wherewith he was
sanctified, and does despise the spirit of grace? Therefore this sin does
directly respect the first table of the moral law, and is not some particular
slipping aside from the observation of those commandments which are contained
in this first table, such as are some doubtings concerning God, or of the truth
of the scriptures, or of Christ, etc. but it is a general defection and
apo^tasie from God, and that totally. IV. The subject in which it is. This sin
is found in none at al, but such as have been enlightened by the holy Ghost,
and have tasted of the good gift of God. Heb. 6.5,6. Neither is it in him a
bare cogitation alone, but an external action, or rather such a blasphemy
against God as proceeds from a malicious, and obstinate heart. Matthew. 12. 31.
V. The Elect cannot commit this sin: and therefore they who feel in
themselves a sure testimony of their election, need never to despair: nay,
this sin is not in every reprobate: for many of them die before they have
this illumination by Gods spirit. VI. This sin cannot be forgiven, not
because it is greater then that Christ's merit can satisfy for it, but because
after a man has once committed this sin, it is impossible for him to repent.
For the gift of repentance proceeds from the holy Ghost, and the holy ghost
remains in us through Christ apprehended by faith: now no man does apprehend
Christ, that does malitiouslie despise and contemn him. VII. It is very hard
to know when a man commits this sin, because the root thereof, namely,
set malice, lurketh inwardly in the heart, and is not so easily discerned.

Out of all this which has been spoken, we may thus define this sin. The
sin against the holy Ghost is a voluntary, and obstinate denial of, and
blasphemy against the Son of God, or that truth which was before
acknoweledged concerning him, and so consequently an universal defection from
God and his true church. We have an example of this sin partly in the devil,
who albeit he knew well enough that Jesus was that Christ, yet he never ceased
both wittingly and willingly with all his power, to oppugn the sacred Majesty
of GOD, together with the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and, as far forth as he
could, utterly to supplant the same, partly in the Pharisees, Matthew. 12.32. Ioh.
3.2.

After Apostasy follows pollution, which is the very fullness of all
iniquity, altogether contrary to sanctification. Genesis 15.16. And in the
fourth generation they shall come hither again, for the wickedness of the
Amorites is not yet full.

The third degree is damnation, whereby the Reprobates are delivered up to
eternal punishment. The execution of damnation begins in death, and is
finished in the last judgment. Luke 16.22. And it was so that the beggar died,
and was carried by the Angel into Abraham's bosom; the rich man also died and
was buried. 23. And being in hell torments, he lift up his eyes and saw
Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

The execution of the decree of reprobation in Infidels, which are not called,
is this. First, they have by nature ignorance and vanity of mind. After that
follows hardness of heart, whereby they become void of all sorrow for
their sins. Then comes a reprobate sense, which is, when the natural light
of reason, and of the judgment of good and evil, is extinguished. Afterward
when the heart cease to sorrow, then arises a committing of sin with
greediness. Then comes pollution, which is the fullness of sin. Lastly, a
just reward is given to all these, to wit, fearful condemnation. Ephesians. 4. 18.
Having their cogitations darkened, and being strangers from the life of God
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their hearts.
Romans 1.28. For as they regarded not to know God, even so God delivered them up
to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient.

CHAP. 54. Concerning a new devised doctrine of Predestination, taught by some
new and late Divines.
Certain new Divines of our age, have of late erected up a new doctrine of
Predestination, in which, fearing belike, least they should make God both
unjust, and unmerciful, they do in the distribution of the causes of
salvation and damnation, turn them vpside down; as may appear by their
description in this table.

But this their doctrine has some foul errors and defects, the which I,
according as I shall be able, will briefly touch.

The I. error.
There is a certain universal or general election, whereby God, without any
either restraint, or exception of persons, has decreed to redeem by Christ,
and to reconcile unto himself all mankind wholly, fallen in Adam, yea every
singular person, as well the Reprobate, as the Elect.

The Confutation.
The very name of Election does fully confute this: for none can be said to be
elected, if so be that God would have all men elected in Christ. For he that
electeth, or makes choice, cannot be said to take all: neither can he that
accepts of all, be said to make choice only of some.

Object. Election is nothing else but dilection, or love: but this we know, that
God loves all his creatures; therefore he electeth all his creatures.

Answer. I. I deny that to elect is to love, but to ordain and appoint to
love. Romans 9.13. II. God does love all his creatures, yet not all equally, but
every one in their place.

Furthermore, this position does flatly repugne the most plain places of holy
Scripture. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all i^iquitie, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself. Ioh. 10. I
give my life for my sheep. Exception. All men are the sheep of Christ.
Answer. John adds, And my sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, neither shall they perish. Ephesians.
5.23. Christ is the head of the Church, and the same is the Savior of his
body. verse. 25. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Redemption
and remission of sins, is the inheritance of the Saints, and of such as are
made heirs of the kingdom of Christ. Coloss. 1.13.

Again, look for whom Christ is an Advocate, and to them only is he a
Redeemer; for redemption and intercession, which are parts of Christ's
priesthood, the one is as general and large as the other, and are so surely
united and fastened together, as that one cannot be without the other. But
Christ is only an Advocate of the faithful. Ioh. 17. in that his solemn
prayer, he first prays for his own, namely his disciples elected not only to
the Apostleship but also to eternal life: and then verse. 20. he prays
likewise for them that should believe in him by their word. Now against
these, he opposes the world, for which he prays not that it may attain
eternal life. And Romans 8. Who shall accuse Gods elect? Christ sits at the
right hand of the father, and makes intercess^on for us. Furthermore, the
members of Christ's Church, are called the Redeemed of the Lord, Psalm 87.
Therefore this privilege is not given to all alike.

Exception. This universal reconciliation is not in respect of man, but God
himself, who, both made it for all, and offers it to all. Ans. If Christ
became once before God a reconciliation for all men's sins, yea and also
satisfied for them all, it must needs follow that before God al those sins
must be quite blotted out of his remembrance. For the actual blotting out of
sins, does inseparably depend upon reconciliation for sins: and
satisfaction does infer by God, and that necessarily, the very real and
general abolishment of the guilt and punishment of sin.

Object. I. Christ took upon him man's nature: therefore he redeemed man's
nature generally. Answer. I. It follows not, except we would say that Christ
redeemed his own humanity, which cannot be any ways possible. II. Every
woman does partake the humane nature of every man, yet is not every man each
woman's husband, but hers alone, with whom by the covenant in matrimorie, he is
made one flesh: and in like sort Christ did by his incarnation ((...)) take
also upon him man's nature, and that common to all Adams progeny, yet is he the
husband of his Church alone, by another more peculiar conjunction, namely, the
bond of the spirit and of faith. And by it the Church is become flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone. Ephesians. 5.20. And therefore she alone may justly
claim title to the death of Christ and al his merits.

Objection. II. Christ's redemption is as general, as Adams fall was: and
therefore it appertains to all Adams posterity. Answer. Adam was a type of
Christ, and Christ a counter-type correspondent to Adam. Adam was the root of
all his successors, or all that should come of him, from the which first Adam,
was sin and death derived: again, Christ he is also a root, but of the
elect only, and such as believe, to whom, from him, proceed righteousness,
and life eternal. He cannot be said to be the root of all, and every
singular man, because that all do not drink and receive this his
righteousness, and life neither are they actually by him made righteous.
Romans 12.17.19. Object. The benefit of Christ's death redounded to all. Answer.
It did, to all that believe. For as Adam destroyed all those that were borne of
him: so Christ does justify and save all those that are borne anewe by him,
and none other. Object. If tha^ Adams sin destroyed all, and Christ's merit
does not save all: then is Adams sin more forcible to condemn, then Christ's
mercy is to save. Answer. We must not esteem of the mercy of Christ by the
number of men which receive mercy (for so indeed I grant, that as Adams fall
made all unjust, so the mercy of Christ and his redemption should actually
justify all) but we mu^t rather measure it by the efficacy and dignity
thereof, then by the number on whom it is bestowed. For it was a more easy
thing to destroy all by sin, then by grace to save but one. Man, being but
mere man, could destroy all: but to save even one, none could do it, but such
an one as was both God and man.

Object. III. Many places of Scripture there are which affirm this, that the
benefit of Christ's death does appertain unto all. Romans ^1. God has shut up
all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all. 1. Tim. 2.4. God would
have all men to be saved. 2. Pet. ^.9. God would not have any to perish, but
all come to repentance. Answer. I. You must understand all that believe, as it
is Math. 11.28. All that are weary and heavy laden. Ioh. 3.6. All that
believe. Gal. 3.23. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to them which believe.
Act. 10.43. All which believe. And surely there is as well a generality of
them that believe, as of the whole world. II. We may understand by [ all] of
all sorts some, not every singular person of all sorts. So, Revel. 5.9. Christ
is said to have redeemed some out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and
nation. And Gal. 3.28. There is neither Jew nor Grecian, neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. Matthew. 4.
Christ is said to have healed every disease, that is, every kind of disease.
And Augustine to this purpose has a fit rule. All is often used for many, as
Romans 5.18,19. Augustine in his Manuel to Laur. chap. 103. It is thus said
(says Augustine) God would have all to be saved, not because there was no man
which he would have damned, who therefore would not do miracles amongst them,
which would as he says, have repented, if he had done miracles, but that by
all men we should understand all sorts of men, howsoever distinguished, whether
Kings, private persons, etc. And in his book de Corrept. and gratia, chap. 14.
It is said, he would have all to be saved, so as we must understand all such
as are predestinate to be saved, because amongst them there are all sorts of
men, as he said to the Pharisees, You tithe every herb. III. These two, to be
willing to save man, and that he should come to the saving knowledge of the
truth, are inseparably united together. 1. Tim. 2.4. But the second we see does
not agree to all and every singular person: therefore the first cannot.

Object. IV. In many places of Scripture Christ is said to redeem the world,
as 1. Ioh. 2.2. He is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world. Ans.
This word world, signifies, I. the frame of heaven and earth. II. All men both
good and bad together. III. The company of unbelievers, and malignant haters
of Christ. IV. The congregation of the Elect, dispersed over the face of the
whole earth, and to be gathered out of the same. In this fourth signification
we must understand such places as are above mentioned. Abraham is called the
heir of the world, Romans 4.13. that is, of many nations. Genesis 17.45.

Object. V. God will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he repent and
live, Ezech. 18.23. Answer. Augustine in his 1. book to Simplicius, 2. quest.
answers this question. You must, says he, distinguish betwixt man, as he is
borne man, and man, as he is a sinner. For God is not delighted with the
destruction of man, as he is man, but as he is a sinner: neither will he simply
the death of any as he is a sinner, or as it is the ruin and destruction of
his creature: but in that, by the detestation and revenge of sin with
eternal death, his glory is exceedingly advanced. God therefore will the
death of a sinner, but as it is a punishment, that is, as it is a means to
declare and set out his divine justice: and therefore it is an untruth for a man
to say that God would have none condemned. For whereas men are once condemned,
it must be either with Gods will, or without it: if without it, then the will
of God must needs suffer violence, the which to affirm is great impiety: if
with his will, God must needs change his sentence before set down, but we
must not presume to say so.

Object. VI. God is the Father of all, Malach. 2.10. Ans. This place is meant
of Gods Church, out of which, all men, standing in that corrupt estate by Ada^,
are the children of wrath, and of the devil. Ephesians. 2.2. Ioh. 8.44.

Object. VII. If God did elect some, and reject others, he must needs be
[(...)] a respecter of persons. Ans. I. One is said then to accept, or have
respect of persons, when as he by some circumstances inherent in the person, is
moved to do this or that. Now, as for God, he did upon his mere pleasure
elect some, and reject others eternally, not moved or urged thereunto by any
thing whatsoever, out of himself. II. He is debtor to none, but may by good
right do with his creatures what seems good unto him in his own eyes. III.
It is one thing with God to accept of persons, and another to make choice of
men. This if we should not grant, it would follow that God must be deemed
blame-worthie, because he made not all his creatures most glorious Angels.

Object. VIII. If God decreed to reject certain men, then did he hate his
creature. Answ. God decreed to reject his creature and workmanship, not because
he hated it, but because he appointed it to hatred. And it is one thing to
hate, and another to appoint to hatred. And indeed God does not actually hate
any thing, but for sin. That saying of Augustine to Simplicius is fit for
this purpose. When God makes the wicked, whom he does not justify, vessels
of wrath, he does it not to hate that which he made: for in that he made them
vessels, they have their use, namely, that by their pains to which they were
ordained, the vessels of honor might reap profit. God therefore does not hate
them, in that they are men, or vessels, neither any thing that he made in them
by creation, or ordination. For God hates nothing which he has made. But in
as much as he made them vessels of destruction, he did it to instruct others.
As for their impiety, which he never made, that he hates utterly. As therefore
a judge hates theft in a man, but he does not hate his punishment that he is
sent to work in the mines. For the thief does the first, the judge the
latter: so God, whereas of the company of them which perish, he makes vessels
of perdition, he does not therefore hate that which he does, that is, the
condemnation of those which perish in their due punishment for sin.

Object. IX. The reprobates are said in many places of Scripture to be redeemed
by Christ, as 2. Pet. 2.1. Ans. First, we must not understand such places meant
of all reprobates, but of such as are for a time in the Church. II. They are
said to be redeemed, justified, and sanctified, both in their own judgments,
and the Churches also, in as much as they make an external profession of the
faith. But this is a judgment of charity, not of certentie.

Object. X. God might be thought cruel, if that he had ordained the greatest
part of the world to destruction. Answer. God could well enough have decreed,
that even all men should utterly have been rejected, and yet he should have
been never a whit either cruel or unjust. Reasons. I. He adjudged all and
every one of those soul and wicked spirits which fell from him, to eternal
torments. II. He decreed also, as is apparent by the event, that men should
live by the slaughter of beasts; and yet God is not therefore cruel against
them: and surely God is no more bounden unto man, then unto the very bruit
beasts.

Exception. God appointed all to be saved, with this caveat and condition, If
they believe. Answer. This is absurd to affirm: for, I. by this means the
decree of God should depend upon the will of man^ when as contrarily Gods
decree does limit and order all inferior causes. II. It quite takes away the
certainty of Gods decree, because a conditional proposition does set down
nothing as being, or, it does not certainly affirm any thing.

Object. If the merit of Christ did not extend it self as far as the fall of
Adam, then is not the head of the Serpent broken, nor Satan's kingdom abolished
by Christ. Ans. This brusing of the Serpents head, is seen in them only which
are at enimitie with the Serpent, namely in such as truly believe. Genesis 3.15.
compared with Romans 16.20.

To conclude, that is not true which they say, namely, that this opinion of an
universal and effectual redemption of every singular man, is a notable
remedy to comfort afflicted consciences. For I appeal to the judgment of all
men, whether there is in this manner of consolation, any great comfort to the
conscience afflicted.

Christ died for all men:

Thou art a man:

Therefore Christ died for thee.

The II. error.
God did foreknow the fall of Adam, but he did not by his eternal decree
foreordaine the same: and therefore that his fall was without the agent
permission of God.

The Confutation.
It is false. For, I. there is not the least thing in nature, but it comes to
pass by the decree and will of God. Math. 10.30. Wherefore such as affirm,
that God did only foreknow this, or that, they do either quite ouerturne the
providence of GOD, or at the least imagine that it is a very idle providence.
II. The fact of Herod and Pilate in delivering Christ against their own
consciences, to be crucified, may seem to be as heinous as was Adams fall, and
yet they are said to have done that, which the hand of the Lord had
foreordained to be done. Act. 4. 28. Again, the fall of Adam was two manner
of ways by Gods active, or rather operative permission. I. In as much as the
fall was an action: for in God alone we live, we move, and have our being.
II. In as much as that his fall was but a bare trial of his loyalty to God,
whereby God would try both the power, and will of his creature.

The III. error.
God, by reason that he did foresee the disobedience of some, or, that they
would contemn the Gospel, did decree their destruction and condemnation.

The Confutation.
We utterly deny, that the foreseeing of the contempt of grace in any, was the
first and principal cause of the decree of reprobation. Reasons. I. Paul, Romans
1. does derive the common condemnation of the Gentiles from hence, namely, that
they withheld the truth in unrighteousness, that is, because they did wittingly
extinguish that light of nature, by their wicked doings, which they had of the
knowledge of God and would not obey their consciences inwardly checking them
for the same. II. If that faith foreseen, be not the cause of the decree of
Election, it can not be that the want of faith foreseen, should be the cause
of the decree of reprobation; but rather as faith does in order of causes
follow after election, so must incredulity reprobation. For there is the like
reason or proportion of contraries. III. Many infants depart this life, both
being out of the true Church, and before they have any use of reason: and
again many there are, which albeit they live long, yet being either idiots and
fools, or borne deaf, they cannot come to the true use of reason: in all
which, it is not credible that their should be suspected any contempt of the
Gospel which they could not learn. IV. Esau was hated of God for none other
cause, but for that it so pleased him. Romans 9.18. V. If this opinion should be
true, then would it follow that men should be condemned for nothing else but
incredulity: the which is not so. Ioh. 3.36. Christ speaking of unbelief,
says not that for it the wrath of God came upon man, but remains upon him.
And why should we daily ask pardon for our sins, if nothing but incredulity
or unbelief condemned us? nay, although that there were never any contempt of
the Gospel, yet that corruption of original sin, were sufficient enough to
condemn men. VI. Also that admiration which Paul has, Romans 9.20. O man, who
art thou which disputest with God^ does plainly show that the cause of the
decree of God in rejecting some, is unsearchable: and that it does not at all
depend upon any foreseen contumacie toward the grace of God offered in the
Gospel. For if it were otherwise, we might easily give a reason of Gods decree.
August. epist. 105. says very well. Who (says he) created the reprobates, but
God? and why, but because it pleased him? but why pleased it him? O man, who
art thou that disputest with God!

Some Divines perceiving that this is an hard sentence, they go about to
mitigate it in this sort. The matter, say they, or object of predestination, is
a reasonable creature, and that not simply or absolutely considered, but partly
as it fell, partly as of it self it was subject to fall: and thereupon God
preordaining men from everlasting, considered them, not simply as he was to
make them men, but as they were such men as might fall into sin, and again
be redeemed by Christ, and after called to the light of the Gospel. The
efficient or first motive cause, was not any foreknowne cause either this or
that, but the mere will of God. For he disposes all things not of, and by his
foreknowledge, but rather according to the same. But these things albeit they
may seem to be subtle devises, yet are they not altogether true. Reasons. I.
The potter when he purposes to make some vessel, does not consider the clay,
and regard in it some inherent quality, to make such a vessel, but he makes
it of such and such a form, to this or that use, even of his alone free will
and pleasure. II. Romans 9.21. Has not the potter power to make of the same
lump one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? In which place we may
not understand by the name lump, all mankind corrupted, and fallen, and so to
be redeemed in Christ: for then Paul would not have said that God made vessels
of wrath, but rather that he did forsake them after they were made. III. This
seems preposterous, that God did first foreknow mankind, created, fallen, and
redeemed in Christ: and that afterward he ordained them so foreknown, to life
or to death. For the end is the first thing in the intention of the agent:
neither will a most skillful workman first prepare means by which he may be
helped to do a thing, before he has set down in his mind all the ends,
both such as are most near, and them that are very far off. Now we know
this, that man's creation; and his fall in Adam, are but means to execute Gods
predestination, and therefore are subordinate unto it: but the end of Gods
decree is the manifestation of his glory in saving some, and condemning
others. Therefore we may not once imagine that God did first consult of the
means whereby he determined to execute his decree, before he deliberated of
the election, and reprobation of man.

The IIII. error.
Gods calling to the knowledge of the Gospel is universal, yea of all men and
every singular person, without exception.

The Confutation.
This is a very unreasonable position. Reasons. I. God would not have all men
called, Math. 20.16. Many are called, but few are chosen. He says not that
all, but many are called. Christ in his Disciples first embassage, charge
them that they should not preach to the Gentiles of his coming: and to the
Cananitish woman he says, It is not lawful to give that which is holy unto
dogs. Mat. 13.11. It is not given to every one to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of God. Romans 16. 25. The mystery of the Gospel (whether it be meant
of Christ, or the calling of the Gentiles) was kept secret from the beginning
of the world. II. There be many millions of men, which have not so much as
heard of Christ. Act. 14.16. God in times past suffered all the Gentiles to
walk in their own ways. III. The greatest part of the world has ever been
out of the Covenant. Ephesians. 2. 12. Ye were, I say, at that time without Christ,
and were aliants from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
covenants of promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the world: but
now ye are no more strangers and forrenners, but citizens with the Saints.

Object. They are said to be [(...)] not simply alienated, but abalienated from
God: now how could they be abalienated, except either they or their
predecessors had been in the covenant? Ans. The Gentiles are not said to be
abalienated from the covenant, but from the commonwealth of Israel: because
that God had then by certain laws, rites, and ceremonies, utterly severed,
and distinguished the people of the Jews from all other nations.

Object. This general calling is not to be understood simply of the ministry
of the word, but of the will of God, delivered presently after the fall in his
unwritten word, but afterward in his written word: and this all men ought to
know, although many, through their own default, know it not. Ans. But the
Scriptures were committed to the custody of the Church of God, and every one
was not credited with them. Romans 3.2. Unto the Jews were of credit committed
the Oracles of God. 1. Tim. 3. 15. The Church is the pillar and ground of
truth. Psalm. 147. 19. He showed his words unto Jacob, and his statutes and
laws to the house of Israel. 20. He has not dealt so with every nation:
therefore they have not known his law^s. Psalm. 76. 1. The Lord is famous in
Judea, and in Israel is his name great.

Object. The covenant of Grace was made with Adam and Eve, and in them all
mankind was received both into the Church, and covenant, and also called to the
knowledge of God. Ans. I. This reason wants even common reason and sense, to
say that God giving his promise in the days of Adam and Noah, did in them call
all mankind that should come after. II. Adam before his fall, did indeed
receive the grace both for himself, and for others also: and in the fall, he
lost it both for himself, and for all others: but after the fall, he received
the promise for himself alone, and not for the whole world, otherwise the
first Adam should not only have been a living creature, but a quickening
spirit, the which is proper to the second Adam. 1. Cor. 15.45.

The conclusion.
If we should grant this doctrine to be true, then must we needs allow of
these absurdities in divinity, which follow. I. That God would have all, and
each singular man to be saved: and withal he would have some ordained to
hatred, and perdition: or, That in regard of God, all men are elected, and
redeemed, but in regard of the event many perish. II. The guilt of Adams sin
must not be imputed to any one of his posterity, because that God, having
mercy of all generally in Christ, did take into the covenant of reconciliatio^
all mankind. Now if but the guiltines of Adams fall be taken away, the
punishment forthwith cease to be a punishment, and corruption it self is by
little and little abolished in all men.

CHAP. 55. Of the state and condition of the Reprobates when they are dead.
THe death of the Reprobate, is a separation of the body and the soul: of the
body, that for a time it may lie dead in the earth: of the soul, that it may
feel the torments of hell, even until the time of the last judgment: at
which time the whole man shall be cast into the most terrible and fearful fire
of hell. 1. Pet. 3.19. By the which he also went and preached unto the spirits
that are in prison. Luke 8. 2. Pet. 2.4. For if God spared not the Angels that
sinned, but cast them down into hell, and delivered them into chains of
darkness to be kept unto damnation, etc.

The reprobate when they die, do become without sense and astonished, like
unto a stone: or else they are overwhelmed with a terrible horror of
conscience, and despairing of their salvation, as it were, with a gulf of the
sea over turning them. 1. Sam. 25.37. Then in the morning when the wine was
gone out of Nabal, his wife told him those words, and his heart died within
him, and he was like a stone. 38. And about ten days after the Lord smote
Nabal that he died. Mat. 27.5. And when he had cast down the silver pieces in
the temple, he departed, and went and hanged himself.

CHAP. 56. Of the condemnation of the Reprobates at the last judgment.
IN the last judgment, at the sound of the trumpet, the living being stricken
with horror and fear, shall be changed in a moment, the dead shall rise
again to condemnation: both the living and the dead shall then have immortal
bodies, but without glory: and they standing upon the earth at the left hand
of Christ the Judge, shall hear the sentence of condemnation: Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his
angels. Ioh. 5.29. And they shall come forth that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life: but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
condemnation. Matthew. 25. 41. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel, and with
the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. 17. Then shall we,
which live and remain, be caught up with the^ also in the clouds, to meet
the Lord in the air and so shall we be ever with the lord,

CHAP. 57. Of the estate of the Reprobates in hell.
AFter that the sentence of condemna^^on is pronounced, then follows
everlasting death: whereof this is the estate.

I. The Reprobates are separated from the presence and glory of God. II. They
are punished with eternal confusion, and most bitter reproaches: because all
their secret wickednesses and sins are revealed. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Which shall
be punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power. Math. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God. 1. Ioh. 2.28. And now little children, abide in him, that when
he shall appear, we may be bold, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.
III. They have fellowship with the devil and his angels, Math. 25.41. IV. They
are wholly in body and soul tormented with an incredible horror, and
exceeding great anguish, through the sense and feeling of Gods wrath, powered
out upon them for ever. Esai 66. 24. And they shall go forth, and look upon
the carkases of men, that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall
not die, neither shall their fire be quenched: and they shall be an abhorring
unto all flesh.
Hereupon is the punishment of those that are condemned, called Hell fire, a
worm, weeping, and gnashing of teeth, utter darkness, etc. Rev. 21.8. But the
fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
Math. 13.42. And shall cast them into a furnace of fire, ther^ shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. Esai 66. 24.

A Corollarie.
ANd this is the full execution of Gods decree of reprobation, whereby
appears the great justice of God in punishing sin: from whence also comes
Gods glory, which he propounds to himself, as the last etchiefest end in
all these things. Therefore let every Christian propound the same end unto
himself. Romans 9.14. What shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with
God? God forbid. 15. For he said to Moses, I will have mercy on him to whom I
will show mercy: and will have compassion on him on whom I will have
compassion. 16. So then, it is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but in God that shows mercy. 17. For the Scriptures says unto
Pharaoh, For this same purpose have I stirred thee up, that I might show my
power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth. 1.
Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all
to the glory of God.

CHAP. 58. Of the application of Predestination.
THe right applying of Predestination to the persons of men, is very
necessary: and it has two parts. The first is, the judgment of particular
predestination, and the second is, the use of it.

The judgment and discerning of a man's own predestination, is to be performed
by means of these rules which follow.

I. The Elect alone, and all they that are elect, not only may be, but also in
Gods good time, are sure of election in Christ to eternal life. 1. Corinthians.
2.12. 2. Cor. 13.5. II. They have not this knowledge from the first causes of
Election, but rather from the last effects thereof: and they are especially
two: The testimony of Gods spirit, and the works of Sanctification. 2. Pet.
1. 10. Romans 8.16. III. If any doubt of this testimony, it will appear unto
them, whether it come from the Spirit of God, or their own carnal
presumption: First, by a full persuasion which they shall have; for the holy
Ghost will not barely say it, but persuades such, that they are the children
of God, the which the flesh can not in any wise do. Secondly, by the manner of
persuasion: for the holy Ghost draws not reasons from the works, or
worthiness of man, but from Gods favor and love: and this kind of persuasion
is far different from that which Satan uses. Thirdly, by the effects of that
testimony. For if the persuasion arise from presumption, it is a dead
persuasion: but contrarily, it is most lively and stirring, if it come from the
holy Ghost. For such as are persuaded that they are elected, and adopted
children of GOD, they will love god, they will trust in him, and they will call
upon him with their whole heart. IV. If the testimony of Gods spirit be not so
powerful in the elect, then may they judge of their election, by that other
effect of the holy ghost; namely, Sanctification: like as we use to judge by
heat that there is fire, when we cannot see the flame it self. V. And of all
the effects of sanctification, these are most notable. I. To feel our wants,
and in the bitterness of heart to bewail the offense of GOD in every sin. II.
To strive against the flesh, that is, to resist, and to hate the ungodly
motions thereof, and with grief to think them burthenous and troublesome. III.
To desire earnestly and vehemently the grace of God, and merit of Christ to
obtain eternal life. IV. When it is obtained, to account it a most precious
jewel. Phil. 3.8. V. To love the minister of Gods word, in that he is a
minister, and a Christian, in that he is a Christian: and for that cause, if
need require, to be ready to spend our blood with them. Mat. 10.42. 1. Ioh.
3.16. VI. To call upon God earnestly, and with tears. VII. To desire and love
Christ's coming, and the day of judgment, that an end may be made of the
days of sin. VIII. To fly all occasions of sin, and seriously to
endeavor to come to newness of life. IX. To persevere in these things to the
last gasp of life. Luther has a good sentence for this purpose. He that will
serve God, must, says he, believe that which cannot be seen, hope for that
which is deferred, and love God, when he shows himself an enemy, and thus
remain to the end. VI. Now, if so be all the effects of the spirit are very
feeble in the godly, they must know this, that God tries them, yet so, as they
must not therewith be dismayed, because it is most sure, that if they have
faith, but as much as a grain of mustard seed, and be as weak as a young
infant is, it is sufficient to ingraffe the^ into Christ, and therefore they
must not doubt of their election, because they see their faith feeble, and the
effects of the holy Ghost faint within them. VII. Neither must he, that as yet
has not felt in his heart any of these effects, presently conclude, that he
is a Reprobate: but let him rather use the word of God, and the Sacraments,
that he may have an inward sense of the power of Christ, drawing him unto him,
and an assurance of his redemption by Christ's death and passion. VIII. No man
may peremptorily set down, that himself, or any other is a reprobate. For God
does oftentimes prefer those which did seem to be most of all estranged from
his favor, to be in his kingdom above those, who in man's judgment were the
children of the kingdom. Hence is it that Christ says: The Publicanes and
harlots go before you: and, many an one is called at the eleventh hour, as
appears by that notable example of the thief upon the cross.
The uses, which may be made of this doctrine of predestination, are very many.
First, for our instruction, we are taught these things.

I. That there is neither any justification by works, nor any works of ours
that are meritorious. For election is by the free grace of God: and therefore
in like sort is justification. For, as I said before, the cause of the cause,
is the cause of the thing caused. And for this reason, in the work of
salvation, grace does wholly challenge al to it self. Romans 11.5. At this time
there is a remnant through the election of grace. 2. Tim. 1.9. Who has saved
us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us, through Christ
Jesus before the world was. Phil. 1. 29. Unto you i^ is given for Christ, that
not only ye should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. Romans 3.24.
We are justified freely by grace. Tit. 3.5. Not by the works of
righteousness, which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved us.
Ezech. 36. 27. I will cause you to walk in my statutes. Romans 6.23. The gift of
God is eternal life. II. That Astrology, teaching, by the casting of
Natiuities, what men will be, is ridiculous, and impious: because it
determines, that such shall be very like in life, and conversation, whom God
in his predestination has made unlike. Jacob and Esau, borne of the same
parents, and almost in the same moment of time, (for Jacob held Esau by the
heel as he was borne) were of most unlike dispositions, and had diverse events.
The like may we see in all twins, and others, which are borne at the same
time. III. That God is most wise, omnipotent, just, and merciful. O the
wonderful riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable
are his judgments, and his ways past finding ont! Ephesians. 1.5. Who has
predestinate us, to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to
the good pleasure of his will.
Secondly, being the servants of Christ we are admonished:

I. To fight against all doubting and diffidence of our salvation, because it
neither depends upon works, nor faith, but upon Gods decree which is
immutable. Math. 24.24. Luke 10.20. Rejoice that your names are written in the
book of life. Romans 8.33. Who shall any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it
is God that justifies, who shall condemn? 2. Tim. 2.19. This teaches, that
the anchor of hope must be fixed in the truth, and stabilitie of the immutable
good pleasure of God: so that albeit our faith be so tossed, as that it is in
danger of shipwreck, nevertheless it must never sink to the bottom, but
even in the midst of danger, take hold upon repentance, as on a board and so
recover it self. II. To humble our souls under the mighty hand of God: for
we are as clay in the hand of the potter. Romans 9.21. They through infidelity
are broken off, but thou stand through faith. Be not high minded, but fear.
III. To give all glory to God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. We ought to give thanks alwaie
to God for you brethren, beloved of the Lord, because that God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation. IV. To bear crosses patiently. Romans 8.29.
Those which he knew before, he has also pre^estinate, to be made like to the
image of his son. This likeness to Christ, is in bearing afflictions. Phil.
3.10. That I may know him, and the virtue of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his afflictions, to be made conformable to his death. V. To do
good works. Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to
do good works, which God has ordained, that we should walk in them.
Thus much concerning Theology.

AN EXCELLENT TREATISE of comforting such, as are troubled about their
Predestination, Taken out of the second answer of M. Beza, to D. Andreas, in
the act of their Colloquie at Mompelgart, etc.
Unless (says D. Andreas) regeneration be always united to baptism, and
remains in such as are baptized, how should the troubled consciences of
those be eased and comforted, who because they feel not in themselves any good
motions of gods holy spirit, find none other refuge, but the Word and
Sacraments, especially the Sacrament of Baptism? Now this remedy would be of
small force, except it be opposed against those imaginations, which the devil
casts into a troubled heart; yea, except it taught such, that God is greater
then our heart, who in Baptism has not only offered us the adoption of
sons, but has indeed bestowed the same upon us: as it is said by Christ,
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. And by Paul, Ye which are
baptized, have put on Christ. David being armed with the like comfort from his
circumcision, feared not to join battle with that great giant Goliath: and if
this were not so, it must needs follow, that Baptism were nothing else but an
idle ceremony, and also the persons of the Trinity would be thought liars.
Wherefore those afflicted men, when Satan assaulteth them, must resist him with
these words: Depart from me Satan, thou have neither part nor portion in the
inheritance of my soul, because I am baptized in the Name of the holy
Trinity, and so am truly made the son of God by adoption. And are these the
strong weapons, which so many times, and in so many words, have been objected
against me by D. Andreas? and whereby he has gotten the victory? But because
this his reason is somewhat intricate, I will explain it after this sort.
First, for the place of Scripture which he alleges, namely, that God is
greater then our hearts: It is so far from comforting an afflicted
conscience, that it will rather drive him to de^paire. Neither does John 1.
epist. 3.20. make mention of it, to ease such as are in despair, showing unto
them by that sentence, the greatness of Gods mercies; but rather that he might
thereby, even bruise in pieces the hearts of proud persons, when they consider
the greatness of Gods majesty. And for the other place, when as a man
doubts of his salvation, and feels no testimonies of faith in himself,
(for such an one we here speak of) what comfort, think you, can he have in
these words: He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved? For he
would rather reason contrarily thus: I indeed am baptized, yet for all that I
believe not, and therefore my Baptism is not available, I must needs be
condemned. For the saying of August. in his treatise upon Ioh. 6. is very
true, who speaking of Simon Magus, says, What good did it to him to be
baptized? brag not therefore, says he, that thou art baptized, as though
that were sufficient for thee, to inherit the kingdom of heaven. As for the
place of Paul, Gal. 3. I showed plainly before, how D. Andreas did violently
wrest it to his purpose.

Neither are his reasons taken from the absurdity that would follow, of more
force then the former, albeit he makes them especial pillars to underprop
the truth of his cause. For, I pray you, is God of less truth, because his
truth is neglected, and derided of them that contemn it? Is the ceremony of
Baptism therefore in vain, because some refuse the grace offered in Baptism:
others (if we may believe D. Andreas) reject that grace when they have received
it? What? Is not the Gospel therefore the power of God to salvation, because it
is to such as believe not, the savor of death to eternal death? May not the
Supper of the Lord, be a pledge of Gods covenant, because so may abuse these
holy signs, or, (as D. Andreas is of opinion) the very body and blood of our
Savior Christ? And, that I may reason from that which is true in the
experience of every child, can the Sun be said to be without light, because
they which are blind, and asleep, have no benefit by the light thereof,
neither such as shut their eyes so close, that they will not enjoy the comfort
of the light? But amongst all, this one is most childish, that D^ Andreas will
make this his principal argument, namely, that in vain did men, thus tempted,
fly at all unto Baptism, unless we conclude with him, that all such as are
baptized, are in Baptism adopted the sons of God. For first, if this were a
good consequent from baptism, it were in vain, for such an afflicted
conscience, to gather unto himself a testimony from the word of God, and the
other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, unless we make all those to be in like
sort regenerate and adopted, unto whom the word of God is preached, and the
Lords supper administered, either of which, for D. Andreas to affirm, is a bold
untruth.

But to omit this, what if we grant this which D. Andreas requires concerning
Baptism? may not for all that, any that is so tempted, by Satan's policy,
refell this great comforter, by his own argument? after this sort: I will
grant D. Andreas your question: suppose I have been baptized and adopted the
son of God, yet seeing you teach, that the grace of God is not so sure but
that I may fall from the same, as indeed I feel that I have grievously fallen,
what do you now else but lift me up with one hand to heaven, and with the other
cast me down into hell? What mean you therefore to teach me those things
which are so far from easing me, as that contrarily, they do more and more
lay out unto me mine abominable and ungrateful heart? See now what sure
consolation, consciences grievously afflicted may reap by this doctrine of
their comforter D. Andreas.

Now if any be desirous to know, what spiritual comfort is most meet to be
ministered unto consciences so troubled, I will show them that which is grounded
upon a sure foundation, and which I my self have often found to be true in
mine own experience: the which also I purpose to handle more largely, for the
benefit of the Christian reader. First therefore we teach, contrarily to that
which D. Andreas does most falsely object against us, that the eternal decree,
or as Paul speaks, the purpose of God, must not be sought in the bottomless
counsel of God, but rather in the manifestation of it, namely, in his vocation,
by the Word and Sacraments. This I speak of such as are of years of
discretion, as they must needs be, whom we seek to comfort in this place.

Now because that external vocation, is not proper only to the elect ( for
many are called, but few are chosen) but such a vocation as is effectual,
that is, whereby the understanding is not only enlightened with the saving
knoweledge of God, but in the will also there is created a true, though not a
perfect hatred of sin, from whence arises an abhorring of sin, and love of
that which is good, or rather a desire to will, and do that which is right.
Therefore when we see one thus dangerously tempted, we apply unto his
afflicted conscience, that true Nepenthes, and comfortable and restoratiue
medicine, which is taken from Gods effectual vocation, as it were out of an
Apothecaries box.

If therefore I have to do with such an one, who either was never called by
the preaching of the Gospel, or if he were called, yet seems both to himself
and others, never to have regarded him that called: and hence concludes that
he is not in the number of them, whom God has purposed to take pity upon: I
forthwith tell him, that Satan plaieth the Sophister, in teaching him thus to
conclude: for this his reason is as untrue, as if a man looking at midnight,
and seeing that the Sun is not then risen, should therefore affirm that it
would never rise. And this is that which when I objected to D. Andreas, page
482. he very boldly corrupting my meaning printed this as mine assertion, Say
unto a man that is asflicted, the sun is risen, although as yet it be not
risen. But I teach not lies, howesoeuer this deprauation of my words came from
D. Andreas printers, or himself. And whereas D. Andreas excepted, that this
consolation were to no purpose, because he that was afflicted might doubt
whether this sun would ever rise or not: I answered to him, that which the
printers have quite left out, and which I will now therefore more fully repeat.
I was wont therefore to tell the party thus troubled, after he had forsaken
his false and diueli^h position: that although an external vocation were not
of force enough to appease an a^flicted conscience, yet it was of sufficient
force and efficacy against the devil. For I tell him that they which never
had external nor internal calling, they (if we regard an ordinary calling)
must needs perish: but whosoever is once called, he has set as it were^ his
foot in the first entry into the kingdom of heaven: and unless it be by his
own default, he shall come afterward into the courts of God, and so by
degrees into his Majesty's palace. And for the confirmation of this, I use
diverse ways. For why, say I, doubtest thou of his good will toward thee, who
in mercy has sent me a minister to call thee unto him? thou have no cause,
unless thou allege the number of thy sins. If this be all, why, oppose the
infinite greatness of Gods mercy against thy sins, who has sent me to bring
thee unto him. The Lord vouchsafes to bring thee into the way of the elect,
why art thou a stumbling block unto thy self? and refusest to ^ollow him? If
thou feel not as yet inwardly thy self to be stirred forward, pray that
thou may be-know this for a most sure truth, that this desire in thee is a
pledge of God^ fatherly good will toward thee. He neither can, nor will be
wanting to this which he has stirred up in thee. After these exhortations, I
show him, how some are called at the eleventh hour, how the Gentiles after
many thousand years were called to be Gods people, how the thief was saved
upon the cross: these and other remedies I used, whereof, I never remember,
that it repented me.

But if I deal with such as have before obeyed the Lords calling, and either
by reason of some grieuons sin into which they have fallen, or because they
have absented themselves from the Church of GOD, or in that they, refusing
public and private admonitions, have been offensive to the Church, or which
in mine experience, has befallen many very good and godly persons, whilst
they satisfy not th^mselues they are so altogether busily conversant in
reprehending and judging themselves that they for a while forget the mercy of
God: with these, to omit such as for some natural infirmities, are, if they
procure not speedy help of some expert Minister, most dangerously tempted,
with these I say, I use this order.

First, I desire that they intimate unto me, that which especially grieueth
the^, and as I understand both, the thing, and measure thereof by them: I take
especial care of this, that they being already overmuch cast down, that I
then, by the severe denunciation of the Law, do not quite ouerturne them: yet
so as that I do not altogether withdraw them either from condemning their
former sins, or the meditation of Gods judgment: And so, as much as I can, I
temper the words of consolation, as that I nothing cloak Gods anger against
them for their sins.

After I have thus prepared them, I then demand, whether they have been ever
in this case or no? Nay, (say they, for the most part) the time was, when I was
in great joy and peace of conscience I served the Lord, then was I an happy
person, full of faith, full of hope: But now wretch that I am, I have lost my
first love, and there is nothing vexes me more, then to remember those times
past. But say I, whether consideration is more grievous unto thee, the
apprehension of Gods judgments, or the dislike of thy self that thou
should offend so gracious and so loving a father? Both, say they, but
especially the latter. Therefore, say I, sin also displeases thee in that it
is sin, namely, because it is evil, and God who is goodness it self, is
offended with it? It is even as you told us, say they, and I am now ashamed
that so vile and wicked a wretch as my self, should come before so gracious
and merciful a father. Then I tell them, that no man is offended, but rather
is glad, when he can injury one whom he hates: this they grant, and
withal say, God forbid, that albeit the Lord hate me, I in like sort should
hate him, unto whom, if it were possible, I would be reconciled again. Then I
add this: Be of good comfort, my dear brother, you are in good case. For who
can love God, especially when he is wounded by him? who can bewail the loss
of his friendship? who can desire to come again into his favor, but he,
whom God still loves although for a time he be angry with him? except
peradventure you have not learned thus much, that the knowledge of our
salvation comes not from flesh and blood, but from God himself, who first
vouchsafed to instruct us, and from Christ Jesus, manifesting the Father unto
us: And that it is Gods blessing, that we do love God, who loved us first,
when we were his enemies. You have therefore, my good brother, just cause, why
you should be greatly displeased with many things past, but there is no cause
why you should despair. Briefly, you have inwardly, and, as it were, dwelling
with you, evident testimonies of you future reconciliation with God: especially
if you cease not to pray unto him earnestly, who has laid the foundation of
repentance in you, to wit, a dislike of sin, and a desire to be reconciled
unto him. The sheep which wandered out of the fold ceased not to be a sheep,
albeit it went astray for a time: you now are that sheep, to whom that
faithful sheapheard of al those sheep, which the father has committed to him,
leaving those ninety and nine, does not so much by my ministry, declare that
he seek^th you, as having already sought you, though you not seeking him, has
indeed found you. Knock (says he) and it shall be opened unto you. And
have you now forgotten those promises, which were so often made to them that
repent? and also which they had experience of, who in the sight of the world
were in a desperate case. But I, says he, again feel no motions of the
Comforter, I have now no sense of faith, or hope: but I feel all the
contrary. Nay say I, you deceive your self, as I told you before. For it is
the Comforter alone, which teaches you to hate sin, not so much for the
punishment, as because it is evil and disliketh God, albeit he show not
himself so fully at the first: because you had so many ways grievously
offended him, as that he seems for a while quite to forsake you. And, that
you have not quite lost him, but that he is yet in some secret corner of your
soul, from whence at your instant prayers he will show himself unto you,
this will plainly declare unto you, which I now admonish you of the second
time. But let us grant as much as you can say: yet, sure it is, that your
faith was not dead, but only possessed with a spiritual lethargy. You lived
in the womb of your mother, and there were ignorant of your life. A drunken
man, although he loose for a time the use of reason, and also of his limbs,
yet he never loses reason it self. You would think that in winter the trees
were dead, but they spring again in the summer season. At night the Sun
sets, but in the next morning it rises again. And how often see we by
experience, that he which at one time took the foil in a combat, at another
did win the price? And know this, that in the spiritual combat of the flesh
with the spirit, the like we may see in many, partly by reason of the weakness
of our nature, partly through sloth to resist, and partly for default to
beware. To these he replieth for such temptations are very hardly removed, I
would to God, says he, I could persuade my self that these promises belonged
to me. For my present estate constrains me to doubt, whether I am the child
of God, or not.

Laus Christo nescia finis.

A brief table directing the Reader of this book to the principal things in
the same.
ABsence in a Pastor when allowed. 77 external Abstinence. 48 Abstraction. 21
Abuse of Gods name and creatures. 55 Accusations on malice. 97 unjust
Accusations. 98 Accusing conscience. 18 to Acknowledge God, what. 39
Acknowledge others good gifts. 98 Actual sin. 20 Adam representing all men.
16 his estate in innocence. 12 his fall. 15 private Admonition. 141 Adoption.
124 Adultery what. 82 lightly punished. 85 Affections corrupted. 19
Afflictions. 124,137 Affiance in God. 39 All, how said to be saved. 169
Allowance of others sins. 21 Ambition how healed. 135 our Ancestors how
saved. 104 Andreas opinion confuted. 180 Angels with their nature and office.
11 their fall. 13 it was more grievous then man's. 15 they serve the elect. 142
rash Anger. 73 preservatives against Anger^ 135 slow to Anger. 78 snappish
Answers. 75 courteous Answers. 78 Antichrist Satan's subject. 35 his sin. 72
when first at Rome. 36 Apology. 136,139 Apostates Satan's subjects. 35
Apostasy. 166 Iasciuious Aparrell. 84 decent Apparel. 86 Approbatio^ of
idolatry condemned. 45 Approaching to God how. 52 to his throne. 119 Application
of Gods promises necessary. 119 Armor complet with parts. 129 Arrius
condemned. 41 Astrology. 56,57 Arts which are unlawful. 91 Assaults of a
Christian about his calling. 130 his faith. 131 sanctification. 134 assent. 139
Asseueration. 59 Assurance of knowledge. 118 Atheism. 40 Atheists Satan's
subjects. 35 Authority over creatures lost. 23 Authority must be obeyed. 68
B
Babbling. 97 Ballades. 85 Banketting. 85,87 on the Sabbath day inconvenient. 65
Bankerupts. 90 Baptism. 107,152 the matter, water, 109 the form. 109 the
covenants in Baptism. 109 use of it. 111 Bargaining. 89 the Beast who. 47
pleasures with Beasts. 82 to Bear, what it signifies. 95 the Birth of sin.
21 Bitter speaking. 73,97 Blasphemy. 19,55 Blessedness. 144 in what. 144
Blessing of children. 67 Boasting. 97 the Body corrupted. 19 punished. 19
amorous Bookes^ 85 Book of life. 144 to Bow down to, what. 43 Bounds not to
be removed. 91 Brawling. 73 Burial of the dead. 79 Burning of the flesh. 82
Buyers sin. 89 Buying. 89 Buggerie. 82
C
Callings must be sanctified with prayer. 60 a Calling to live in. 92
effectual Calling. 114 how wrought. 116,117 ineffectual Calling. 164 all are
not Called. 174 Calling on God. 52,139 Careless using of Gods name. 55
Ceremonies. 121 Chastity. 85,88 Charming. 51 Cherubims defend not images. 45
Children must obey parents. 67 Children freed from it by the pope. 72 Cherubims
why painted with wings. 11 Choice of one God. 42 Censures. 95 Christ the
foundation of election. 24 how subordinate to election. 24 why God and man.
24,25 his infirmities. ibid. union of two natures. 25 Conception. ibid.
sanctification. ibid. assumption of flesh. ibid. Communion of properties. 26
distinction of both natures. 27 how two wills in him. ibid. his nativity.
ibid. Circumcision. 28 office. ibid. princes his vicegerents. ibid. as
Mediator he has none. 29 his Priesthood. ibid. he satisfied only for the
elect. 29,168 how he did it. 29 his passion. 9,29 agony. 30 sncrifice. ibid.
he is the altar. ibid. how a priest. ibid. humiliation. 31 accursednesse. ibid.
dead. ibid. power of it. 32 buried. 31 descension into hell what. 31 abolishing
of death. 32 fulfilling of the Law. 32 intercession. 32,33 his prophetical
office. 33 regal office. 33,34 exaltation. 33 body is visible. 34
resurrection. 33 power of it. 125 ascension. 34 his sitting at Gods right haud.
34 prerogative royal. 35 his justice ours. 123 things spoken of him as God and
man. 26 his manhood exalted. 27 he that only lawgiuer. 33 his merits infinite.
133 his surrendering his kingdom to his father. 36 Christ when received. 118
Christian conversation. 128 Church goods are not to be sold. 89 the Church may
appoint holy days. 62 Civil authority in Bish. of Rome Antichrist. 36
Comedies. ^5 Combats unlawful. 75 Co^forts for aff^cted consciences. 132
Combat of afflicted conscience. 129 Commemoration of the creature. 55
Commendation for well doing to be used. 100 Commandments to man in
innocence. 13 Company. 85 want of Compassion. 74 Complaints. 74 Compunction.
165 Concupiscence. 100 Conception of sin. 21 Condemnation is by man. 164
Confession of sins. 119 Confidence in creatures. 41 Cooks must keep the
sabbath. 63 Coniuring. 50 Conjunction with God. 115 Conscience corrupted. 18
not Comforted by a general election. 172 Concealing of sins. 21,99 Consent
in sin. 21 Contentation. 92 Contentions. 74 Contempt of superiors. 71
Contempt of Gods service. 48 Corn for the poor. 75 Conversation. 58 to Covet,
what. ^00 Counterfeit wares. 89 Countenance austere. 74 Covetousness. 89
Covenant of grace and works. 36, 102 Covenant with satan. 49 who are in the
Covenant. 108 Contracts how, and with whom. 88 Contingencie not taken away by
gods decree. 9 Controversies how decided. 75 Conversion to God whence. 19
Craving pardon for sins. 119 Credulity. 98 Creation. 10 creatures must not
be used hardly. 74 Cryings. 74 Crosses. 136 Cruelty. 72 Cursings. 55 Custom
in sin. 21 Constantine, and what figure he saw. 4^
D
Damage in goods a punishment. 23 Damnation. 164,171 Dancing. 85 Death a
punishment. 23 Death not to be feared. 142 Death of the elect. 141 Death driven
far off. 20 Decalogue. 36 Decree of God. 8 it is secret. 164 Degrees in
sinning. 20 Degrees in devils. 15 Defense of a man's self. 81 Denial of our
selves. 1^8 Derision is persecution. 74 Derision of Gods creatures. 55 of
superiors. 71 Desire to please God. 40 desires of the flesh how avoided. 135
holy Desperation. 117 Devils. 36 what they can do. 49 Differences of actual
sin. 21 Disdain. 95 Disobedience. 71 Distinction of dominions a punishment.
23 Distinction of persons. 6 Distrust in God. 40 Dissolute life. 58
Doubtfulnes. 40,132 Dreams. 19 Divination. 50 Discerning. 126 Duties of man to
himself. 71
E
Ears of corn may be pulled to satisfy hunger. 80 Eating, with
circumstances. 87 Edict of the law. 36 Edification. 140 Elders, fathers. 66
Elect know themselves elect. 163 election. 23,114,146 by Christ. 24,114 means
of election. 24,36 it is Gods gift. 114 it is not generally of all. 168 notes
of election. 177 elect can not finally fall. 160 elect have dominion over
creatures. 124 Elohim, what. 1 elevation in the mass. 48 enchantments. 51
enterludes. 85 envy. 74,95 entising to sin. 21 encourage such as fear God.
81 equality in contracts. 93 errors of Predest. confuted. 149 estate of
infidelity. 16 estate of the elect after death. 141, 143,144 estate of wicked
men. 175 estimation of our selves. 20 eternal life. 144 eternal joy. 145
eternal destruction. 23,174,175 evangelical promises indefinite. 132 evil
things, how good with God. 9, 10 evil thoughts. 20 excellency of gifts
reverenced. 69 excuse of sin whence. 18 execution of Gods decree. 23
execution of election. 25 execution of the decree of reprobation. 164
exposition of scripture to xpe. 33 external observation of the sabbath. 65
extolling of a man's self above others. 72 eyes full of adultery. 84
F
the Fall of a christian soldier. 130, 131 the remedies. 131 before my Face
what. 39 the Fall. 14 Falling from God. 166 decreed of God. 16,173 Faith.
117,120,155 a temporary faith. 166 how faith is begotten. 33,103 degrees in
working it. 118 degrees in Faith. 120 Faith how shaken. 120 not commanded in
the moral law. 121 Faires may not be on the sabbath. 65 the Faithful alone
have title to Gods goods. 124 False witness. 95 False sentence. 91 Fasting.
53,88 Father what. 66 Fatherless. 74 Fear of God. 40 of death. 166 to offend
God. 127 Feasts. 87 to idols. 45 at Feasts leave somewhat. 87 Feeble not to be
inuried. 74 Fighting. ibid. Flattery. 97 Flight in persecution. 140 Forgerie.
99 Foreknowledge of God. 9 Fornication. 82 Found things restore. 89,94
Free Will not taken away by Gods decree. 9 Free Will. 151,153 Frowardnes. 74
Funerals how to be solemnized. 79 Fulness of bread. 85
G
Gain lawful. 91 unlawful. ibid. Gaming for gain. ibid. Gate, what. 63
Gifts of the holy Ghost not saleable. 89 Gleanings. 80 Glorification. 141
perfect Glory. 144 Glory of God sought above all. 100 it is the end of all.
146, 176 Gospel. 103 thought folly. 20 God is, and what. 1 he is denied. 20
his nature. 1 simplenes. 2 infiniteness. 2 he has neither subject nor
adiunct. 2 his essence. ibid. immutabilitie. ibid. searcher of the heart. 3 the
life of God. ibid. how he wills evil. 3 his love, mercy, etc. ibid. what
God can do. 5 his glory known only to himself. ibid. how God is known to
man. ibid. God the Father. 7 his properties. ibid. God the Son. ibid. he
only incarnate. 24 how sent. 7 how the Word. ibid. his properties. 7 God the
holy Ghost. 8 Gods operation and operative permission. 9 thy God, what. 38
others gods, what. 38, 39 Good meaning. 20 Good name. 99 Goodness of the
creature. 11 Government of Christ's Church. 35 when corrupted. 48 Grace can not
be extinguished. 160 Grapes may be plucked. 79 Grief for others and our own
sins. 127 Graven image. 43 Grudges. 74 Guiltless, what. 54
H
Hallow the sabbath. 61 Hardness of heart. 23 Hard, and soft heart. 42 Hatred of
God. 42,164 of our neighbor. 74 Heavens threefold. 11 Hellenisme. 40 Heresies
spring from original sin. 17,18 Hell fire. 176 Holy Ghost. 8 not Christ's
father. 25 Holiness of mind. 126 of memory. ibid. conscience. ibid. will. 127
affections. ibid. body. 128 Honor what. 83 Hope. 39,127 Hope of pardon. 118
House coueted. 100 Humility. 40 Hungring after grace. 118 Hunting. 81
Husbandry on the sabbath. 65 Hypocrisy. 47,48
I
Idleness. 88 Jealous what. 43,44 Jesting at scripture. 58 Jews. 35 Idolatry.
45 Idolaters. 35 Idol. 43 Idolatrous service may not be heard. 45 Idolaters
sorry when they omit their fained worship. 18 Illumination. 126 Jehovah. 38
Image of God. 11 how much of Gods Image we retained. 17 Engrossing commodities.
90 Infamy a punishment. 23 Infants how saved. 114 Infants in the covenant. 108
Infants which condemned. 164 Ingratitude. 72 Inhabitants of the world. 11
Inholders duty. 63 Ignorance from Adam. 17 sin of Ignorance. 21,22
Impatience in afflictions. 41 Impotencie of mind. 17 of will. 19 Inclination
to evil. 17 Impuritie of conscience. 18,19 Inescation. 21 Injuries. 74
Indulgences. 47 Imputatio^ of man's sins to Christ. 31 Imputation of Christ's
righteousness to man. 122 imputative justice proved. 123,156 Joseph's piety. 98
Iourneies on the sabbath day. 65 Iudaisme. 40 Images in Churches unlawful. 44
Infirmities to be concealed. 78,97,99 Infirmities of the body covered by
Christ. 33 Infidels how damned. 167 Joy in the holy Ghost. 128 Judgments of
God must be regarded. 58 Judging. 99 last Judgment. 143 Just dealing. 92
Iugling. 51 Justice. 129 of the faithful. 160 Justification. 121,122 second
Justification confuted. 157 Intermission of Gods service. 48 Interpreting
amiss. 75 Interpreting well. 98 Justice inherent. 156
K
to Kill, what, who, when. 73 the Knowledge of Gods law bruiseth the heart. 177
the Knowledge of the Gospel. 118 Kings are fathers. 66
L
Labor commanded. 88 Laborers must be paid. 74,91 Law of God moral. 36 the
Law can not be fulfilled in this life. 160 use of the Law. 101 use of it in
the regenerate. 102 Church Laws by Christ. 33 Law. 95 Lawyers sin. 91
Leagues, which are lawful. 78 Leagues with infidels. 79 Leagues with the
godly. 54 Lenity in correction. 72 Lending freely. 94 Life vnoffensiue. 81
inordinate. 88 long Life promised to children. 67 Lordships distinguished. 23
Lottes. 56 Love of God. 39,41 marks of it. 40 Love of God in Christ. 113 Love
of the creature more then god. 41 the Lords supper. 111 Lower room at table.
87 Lying. 54,96 Luck good and bad. 56 Lust of heart. 82 Lutherans
consubstantiation. 112
M
Madness a punishment of sin. 23 Magistrates fathers. 66 Magistrates winking
at sin. 21 Magistrates to be obeyed. 68 Magic. 49 Magitians. 35,41,49
Magitians not to be sought unto. 51 Malice 95 Man and wife abusing their
liberty. 84 Man's creation with circumstances. 12, 13 created mutable. 13 his
fall. 15 Man Gods image. 45,56 pleasures with Men. 82 Manichees condemned. 41
Marriage to be sanctified with prayer. 60 Marriage without parents consent. 71
with infidels. 46 Marie Christ's mother continued a virgin. 27 Marcion. 41
Martyrdom. 139 Merchandise sold to an idolatrous use. 46 Mass may not be
heard. 45 Mayming of the body. 74 Meditation of the creation on the Sabbath.
65 Meditation of Christ's passion. 31 Meditation in the promises of the Gospel.
118 Means of Gods worship. 52 Members of Christ. 116 Gods mercy above his
justice. 44 Merit of congruitie. 154 of condignitie. 161 the Mind corrupted.
17 MINISTERS, fathers. 66 Ministers sins. 21 Ministers duty. 52 Mirth at
meat. 87 Miseries of our neighbor. 77 Modesty. 85 Monastical vows. 47
Monks. 91 Monuments of idolatry. 46 Mortification. 124 Mourning. 80 Mother,
what. 67 Mothers must nurse their own children. 72 Music lawful. 81 Music
in Churches. 47 Murder unpardonable. 75
N
Naamans worship in the Temple of Rimmon. 45 Name of God. 54 good Name. 99
Necromancie. 50 Neglect of Gods service. 48 Neighbors who and how to be loved.
66,74 Non-residencie reproved by scripture and councels. 76,77 Notions of the
mind. 17
O
Obedience to god how measured by him. 48 Obedience to superiors. 69 Obedience
to the law. 20 evangelical Obedience. 129 Occasions of strife how ministered.
76 Offenses against superiors. 71 equals. 72 inferiors. 72,77 Old men
fathers. 67 Operation of God. 9 Oppression. 89 Original sin. 17 not taken
away by baptism. 152 Outward actual sin. 20 Original sin deserves
death. 173 Oaths. 59 lawful. ibid. unlawful. ibid.
P
Particular persuasion of salvation. 119 Pains in childbirth. 23 a Punishment
for sin. 23 Parents how said to be holy. 108 Parents prolong their childrens
life. 67 Patience in perils. 39 Patience with preservatives. 137 Peace of God.
148 Perfection of sin. 21 Permission of evil. 14 Perjury. 5 Peoples duty
in Gods service. 52 petition. 60 Peter's fall. 22 Pirates. 91 philosophy. 81
physic. 81 pictures. 44 plague. 81 plays. 85 Pledges to be restored. 75,90
to be redeemed. 93 strange Pleasures. 82 pollution. 197 pollution by night. 84
the Pope Antichrist. 35 Popish superstitions. 47,58 popish fasting. 48 popish
traditions. 48 power of the law. 102 of Christ's death. 126 preaching of the
Gospel an image of Christ. 45 it begets faith. 33 prayer. 138 prayers of the
faithful. 139 to creatures. 49 a means to sanctify Gods creatures. 60 prayers
on particular occasions. 60 praising of God in heaven. 145 Predestination.
10,167 it is both of the Elect and reprobate. 149 immutable. 150 not by
foreseen works in man. 172 it may be known. 177 what it is to the Papists.
146 Predestination applied. 176 preservatives against assaults of temptation.
131 vocation. 131 faith. 132 sanctification. 134 presumption. 22,42 pride. 42
promises of God and man. 36 promises must be kept. 94 pronenesse to diseases a
punishment. 22 pronouncing unjust sentence. 96 propagation of sin. 17
profession of God commanded. 39, 138 processions. 45 prognostications. 56
prophesies. 50 prophanations of sabbaths. 64 punishments of sin. 22
punishments inflicted by superiors to be borne. 69 punishments how to be
inflicted. 70
Q
Quarrellings. 74
R
Railings forbidden. 74 Raising of prises in wares. 89 Remission of sins. 122
rejoicing at our neighbors good. 77 Rebaptizing. 110 Rebellion inward. 20
Recreation. 81 Relikes of idols unlawful. 46 Relief of such as are godly. 140
Remember, what it signifies. 61 Representing of God in an image. 44
Reprobates. 165 how far they may go in godliness. 164 Reprobates may know the
lord. 165 have temporary faith. 165 a taste of the heavenly gifts. ibid. outward
holiness. ibid. their falling from God. ibid. death. 175 condemnation. ibid.
estate in hell. 176 Reprobation. 163 Reprobate sense. 17 Reverence to
superiors with many branches. 68 Revenge. 74 Restitution. 89,94 Repentance.
129 how in Reprobates. 165 how in God. 2 Resurrection. 143 Reading sometimes
begets faith. 103 to rise early on the Sabbath. 63 Rogues. 91 Robberies.
ibid. the Romish Hierarchy. 48 Rules for the communion of properties. 7,26
Rules for vows. 52 Rules for equality in contracts. 93 Rules for the
interpretation of the decalogue. 37 Rules for such as would be saved. 103
S
Sabellius condemned. 41 Sabbath commanded in Paradise. 63 Sabbath. 61 how
sanctified. 63 how moral and ceremonial. 63,64 why changed. 64 a Sabbath
days work. 62 preparation to the Sabbath. 64 how profaned. 65 Sacraments.
104 how necessary. 107 Sacrifice and Sacrament differ. 107 Salvation. 146,171
Salvation according to the Church of Rome. 146 Saints not to be prayed for. 49
Samuel raised up, not true Samuel. 50,51 Sanctuaries. 76 to Sanctify what. 61
Sanctification of Gods creatures. 60 Sanctification with the effects thereof.
124 Satan's shifts to cause infidelity. 132 Satan Gods ape. 50 his Sacraments.
50 Scandals. 76 Scriptures only expounded by Christ. 34 Serpents head bruised.
171 Second causes are not frustrate by Gods decree. 8 Security. 20,42 Service
of God in heaven. 145 Sellers sin. 89 Servants eye service. 72 Shame of
nakedness a punishment. 22 Shooting. 81 Signs in the sacraments. 105 Sin
what. 13 mortal Sin. 160 why it reigns in man. 102 one Sin forgiven all
forgiven. 134 Sin corrupts only faculties. 17 Sins of omission and
commission. 20 Sin against the holy ghost. 22,166 Six days to work. 62
Single life. 87 Sobriety. 86 Soul punished. 23 Sorrow for sin. 136 Society
with infidels. 46 Souls in heaven. 142 Southsaying. 50 christian Soldier. 129
Spirit of slumber. 18 Spiritual drunkenness. ibid. Sports on the Sabbath. 65
Stars what force they have. 57 Stealing. 88 Step-parents to be honored. 66
Strangers not to be iniuried. 78,80 the Sting of death. 142 Subject to satan.
35 Subjection to Satan a punishment. 23 Suretiship. 94 Suites in law. 47
Supremacy in the Pope, a note of Antichrist. 35 Superstition. 56 Suspicions.
96 Superiors duty to inferiors. 70 Superiors to be reverenced. 67 they must
speak first. 68 Subjects are freed from their allegiance to their prince by
the Pope. 72 Swearing any way. 55
T
to Take the name of god in vain. 54 Talk corrupt. 85,97 table Talk. 87
Tales raised. 97,98 Taunting. 75 Tempting of God. 41 Temptation. 21,130,132
Tempter. 129 Terror of conscience. 19,23 Terrors for well doing. 19
Testament. 103 Thanksgiving. 52,60,130 Theology, what. 2 Theft how punished.
91,92 Thrift. 92 Titles of God where to be used. 5^ Titles may be given to men.
68 Traffic with infidels. 46 Transubstantiation. 112 Trembling at gods
presence. 23,113 Trials of suites before infidels. 47 Trouble of mind. 23
Truth to be spoken. 92 Truces. 79 Turks the devils subjects. 35 the two Trees
in Eden. 13 Tyrants to be obeyed. 69 Tyrants punishment. 75
V
Vanity from Adam. 18 Vainglory. 96 Virtue of creatures lost by sin. 23
Vices not to be allowed, 96,97 abstained from. 98 to Visit. 44 Vivification.
126 Vows. 47,53 Uncharitable opinions of such as fear God. 20 Union with God.
41 Union of christians with Christ. 115 spiritual Understanding. 126 Unjust
dealing. 88 Unprofitable wars. 89 Usury. 90
W
Washing in baptism. 109 Wasting others goods. 72 Wages detained. 75
Wantonness. 84 Christian Warrefare. 129 Warriars. 129 Weights falsified. 89,93
Wedlock. 87 Will corrupted. 19 Will worship. 47 spiritual Wisdom. 126
Witches. 52 Wishing. 101 Witness. 98 the Work of God. 8 Works of the elect,
how acceptable to God. 98 the World and parts thereof. 11 how the godly esteem
of the World. 127 the Word how first revealed. 33 the Word preached a means of
salvation 33 to sanctify Gods creatures. 60 Wise in his own conceit. 73
Widows not to be iniuried. 75 to Win men to religion. 51 Wares to be
saleable. 93 Gods worship when corrupted. 48 means by which God is Worshipped.
50 Works justify not. 151,161 Works foreseen. 172 Worm of conscience. 176
Whole man punished. 23 Worshipping the beast. 47 of devils. 49
Z
Zeal of Gods glory. 58,127
FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE SYMBOL OR CREED OF THE APOSTLES, ACCORDING TO THE
TENOVR OF THE SCRIPTVRE, AND the consent of the Orthodoxe Fathers of the
Church: reuewed and corrected BY William Perkins.

They are good Catholics, which are of sound faith and good life. August. lib.
quaest. in Matthew. cap. 11. PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE PRINTER to the University of
Cambridge. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD Lord Russell, Earl of Bedford. Grace, and
peace, etc.
Tit. 1.15.
RIght Honorable, excellent is the saying of Paul to Titus, To the pure all
things are pure: but to the impure and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even
their minds and consciences are defiled. In which words he determines three
questions. The first, whether things ordained and made by God, may become
unclean or no? his answer is, that they may: and his meaning must be conceived
with a distinction. By nature, things ordained of God are not unclean: for
Moses in Genesis says, that God saw all things which he had made, and they
were very good: yet they may become unclean either by law, or by the fault of
men. By law, as when God forbids us the things which in themselves are good:
without whose commandment, they are as pure as things not forbidden. Thus for
the time of the old Testament God forbade the Jews the use of certain
creatures; not because they were indeeede worse then the rest, but because it
was his pleasure upon special cause to restrain them, that he might put a
difference between his own people and the rest of the world: that he might
exercise their obedience, and advertise them of the inward impuritie of mind.
Now this legal impuritie was abolished at the ascension of Christ. By the
fault of men things are unclean when they are abused, and not applied to the
ends for which they were ordained. The second question is, to whom things
ordained of God are pure? He answers, to the pure: Act. 15.10. 2. Tim. 4.3.
that is, to them whose persons stand justified and sanctified before God in
Christ in whom they believe: who also do use Gods blessings in holy manner to
his glory and the good of men. The third question is, who they are to whom
all things are unclean? his answer is, to the unclean: by whom he
understands all such I. whose persons displease God, because they do not
indeed believe in Christ: II. who use not the gifts of God in holy manner,
sanctifying them by word and prayer: III: who abuse them to bad ends, as to
riot, pride, and oppression of men, etc. Now that to such, the use of all the
creatures of God is unclean, it is manifest: because all their actions are
sins in that they are not done of faith: and a man's persons must first please
God in Christ, before his action or work done can please him. Again they use
the blessings and creatures of God with evil conscience, because so long as
they are forth of Christ, they are but usurpers thereof before God. For in the
fall of the first Adam we lost the title and interest to all good things: and
though God permit the use of many of them to wicked men; yet is not the
former title recovered but in Christ the second Adam, in whom we are advanced
to a better estate then we had by creation.

Hence it follows necessarily, that (to omit all other things,) Nobility,
though it be a blessing and ordinance of God in it self, is but an unclean
thing, if the enioyers thereof be not truly ingrafted into Christ, and made
bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. The blood unstained before men, is
stained blood before God by the fall of Adam, if it be not restored by the
blood of Christ the lamb of God. And hence it follows again, that Nobility
must not dwell solitary, but combine her self in perpetual fellowship with
hearty love and sincere obedience of pure and sound religion: without the
which all pleasant pastimes, all sumptuousnes of building, all bravery in
apparel, all glistering in gold, all delicate fare, all delightful music,
all reverence done with cappe and knee, all earthly pleasures and delights that
heart can wish, are but as a vanishing shadow, or like the mirth that begins
in laughing and ends in woe. A happy thing were it, if this consideration
might take place in the hearts of all noble men: it would make them honor God
that they might be honored of God with everlasting honor: 1. Sam. ^. 22.26.
Psalm. 2.12.
and it would make them kiss the Son least he be angry, and they perish in
the way.

I speak not this as though I doubted of your Lordships care in this very
point: but mine only meaning is to put you in mind, that as you have begun
to clean unto Christ with full of purpose of heart, so you would continue to
do it still, and do it more: and withal to manifest the same unto the whole
world, by honoring Christ with your own honor, and by resembling him
specially in one thing, in that, Prove. 3.9,10.
as he grew in stature and years, he also grew in grace and favor with God
and men. Luke 2.25.
And for this very cause (without any consideration of earthly respects) I
further present unto you an Exposition of another part of the Catechism,
namely the Symbol or Creed of the Apostles: which is indeed the very pith
and substance of Christian religion, taught by the Apostles, embraced by the
ancient fathers, sealed by the blood of martyrs, used by Socrat. hist. eccl. l.
5. c. 10.
Theodosius the Emperor as a means to end the controversies of his time: and
hereupon has been called the August. de Temp. ser. 119.
rule of faith, the Ambr. ser. 38.
keye of faith. And furthermore I hope that your Lordship will accept the same
in good part, the rather because you vouchsafed when you were in Cambridge to
be an hearer thereof when it was taught and delivered. Thus craving pardon for
my boldness, I take my leave, commending your L. and yours to the protection of
the Almighty.

Ann. 1595. Apr. 2. Your L. to command, William Perkins.

The Contents of the book.
The Creed. page 185 Faith. 187 God. 198 The three persons. 202 The Father.
205 Gods omnipotency. 212 The Creation. 217,221 Gods counsel. 218 The creation
of heaven. 228 The creation of Angels. 231 The creation of man. 236 Gods
providence. 242 Adams fall, and original sin. 252 The covenant of grace. 259
The title, Jesus. 262 The title, Christ. 266 The title, Son. 271 The title,
Lord. 278 The Incarnation of Christ. 279 Christ's humiliation. 295 Christ's
passion. 297 Christ's arraignment. 300 Christ's execution. 328 Christ's sacrifice.
350 Christ's triumph. 356 Christ's burial. 367 The descension of Christ. 372
Christ's exaltation. 378 Christ's Resurrection. 380 Christ's ascension. 396
Christ's sitting at, etc. 407 Christ's intercession. 409 Christ's kingdom. 417
The last judgment. 420 Of the holy Ghost. 436 The Church. 451,488
Predestination. 453 The mystical union. 483 The communion of Saints. 500 The
forgiveness of sins. 506 The resurrection of the body. 509 Life
everlasting. 516
In handling of the foresaid points for orders sake, is considered, 1. The
meaning, or such points of doctrine as are necessary to be known thereof. 2.
The duties to be learned thereby. 3. The comforts that Gods pleople may gather
thence.


AN EXPOSITION OF THE CREED. I believe in God. etc.
NO man justly can be offended at this, that I begin to treat of the doctrine
of faith without a text; though some be of mind, that in Catechizing the
minister is to proceed as in the ordinary course of preaching, only by
handling a set portion of scripture: and therefore that the handling of the
Creed being no scripture, is not convenient. Indeed I grant, that other
course to be commendable: yet I doubt not, but in Catechizing the minister
has his liberty to follow or not to follow a certain text of scripture, as
we do in the usual course of preaching. My reason is taken from the practice
of the Primitive Church; Heb. 6.^, 2^^^
whose Catechism (as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews shows) was
contained in six principles or grounds of religion, which were not taken out
of any set text in the old Testament: but rather was a form of teaching
gathered out of the most clear places thereof. Hence I reason thus: That which
in this point was the use and manner of the Primitive Church, is lawful to be
used of us now: but in the Primitive church it was the manner to catechize
without handling any set text of scripture: and therefore the ministers of the
Gospel at this time may with like liberty do the same: so be it they do
confirm the doctrine which they teach with places of scripture afterward.

Now to come to the Creed, let us begin with the name or title thereof. That
which in English we call the Apostles Creed, in other tongues is called
Symbolum, that is, a shot or a badge. It is called a shot, because as in a
feast or banquet every man pays his part: which being all gathered, the
whole (which we call the shot) amounts: and so out of the several writings
of the Apostles arises this creed or brief confession of faith. It is a
badge, because as a soldier in the field by his badge and liuerie is known of
what band he is, and to what captain he does belong: even so by this belief a
christian man may be distinguished and known from all Jews, Turks, Atheists,
and all false professors: and for this cause it is called a badge.

Again it is called the creed of the Apostles, not because they were the
pe^ners of it, conferring to it besides the matter ^u^f^n in expos. Symb and
^^erony. ad ^am.
the very style and frame of words as we have the^ now set down. Reason. I.
there are in this creed certain words and phrases which are not to be found in
the writings of the Apostles, and namely these: He descended into hell; the
Catholic Church. The latter whereof no doubt Paci^n^s epi^t. 1. ad Sym^ro.
first began to be in use, when after the Apostles days the Church was
dispersed into all quarters of the earth. Secondly if both matter and words
h^d been from the Apostles, why is not the creed Canonical Scripture, as
well as any other of their writings? III. The Apostles had a summarie
collecollection of the points of Christian religion which they taught, and also
delivered to others to teach by; consisting of two heads, faith and love: as
may appear by Paul's exhortation to Timothy, wishing him to keep the pattern
of wholesome words: which he had heard of him in faith and love, which is in
Christ Jesus. ^. Tim. 1.13.
Now the Creed consists not of two heads but of one, namely of faith only and
not of love also. Wherefore I rather think, that it is called the Apostles
Creed because it does summarily contain the chief and principal points of
religion, handled and propounded in the doctrine of the Apostles: and because
the points of the Creed are conformable and agreeable to their doctrine and
writings.

And thus much of the title. Now let us hear what the creed is: It is a sum
of things to be believed concerning God and concerning the Church, gathered
forth of the scriptures. For the opening of this description. First I say, it
is a sum of things to be believed, or an abridgement. It has been the
practice of teachers both in the new and old Testament to abridge and
contract summarily the religion of their time. This the Prophets used. For when
they had made their sermons to the people they did abridge them and penned the^
briefly: setting them in some open place, that all the people might read the
same. So the Lord bad Habakuk to write the vision which he saw, and to make it
plain upon tables, that he may run that reads it. Hab. 1^1.
And in the new testament the Apostles did abridge those doctrines, which
otherwise they did handle at large, ^s as may appear in the place of Timothy
before named. ^. Tim. 1.13.
Now the reason ^hy both in the old and new Testament the doctrine of
religion was abridged, is that the understandings of the simple, as also their
memories might be hereby helped, and they better enabled to judge of the
truth, and to discern the same from falsehood. And for this end the Apostles
Creed being a summary collection of things to be believed, was gathered
briefly out of the word of God Aug. se^m. 119. de temp Ca^sian. li. 6. de
inc^r^t. domini.
for the helping of memory and understanding of men. I add that this Creed is
concerning God and the Church. For in these two points consists the whole
sum thereof. Lastly, I say, that it is gathered forth of the scripture, to
make a difference between it and and other writings, and to show the authority
of it, which I will further declare on this manner.

There be two kind of writings in which the doctrine of the Church is
handled, and they are either divine or Ecclesiastical. Divine, are the books
of the old and new Testament penned either by Prophets or Apostles. And these
are not only the pure word of God, but also the scripture of God: because not
only the matter of them but the whole disposition thereof with the style and
the phrase was set down by the immediate inspiration of the holy ghost. And
the authority of these books is divine, that is, absolute and sovereign, and
they are of sufficient credit in and by themselves needing not the testimony
of any creature, not subject to the censure either of men or Angels, binding
the consciences of all men at all times, and being the only foundation of
faith, and the rule and canon of all truth.

Ecclesiastical writings are all other ordinary writings of the Church
consenting with Scriptures. These may be called the word or truth of God, so
far forth as their matter or substance is consenting with the written word of
god: but they cannot be called the scripture of God because the style and
phrase of them was set down according to the pleasure of man, and therefore
they are in such sort the word of God, as that also they are the word of men.
And their authority in defining of truth and falsehood in matters of religion
is not sovereign, but subordinate to the former: and it does not stand in the
authority and pleasures of men etcouncels, but in the consent which they have
with the scriptures.

Ecclesiastical writings are either general, particular, or proper. General,
are the Creedes and confessions of the Church dispersed over the whole world,
and among the rest the Creed of the Apostles, made either by the Apostles
themselves, or by their hearers and disciples, apostolical men delivered to
the Church, and conveyed from hand to hand to our times. Particular writings
are the confessions of particular Churches. Proper writings are the books and
confessions of private men. Now between these we must make difference. For
the General Creed of the Apostles, (other universal Creeds in this case not
excepted) though it be of less authority then scripture; yet has it more
authority then the particular and private writings of Churches and men. For it
has been received and approved by universal consent of the Catholic Church
in all ages, and so were never these: in it the meaning and doctrine can not be
changed by the authority of the whole Catholic Church: and if either the
order of the doctrine or the words whereby it is expressed, should upon some
occasion be changed, a particular Church of any country can not do it, without
Catholic consent of the whole Church: yet particular writings and confessions
made by some special Churches may be altered in the words and in the points of
doctrine by the same Churches without offense to the Catholic Church. Lastly
it is received as a rule of faith among all Churches to try doctrines and
interpretations of scriptures by, not because it is a rule of it self, for
that the scripture is alone; but because it borrows his authority from
scripture with which it agrees. And this honor no other writings of men can
have.

Here some may demand the number of Creedes. Ans. I say but one Creed, as
there is but one faith: and if it be alleged that we have many Creedes, as
besides this of the Apostles, the Nicene Creed and Athanasius Creed, etc. I
answer, the several Creedes and confessions of Churches contain not several
faiths and religions, but one and the same: and this called the Apostles creed
is most ancient, and principal: all the rest are not new Creedes in
substance, but in some points penned more largely for the exposition of it,
that men might better avoid the heresies of their times.

Further, it may be demanded, in what form this Creed was penned? Ans. In the
form of an answer to a question. The reason is this. In the Primitive Church,
when any man was turned from Gentilisme to the faith of Christ, and was to be
baptized, this Cyril. Catec. 1. Mystag. Tertull. de resurrect.

Origin. hom. 5. in. Number. Act. 8.38.


question was asked him, What beleeuest thou^ then he answered according to the
form of the Creed, I believe in God, etc. And this manner of questioning was
used even from the time of the Apostles. When the Eunuch was converted by
Philip, he said, What does let me to be baptized? Philip said, If thou do
believe with all thine heart, thou may. Then he answered, I beleede that
Jesus Christ is the son of God. By this it appears, that although all men,
for the most part, amongst us can say this Creed, yet not one of a thousand
can tell the ancient and first use of it: for commonly at this day of the
simpler sort it is said for a prayer, being indeed no prayer: and when it is
used so, men make it no better then a charm.

Before we come to handle the particular points of the Creed, it is very
requi^ite that we should make an entrance thereto by describing the nature,
properties, and kinds of faith, the confession and ground whereof is set forth
in the Creed. Faith therefore is a gift of God, whereby we give assent or
credence to Gods word. For there is a necessary relation between faith and
Gods word. The common property of faith is noted by the author of the
Hebrews, when he says, H^b. ^^.^.
Faith is the ground of things hoped for: and, the demonstration of things that
are not seen. For all this may be understood, not only of justifying faith,
but also of temporary faith, and the faith of miracles. Where faith is said to
be a ground, the meaning is, that though there are many things promised by God,
which men do not presently enjoy, but only hope for; because as yet they are
not: yet faith does after a sort give subsisting or being unto them. Secondly
it is an evidence or demonstration, etc. that is, by believing a man does make
a thing as it were visible, being otherwise invisible and absent.

Faith is of two sorts: either common faith, or the faith of the Elect: as Paul
says, (...) ^1.
he is an Apostle according to the faith of Gods elect: which also is called
faith without hypocrisy. The common faith is that, which both elect and
reprobate have, and it is threefold. The first is historical faith, which is,
when a man does believe the outward letter and history of the word. It has
two parts; knowledge of Gods word, and an assent unto the same knowledge: and
it is to be found in the devil and his angels. (...)
So Saint James says, the devils believe and tremble. Some will say, what a
faith have they? Ans. Such as thereby they understand both the Law and the
Gospel: besides they give assent to it to be true: and they do more yet, in
that they tremble and fear. And many a man has not so much. For amongst us,
there is many a one which has no knowledge of God at all, more th^n he has
learned by the common talk of the world: as namely, that there is a God, and
that he is merciful, etc. and yet this man will say, that he believes with
all his heart: but without knowledge it can not be that any should truly
believe, and therefore he deceiu^th himself. Quest. But whence have the devils
historical faith? were they illuminated by the light of the spirit? Ans. No:
but when the Gospel was preached, they did acknowledge it, and believed it to
be true, and that by the virtue of the relics of Gods image, which remained
in them since their fall. And therefore this their faith does not arise from
any special illumination by his spirit, but they attain to it even by the
very light of nature, which was left in them from the beginning.

The second kind of faith is Temporary faith, so called because it lasts
but for a time and season, and commonly not to the end of a man's life. This
kind of faith is noted unto us in the parable of the seed, that fell in the
stony ground. And there be two differences or kinds of this faith. The first
kind of temporary faith has in it three degrees. The first is, to know the
Word of God and particularly the Gospel. The second, to give an assent unto
it. The third, to profess it, but to go no further: and all this may be done
without any love to the word. This faith has one degree more then historical
faith. Examples of it we have in Simon Magus, Acts 8.13. who is said to
believe, because he held the doctrine of the Apostle to be true; and withal
professed the same: and in the devils also, who in some sort confessed, that
Christ was the son of the most highest, and yet looked for no salvation by
him, Mark. 5.7. Act. 19.15. And this is the common faith that abounds in this
land. Men say they believe as the Prince believes, and if religion change they
will change. For by reason of the authority of princes laws, they are made to
learn some little knowledge of the word: they believe it to be good, and they
profess it: and thus for the space of thirty or forty years men hear the
word preached, and receive the sacraments, being for all this as void of
grace as ever they were at the first day: and the reason is, because they do
barely profess it, without either liking or love of the same. The second kind
of temporary faith has in it five degrees. For by it first a man knows the
word. Secondly he assenteth unto it. Thirdly, he professes it. Forthly, he
reioiceth inwardly in it. Fifthly, he brings forth some kind of fruit: and yet
for all this has no more in him, but a faith that will fail in the end;
because he wants the effectual application of the promise of the Gospel, and
is without all manner of sound conversion. This faith is like corn in the
house top, which grows for a while, but when heat of summer comes, it
withers. And this is also set forth unto us in the parable of the seed,
which fell in a stony ground, which is hasty in springing up: Luke 8.23.
but because of the stones, which will not suffer it to take deep root, it
withers. And this is a very common faith in the Church of God: by which many
rejoice in the preaching of the word, and for a time bring forth some fruits
accordingly with show of great forwardness, yet afterward shake off religion
and all. But (some will say) how can this be a temporary faith, seeing it has
such fruits? Ans. Such a kind of faith is temporary, because it is grounded on
temporary causes which are three. I. A desire to get knowledge of some
strange points of religion. For many a man does labor for the five former
degrees of temporary faith, only because he desires to get more knowledge in
Scripture, then other men have. The second cause is a desire of praise among
men, which is of that force that it will make a man put on a show of all the
graces, which God bestows upon his own children, though otherwise he want
them: and to go very far in religion; which appears thus. Some there are
which seem very bitterly to weep for the sins of other men, and yet have
neither sorrow nor touch of conscience for their own: and the cause hereof is
nothing else but pride. For he that sheddes tears for an other man's sins,
should much more weep for his own, if he had grace. Again, a man for his
own sins will pray very slackly and dully, when he prays privately: and
yet when he is in the company of others, he prays very fervently and
earnestly. From whence is this difference? surely often it springs from the
pride of heart and from a desire and praise among men. The third cause of
temporary faith is profit, commodity, the getting of wealth and riches: which
are common occasions to move to choose or refuse religion, as the time
serves: but such kind of believers embrace not the Gospel because it is the
Gospel, that is, the glad tidings of salvation; but because it brings
wealth, peace, and liberty with it. And these are the three causes of
temporary faith.

The third kind of faith is the faith of Miracles: when a man grounding
himself on some special promise or revelation from God, does believe, that
some strange and extraordinary thing, which he has desired or foretold,
shall come to pass by the work of God. This must be distinguished from
historical and temporary faith. Act. 8.19.
For Simon Magus having both these kinds of faith, wanted this faith of
miracles, and therefore would have bought the same of the Apostles for money.
Yet we must know that this faith of miracles may be in hypocrites, as it was in
Judas, and at the last judgment it shall be found to have bin in the wicked
and reprobate; which shall say to Christ, Math. 7.22. 2. Cor. 13.^.
Lord, in thy name we have prophesied, and cast out devils, and done many
great miracles.

And thus much for the three sorts of common faith: Now we come to the true
faith, which is called the Faith of the Elect. It is thus defined: Faith is a
supernatural gift of God in the mind, apprehending the saving promise with
all the promises that depend on it. First, I say, it is a gift of God, Philip.
1.29. to confute the blind opinion of our people, that think that the faith
whereby they are to be saved, is bredde and borne with them. I add that this
is a gift supernatural; not only because it is above that corrupt nature in
which we are borne, but also because it is above that pure nature, in which our
first parents were created. For in the state of innocence they wanted this
faith, neither had they then any need of faith in the same God as he is
Messiah: but this faith is a new grace of God added to regeneration after the
fall, and first prescribed and taught in the covenant of grace. And by this one
thing, faith differs from the rest of the gifts of God, as the fear of God,
the love of God, the love of our brethren, etc. for these were in man's nature
before the fall, and after it, when it pleases God to call us, they are but
renewed: but justifying faith admits no renewing. For the first ingrafting of it
into the heart, in the conversion of a sinner after his fall.

The place and seat of faith (as I think) is the mind of man, not the will:
for it stands in a kind of particular knowledge or persuasion, and there is no
persuasion but in the mind. Paul says indeed, that we believe with the
heart, Romans 10. but by the heart he understands the soul without limitation to
any part. Some do place faith in the mind, and partly in the will, because it
has two parts; knowledge, and affiance: but it seems not greatly to stand
with reason, that one particular and single grace should be seated in diverse
parts or faculties of the souls.

The form of faith is, to apprehend the promise, Gal. 3. 14. that we might
receive the promise of the spirit through faith: and, Ioh. 1.12. to receive
Christ, and to believe, are put one for another; and to believe, is to eat and
drink the body and blood of Christ. To apprehend properly, is an action of
the hand of man, which lays hold of a thing, and pulls it to himself: and by
resembla^ce it agrees to faith, which is the hand of the soul, receiving and
applying the saving promise.

This apprehension of faith, is not performed by any affection of the will, but
by a certain and particular persuasion, whereby a man is resolved that the
promise of salvation belongs unto him. Which persuasion is wrought in the mind
by the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 2.12. And by this, the promise which is general is
applied particularly to one subject.

By this one action, saving faith differs from all other kinds of faith.
From historical; for it wants all apprehension, and stands only in a
general assent. From temporary faith, which though it make a man to profess
the Gospel and to rejoice in the same, yet does it not thoroughly apply Christ
with his benefits. For it never brings with it any thorough touch of conscience
or lively sense of Gods grace in the heart. And the same may be said of the
rest.

The principal and maine object of this faith is, the saving promise, God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes
in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life. But some will say, Christ
is commonly said to be the object of faith. Ans. In effect it is all one to say
the saving promise, and Christ promised, who is the substance of the covenant.
Christ then as he is set forth unto us in the word and Sacraments, is the
object of faith. And here certain questions offer themselves to be skanned.

The first, What is, that particular thing, which faith apprehends? Answ.
Faith apprehends whole Christ God and man. For his godhead without his
manhood, and his manhood without his godhead does not reconcile us to God.
Yet this which I say must be conceived with some distinction according to the
difference of his two natures. His godhead is apprehended not in respect of his
essence or nature, but in respect of his efficacy manifested in the manhood,
whereby the obedience thereof is made meritorious before God: as for his
manhood, it is apprehended both in respect of the substance or thing it self,
and also in respect of the efficacy and benefits thereof.

The second, In what order faith apprehends Christ? Answ. First of all it
apprehendes the very body and blood of Christ: and then in the second place
the virtue and benefits of his body and blood: as a man that would feel in
his body the virtue of meat and drink, must first of all receive the
substance thereof.

To go forward. Besides this main promise, which concerns righteousness and
life everlasting in Christ, there be other particular promises touching
strength in temptations, comfort in afflictions, and such like, which depend on
the former: and they also are the object of justifying faith: and with the very
same faith we believe them, wherewith we believe our salvation. Thus Abraham by
the same faith wherewith he was justified, believed that he should have a son
in his old age, Romans 4.19,22. And Noe by that faith whereby he was made heir
of righteousness, believed that he and his family should be preserved in the
floode: this conclusion being always laid down, that, To whom God gives
Christ, to them also he gives all things needful for this life or the life to
come, in and by Christ. And hereupon it comes to pass that in our prayers,
besides the desire of things promised, we must bring faith whereby we must be
certainly persuaded, that God will grant us such things as he has promised:
and this faith is not a new kind or distinct faith from justifying faith. Thus
we see plainly what saving faith is.

1 p^^. 3.12.
Whereas some are of opinion, that faith is an affiance or confidence, that
seems to be otherwise: for it is a fruit of faith, and indeed no man can put
any confidence in God, till he be first of all persuaded of Gods mercy in
Christ toward him.

Some again are of mind, that love is the very nature and form of faith: but
it is otherwise. For as confidence in God, so also love is an effect which
proceeds from faith. 1. Tim. 1.5. The end of the law is love from a pure
heart and good conscience and faith unfeigned. And in nature they differ
greatly. Christ is the fountain of the waters of life. Faith in the heart is
as the pipes and leads that receive in, and hold the water: and love in some
part is as the cock of the conduit, that lets out the water to every commer.
The property of the hand is to hold, and of it self it can not cut: yet by a
knife or other instrument put into the hand, it cuts: the hand of the soul is
faith, and his property is to apprehend Christ with all his benefits, and by
it self it can do nothing else; Gal. 5.6.
yet join love unto it, and by love it will be effectual in all good duties.

Now to proceed further: first we are to consider, how faith is wrought:
secondly, what be the differences of it. For the first, faith is wrought in and
by the outward ministry of the Gospel, accompanied by the inward operation
of the spirit, and that not suddenly, but by certain steps and degrees: as
nature frames the body of the infant in the mothers womb, 1. by making the
brain and heart, 2. by making veins, sinews, arteries, bones: 3. by adding
flesh to them all. And the whole operation of the spirit stands in two
principal actions. First, the enlightening of the mind: the second, the
moving of the will. For the first, the holy Ghost inlightens men's minds with a
further knowledge of the law then nature can affoard; and thereby makes them to
see the sins of their hearts and lives with the ouglines thereof, and withal
to tremble at the curse of the law. Afterward the same spirit opens the eye to
understand and consider seriously of righteousness and life eternal promised in
Christ. This done, then comes the second work of the holy ghost, which is the
inflaming of the will, that a man having considered his fearful estate by
reason of sin, and the benefits of Christ's death, might hunger after Christ;
and have a desire not so much to have the punishments of sin taken away, as
Gods displeasure: and also might enjoy the benefits of Christ. And when he has
stirred up a man to desire reco^ciliation with god in Christ, then withal he
gives him grace to pray not only for life eternal, but especially for the
free remission and pardon of all his sins: and then the Lords promise is,
Math. 7.7.
Knock and it shall be opened, seek and ye shall find. After which he
further sendes his spirit into the same heart that desires reconciliation with
God, and remission of sins in Christ; and does seal up the same in his heart
by a lively and plentiful assurance thereof.

The differences and degrees of faith are two: I. a weak faith: II. a strong
faith. Concerning the first, this weak faith shows it self by this grace of
God, namely an unfeigned desire, not only of salvation (for that the wicked and
graceles man may have) but of reconciliation with God in Christ. This is a sure
sign of faith in every touched and humbled heart, and it is peculiar to the
elect: and they which have this, have in them also the ground and substance of
true saving faith: which afterward in time will grow up to greater strength.
Reasons: I. Promise of life everlasting, is made to the desire of
reconciliation, Psalm. 10.17. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the poor.
Psalm. 143. 6. My soul desires after thee, as the thirsty land. Psalm. 145.
19. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him. Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are
they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.
Reuelat. 21.6. I will give unto him which is a thirst, of the well of the water
of life freely. II. The hungering desire after grace is a sanctified affection:
where one affection is sanctified, all are sanctified: where all are
sanctified, the whole man is sanctified: and he that is sanctified, is
justified and believes. III. God accepts the will and desire to repent and
believe, for repenting and believing indeed: wherefore this desire of
reconciliation (if it be soundly wrought in the heart) is in acceptance with
God as true faith indeed. But carnal men will say, If faith, yea true faith
show it self by a desire of reconciliatio^ with God in Christ for all our
sins, then we are well enough, though we live in our sins: for we have very
good desires. I answer, That there be many sundry fleeting motions and desires
to do good things which grow to no issue or head, but in time vanish as they
come. Now such passions have no soundness in them, and must be distinguished
from the desire of reconciliation with God, that comes from a bruised heart^
and brings always with it reformation of life: therefore such whatsoever they
are that live after the course of this world, and think notwithstanding that
they have desires that are good, deceive themselves.

Now faith is said to be weak, when a man either fails in the knowledge of
the Gospel; or else having knowledge, is weak in grace to apply unto
himself the sweet promises thereof. As for example, we know that the Apostles
had all true saving faith (except Judas) and when our Savior Christ asked
them, Math. 16.16^.
whom they thought that he was; Peter in the person of the rest, answered for
them all, and said; Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God: for which our
Savior commended him, and in him, them all, saying: Thou art Peter, and upon
this rock, (that is, upon Christ, which Peter confessed in the name of them
all) will I build my Church. And yet about that time we shall find in the
Gospel, Math. 8.10. and 16.^.
that they are called men of little faith. Now they failed in knowledge of the
death of Christ, and of his passion, and resurrection; and were carried away
with a vain hope of an earthly kingdom. And therefore when our Savior showed
them of his going down to Jerusalem and of his sufferings there, Peter a
little after his notable confession began to rebuke Christ, and said, Master
have pity on thy self, this shall not be unto thee. And until he had
appeared to them after his death, they did not distinctly believe his
resurrection.

Again, weak faith though it be joined with knowledge, yet it may fail in the
applying or in the apprehension and appropriating of Christ's benefits to a man's
own self. This is to be seen in ordinary experience. For many a man there
is of humble and contrite heart, that serves God in spirit and truth, yet is
not able to say without great doubtings and wauerings; I know and am fully
assured that my sins are pardoned. Now shall we say, that all such are
without faith? God forbid. Nay, we may resolve our selves, that the true child
of God may have a hungering desire in his heart after reconciliation with God
in Christ for all his sins with care to keep a good conscience, and yet be
weak sometime in the apprehension of Gods mercy and the assurance of the
remission of his own sins.

But if faith fail either in the true knowledge, or in the apprehension of
Gods mercies, how can a man be saved by it? Ans. We must know that this weak
faith will as truly apprehend Gods merciful promises for the pardon of sin,
as strong faith, though not so soundly. Even as a man with a palsy hand can
stretch it out as well to receive a gift at the hand of a king, as he that is
more sound, though it be not so firmly and steadfastly. And Christ says, that
he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax.

The Church of Rome bears men in hand, that they are good Catholics, if they
believe as the Church believes; though in the mean season they can not tell
what the Church believes. And some Papists commend this faith by the example of
an old devout father, who being tempted of the devil, and asked how he
believed; answered that he believed as the Church believed: being again asked
how the Church believed, he answered, as I believe: whereupon the devil (as
they say) was feign to depart. Well, this fond and ridiculous kind of faith we
renounce, as being a means to nuzle men in blindness, superstition, and
perpetual ignorance: yet withal we do not deny but that there is an
implicit or infolded faith; which is, when a man as yet having but some little
portion of knowledge in the doctrine of the Gospel, does truly perform
obedience according to the measure thereof; and withal has care to get more
knowledge, and shows good affection to all good means whereby it may be
increased. In this respect a certain ruler, who by a miracle wrought upon his
child, Ioh. 4.33. and ^.2.
was moved to acknowledge Christ for the Messiah, and further to submit
himself to his doctrine, is commended for a believer: and so are in the like
case, the Samaritanes.

And thus much of weak faith: which must be understood to be in a man not all
the days of his life, but while he is a young babe in Christ. For as it is in
the state of the body, first we are babes and grow to greater strength as we
grow in years; so it is with a christian man. First he is a babe in Christ,
having weak faith, but after grows from grace to grace, till he come to have
a strong faith: example wher^of we have in Abraham, who was strong and perfect
both in knowledge and apprehension. This strong faith is, when a man is endued
with the knowledge of the Gospel and grace to apprehend and apply the
righteousness of Christ unto himself for the remission of his own sins: so
as he can say distinctly of himself and truly, that he is fully resolved in
his own conscience, that he is reconciled unto God in Christ for all his
sins, and accepted in him to life everlasting. This degree of faith is proper
to him that begins to be a tall man and of ripe years in Christ. And it
comes not at the first calling of a man unto grace. And if any shall think
that he can have it at the first, he deceives himself. For as it is in nature:
first we are babes, and then as we increase in years, so we grow in strength:
so it is in the life of a Christian; first ordinarily he has a weak faith,
and after grows from grace to grace, till he come to stronger faith: and at
the last he be able to say, he is fully assured in his heart and conscience of
the pardon of his sins and of reconciliation to God in Christ. And this
assurance arises from many experiences of Gods favor and love in the course
of his life by manifold preseruations and other blessings, which being deeply
and duly considered bring a man to be fully persuaded, that God is his God, and
God the father, his father, and Jesus Christ his redeemer, and the holy Ghost
his sanctifier.

Now howesoeuer this faith be strong, yet is it always imperfect, as also our
knoweledge is; and shall so long as we live in this world be mingled with
contrary unbelief and sundry doubtings more or less. A great part of men
amongst us, blinded with gross ignorance, say they have faith, and yet
indeed have not. For ask them what faith they have, they will answer, they
believe that God is their father, and the Son their redeemer, etc. ask them
how long they have had this faith, they will answer, ever since they could
remember: ask them whether they ever doubt of Gods favor? they will say, they
would not once doubt for all the world. But the case of these men is to be
pitied: for howesoeuer they may persuade themselves, yet true it is, that they
have no sound faith at all: for even strong faith is assaulted with temptations
and doubtings: and God will not have men perfect in this life, that they may
always go out of themselves, and depend wholly on the merit of Christ.

And thus much of these two degrees of faith. Now in whom soever it is,
whether it be a weak faith, or a strong, it brings forth some fruit, as a
tree does in the time of summer. And a special fruit of faith, is this
confession of faith, Romans 10.10.
I believe in God, etc. so Paul says, With the heart a man may believe unto
righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses to salvation. Confession of
faith is, when a man in speech and outward profession does make manifest his
faith for these two causes. I. That with his mouth outwardly he may glorify
God and do him service both in body and soul. II. That by the confession of
his faith, he may sever himself from all false Christians, from Atheists,
hypocrites, and all false seducers whatsoever. And as this is the duty of a
Christian man, to make profession of his faith; so here in this Creed of the
Apostles, we have the right order and form of making confession set down, as
we shall see in handling the parts thereof.

The Creed therefore setts down two things concerning faith, namely, the
action of faith and his object, which also are the parts of the Creed. The
action in these words, I believe: the object in all the words following, in
God the Father Almighty, maker, etc. And first let us begin with the action.

I believe in God] We are taught to say, I believe, not we believe, for two
causes. First because (as we touched before) in the Primitive Church this
Creed was made to be an answer to a demand or question, which was
demanded of every particular man that was baptized: for they asked him thus;
What do thou believe? then he answered, I believe in God the Father, etc.
And thus did every one of years make profession of his faith: and it is
likely that Peter alluded hereunto, ^. Pet. 3.21.
saying the stipulation or answer of a good conscience makes request to God.
The second cause is, howesoeuer we are to pray one for another by saying^ O our
Father, etc. yet when we come to years, we must have a particular faith of our
own: no man can be saved by another man's faith, but by his own, as it is said:
Heb. ^.4.
The just shall live by his faith. But some will say, this is not true, because
children must be saved by their parents faith: the answer is this, the faith
of the parent does bring the child to have a title or interest to the Covenant
of grace and to all the benefits of Christ: yet does it not apply the benefits
of Christ's death, his obedience, his merits, and righteousness unto the
infant: for this the believer does only unto himself and to no other. Again,
some may say, if children do not apprehend Christ's benefits by their parents
faith, how then is Christ's righteousness made theirs and they saved? Answer.
By the inward working of the holy Ghost, who is the principal applier of all
graces, whereas faith is but the instrument. As for the places of scripture
that mention justification and salvation by faith, they are to be restrained to
men of years: whereas infants dying in their infancy, and therefore wanting
actual faith which none can have without actual knowledge of Gods will and
word, are no doubt saved by some other special working of Gods holy spirit,
not known to us.

Furthermore, to believe signifies two things; to conceive or understand any
thing, and withal to give assent unto it to be true: and therefore in this
place, to believe signifies to know and acknowledge that all the points of
religion which follow, are the truth of God. Here therefore we must
remember, that this clause ( I believe) placed in the beginning of the Creed,
must be particularly applied to all and every article following. For so the
case stands, that if faith fail in one maine point, it fails a man in all:
and therefore faith is said to be wholly copulative. It is not sufficient to
hold one article, ^ides est^o^a copulatiua.
but he that will hold any of them for his good, must hold them all: and he
which holds them all in show of words, if he ouerturne but one of them
indeed, he ouerturnes them all.

Again, to believe is one thing, and to believe in this or that is another
thing: and it contains in it three points or actions of a believer. I. To
know a thing: II. To acknowledge the same: III. To put trust and confidence in
it. And in this order must these three actions of faith be applied to every
article following which concerns any of the persons in Trinity. And this
must be marked as a matter of special moment. For always by adding them to
the words following, we do apply the article unto our selves in a very
comfortable manner. As I believe in the father, and do believe that he is my
father: and therefore I put my whole trust in him, and so of the rest.

Now we come to the object of general faith, which is either God or the
Church; in handling of both which, I will observe this order. I. I will speak
of the meaning of every article. II. Of the duties which we ought to learn
thereby. III. And lastly, of the consolations which may be gathered thence.
Concerning God, three things are to be considered. And first by reason of
manifold doubtings that rise in our minds, it may be demanded, whether there
be a God? many reasons might be used to resolve those that have scruple of
conscience: otherways we are bound to believe that there is a God without
all doubting. As for those Atheists which confidently avouch there is no God,
by Gods law they ought to die the death: nay, the earth is to good for such to
dwell on. Malefactors, as thieves and rebels, for their offenses have their
reward of death: but the offense of those, which denies that there is a God,
is greater: and therefore deserves most cruel death.

The second point follows, namely what God is? Exodus 3^.
Answer. Moses desiring to see Gods face, was not permitted but to see his
hinder parts: and therefore no man can be able to describe God by his nature,
but by his effects and properties, on this or such like manner: God is an
essence spiritual, simple, infinite, most holy. I say first of all, that God
is an essence, to show that he is a thing absolutely subsisting in himself,
and by himself, not receiving his being from any other. And herein he
differs from all creatures whatsoever, which have subsisting and being from
him alone. Again, I say he is an essence spiritual, because he is not any
kind of body, neither has he the parts of the bodies of men or other
creatures, but is in nature a spirit invisible, not subject to any of man's
senses. I add also, that he is a simple essence, because his nature admits no
manner of composition of matter or form or parts. The creatures are
compounded of diverse parts, and of variety of nature, but there is no such
thing in God: for whatsoever thing he is, he is the same by one and the same
singular and indivisible essence. Furthermore he is infinite, and that diverse
ways: infinite in time, without any beginning and without end: infinite in
place; because he is every where and excluded no where, within all places, and
forth of all places. Lastly he is most holy, that is, of infinite wisdom,
mercy, love, goodness, etc. and he alone is rightly termed most holy, because
holiness is of the very nature of God himself; whereas among the most excellent
creatures, it is otherwise. For the creature it self is one thing, and the
holiness of the creature another thing. Thus we see what God is, and to this
effect God describes himself to be Iehova Elohim: Exo. 3.6.14. 1. Tim. 1.17.
and Paul describes him to be a King everlasting, immortal, invisible, and
only wise, to whom is due all honor and glory for ever.

The third point is, touching the number of Gods, namely whether there be more
gods then one or no. Ans. There is not, neither can there be any more Gods then
one. Which point the Creed avouches, in saying, I believe in God, not gods:
and yet more plainly the Nicene Creed and the Creed of Athanasius, both of
them explaining the words of the Apostles Creed on this manner, I believe in
one God. Howesoeuer some in former times have erroniously held, that two gods
were the beginning of all things, one of good things, the other of evil
things: others, that there was one God in the old testament, another in the
new: others again, namely the Valentinians, that there were thirty couple of
gods: and the heathen people (as Augustine records) worshipped thirty
thousand gods: yet we that are members of Gods Church, must hold and believe
one God alone, and no more, Deuteronomy. 4.39. Understand this day and consider in
thine heart, that Jehovah he is God in heaven above and upon the earth
beneath: there is none other. Ephesians. 4.6. One God, one faith, one baptism. If it
be alleged that the Scripture mentions many gods, because Psalm. 82.6.
Magistrates are called Gods, Exodus 4.16.
Moses is called Aarons god, ^. Cor. 4.4.
the devil and all idols are called gods. The answer is this: They are not
properly or by nature gods, for in that respect there is only one God: but
they are so termed in other respects. Magistrates are gods, because they be
Vicegerents placed in the room of the true God, to govern their subjects:
Moses is Aarons god, because he was in the room of God to reveal his will to
Aaron: the devil is a god, because the hearts of the wicked would give the
honor unto him, which is peculiar to the everliving God: idols are called
gods, because they are such in men's conceits and opinions who esteem of them
as of gods. Therefore Paul says, an idol is nothing in the world, ^ Cor. 8.4.
that is, nothing in nature subsisting, or nothing in respect of the divinity
ascribed unto it.

To proceed forward, to believe in this one God, is in effect thus much: I.
To know and acknowledge him as he has revealed himself in his word: II. To
believe him to be my God: III. From mine heart to put all mine affiance in
him. To this purpose Christ says, ^o^. 17.3.
This is eternal life to know thee the only God, and whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ. Now the knowledge here meant, is not a bare or general
knowledge, for that the devils have, but a more special knowledge whereby I
know God not only to be God, but also to be my God, and thereupon do put my
confidence in him.

And thus much of the meaning of the first words, I believe in God, etc. Now
follow the duties which may be gathered hence. First of all, if we are bound
to believe in God, then we are also bound to take notice of our natural
unbelief, whereby we distrust God, to check our selves for it, and to strive
against it. Thus dealt the father of the child that had a dumme spirit, Lord
(says he) I believe, Lord help mine unbelief. Mark. 9.24.
And David, Why art thou cast down my soul? and w^y art thou so di^quieted in
me? wait on God. ^sal. 42.12.
And that which our Savior Christ said once to Peter, men should daiely
speak to themselves: O thou of little faith, why have thou doubted? But some
may say, wherein stands our unbelief? Answer. It stands in two things: I.
In distrusting the goodness of God, that is, in giving too little or no
affiance to him; or in putting affiance in the creature. For the first, few men
will abide to be told of their distrust in God: but indeed it is a common and
ri^e corruption: and though they soothe themselves never so, yet their usual
dealings proclaim their unbelief. Go through all places, it shall be found
that scarce one of a thousand in his dealings makes conscience of a lie: a
great part of men gets their wealth by fraud and oppression and all kind of
unjust and unmerciful dealing. What is the cause that they can do so? Alas,
alas, if there be any faith, it is pinned up in some by-corner of the heart,
and unbelief bears sway as the lord of the house. Again, if a man had as
much wealth as the world comes to, he could find in his heart to wish for an
other; and if he had two worlds, he would be casting for the third, if it might
be compassed: the reason hereof is, because men have not learned to make God
their portion, and to stay their affections on him: which if they could do, a
mean portion in temporal blessings would be enough. Indeed these and such
like persons will in no wise ^eelde that they do distrust the Lord, unless at
some time they be touched in conscience with a sense and feeling of their
sins, and be thoroughly humbled for the same: but the truth is, that distrust
of Gods goodness is a general and a mother-sinne, the ground of all other
sins, and the very first and principal sin in Adams fall. And for the
second part of unbelief, which is an affiance in the creatures, read the whole
book of God, and we shall find it a common and usual sin in all sorts of
men, some putting their trust in riches, some in strength, some in pleasures,
some placing their felicity in one sin, some in an other. When King Asa was
sick, 2. Chr. 16.12.
he put his whole trust in the Physicians, and not in the Lord. And in our
days the common practice is, when crosses and calamities fall, then there is
trotting out to that wise man, to this cunning woman, to this sorcerer, to that
wizzard, that is, from God to the devil, and their counsel is received and
practiced without any bones making. And this shows the bitter root of
unbelief, and confidence in vain creatures; let men smoothe it over with
goodly terms as long as they will. In a word, there is no man in the world,
be he called or not called, if he look narrowly unto himself, he shall find
his heart almost filled with manifold doubtings and distrustings, whereby he
shall feel himself even carried away from believing in God. Therefore the
duty of every man is, that will truly say that h^ believes in God, to labor
to see his own unbelief and the fruits thereof in his life. As for such as
say they have no unbelief, nor feel none; more pitiful is their case. For so
much the greater is their unbelief.

Secondly, considering that we profess our selves to believe in God, we must
every one of us learn to know God. As Paul says, Romans 10.^^
How can they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how can they
hear without a preacher? therefore none can believe in God but he must first
of all hear and be taught by the ministry of the word to know God aright.
Let this be remembered of young and old. It is not the pattering over of the
belief for a prayer, that will make a man a good believer, but God must be
known of us and acknowledged as he has revealed himself partly in his word
and partly in his creatures. Blind ignorance and the right use of the Apostles
Creed will never stand together. Therefore it stands men in hand to labor
and take pains to get knoweledge in religion, that knowing God aright, they
may come steadfastly to believe in him, and truly make confession of their
faith.

Thirdly, because we believe in God, therefore another duty is, to deny our
selves utterly, and to become nothing in our selves. Our Savior Christ
requires of us to become as little children, if we would believe. The beggar
depends not on the relief of others, till he find nothing at home: and till
our hearts be purged of self-love and pride, we cannot depend on the favor
and goodness of God. Therefore he that would trust in God, must first of all
be abased and confounded in himself, and in regard of himself be out of all
hope of attaining to the least spark of the grace of God.

Fourthly, in that we believe in God, and therefore put our whole trust and
assurance in him: we are taught, that every man must commit his body, his
soul, goods, life, yea all that he has into the hands of God, and to his
custody. So Paul says, ^. Tim. 1.12.
I am not ashamed of my sufferings, for I know whom I have believed, and am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against
that day. A worthy saying: for what is the thing which Paul committed unto the
Lord? it was his own soul and the eternal salvation thereof. But what mooues
him to trust God? surely his persuasion whereby he knew that God would keep
it. ^ Pet. 4.19.
And Peter says: Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit
their souls to him in well doing as unto a faithful creator. Look as one
friend lays down a thing to be kept of another, so must a man give that he
has to the custody of God. Few or none can practice this, and therefore when
any evil befalls them either in body or in goods, or any other way
whatsoever, then they presently show themselves rather beasts then men in
impatience. For in prosperity they had no care to put their trust in God, and
therefore in adversity when crosses come, they are void of comfort. But when a
man has grace to believe, and trust in God, then he commits all into Gods
hands: and though all the world should perish, yet he would not be dismayed.
And undoubtedly if a man will be thankful for the preservation of his goods,
or of his life, he must show the same by committing all he has into God
hands, and suffer himself to be ruled by him.

Now follows the consolations and comforts which Gods Church and children
reap hereby. He that believes in God, and takes God for his God, may assure
himself of salvation, and of a happy deliverance in all dangers and
necessities. When God threatened a plague upon Israel for their idolatry, ^
Chr. 34.27.
good King Josiah humbled himself before the Lord his God: ^ Chr.3^.
and he was safe all his days. And so King Hezekiah, when Senacherib the King
of Ashur offered to invade Judah, he trusted likewise in the Lord, and prayed
unto him, and was delivered. Whereby we see, if a man puts his whole trust in
God, he shall have security and quietness, ^ Chr. 20.20.
as Iehosaphat said to the men of Judah. And our Savior Christ when he was
upon the cross, and felt the whole burden of the terrible wrath of God upon
him, cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And it appears in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Hebr. 5.7.
that Christ was heard in that he feared: whereby we are given to understand,
that they shall never be utterly forsaken that take God for their God. And King
David having experience of this, Psalm. ^^.
uses most excellent speeches for this end, to show that the ground of his
comfort was, that God was his God. And it is said that Daniel had no manner of
hurt in the Lions den; Dan. 6.2^.
because he trusted in the Lord his God. And contrariwise, such as distrust God
are subject to all miseries and judgments. Psalm. 78.21,2^.
The Israelites in the wilderness believed not God, and trusted not in his
help, therefore God was angry, and his fire was kindled in Jacob, and wrath
came upon Israel.

God, the Father Almighty.] Some have thought that these words are to be
coupled to the former without distinction, as if the title of God had been
proper to the first person the Father, and not common to the rest^ and thus
have some heretics thought. But in deed there must a pause or distinction be
made, that the name or title of God may be set in the forefront, as common to
all the three persons following. For that is the very intent of the order of
this Creed, to teach us to believe in one God, who is distinct into three
subsistances or persons called the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. And
here offers it self to be considered even one of the greatest mysteries of
our religion: namely, that God is the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost:
and again, that the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are one and the same
God. Some at the first may possibly say, that this cannot stand, because it is
against all reason that one should be three, or three one. The answer is,
that indeed if one and the same respect be kept it is not possible, but in
diverse considerations and respects it may. And thus the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost are three, namely in person; and again, they three are one, not
in person but in nature. By nature is meant, a thing subsisting by it self,
that is common to many: as the substance of man consisting of body and soul
common to all men, which we call the humanity of a man, is the nature of man.
By person is meant, a thing or essence subsisting by it self, not common to
many, but incommunicable: as among men, these particulars, Peter, John, Paul,
are called persons. And so in the mystery of the Trinity, the divine nature
is the godhead it self simply and absolutely considered; and a person is that
which subsisteth in this Godhead, as the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
Or again, a person is one and the same godhead not absolutely considered, but
in relation, and as it were, restrained by personal or caracteristicall
proprieties: as the godhead or God begetting is the Father. God again
considered not simply but so far forth as he is begotten is the Son; and
God proceeding of the Father and the Son, the holy Ghost. And if any man
would conceive in mind rightly the divine nature, he must conceive God or the
godhead absolutely; if any of the persons, then he must conceive the same
godhead relatiuely with personal proprieties. Thus the godhead considered with
the propriety of fatherhoode or begetting is the father: and conceiving the
same godhead with the propriety of generation, we conceive the Son, and the
godhead with the propriety of proceeding, we conceive the holy Ghost. Neither
must it seem strange to any that we use the names of nature and person, to
set forth this mystery by: for they have been taken up by common consent in
the primitive Church, and that upon weighty consideration to manifest the
truth, and to stop the mouths of heretics: and they are not used against the
proper sense of the scriptures, nay they are therein Hebr. 1.3. Gal. 4.8.
contained. Thus we see how it comes to pass that the three things signified
by these names, Father, Son, holy Ghost, are each of them one and the same
God. And this mystery may well be conceived by a comparison borrowed from
light. The light of the sun, the light of the moon, and the light of the
air for nature and substance are one and the same light: and yet they are
three distinct lights. The light of the sun being of it self and from none,
the light of the moon from the sun, and the light of the air from them
both. So the divine nature is one, and the persons are three, subsisting after
a diverse manner in one and the same nature.

And for the further clearing of this point, we must yet further mark and
remember two things: namely, the union and the distinction of the persons. The
union is, whereby three persons are one not simply, but one in nature, that is,
coessentiall or co^substantiall; having all one godhead. For the Father is God,
the son is god, and the holy ghost is god: now there are not three distinct
Gods, but one God, because there is one God and no more in nature; considering
that the thing which is infinite is but one and is not subject to
multiplication: and the Father is this one God, as also the Son and the holy
Ghost. And as these three persons are one in nature, so whatsoever agrees to
God simply considered, agrees to them all three. They are all coequal and
coeternall: all most wise, just, merciful, omnipotent, by one and the same
wisdom, justice, mercy, power. And because they have all one godhead,
therefore they are not only one with another, but also each in other, the
Father, in the Son, and the Son in the Father, and the holy Ghost in them
both. And we must not imagine that these three are one God, as though the
Father had one part of the Godhead, the Son another part, and the holy Ghost
a third. For that is most false, because the infinite and the most simple
godhead is not subject to composition or division: but every person is whole
god, subsisting not in a part, but in the whole godhead: and the whole entire
godhead is communicate^ from the father to the sonne^ and from both father and
son to the holy Ghost. But some may yet say, that this doctrine seems to be
impossible; because three creatures, as for example, Peter, Paul, Timothy
being three persons and so remaining, cannot have one and the same nature,
that is, the same body and the same soul. Answ. Three or more men may have the
same nature Specie.
in kind, but the truth is, they cannot possibly have a nature which shall be one
and the same Numero.
in number, in them all three. For a man is a substance created and finite, and
the bodies of men are quantities, and therefore diuisible and separable one
from another. Hereupon it comes, that the persons of men are not only
distinguished by proprieties, but also divided and sundered one from another.
And though Peter, Paul, Timothy have all one common and universal form, yet
they three are not one man, but three men. Now it is otherwise with the divine
nature or godhead which is uncreated and infinite, and therefore admits neither
composition nor division, but a distinction without any seperatio^: so as the
three persons subsisting in it, shall not be three gods but one and the same God.

Yet further some will object, that it is truly said of the father, that he is
god, but the same godhead is not in the son, nor in the holy ghost; for the
son and the holy ghost have their beginning from the father. Ans. The son
and the holy ghost have not a beginning of their nature or of their godhead
from the Father, but of their person only: the person of the Son is from the
Father; and the person of the holy ghost is both from the father and from the
Son: but the godhead of all three persons is uncreate and unbegotten, and
proceeding from none. Yet some may say, both the son and the holy ghost have
received from the Father al their attributes, as wisdom, knowledge, power,
etc. Now he that receives any thing from another, is in that respect
inferior to him that gives it: and therefore the Son and the holy Ghost are
not God as he is. Ans. We must know, that, which the Son receives of the
Father, he receives it by nature, and not by grace: and he receives not a
part but all that the father has, saving the perso^all propriety. And the
holy ghost receives from the Father and the Son by nature, and not by grace:
and therefore though both the son and the holy Ghost receive from the Father,
yet they are not inferior to him, but equal with him. And thus much is both
necessary and profitable to be learned of the union between the three persons
in Trinity, whereby they being three have all one and the same godhead.

The second point to be considered is, that that though these three have but
one godhead, and all make but one God: yet they are distinguished one from
another: for the father is the father, and not the son, or the holy Ghost:
the son is the son, and not the father, nor the holy Ghost: and the holy
ghost is the holy ghost, not the father nor the son. This distinction of the
persons is notably set forth unto us in the baptism of our Savior Christ:
where it is said, that when Jesus was baptized, he came out of the water:
Math. 3. 16,17.
there is the second person: and the holy Ghost descended upon him in the form
of a dove; there is the third person: and the father the first person
pronounced from heaven, that he was his only beloved son in whom he was
well pleased. And we must conceive this distinction in such manner as though
these three, Father, Son, and holy Ghost were three names of one God. For the
three persons do not in name or word, but really in truth distinctly subsist
in the same divine nature. Neither must we imagine that the three persons are
three forms or differences of one God, as some heretics have dreamed, who
taught that the father alone is God, and that he is called a father in one
respect, the son in another, and the holy Ghost in a third. For this were
nothing else but to make the personal proprieties to be nothing but imaginary
accidents, which indeed, or at the least in man's conceit, might come and go,
and be either in the persons or forth of them. For the personal r^lations
though in (...)
mind they may be distinguished from the divine essence, yet (...).
indeed they are one with it. But some will say, if they make this
distinction, there is rather a quaternitie then a trinity: for the godhead is
one, the father an other, the son a third, and the holy Ghost a fourth. Thus
some heretics have objected against the distinction of the trinity: but it is
untrue which they say. For the godhead must not be severed from the Father, nor
from the Son, nor from the holy Ghost: for the father is God or the whole
godhead, so also is the son and the holy Ghost: and the godhead likewise is
in every one of these three persons, and every one of them subsisting in the
godhead, and the godhead must be conceived to be in them all, and not as a
fourth thing out of them. And therefore we must still m^intaine, that these
three persons are distinguished and not divided, as three men are divided in
being and substance: for this division can not be in them; because all three
have one dr^ine nature and one godhead. This is the mystery of all mysteries
to be received of us all, namely, the trinity of the persons in the unity of
the godhead. This form of doctrine must be retained and holden for these
causes: I. because by it we are able to distinguish this true God from all
false gods and idols. II. because among all other points of religion this is
one of the chiefest, being the very foundation thereof. For it is not
sufficient for us to know God as we can conceive of him in our own
imagination: but we must know him as he has revealed himself in his word. And
it is not sufficient to salvation to believe in God confusedly, but we must
believe in one God distinct into three persons, the Father, the Son, the holy
Ghost: yea and more then this, we must hold and believe that God the father is
our father, the Son our redeemer, the holy Ghost our sanctifier and
comforter. Well then, if we must in this manner believe in God, then we must
also know him: for we can have no faith in the thing which is utterly unknown.
Wherefore if we would believe in the father, son, or holy Ghost, we must know
them in part, Ioh. 17. This is life eternal to know thee the only God, and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Ioh. 14. 17. The world can not receive the
spirit of truth because it has neither seen him nor known him. 1. Ioh. 2.23.
Whosoever denies the son has not the father. Thirdly, this doctrine directs
us in worshipping God aright: for unity in trinity, and trinity in unity is
to be worshipped: one God must be worshipped in the Father, in the Son, and
in the holy Ghost: and if we worship God the father without the Son and the
holy Ghost: or if we worship the Son without the father and the holy Ghost:
and the holy Ghost without the father and the Son, we worship nothing but an
Idol. Again, if we worship the three persons not as one God, but as three
Gods, then likewise we make three Idols.

Note further, that of all the three persons, the first person the Father is
set in the first place, and described to us by three things: I. by his title
that he is a Father. II. by his attribute that he is Almighty. III. by his
effect, that he is maker of heaven and earth: of these in order as they lie in
the Creed. And first of the title [ Father.] It may seem that he has some
prerogative over the Son and the holy Ghost, because he is set before them:
but we must know, that he is set before them neither in regard of time^ nor
of dignity, for therein all three are equal; but in regard of order only.
The Father is the first, the Son the second, and the holy Ghost the third: as
may appear by this similitude. If three Emperors equal in dignity should
meet all in one place, being equal also in power and majesty, if all three
should sit down, though one be no better then an other; yet one of them must
needs sit down the first, and an other in the second place, and then the
third: but yet we cannot say, that he which sat down first is the chiefest.
And so it is in the Trinity, though none be greater or above another; yet the
Father is in the first place, not because he is before the Son, or the holy
Ghost in dignity or honor, but because he is the fountain of the Deity, the
Son being from him, and the holy Ghost from them both.

Now let us come to the title of the first person. The meaning
The name Father in Scriptures is ascribed either to God taken indefinitely,
and so by consequent to all the three persons in Trinity: or particularly to
the first person alone. For the first, God is a father properly and
principally, according to the saying of Christ, Math. 23.9.
Call no man father upon earth, for there is but one your father which is in
heaven: that is, principally: whereas earthly parents, whom we are commanded
to worship and honor are but certain images or resemblances of our heavenly
Father, having this blessing that they are fathers, from him. And hereupon this
title agrees to men, not simply, but so far forth as God honors them with
fatherhoode in calling them to be fathers, whereas God himself receives this
honor from none. God is termed a Father in respect both of nature and grace.
He is a father in regard of nature^ because he created and governs all
things. In this regard he is called the Heb. 12.9.
father of spirits, and Luke 3.38.
Adam is called the Son of God. He is a father in respect of grace, because
we are regenerate by him, and accepted to be his sonn^s by adoption thorough
the merit of Christ. And in this respect the second person as well as the
first is called Esa. 9.6.
a Father, and said to have an offspring Esa. 53.10.
or seed and Esa. 8.18.
children. But when the name of Father is given to the first person, it is done
upon a special consideration, because he is a father by nature to the fe(...)
^erson begetting him of his own substance before all worlds. By th^^ (...)
^^peares, that out of the title of the first person, we may fetch a ^^^cription
thereof on this manner. The Father is the first person in Trinity, begetting
the son. Now to beget is the personal propriety whereby he is
distinguished from the other two. If it be said that creatures do beget, and
that therefore to beget is not proper to the father: the answer is, that in
this point there are many differences between God the father and all
creatures. First the father begets the son before all eternity: and
therefore God the father begetting, and the son begotten are equal in t^me:
whereas in earthly generation the father is before the son in time. Secondly,
God the father begets his Son by communicating to him his whole essence or
godhead, which can not be in earthly parents unless they should be abolished
and come to nothing. Whereas nevertheless, God the Father giving his whole
nature to his son, retains the same still, because it is infinite. Thirdly,
the father begets the son in himself and not forth of himself: but in
earthly generation the father begetting is forth of the child, and the child
forth of the father. And that must not trouble us which heretics allege
against this doctrine, namely, that if the father who is of one nature with the
son, did beget the son, then he did beget himself: for the godhead of the
father does not beget either the godhead or the person of the son: but the
person of the father begets the person of the son, both which in one godhead
are really distinct.

Thus we see what the Father is. Now to believe in the father, is to be
persuaded, that the first person in Trinity, is the father of Christ, and in
him my father particularly, Ier. 3.4,19. Matthew. 6.4.
and that for this cause I intend and desire for ever to put my tru^t in him.

The duties which we may learn hence are manifold. And here we have occasion
offered first of all to consider who is our father by nature. I shall say to
corruption (says Job) thou art my father: and to the worm, thou art my
mother: Job 17.14.
seeing God vouchsafes this great prerogative to them that love him, that he
will be their father: therefore Job in consideration hereof would have every
man to have recourse to his own natural condition, to see who is his father
by nature^ Job says, corruption is his father: but if we mark well the
condition of our nature, we shall further see every man to be the child of
wrath, and that Satan is his father: for so long as a man walks in his sins
(which every man does by nature) so long does he show himself to be the
lively child of the devil. And thus Christ reasons against the Scribes and
Pharisees. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye
will do. Ioh. 8.44.
And true it is, that no child is so like his father that begat him, as every
man by nature is like the devil: and the whole tenor and course of his
natural life without grace is a lively resemblance of the disposition of
Satan. Secondly, every one that believes God to be a Father, and in Christ his
father, must as a good child be obedient to his fathers will. So Solomon says,
Prove. 10.1.
A wise son makes a glad father. How? by doing his will: and therefore when
one told our Savior Christ that his mother and brethren stood without,
desiring to speak with him, he said, Math. 12.50.
Whosoever shall do my fathers will which is in heaven, the same is my father,
my sister, and mother: where we may note, that he that will have God the father
to be his father, and Christ Jesus his brother, must do the will of God the
father. And hence God says, Mal. 1.6.
If I be a master, where is my fear? if I be a father, where is my honor?
Where is plainly taught this second duty; that if God be our father, then as
good children we must show obedience unto him: but if we disobey him, then we
must know, that that former saying of Christ will be verefied upon us: that
because men do the lusts of the devil, therefore they are the children of the
devil. But least this fearful sentence be verefied of us, it is the duty of
every man that makes this confession, that he believes God to be his father,
first to labor to know Gods will; and secondly, to perform continual
obedience unto the same: like unto a good child that would fain please his
father, and therefore is always ready to do the best he can. And without
doubt that man which unfeignedly takes God for his father, is then most grieved,
when as by any sin he displeases him, and no other cross or calamity is so
grievous unto him. The greatest grief that the prodigal son upon his
repentance had, was that he had offended his father by sinning against heaven,
and against him: the same also must be our grief: and all our care must be set
on this, to consider how we may be obedient children to this our loving father.
Thirdly, that man that believes God to be his father, must imitate and follow
him: for it is the will of God that his children should be like unto himself.
Now we follow God especially in two things. I. In doing good to them that
persecute us: so says our Savior Christ, Math. 5.45.
Pray for them that hurt you, that you may be the children of you, father which
is in heaven: for he makes the sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
sends rain on the just and unjust. II. Our heavenly father is merciful:
Psalm. 68.5.
for he is a father of the fatherless: and therefore he that will be a son
of this father, must be merciful to his poor brethren, as Job says of
himself, Job 29.1^,^6.
I was the eyes to the blind, and I was the feet unto the lame: I was a
father unto the poor. Fourthly, seeing we believe god to be our father, we are
hereby taught to use moderate care for the things of this life: for if a man
know himself to be the child of God, then he also knows that God will
provide for him, as we know in a family the father provides for all. Now God
is a father, and his Church is his family: therefore if thou will be a member
of Gods Church, and a child of God, thou must cast thy care on God, and follow
the counsel of Christ. Be not too careful for your life what ye shall eat,
or what ye shall drink. And mark his reason drawn from the point which we
have in hand. Math. 6.26.
The fowls of the heaven (says he) they neither sow nor reap, nor carry
into barnes: and yet your heavenly father feeds them: are ye not much better
then they. But alas, the practice of the world is contrary: for men have no
care for the knowledge of Gods word, nor the means of their salvation: all
their minds are set on the things of this life, when as Christ says, First
seek the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall be ministered unto you. If you should see a young man provide for
himself, and no man else for him, we would presently say, surely his father is
dead: even so, when a man's care is set wholly both day and night for the things
of this life, it argues that God has either cast him off, or else that he
takes him for no father of his. Fifthly, if God be our father, then we must
learn to bear any cross patiently that he shall lay upon us, either in body
or in mind, and always look for deliverance from him: for whom the Lord
loves, them he chastises: and if ye endure chastising (says the Apostle) God
offers himself unto you as unto children: Heb.12^^
which may appear more plainly by this comparison. If two children should
fight, and a man coming by, should part them, and after beat the one, and let
the other go free: every man that sees this will say, that that child which
he beats is his own son. Even so, when God chastises us, he shows
himself unto us as a father, if we submit our selves. Now if our earthly
fathers corrected us and we gave them reverence, taking it patiently: should we
not much rather be in subjection to the father of spirits that we may live.
Therefore the conclusion is this: if we displease God, be ye sure, he will
correct us; and when his hand is upon us we must not murmr against him, but
bear it with a mild spirit: and furthermore when we are under the cross, we
must always look for deliverance from this our father only. If a son when
he is beaten should flee to his fathers enemies for help and counsel; it
would argue that he were but a graceless child. Sundry and diverse calamities
and crosses befall men in this life, which they can not brook: and therefore
it is a common practice of many among us in th^se days, when Gods hand is upon
them, to go for help to the devil; they seek for counsel at witches and
wise men (as I have said) but let them look unto it, for that is the right way
to double their misery, and to show themselves lewd children. Lastly, if we
confess and believe God to be the father of Christ, and in him our father
also; then in regard of our conversation, we must not frame our selves like
unto the world: but the course of our lives must be in righteousness and true
holiness. 2. Cor. 6.18.
Paul exhorts the Corinthians to separate themselves from Idolaters,
alleging the place out of the old Testament, where the Lord bids the
Israelites to come out from Idolaters, and to touch no unclean thing: Isa.
52.11.
and the reason follows out of Jeremy, that if they do so, Ier. 3^.1.
then God will be their father, and they shall be his children, even his sons
and daughters: which reason Paul urges in the next chapter to this effect: 2.
Cor. ^.1.
considering we have these promises, that therefore we should cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and grow up unto
holiness in the fear of the Lord: where, if we mark the place diligently, we
shall find this lesson, that every man who takes God for his father, must not
only in this sin of Idolatry, but in all other sins separate himself,
that men by his godly life may know whose child he is. But some will say, this
exhortation is needless amongst us, for we have no cause to separate our
selves from others, because all among us are Christians, all believe in God and
are baptized, and hope to be saved by Christ. Answer. In outward profession, I
confess, we carry the show of Christians, but in deed and truth, by our
lives and conuersations, very many among us deny Christ: for in every place
the common practice is, to spend the time in drunkenness and surfeiting, in
chambering and wantonness: yea, great is the company of those that make a
trade of it: take this lewd conversation from many men, and take away their
lives. And on the Lords day it may be seen both publicly and privately, in
houses and in the open streets, there is such revel, as though there were no
God to serve. In the six days of the week, many men walk very painefully in
their callings: but when the Lords day comes, then every man takes license to
do what he will: and because of the Princes laws, men will come formally to
the Church for fashions sake: but in the mean time how many do nothing else
but scorn, mock, and deride, and as much as in them lies, disgrace both the
word and the ministers thereof? so that the common saying is this: oh he is a
precise fellow, he goes to hear Sermons, he is too holy for our company. But
it stands men in hand to take out a better lesson, which is, if we will have
God to be our father, we must show our selves to be the children of God by
repentance and newness of life: he can not be but a graceless child, that
will lead a rebellious life flat against his fathers mind. Let us then so
behave our selves, that we may honor our father which is in heaven, and not
dishonor him in our lives and callings: rather let us separate our selves from
the filthiness of the flesh, loathing those things which our father lotheth,
and fleeing from those things which our father abhors.

And thus much for the duties. Now follow the consolations which arise from
this point. But first we are to know that there are three sorts of men in the
world. The first are such as will neither hear nor obey the word of God. The
second sort are those which hear the word preached unto them but they will not
obey: both these sorts of men are not to look for any comfort hence. Now there
is a third sort of men, which as they hear Gods word; so they make conscience
of obeying the same in their lives and callings: and these are they to whom
the consolations that arise out of this place, do rightly belong, and must be
applied.

First therefore, seeing God the father of Christ, and in him the father of all
that obey and do his will, is our father, here note the dignity and
prerogative of all true believers: for they are sons and daughters of God,
Ioh. 1.12,
as says Saint John, So many as received him, to them he gave a prerogative to
be the sons of God: even to them that believe in his name. This privilege
will appear the greater if we consider our first estate; for as Abraham says,
Genesis 18.^7.
We are but dust and ashes, and in regard of the deprivation of our natures, we
are the children of the devil; therefore of such rebels to be made the sons
of God, it is a wonderful privilege and prerogative, and no dignity like
unto it. And to enlarge it further, he that is the son of God, is the brother
of Christ, and fellow heir with him; and so heir apparent to the kingdom of
heaven: and in this respect, is not inferior to the very angels. This must be
laid up carefully in the hearts of Gods people, to confirm them in their
conversation among the company of ungodly men in this world.

Secondly, if a man do endeavor himself to walk according to Gods word,
then the Lord of his mercy will bear with his wants: Mal. 3.17. Psalm. 103.13^
for as a father spares his own son, so will God spare them that fear him.
Now a father commandes his child to write or to apply his book: though all
things herein be not done according to his mind, yet if he find a readiness
with a good endeavor, he is content, and falls to praise his childs writing
or learning. So God gives his commandment, and though his servants fail in
obedience; yet if the Lord see their hearty endeavor, and their unfeigned
willingness to obey his will, though with sundry wants, he has made this
promise and will perform it, that as a father spares his son, so will he
spare them. If a child be sick, will the father cast him off? nay, if through
the grieuousnes of his sickness he can not take the meat that is given him,
or if he take it, and for faintness pick it up again, will the father of the
child thrust him out of doors? no: but he will rather pity him. And so when
a man does endeavor himself through the whole course of his life to keep
Gods commandments, God will not cast him away though through weakness he
fail in sundry things and displease God. This prerogative can none have, but
he that is the child of God: as for others when they sin, they do nothing
else but draw down Gods judgments upon them, for their deeper condemnation.

Thirdly hence we learn, that the child of God can not wholly fall away from
Gods favor, I do not say, that he cannot fall at all: for he may fall away in
part but he can not wholly. Indeed so often as he sins, he depriues himself
wholly of Gods favor as much as in him lies: yet god for his part still
keeps the mind and purpose of a father. David loved his son Absolon
wonderfully, but Absolon like a wicked son played a lewd pranck, and would
have thrust his father out of his kingdom: and David although he was sore
offended with Absolon, and showed tokens of his wrath, yet in heart he loved
him, and never purposed to cast him off. Herupon when he went against him, he
commanded the captains to entreat the young man Absolon gently for his sake. And
when he was hanged by the hair of the head in pursuing his father, the^ David
wept and cried, O my son Absolon, my son Absolon, would God I had died with
thee, Absolon my son. 2. Sam. 18.5.
And so it is with God our heavenly father, when his children sin against
him, and thereby loose his love and favor, and fall from grace, he forsakes
them: but how far? Surely he shows signs of anger for their wickedness, and
yet indeed his love remains toward them still: and this is a true
conclusion, the grace of God in the adoption of the elect is unchangeable, and
he that ^s the child of God can never fall away wholly or finally. On the
contrary, Torren. conf. A^gust.
that is a bad and comfortless opinion of the Church of Rome; which holds
that a man may be justified before God, and yet afterward by a mortal sin,
finally fall from grace and be condemned.

Fourthly, the child of God that takes God the father for his father, may
freely come into the presence of God, and have liberty to pray unto him. We
know it is a great privilege to come into the chamber of presence before an
earthly prince: and few can always have this prerogative though they be great
men: yet the kings own son may have free entrance, and speak freely unto
the king himself, because he is his son. Now the children of God have more
prerogative then this: for they may come into the presence, not of an earthly
king, but of Almighty God the King of kings, and as they are the sons of God
in Christ, so in him they may freely speak unto God their father by prayer.
And this overthrows the doctrine of such as be of the Church of Rome, which
teach and hold, that a man must come to speak to God by by prayer through the
intercession of Saints: for say they, the presence of God is so glorious, that
we may not be so bold, as of our selves to speak unto him; but needs must
have the intercession of others.

Lastly, God will provide for all his Church and children all things needful
both for their bodies and souls: so our Savior Christ bids his disciples take
no thought what they should eat, or what they should drink, or wherewith they
should be clothed, adding this reason, for your heavenly Father knows all
your wants. And if we take thought, it must be moderate, and not distrustful:
it is a part of the fathers duty to provide for his family and children, and
not the children for the father. Now shall an earthly father have this care for
his children: and shall not our heavenly father much more provide for those
that fear and love him? Nay mark further, in Gods Church there be many
hypocrites which receive infinite benefits from God, by reason of his elect
children with whom they live: and we shall see this to be true, that the
wicked man has ever fared better for the godly man's cause. Sodom and Gomorrha
received many benefits by reason of righteous Lot: and when the Lord was
purposed to destroy Sodom, he was feign to pull Lot forth of the city: Genesis ^9
22.
for the text says the Angel of the Lord could not do any thing till he was
come out of it. So also in Paul's dangerous voyage toward Rome, all the men in
it fared better for Paul's company: for the Lord told Paul by an angel, that
there should be no loss of any man's life, Act. 27.24.
for the Lord had given to him all that sailed with him. And undoubtedly if it
were not for some few that fear God, he would power down his vengeance upon
many nations and kingdoms, there is such excess of wickedness in all sorts.
Again, if the Lord do thus carefully provide for his children all kind of
benefits; what a wonderful wickedness is this, for men to get their living by
ungodly means: as usury, carding, dicing, and such like exercises. If a man
were persuaded that God were his father, and would provide sufficiently both
for his body and soul; so that using lawful means he should eue^ have
enough: out of all doubt he would never after the fashion of the world use
unlawful and profane means to get a living. But this proves, that
howesoeuer such men say, God is their father, yet indeed they deny him.

And thus much of (...) ti^le, Father, the first thing whereby the first person
is described. Now follows the second point, namely his attribute of
omnipotency in the word almighty. And whereas the father is said to be
almighty, it is not so to b^ understood as though the Son were not
almighty, or the holy ghost no^ ^lmightie: for every property and attribute
(save the personal properties) is c^mmo^ to all the three persons. For as God
the father does impart his godhead unto the son, and to the holy ghost, so
does he communicate the propriet^es of the godhead to them also.

God is omnipotent two ways: I. Because he is able to do whatsoever he
will. II. Because he is able to do more then he will do. For the first, that
god is able to do whatsoever he will, David says: Our God is in heaven, and
he does whatsoever he will: for there is nothing that can hinder God; but as he
wills, so every thing is done. Secondly, that God can do more then he
wills to be done, it is plain where John Baptist says: Mat. 3.9.
God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham: for though God
can do thus much, yet he will not do it. So likewise when Christ was
betrayed, the Father could have given him more then 12. legions of angels to
have delivered him out of their hands, but yet he would not: and the like may
be said of many other things. The father is and was able to have created
another world, yea a thousand worlds; but he would not, nor will not. And
likewise Christ being upon the cross, was able at their bidding to have come
down, and saved himself from death; but he would not: and therefore this is
true, the Lord can do any thing that he wills to be done actually, yea and
more then he will. But some will say, God can not do some things which man can
do, as God cannot lie, nor deny himself: Tit. 12. 2. Tim. 2.13.
and therefore he is not omnipotent. Answer. Although some have thought that
God could do even these things, and that he did them not, because he would
not: yet we must know and believe that God can neither lie, nor deny
himself: indeed man can do both, but these and many other such things if God
could do them, he could not be God. God indeed can do all things which
show forth his glory and majesty: but such things as are against his nature,
he cannot doe^ as for example: God can not sin, and therefore cannot li^: and
because he cannot do these things, for this very cause he is omnipotent: for
these and such like, are works of impotencie: which if god could do, he
should even by his own word be judged impotent. Secondly, he cannot do that
which implies contradiction: as when a thing is, to make it at the same time to
be, and not to be: as when the Sun does shine, to make it at the same instant
to shine and not to shine. And therefore false is the doctrine of the church,
which in their transubsta^tiation make the body of Christ, (whose essential
property is to be only in one place at once) to be circumscribed, and not to
be circumscribed: to be in one place, and not to be in one place.

And thus much for the meaning. Now follow the duties whereunto we are moved
by this doctrine, of Gods omnipotency.

First, whereas God the father is said to be almighty, we are taught true
humiliation: ^. P^t. 5.6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, says Peter: where he gives
an exhortation to humility, and alleges the cause, because God is
almighty. To make this more plain. Every one of us was borne in sin, and by
nature we are most wretched in our selves: now what an one is God? Surely he is
able to do whatsoever he will, yea and more then he will, and is able to
destroy such as rebel against him every moment. Therefore our duty is, to
cast down our selves for our sins in his presence. This true humiliation was
that which our Savior Christ would have brought the young man in the Gospel
unto, when he bade him go sell all that he had and give to the poor.
Therefore whosoever thou art, take heed thou must: for if thou run on in thy
wickedness, and still rebel against God, it is a thousand to one at length he
will destroy thee. For he is an almighty God, and able to do whatsoever he
will: his hand is mighty, it boots not a man to strive with him: for he was
never yet ouermastered, and for this cause we must needs ^ast down our selves
under his hand. It is a fearful thing (says the holy Ghost) to fall into the
hands of the living God: Heb. 10.32.
therefore if we would e^cape his heavy and terrible displeasure, the best
way for us is, to abase our selves, and be ashamed to follow our sins.
Christ bids us not to fear him that is able to kill the body, and can go
no further: but we must fear him that is able to cast both body and soul
into hell fire. Man. 10.28.
Example of this we have in David, who when he was persecuted by his own son
Absolon, he said unto the Lord, If he thus say, I have no delight in thee,
behold here I am, let him do to me as seems good in his eyes. 2. Sam. 15.26.
But some will say, I will live a little longer in my sins, in lying, pride,
Sabbath breaking, in swearing, dicing, gaming, and wantonness: for God is
merciful, and in my old age I will repent. Ans. Well, soothe not thy self:
but mark, usually when God holds back his hand for a season, he does as it
were fetch a more mighty blow, for the greater confusion of a rebellious
sinner; therefore humble, submit, and cast down thy self before God, and do
not strive against him: his hand is mighty, and will overthrow thee. Though
thou had all learning, wisdom, might, riches, etc. yet (as Christ said to
the young man) one thing is wanting, that thou should be humbled; and
until thou be humbled, nothing is to be looked for but Gods judgment for
sin,

Secondly seeing God is almighty; we must tremble and fear at all his
judgments, we must stand in awe, quake, and quiver at them, as the poor
child does, when he sees his father come with the rod. Example of this we
have often in Gods word; as when the sons of Aaron offered strange fire
before the Lord, he sent fire from heaven, and burned them up. And though Aaron
was very sorry for his sons: yet when Moses told him, that the Lord would be
glorified in all that came near him, then the text says, Aaron held his
peace. Lev. 10.^.
So also we read that the Apostles reproved Peter, for preaching unto the
Gentiles: but when Peter had expounded the things in order which he had seen,
then they held their peace, and glorified God. Act. 11.18.
As also David says: I held my tongue O Lord, because thou did it. Isaiah
says, Psalm. 19.10. Isai. 50.
In hope and silence is true fortitude. If a man be in trouble he must hope for
deliverance, and be quiet and patient at Gods judgments. But the practice of
the world is flat contrary. For men are so far from trembling at them, that
they use to pray to god that plagues, curses, and vengeance may light upon
them, and upon their servants and children. Now the Lord being a mighty God,
often does answerably bring his judgments upon them. Again, many carried with
impatiencie wish themselves hanged or drowned: which evils they think shall
never befall them: yet at the length God does in his justice bring such
punishments upon them according as they wished. And (which is more) in all ages
there have been some which have scorned and mocked at Gods judgments. Hereof
we had not far hence a most fearful example. One being with his companion in
a house drinking on the Lords day, when he was ready to depart thence, there
was great lightening and thunder: whereupon his fellow requested him to stay,
but the man mocking and jesting at the thunder and lightning, said (as report
was) it was nothing but a knave cooper knocking on his tubbes, Anno 1592. in
Cambridge shiere.
come what would, he would go; and so went on his journey: but before he
came half a mile from the house, the same hand of the Lord which before he had
mocked, in a crack of thunder stroke him about the girdlestead, that he fell
down stark dead. Which example is worthy our remembrance, to put us in mind
of Gods heavy wrath against those which scorn his judgments: for our duty is
to tremble and fear: and it were greatly to be wished, that we could with
open eye behold the terriblenesse and fearfulness of Gods judgments: it
would make a man to quake and to leave off sin. If a man pass by some high
and dangerous place in the night when he cannot see, he is not affraide; but
if ye bring him back again in the day, and let him see what a steep and
dangerous way he came, he will not be persuaded to pass the same way again
for any thing: so it is in sinning: for men living in ignorance and
blindness, practice any wickedness, and do not care for Gods judgments:
but when God of his goodness brings them back, and opens their eyes to
see the downfall to the pit of hell, and the judgments of God due to their
sins: then (they say) they will never sin as they have done, but become new
men, and walk in the way to eternal life.

Thirdly, we are taught by the Apostle Paul, that if we be to do any duty to
our brethren, as to relieve them, we must do it with cheerfulness: for he
labors to persuade the Corinthians to cheerful liberality; and the reason
of his persuasion is, because God is able to make all grace to abound toward
them. 1. Cor 9.7,8.
Where also this duty is taught us, that seeing God is omnipotent, and
therefore able to make us abound, therefore we must give cheerfully to our
poor brethren which want.

Fourthly, whereas there are many in every place, which have lived long in
their sins, even from their cradle; some in wantonness, some in drunkenness,
some in swearing, some in idleness, and such like: out of this place to all
such there is a good lesson, namely that every one of them do now become new
men, and repent of all their sins, for all their life past. For mark what
Paul says of the Jews which are cut off from Christ through unbelief, and
have so continued in hardness of heart, and desperate malice against him,
almost 16. hundredth years: Romans 11.^3.
If (says he) they abide not still in unbelief, they may be grafted into
their olive again: and his reason is this, because God is able to graft them
in again. Even so though we have lived many years in sin, (and sure it is
a dangerous and fearful case for a man to live 20.30. or 40. years under
the power of the devil;) yet we must know that if we will now live a new
life, forsake all our sins and turn to God, we may be received to grace,
and be made a branch of the true olive, though we have borne the fruits of the
wild olive all our life long. But some will object, that they have no hope of
Gods favor, because they have been so grievous sinners, and continued in them
so long. Ans. But know it, whosoever thou art, God is able to graft thee in;
and if thou repent, he will receive thee to his love and favor. This must be
observed of all, but especially of such as are old in years, and yet remain
ignorant without knowledge; they must turn to the Lord by repentance:
otherwise, if they continue still profane and impenitent, they must know this,
that their damnation comes post have to meet them, and they to it.

And thus much for the duties. Now follow the consolations which Gods Church
reap from this, that God the father is omnipotent. First, the wonderful power
of God serves to strengthen us in prayer unto God; for he that will pray
truly, must only pray for those things for which he has warrant in Gods
word: all our prayers must be made in faith, and for a man to pray in faith,
it is hard: therefore a special means to strengthen us herein, is the mighty
power of God. This was the ground and stay of the leper whom our Savior Christ
cleansed: Mat. ^.
Lord (says he) if thou will thou can make me clean. And in the Lords
prayer, when our Savior Christ has taught us to make six petitions; in the
end he gives us a reason, or motive to induce us to stand upon, and to wait
for the benefits before craved, in these words: Thine is the kingdom, thine
is the power, etc.

Secondly, hence we learn this comfort, that all the gates of hell shall
never be able to prevail against the least member of Christ. I do not say
they shall never be able to assault, or tempt them, for that may be: but they
shall never overcome them. How (will some say) may we be resolved of this? I
answer, By reason of faith: for if a Christian man do believe that God the
father, and in Christ his father, is almighty, no enemy shall ever be able to
prevail against him. ^. Ioh. ^.^.
So S. John reasons: Little children, ye are of God, and have overcome them,
that is, all false teachers, because greater is he that is in you, that is,
Christ Jesus by his holy spirit, who is God, and therefore almighty, then he
that is in the world, that is, the spirit of satan: therefore you need not to
fear. So David compares himself to a silly sheep, and says: Though I
should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23.
that is, as it were in the mouth of the lion, yet I will fear none evil: why
so? because the Lord is with him: thy rod (says he) and thy staff comfort
me.

Thus much for the benefits. Now whereas it is said the first person is a
Father, as also Almighty: join these two together, and hence will arise
singular benefits and instructions. First, whereas we are taught to confess,
that the first person is a Father Almighty, we and every man must learn to
have experience in himself, of the mighty power of this almighty father.
Why, will some say, that is nothing, for the devil and all the damned souls
feel the power of the Almighty? True indeed they feel the power of God,
namely, as he is an almighty. Judge condemning them; but they feel not the
power of an almighty father: this is the point whereof we must endeavor to
have experience in our selves. Ephesians. 1.19.
Paul prays that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the father of glory, would
give unto the Ephesians the spirit of wisdom, to see what is the exceeding
greatness of his power in them which believe, according to the working of his
mighty power which he wrought in Christ. Which place must be considered: for
here the Apostle would have us have such a special manifestation of Gods power
in our selves, like to that which he did once show forth in Christ. But how did
Christ see and find the power of God as he was man^ Answer. Diverse ways: I.
On the cross he died the first death; which is the separation of body and
soul: and he suffered the sorrows of the second death. For in his soul he
bare the whole wrath of God, and all the pangs of hell, and after was buried
and laid in the grave, where death triumphed over him for the space of three
days. Now in this extremity God did show his power, in that he raised
Christ from death to life. And look as his power was manifested in Christ the
head: so must it be manifested in all his members: for every man has his
grave, which is natural sin and corruption, which we draw from our first
parents, and look as a man lies dead in the grave, and can move neither hand
nor foot: so every man by nature lies dead in sin. Now as God did show his
power in raising Christ from death: so every one must labor to have this
knowledge and experience in himself of the mighty power of God, in raising
him from the grave of sin to newness of life. For thus Paul makes a special
request, that he might know Christ, and the virtue of his resurrection, Phil.
3.10.
that is, that he might feel in himself that power whereby Christ was raised
from death to life, to raise him also from the bondage of his sins to a new
life more and more. Furthermore, when Christ was upon the cross, and all the
gates of hell were open against him, then did he vanquish Satan; he bruised the
serpents head, and as Paul says, Col. 2.15.
he spoiled principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly, and has
triumphed over them in the cross: he overcame the devil and all his angels by
the power of his almighty father, and by his own power as he is God. And even
so must Christian men labor to find the same power in themselves of this
almighty father by which Christ did triumph over Satan: that by it they may
tread him under their feet, which men can never do by any power in
themselves. Again, Christ prays that that cup might pass from him: and yet
he says: Luke 22.42.
Not my will, but thy will be fulfilled. For it was necessary that Christ
should suffer. And this request was heard, not because he was freed from death,
but because God his father Almighty gave him power and strength in his manhood
to bear the brunt of his indignation. Now look as this power was effectual
in Christ Jesus the head, to make him able and sufficient to bear the pangs of
hell: so the same power of God, is in some measure effectual in all the members
of Christ, to make them both patient, and of sufficient strength to bear any
affliction, as Saint Paul says: Coloss. ^.11.
being strengthened with all might through his glorious power unto all
patience and long suffering with ioifulnesse. And this is a notable point which
every one ought to learn: that whereas they confess God to be their Almighty
father, they should herewithall labor to feel and have experience in
themselves, that he is almighty in the beginning and continuing of grace unto
them, and in giving them power and patience to suffer afflictions. Ephesians. 1.20,21.
Further, Christ Jesus when the work of our redemption was accomplished, was
lifted up into heaven, and set at the right hand of God in heavenly places,
far above all principalities and powers, etc. even by the power of his
father: well, as this power was made manifest in the head: so must it be in
the members thereof. Every child of God shall hereafter see and feel in
himself the same power, to translate him from this vale of misery in this
life, to the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore to conclude, we have great cause to
be thankful and to praise God for this privilege, that he shows his
power in his children in regenerating the^, in making them die unto sin, and to
stand against the gates of hell, and to suffer afflictions patiently: as also
that he translates them from death to life. And every one should show his
thankfulness in laboring to have experience of this power in himself, as
Paul exhorts us in his Epistles to the Colossians and Ephesians: yea, read
all his epistles, and we shall find he mentions no point so often as this,
namely the mighty power of God, manifested first in Christ, and secondly in his
members: Phil. 3.10
and he accounts all things loss that he might know Christ, and the virtue
of his resurrection. This point is the rather to be marked, because his power
in the matter of grace is not to be seen with eye; and few there be in
respect that have felt the virtue thereof in themselves: for the devil does
mightily show his contrary power in the greatest part of the world, in
carrying them to sin and wickedness.

Romans 8.28.
Secondly, hence we learn that which Paul teaches, namely to know that all
things work together for the best unto them that love God. God is almighty,
and therefore able to do whatsoever he will: he is also a father, and
therefore is willing to do that which is for our good. But some will say, we
are subject to many crosses, yea to sin: what? can our sins turn to our
good? Ans. If God almighty be thy father, he will turn thine afflictions, yea
thy sins which by nature are evil, beyond all expectation unto thy salvation.
And thus much God will do to all such as be obedient unto him: yet no man must
hereupon presume to sin.

Thirdly, whereas we believe that God is a mighty father, it serves to
confirm gods children in the promises of mercy revealed in his word. The
chiefest whereof is, that if men will turn from their sins, and believe in
Christ, they shall not perish but have life everlasting. I know some men will
make it an easy thing to believe, especially those which never knew what
faith meant. But such persons need no means of confirmation of faith:
therefore let all those which have tasted of the hardness of attaining unto it,
learn how to establish their wavering hearts in the promises of God, by the
consideration of these two points: God is a father, and therefore he is
willing: he is also almighty, and therefore he is able to perform his
promises. He that will be truly resolved of Gods promises, must have both
these settled in his heart, and build on them as on two foundations.

It follows, Creator of heaven and earth] We have spoken of the title of the
first person, and of his attributes: now we come to speak of his effect,
namely the creation: but before we come to it, we are to answer a certain
objection which may be made. At the first it may seem strange to some, that
the work of creation is ascribed to the first person in Trinity the father:
whereas in the Scripture it is common to them all three equally. And first that
the father is Creator, it was never doubted: as for the second person the
Son, that he is Creator, it is evident: All things are made by it, Ioh. 1.3.
that is, by the Son, who is the substantial word of the father, and
without it was made nothing that was made. And again it is said, that God by
his son made the world. Heb. 1.2.
As for the holy Ghost, the work of creation is also ascribed unto him: and
therefore Moses says, Genesis 1.2.
The spirit moved upon the waters: and Job says, His spirit has garnished
the heavens. How then is this peculiar to the father, being common to all the
three persons in trinity? I answer, The actions of God are twofold: either
inward, or outward. The inward actions are those, which one person does
exercise toward another: as the father does beget the son, and this is an
inward action peculiar to the father: and all inward actions are proper to the
persons from whom they are. So the Son does receive the Godhead by
communication from the Father: and the holy Ghost from them both: and these are
inward actions peculiar to these persons. So likewise, for the father to send
his son, it is an inward action proper to the father and cannot be
communicated to the holy ghost: and the son to be sent by the father only
is a thing proper to the Son, and not common to the father, or to the holy
Ghost. Now outward actions are the actions of the persons in the Trinity to
the creatures: as the work of creation, the work of preservation, and of
redemption. These and all such actions are common to all the three persons: the
father creates, the son creates, and the holy Ghost creates: and so we may
say of the works of government, and of redemption, and of all outward actions
of the persons to the creatures. But some again may say, how then can the
work of creation, being an outward action of God to the creature, be peculiar
to the first person the father? I answer, the work of creation is not so
proper to the first person the father, as that it cannot also be common to the
rest: for all the three persons jointly created all things of nothing; only
they are distinguished in the manner of creating. For the father is the cause
that begins the work, the son puts it in execution, the holy ghost is the
finisher of it. And again, the father creates by the (...) cap. 16. ^ Colo^s.
1.16. ^om. 11.^6.
son; and by the holy ghost: the son creates by the holy ghost, and from
the father: the holy ghost creates not by the father, nor by the son; but
from the father and the son. And this is the reason why the work of creation
is ascribed here unto the father, because he alone creates after a peculiar
manner, namely by the son, and by the holy Ghost: but the Son and the holy
Ghost create not by the father but from him.

Thus having answered the objection, we come to speak of the creation it
self. In handling whereof, we must withal treat of the Counsel of God, as
being the cause thereof, and of the Government of the creatures, as being a
work of God whereby he continunes the creation. And the order which I will
observe, is first to speak of the Counsel of God, and secondly of the
exequution of his Counsel, which has two special branches, the first the
creation, the second the preservation or government of things created.

The Counsel of God, is his eternal and unchangeable decree, whereby he has
ordained all things either past, present, or to come, for his own glory.
First I call it a decree, because God has in it set down with himself and
appointed as sovereign Lord, what shall be, what shall not be. I add
further, that all things whatsoever come under the compass of this decree; as
Paul says, He works all things according to the counsel of his will. And
our Savior Christ says, that a sparrowe cannot fall on the ground without the
heavenly father: Ephesians. 1.11. Math. 10.29.
yea further, he tells his disciples, that the very hairs of their heads are
numbered, ver. 30.
meaning that they are known and set down in the counsel of God. And
considering that God is King of heaven and earth; and that most wise, yea
wisdom it self; and most mighty, yea might and power it self: it must
needs be that he has determined how all things shall come to pass in his
kingdom, with all their circumstances, time, place, causes, etc. in such
particular manner, that the very least thing that may be, is not left
vnappointed and undisposed.

The counsel of God, has two properties, eternity, and vnchaungeablenes. It
is eternal, because it was set down by God from everlasting before all times,
as Paul says, God has chosen the Ephesians to salvation before all worlds.
Ephesians. 1.4. 2. Tim. 1.9.
And he says of himself, that he was called according to the purpose of God,
which was before all worlds. Again, the same counsel once set down, is
unchangeable. Mal. 3.6. Iam. 1.17.
God says, I am Jehovah, and I change not. With God (says S. James) there is
no variableness, nor shadow of change. Now such as God is, such is his
decree or counsel. And being unchangeable, his counsels also are unchangeable.

Gods counsel has two parts: his foreknoweledge, and his will or pleasure. His
foreknowledge, whereby he did foresee all things which were to come. His will,
whereby in a general manner he wills and ordaines whatsoever is to come to
pass: and therefore such things as God altogether nilleth, cannot come to
pass. Now these two-parts of the counsel of God must be joined together, and
not severed. Will without knowledge is impotent, and foreknowledge without will
is idle. And therefore such as hold that God does barely foresee sundry
things to come, no manner of way either willing or decreeing the issue and
event of them, do bring in little better then Atheism. For if we say that any
thing comes to pass either against Gods will, or God not knowing of it, or not
regarding it, we shall make him either impotent or careless, and raze the very
foundation of Gods providence.

And this decree of God must be conceived of us as the most general cause of
all things subsisting: being first in order having all other causes under it,
and most principal, ouerruling all, ouerruled by none.

Thus we see what is to be held touching Gods counsel: now for the better
clearing of the truth, three objections of some difficulty are to be
answered. First may some man say, if God decree and ordain all things
whatsoever, then he decrees and ordains sin: but God decrees not sin in
as much as it is against his will: and therefore he decrees not all things.
Ans. We use not to say that God does simply will or decree sin, but only in
part, adding withal these caueats: I. That God wills and decrees sin, not
properly as it is sin, but as it has in it sundry regards and respects of
goodness, so farforth as it is a punishment, or chastisement, or trial, or
action, or Quatenus habet rationem entis, non quatenus hab^t rationem de^e^us.
has any existence in nature. II. God can so use evil instruments, that the
work done by them being a sin, shall nevertheless in him be a good work:
because he knows how to use evil instruments well. If it be further
alleged, that God wills no wickedness, Psalm. 5.5. we must know, that Gods
will is two-folde, general, and special. General, whereby God wills and
decrees that a thing shall be: and by this kind of will he may be said to
will sin; and that without sin. For though he decree it thus, yet does he
not instill wickedness into the heart of any sinner, and his decree is only
for a most excellent end. For in regard of God which decrees, it Bonum est vt
f^^ malum. Aug. ^uchir. ad Laur. c. 10^.
is good that there should be evil. To this purpose Augustine says
excellently, By an unspeakable manner it comes to pass, that that which is
against Gods will, is not without his will. Voluntate permi^^i^a vul^^ app
oba^tiua non vuit.
Now the special will of God is that whereby he wills any thing in such
manner, that he approoueth it, and delights in it. And thus indeed we cannot
say without blasphemy, that god wills sin. Thus then we see in what manner
and how farforth God may be said to decree sin, that is, to will and appoint
the permission of it.

Again it may be objected thus. If all things be determined by the
unchangeable decree of God, then all things come to pass by an unchangeable
necessity: and men in their actions have no freewill at all, or liberty in
doing any thing. Answer. This must be learned as a certain rule, that the
necessary decree of God, does not abolish the nature of the second causes, and
impose necessity upon the will of man, but only order and incline it without
any constraint, to one part. As for example: when a people is gathered together
to hear gods word, there is none of them but they know that they come thither
by Gods providence (and In that respect necessarily) yet before they come, they
had all freedom and liberty in themselves to come or not to come: and Gods
eternal counsel did not hinder the liberty of our wills, in coming or not
coming, nor take away the same: but only incline and turn them to the choice
of one part. An other example hereof we may have in our Savior Christ, whose
state and condition of body, if we regard, he might have lived longer: yet by
the eternal counsel of God, he must die at that place, at that time, at that
hour where and when he died. Whereby we may see, that Gods counsel does not
hinder the will of man; but only order and dispose it. Which answer being well
marked, we shall see these two will stand together: the necessary and
unchangeable counsel of God, and the free will of man. And again, that the
same action may be both necessary and contingent: necessary in regard of the
highest cause, the counsel of God; not necessary but contingent in respect of
the second causes, as among the rest, the will of man.

Thirdly, some will yet object against this doctrine, that if all things come
to pass according to Gods unchangeable decree, then what needs the using of
any means? what needs the preaching of the word, and receiving of the
Sacraments? what needs any laws, Princes, Magistrates, or government? what
needs walking in men's ordinary callings? all is to no end: for let men play
or work, sleep, or wake; let them do what they will: all is one: for Gods
eternal counsel must needs come to pass: therefore it may seem in vain
for men to busy themselves about such things. Answ. But we must know, that as
God has appointed all things to come to pass in his eternal and unchangeable
counsel; so in the same decree, he has together set down the means and
ways whereby he will have the same things brought to pass: for these two must
never be severed; the thing to be done, and the means whereby it is done. We
may read in the Acts in Paul's dangerous voyage toward Rome, and Angel of the
Lord told Paul, Act. ^.^.
that God had given him all that sailed with him in the ship: now the
soldiers and mariners hearing this, might reason thus with themselves: Seeing
God has decreed to save us all, we may do what we will, there is no danger,
for we shall all come to land alive: but mark what Paul says, verse. 31.
except these abide in the ship, ye can not be safe: where we see, that as it
was the eternal counsel of God to save Paul, and all that were with him: so
he decreed to save all by this particular means of their abode in the ship.
King Ezechias was restored to his health, 2. King. 20.
and received from God a promise that he should have 15. years added to his
days, and the promise was confirmed by sign: now, what does he? cast off all
means? no: but as he was prescribed, so he applies a bunch of dry figs to
his sore, and uses still his ordinary diet. Therefore it is gross ignorance
and madness in men to reason so against Gods decree; God in his unchangeable
counsel, has decreed and set down all things how they shall be; therefore I
will use no means, but live as I list: nay rather we must say the contrary;
because God has decreed this thing or that to be done: therefore I will use
the means which God has appointed to bring the same to pass.

Now follows the Creation, which is nothing else but a work of the blessed
Trinity, forming and framing his creatures which were not before, and that of
nothing. The points to be known concerning the creation are many. The first
is, the thing by which God did begin and finish the creation. And we must
understand, that at the first God made all things, without any instrument or
means, and not as men do which bring to pass their business by servants and
helps; but only by his word and commandment: as the Psalmist says, He
commanded, and all things were made. Psalm. 148.^. Genesis 13.
In the beginning God said, Let there be light, and there was light: and by
the same means was the creation of every creature following. The very power of
the word etcommandement of God was such, as by it that thing was made and had a
being, which before was not. It may be demanded, what word this was by which
God is said to make all things. Answ. The word of God in Scripture is taken
three ways: for the substantial word, for the sounding or written word, for
the operative or powerful word. The substantial word, is the second person
begotten of the substance of the father. Now howsoever it be true, that God the
father did create all things by his word, that is, by his Son: yet does it
not seem to be true that by these words [ God said, let there be, this or
that] that the Son is meant. For that word which God gave out in the creation
was in time, whereas the Son is the word of the father before all times: and
again, it is a word common to the three persons equally, whereas the Son is
the word of the father only. Furthermore, it is not like that it was any
sounding word standing of letters and syllables, and uttered to the creatures
after the usual manner of men, that was the cause of them: Hebr. 1.3.
it remains therefore that all things were made by the operative word, which is
nothing but the pleasure, will, and appointment of God, and is more powerful
to bring a thing to pass then all the means in the world beside. For Gods
willing of any thing is his effecting and doing of it. And this is proved by
David, when he says, He spoke the word, and they were made: he commanded, and
they were created. Hence we must take out a special lesson, needful to be
learned of every man. Look what power God used and showed in making the
creatures when they were not, the same power he both can and will show forth in
recreating and redeeming sinful men by the precious blood of Christ. Psalm.
51.10.
By his word he created man's heart when it was not; and he can and will as
easily create in us all new hearts, specially when we use the good means
appointed for that end. As, when Christ said to dead Lazarus, Ioh. 11.44^
Lazarus come forth, he arose and came forth of his grave, though bound hand
and foot: so when the Lord speaks to our dead hearts by his word and spirit, we
shall rise forth of the graves of our sins etcorruptions. In the creation of
the great world, God said let there be light, and presently darkness gave
place: and the same he can do to the little world, that is, to man. We are by
nature darkness, and let God but speak to our blind understandings, our
ignorance shall depart, and we shall be enlightened with the knowledge of the
true God and of his will: as Paul says, 1. Cor. 4.6^
God that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, is he which has
shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, God made all creatures, without motion, labor, or defatigation: for
his very bidding of the work to be done, was the doing of it. And this thing
no creature can do, but God only, though unto Adam labor was without pain
before the fall.

Thirdly, the matter and the first beginning of all creatures was nothing, that
is, all things were made, when as there was nothing whereof they might be made,
as Paul says, Romans 4.17^.
God calls those things which be not, as though they were. And indeed in the
first creation, all things must be made either of the essence of God or of
nothing: but a creature can not be made of the essence of God, for it has no
parts, it is not diuisible: and therefore God made all things that were made
out of himself or his own essence: the conclusion then is, that the framing
of the creatures in the beginning, was not of any matter, but of nothing,
because before the creation, out of God there was nothing. This must teach us
to humble our selves. Many there be that stand upon their ancestors: but let
them here look whence they came first, namely, as Abraham says of himself,
of dust and ashes. And what was this dust and ashes made of? surely of nothing:
wherefore every man's first beginning is of nothing. Well then, such men as are
carried away with their pedigree and descent, if they look well into it, they
shall find small cause to boast or brag. And this consideration of our first
beginning must move us to true humiliation in our selves.

Fourthly, God in framing his creatures, in the beginning made them good; yea
very good. Now the goodness of the creature is nothing else, but the perfect
estate of the creature, whereby it was conformable to the will and mind of the
Creator allowing and approouing of it when he had made it: for a creature is
not first good, and then approved of God: but because it is approved of God,
therefore it is good. But wherein, will some say, stands this goodness of the
creature? I an^wer, in three things: I. in the comelines, beauty, and glory
of every work in his kind both in form and constitution of the matter. II. In
the excellency of the virtue which God has given to it: for as he has
appointed every creature for some especial end, so he has fitted and
furnished it with sufficient power and virtue for the accomplishing of the same
end. III. In the exceeding benefit and profitablenesse that came by them to
man. But since the fall of man this goodness of the creature is partly corrupted
and partly diminished. Therefore when we see any want, defect, or deformity in
any of them, we must have recourse back again to the apostasy of our first
parents, and remember our fall in them, and say with a sorrowful heart, this
comes to pass by reason of man's most wretched sin, which has defiled heaven
and earth, and drawn a curse not only upon himself, but upon the rest of the
creatures for his sake, whereby there goodness is much defaced.

Fifthly, the end of creation, is the glory of God, as Solomon says, Prove.
16.4.
God made all things for his own sake, yea even the wicked for the day of
evil. And God propounds this principal end to himself, not as though he
wanted glory, and would purchase it unto himself by the creation; for he is
most glorious in himself, and his honor and praise being infinite, can
neither be increased nor decreased: but rather that he might communicate and
make manifest his glory to his creatures, and give them occasion to magnify
the same. For the reasonable creatures of God beholding his glory in the
creation, are moved to testify and declare the same among men.

The sixth shall be touching the time of the beginning of the world which is
between five thousand and six thousand years ago. For Moses has set down
exactly the computation of time from the making of the world to his own days:
and the Prophets after him have with like diligence set down the continuance
of the same to the very birth of Christ. But for the exact account of years
Chronologers are not all of one mind. Some say there be 3929. from the
creation to Christ's birth, as Beroaldus: some 3952. as Hierome and Bid: some
3960. as Luther and ^o. Lucidus: some 3963. as Melancthon in his Chronicle and
Functius: some 3970. as Bullinger and Tremellius: some toward 4000. as
Buntingus. Now from the birth of Christ to this day are 1592. years, and
adding these together, the whole time amounts. And God would have the very
time of the beginning of the world to be revealed, first that it might be
known to the Church, when the covenant of grace was first given by God to man,
and when it was afterward renewed, and how Christ came in the fullness of time,
Gal. 4. secondly that we might know that the world was not made for the
eternal and everliving God, but for man: thirdly that we might learn not to
set our hearts on the world and on the things therein which have beginning and
end, but seek for things eternal in heaven. And before the time which I have
named began, there was nothing beside God, the world it self and all things
else were uncreated. Some men use to object and say, what did God all that
while before the world was? how did he employ himself? what was he idle? Ans.
The Jews to this badde question make as badde an answer. For they say he was
continually occupied in making many little worlds, which he continually
destroyed as he made them, because none pleased him till he made this. But we
must rather say, that some things are revealed which God did then, as that he
decreed what should come to pass when the world was: ^rov. 8.30.
and that then the blessed persons in Trinity did take eternal delight each in
other. If any man will needs know more, let him hear what Moses says, (...)
^9.22
Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but things revealed to us and to our
children for ever: and let them mark what one eluding the question, answered:
(...). con^e^t. c. 1^.
namely, that God was making hell fire to burn all such curious persons as
will needs know more of God then he has revealed to them: for where God has
not a mouth to speak, there we must not have an ear to hear: therefore our
duty is, to let such curious questions pass.

Seventhly, some may ask in what space of time did God make the world? I
answer, God could have made the world, and all things in it in one moment: but
he began and finished the whole work in six distinct days. Genesis 1.
In the first day he made the matter of all things and the light: in the second
the heavens; in the third day he brought the sea into his compass, and made
the dry land appear, and caused it to bring forth herbs, plants, and trees:
in the fourth he made the Sun, the Moon, and the stars in heaven: in the
fifth day he made the fishes of the sea, the fowls of the heaven, and every
cree^ing thing: in the sixth day he made the beasts of the field, and all
cattle, and in the end of the sixth day he made man. Thus in six distinct
spaces of time, the Lord did make all things: and that especially for three
causes. I. To teach men that they ought to have a distinct and serious
consideration of every creature: for if God made the world in a moment, some
might have said, this work is so mystical, that no man can speak of it. But
for the preventing of this cavil, it was his pleasure to make the world and
all things therein in six days: and the seventh day he commanded it to be
sanctified by men, that they might distinctly and seriously mediate upon every
days work of the creation. II. God made the world, and every thing therein in
six distinct days, to teach us, what wonderful power and liberty he had
over all his creatures: for he made the light when there was neither Sun nor
Moon, nor stars: to show, that in giving light to the world, he is not bound
to the Sun, to any creature, or to any means: for the light was made the
first day: but the sun, the moon, and the stars were not created before
the fourth day. Again, trees and plants were created the third day: but yet
the sun, moon, and the stars, and rain which nourish and make herbs,
trees, and plants to grow were not created till after the third day: which
shows plainly, that God can make trees, plants, and herbs to grow without
the means of rain, and without the virtue and operation of the Sun, the
Moon, and the stars. III. He made the world in six distinct days, and
framed all things in this order, to teach us his wonderful providence over all
his creatures: for before man was created he provided for him a dwelling place,
and all things necessary for his perpetual preservation, and perfect happiness
and felicity. So also he created beasts and cattle: but not before he had
made herbs, plants, and grass, and all means whereby they are preserved. And
if God had this care over man when as yet he was not: much more will God have
care over him now when he is, and has a being in nature.

And thus much concerning the points of doctrine touching the creation. The
duties follow. And first by the work of creation we may discern the true
Jehovah from all false gods and idols in the world. This Esaiah makes plain,
bringing in the Lord reasoning thus: I am God, and there is none other God
besides me. How is that proved? thus: I form the light, and create
darkness, I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things.
Esa. 45.6,7.
If a man ask thee how thou know the true God from all false gods: thou
must answer, by the work of creation: for he alone is the maker of heaven and
earth, and all things in them. This property can not agree to any creature, to
any man, Saint, or Angel: nay, not to all men and all Angels they can not give
being to a creature which before was nothing. Secondly, whereas God the father
is Creator of all things, and has given unto man reason, understanding, and
ability, more then to other creatures, we are taught to consider and meditate
of the work of Gods creation. This the wise man teaches us, saying, Consider
the work of God. Eccles. 7.15.
And indeed it is a special duty of every man which professes himself to
be a member of Gods Church, as he acknowledges God to be the Creator, so to
look upon his workmanship and view and consider all creatures. A skillful
workman can have no greater disgrace, then when he has done some famous
thing, to have his friend pass by his work, and not so much as look upon it.
If it be demanded for what end must we look upon the work of Gods creation?
I answer, that in it we may see and discern Gods power, wisdom, love, mercy,
and providence, and all his attributes, and in all things his glory. This is a
most necessary duty to be learned of every man: we think nothing too much or
too good to bestow on vain shows, and plays, idle sports and pastimes,
which are the vanities of men, and we do most willingly behold them: in the
mean season utterly neglecting and contemning the glorious work of Gods
creation. Well, the Lord God has appointed his Sabbath to be sanctified not
only by the public ministry of the word, and by private prayer, but also by
an especial consideration and meditation of Gods creatures: and therefore the
duty of every man is this, distinctly and seriously to view and consider the
creatures of God; and thereby take occasion to glorify his name, by ascribing
unto him the wisdom, glory, power, and omnipotency that is due unto him and
appears in the same.

Thirdly, we must give God glory in all his creatures, because he is the
creator of them all. So in the Revelation the four and twenty Elders fall
down before him, and say, Rev. 4.11.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor, and power: giving this
reason, for thou have created all things, and for thy wills sake they are and
have been created. Read the Psalms 147. and 148. both which tend to this
effect, that God must be praised, because he is the Creator of all things, to
whom all glory is due. We know, that when men behold any curious work of a
cunning and skillful craftesman, straightway they will leave the work, and
inquire after him that made it, that they may praise his skill. The same is our
duty in this case, when we come abroad, and behold every where in all the
creatures the admirable and unspeakable wisdom, goodness, and power of God,
then we must make have from the creature, and go forward to the Creator, to
praise and glorify him: and herein must we show our selves to differ from
bruit beasts, in that by the use and view of Gods creatures, we do return
due glory, praise, and honor unto the Creator.

Our fourth duty is set down by the Prophet Amos, who moving the people to
meet God by repentance, adds a reason taken from the creation: He that
fourmeth the mountains and creates the winds, which declares unto man what
is his thought, which makes the morning darkness, etc. the Lord God of hosts
is his name. Amos 4.13.
The meaning of the Prophet is this: God is a terrible judge, and we are as
traitors and rebels against him: therefore the best way that we can take is
this: he is coming to judgment, let us therefore meet him and fall down
before him, and humble our selves under his mighty hand. And the holy Ghost by
the Prophet would move the people to meet God by serious repentance, by a
reason framed thus: If God who is their judge, be able to create the winds, and
to form the mountains, and to make the morning darkness: then he is also able
to make an eternal judgment for their confusion. And therefore all such as be
impenitent sinners, let the^ prepare themselves to turn unto him: and surely
if men had grace to lay this to their hearts; they would not live so long in
their sins without repentance as they do: nay rather, they would prepare
themselves to meet him in the way before he come to judgment, because he is a
Creator, and therefore able to bring infinite punishments upon them at his
pleasure, and to bring them to nothing as he made them of nothing. And let them
know it, whosoever they be that go forward in their sins, that God the creator
whenever he will, can open hell to devour them: and that he can show
himself as mighty in his judgment to men's destruction, as he was mighty in
the beginning in giving us a being when we were nothing. Wherefore notable is
the practice of David, who inures himself to the fear of God by the
consideration of his creation, saying, I am fearfully and wonderfully made,
etc. Psalm. 139.14.


Lastly, those which have been impenitent sinners through all their life past,
must not only learn to repent for their sins; but also endeavor to
perform obedience unto Gods word. God is a creator, and the thing created
should in all respects be conformable to his will: for David says, Psalm.
119.73.
Thine hands have fashioned me, and framed me, give me understanding therefore
that I may learn thy commandments. And good reason: for there is no man of
any trade, but he would feign have all that he makes and deuiseth to be used:
but yet so as the use thereof must be conformable to the will of the maker. For
this cause Moses that faithful servant of God says, that the people of Israel
dealt wrongfully with the Lord: why? for he has created them, and proportioned
them, he is their father and be bought them: yet they have dishonored him by
corrupting themselves toward him by their vice. All creatures in heaven and in
earth do the will of the Creator, except man, and the devil and his angels:
for the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, they keep that course which God
has appointed them: but man though he be bound to do the will of God, because
God is his Creator, yet he rebels against him. The potter if in tempering his
clay, he can not make and frame it according to his mind, at length he will
dash it in pieces: so God, he creates man, not that he should do his own
will, but Gods will: and therefore the Lord in his wrath will confound him
eternally who soever he be that follows the lusts of his own wicked heart,
and will not be brought to be conformable to Gods will, but goes on his
rebellion without stay. For this cause it stands every man in hand to yield
himself pliable unto Gods will, and to endeavor to obey it by keeping a good
conscience before God and all men, and by walking faithfully in his calling,
least the end be confusion. If a man have a trade and other men come into his
shop, and use such tools and instruments as be there to wrong ends, he will
in no wise brook it, but take the abuse in great displeasure: now the world is
as it were an opened shop in which God has set forth unto us his glory and
majesty: and the creatures of all kinds be instruments appointed for excellent
uses, and specially man for the accomplishment of his will. And therefore when
he rebels against the will of God, and by sin puts the creatures to wrong
ends, he can not but most grievously offend God.

And thus much of the duties. Now in the third place follow the consolations
unto Gods Church and people. First as S. Peter says, ^. Pet. 4.19.
God is a creator, yea a faithful creator. The properties of a faithful
creator are two: I. He will preserve his creature: no man is so tender over any
work as he that made it, for he cannot abide to see it any way abused. God
therefore being a faithful creator, tenderly loves all his creatures. So Job
reasons with God, that he will not cast him off, Job 10.3.
because he is the work of his hands. II. God will bear with his creature,
to see whether it will be brought to any good end and use before he will
destroy it. And to use the former comparison: the potter will turn and work
the clay every way to make a vessel unto his mind; but if it frame no way,
then will he cast it away and dash it against the wall. And so God who created
man, still preserves him, and uses all means to make him conformable to his
will, before he cast him off. The Lord did long strive with men in the old
world, to turn them from their wickedness: but when nothing would serve them,
it is said, It repented the Lord that he made man on the earth. Genesis 6.3.6.
And in like manner, if we which are the creatures of God, shall rebel
against this our creator, it may be, he will bear with us for a time: but if
we continue therein, and do not turn to him by repentance, he will bring upon
us a final destruction both in body and soul. Yet I say, before he do this,
his manner is to try all means to preserve us, and turn us unto him: and
afterward if nothing will serve, then will he show forth his power in men's
confusion: and therefore it stands us in hand to look unto it betime.

Secondly, look what power the Lord did manifest in the creation of all
things, the same power he both can and will make manifest in the redemption of
mankind. In the beginning God made all things by his word; and so likewise he
is able still to make by the power of his word, of a wicked man that is dead in
sin, a true and lively member of Christ: which the Prophet Esaias signifies
when he says, Esaias 45. 42.^^.
The Lord that created the heavens and spread them abroad, he that stretches
forth the earth and the body thereof, etc. I the Lord have called thee in
righteousness. This must not encourage evil men in their wickedness, but it
serves to comfort the people of God, considering that the same God which once
created them, is also as able to save them: and will show himself as mighty
in their redemption, as he was in their creation of nothing.

And thus much of the creation in general. Now it follows that we come to
the handling of the parts thereof. For it is not said barely that God is a
Creator; but particularly that he is a creator of heaven and earth: of both
which we will speak in order: and first of the creation of heaven.

Heauen] in Gods word signifies all that is above the earth: for the air
wherein we breath is called heaven. And according to this acceptance of the
word, there are three heavens, as Paul says, He was taken up into the third
heaven. 2. Cor. 1^.2.
The first of these heavens is that space, which is from the earth upward unto
the firmament, where the stars are. Thus the birds which fly in the air
between the earth and the stars, are called the fowls of the heaven: and
when God sent the flood to drown the old world, Moses says, Genesis 7.11^
the windows of heaven were opened: meaning, that God powered down rain from
the clouds abundantly, for the making of a flood to drown the world. The
second heaven is that which contains the Sun, the Moon, and the stars:
so Moses says, that God in the beginning created the Sun, the Moon, and the
stars, and placed them in the firmament of heaven. Genesis 5.14.
Besides these two heavens, there is a third which is invisible: and yet it is
the work of Gods hands: and it is that glorious place where Christ even in
his manhood sits at the right hand of the father: and whither the souls of
the faithful departed are carried, and placed: and in which at the end of the
world shall all the elect both in body and soul, have perfect joy and bliss
in the glorious sight and presence of God for ever. But for the better
conceiving the truth, we are to skanne and consider diligently three
questions. First, whether this third heaven be a creature; for many have
thought it was never created, but was eternal with God himself: but it is a
gross error contrary to Gods word. For the Scripture says, Heb. 11.10.
Abraham looked for a city (meaning the heavenly Jerusalem, this third
heaven) having a foundation whose builder and maker is God. Further if it be
eternal, it must either be? Creator or a creature: but it is no creator, for
then it should be God: and therefore it must needs be a creature. But some will
say, the Lord is eternal, and this third heaven has always been the place
of the Lords aboade, and therefore it is also eternal. Answer. True it is
indeed that God does show his glory and majesty in the third heaven: but
yet that cannot possibly contain his Godhead, as Solomon says, Behold the
heavens, and the heavens of heavens are not able to contain thee. 1. King.
8.27.
Wherefore though God does manifest his eternal glory in this third heaven,
yet does it not follow that therefore this place should be eternal: for he
needs no habitation to dwell in: he is every where filling all things with
his presence, excluded from no place. The second question is, where this third
heaven is? A^^were. There are some protestants say, it is every where: and they
hold this opinion to maintain the real presence of the Lords body in or
about the Sacrament. But if it were every where, then hell should be in heaven,
which no man will say: but heaven indeed is above these visible heavens which
we see with our eyes: so the Apostle says, Ephesians. ^7.10.
Christ ascended on high far above all heavens, etc. And again it is said of
Steven, that being full of the holy Ghost, He looked up steadfastly into the
heavens, and saw them open, and the son of man standing at the right hand of
God. Acts. 7.55.56.
Thirdly it may be demanded, why God created this third heaven? Answer. God
made it for this cause, that there might be a certain place wherein he might
make manifest his glory and majesty to his elect angels and men; for the
which cause it was created a thousand fold more glorious then the two former
heavens are, Luke 23.
and in this respect it is called Paradise, by reason of the joy and pleasure
arising from Gods glorious presence. And our Savior Christ calls it the
house of God his father; Ioh. 14.2.
because into it must be gathered all gods children. It is called the kingdom
of heaven, because God is the king thereof and rules there in perfect glory.
True it is, God has his kingdom here on earth: but he rules not so fully and
gloriously here, as he shall in heaven: for this is the kingdom of grace, but
that is the kingdom of his glory, where he so reigns, that he will be all
in all, first in Christ, and then in the elect both angels and men.

Now follow the duties whereunto we are moved principally in consideration
of the making of the third heaven. First, if God created it especially for the
manifestion of his glory unto men, that at the end of this world, by the
fruition of Gods most glorious presence, there they might have perfect joy and
felicity: we have occasion here to consider the wonderful madness and
forgetfulness that reigns every where among men, which only have regard to
the estate of this life, and cast all their care on this world, and never so
much as once dream of the joyful and blessed estate which is prepared for
Gods children in the highest heaven. If a man having two houses^ one but a
homely cottage, and the other a princely palace, should leave the better and
take all the care and pains for the dressing up of the first, would not every
man say, he were a mad man? yes undoubtedly. And yet this is the spiritual
madness that takes place every where among men: for God has prepared for us
two houses, one is this our body which we bear about us, which is an house of
clay, as Job says, Job. 4.19.
We dwell in houses of clay whose foundation is dust, which shall be destroyed
before the moth: and as Peter says, a tabernacle or tent, 2. Pet. 1.14.
which we must shortly take down; and wherein we abide but as pilgrims and
strangers. 1. Pet. 2.10.
Again, the same God of his wonderful goodness has provided for us a second
house in the third heaven, wherein we must not abide for a time and so depart:
but for evermore enjoy the blessed felicity of his glorious presence. For all
this mark a spiritual frenzy possessing the minds of men; for they employ
all their care and industry for the maintaining of this house of clay, whose
foundation is but dust: but for the blessed estate of the second house, which
is prepared for them in the kingdom of heaven, they have little regard or care.
They will both run and ride from place to place day and night, both by sea
and land: but for what? Is it for the preparing of a mansion place in the
heavenly Jerusalem? Nothing less, for they will scarce go forth of the door
to use any means whereby they may come unto it: but all their study is to
patch up the ruins and breaches of their earthly cabbine. Now let all men
judge in their own consciences, whether as I have said, this be not more then
senseless madness? Again, the body is but a tabernacle wherein we must rest
as it were for a night, as a stranger does in an Inn, and so away: but the
second house is eternal in the heavens, an everlasting seat of all felicity
and happiness. And therefore our duty is above al things, Mat. 6.33.
to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, as Christ himself
bids us. And if the Lord have there prepared such a place for us, the^ we
must in this world use all good means, whereby we may be made worthy the
fruition of it; and also fit and ready at the day of death to enter into it:
which at the day of judgment we shall fully possess both in soul and body,
and there reign eternally in all happiness with God Almighty our creator,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. But some may say, how shall a man so
prepare himself, that he may be fit for that place? Answer. This the holy
Ghost teaches us: for speaking of this heavenly Jerusalem, he says, Revel. 22.
There shall enter into it none unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abomination or lies. The means then to make our selves fit is, to seek to
be reconciled to God in Christ for our sins past, and withal to endeavor
to have an assurance of the free remission and pardon of them all in the blood
of Christ. And as touching that part of life which is to come, we must remember
what Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 3.3.
Every one that has this hope purifieth himself, meaning, that he which has
hope to reign with Christ in heaven, uses the means whereby he may purify
and keep himself from sin, as also he says after, 1. Ioh. 5.18.
that he which is borne of God keeps himself, and the wicked one touches
him not. Signifying, that all such persons as are truly justified and
sanctified, carry such a narrow and strait watch over the whole course of
their lives and conuersations that the devil can never give them deadly
wounds, and wholly overcome them. Now the man that i^ resolved in his
conscience of the pardon of his sin for the time past, and has a steadfast
purpose in his heart to keep himself upright, etcontinually to walk in
righteousness and true holiness all the days of his life: this man, I say,
is prepared and made fit to enter into the heavenly Jerusalem: come death when
it will, he is ready. And howesoeuer he must not look for heaven here upon
earth, yet he is as it were in the suburbs of this heavenly city: and at the
end of this life, the king thereof, the Lord Jesus will open the gates, and
receive him into his kingdom, for he is already entered into the kingdom of
grace. To conclude this point, let every man in the fear of god, be moved
hereby to set his heart to prepare himself; that when God shall call him
hence, he may be fit to enter into that glory. Secondly, seeing God has
prepared the third heaven for us, it teaches every man in this world to be
content with the estate wherein God has placed him, whether it be high or
low, rich or poor: why so? because here he is but a pilgrim, and lives in a
cottage of clay, and in a tent wherein he must abide but a while, as a pilgrim
does, oftentimes carrying his house about with him; and we shall in better sort
accept the afflictions which God sendes us in this life; if we remember that
there is prepared for us a place of joy, which must be our resting place and
perfect felicity for evermore. This was the practice of the chidren of God,
especially of Abraham: for when the Lord called him out of his own country, he
obeyed, and by faith abode in the promised land, as in a strange country, as
one that dwelt in tents with Isaac and Iaakob, heirs with him in the same
promise: and the reason follows, Heb. 11.9,10.
for he looked for a city having a foundation whose builder and maker is God.
They believed that these things which the Lord promised, were shadows of
better things: and hereon stayed themselves, being well content with that
estate whereto God had called them. So Paul was contented to bear the
afflictions which God had laid upon him, and his reason was, 2. Cor. 4. end.
Because (says he) we look not on things which are seen, but on things which
are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal. And in the next chapter: ^ verse. 1.2.
We know (says he) that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed,
we have a dwelling given us of God, that is, an house not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens. And for this cause his desire was rather to remove
out of this body, and to be with the Lord.

And thus much concerning heaven. Now follows the second part of Gods
creation in these words.

And earth] Earth signifies the huge mass or body standing of sea and land,
on which we live, and all things that be in or upon the earth whatsoever: as
Paul says, Col. 1.16.
For by him were created all things that are in heaven or in earth, etc. In
other Creeds which were made since this of the Apostles, being expositio^s of
that; there is added, maker of all things visible and invisible. Here we have
occasion to speak of all creatures, but that were infinite: therefore I will
make choice of these two, good Angels and Men.

I. That Angels had a beginning it is no question: for Paul says, that by God
all things were created in heaven and earth, Col. 1.16.
things visible and invisible, whether thrones, principalities, or powers. And
in respect of the creation, angels are called the sons of God. Job. 33^7.
But the time and day of their creation cannot be set down further the^ this,
that they were created in the compass of the six days. For Moses says,
Thus, namely in the compass of the first six days, the heavens and the earth
were fashioned, and all the h^ast of them: that is, all variety of creatures
in heaven and earth serving for the beauty and glory thereof: whereof no doubt
the Angels are the principal. II. Touching the nature of Angels, some have
thought that they are nothing but qualities and motions in the minds of men,
as the Sadduces and the Libertines of this time: but the truth is, that they
are spirits, that is, spiritual and invisible substances created by God, and
really subsisting: for the Scripture ascribes unto them such kind of actions
which can not be performed by the creatures, save only such as be substances:
as to stand before the throne of God, to behold the face of the Father, to
carry men's souls to heaven, etc. yet must we not imagine that they are bodily
substances consisting of flesh and bone. And though they took upon them
visible shapes and forms, and did eat and drink in the company of men, and
thereupon are called Men in Scripture: Luke 24.4.
yet they did this by divine dispensation for a time, that they might the
better perform the actions and businesses among men, to which they were by God
appointed. And the bodies of men which they assumed, were no parts of their
natures united to them, as our bodies are to us; but rather they were as
garments are to us, which they might put off and on at their pleasure. If any
shall ask, whence they had these bodies, the answer is, that either they were
created of nothing by the power of God, or framed of some other matter
subsisting before. If again it be asked what became of these bodies when they
laid them down, because they used them but for a time, the answer may be, that
if they were made of nothing, they were again resolved into nothing: if made
of other creatures, that then they were resolved into the same bodies of which
they were first made; though indeed we can define nothing certainly in this
point. III. Angels are reasonable creatures of excellent knowledge and
understanding, far surpassing all men save Christ. Their knowledge is
threefold: natural, revealed, experimental. Natural, which they received
from God in the creation. Revealed, which God makes manifest to them in
process of time, whereas before they knew it not. Thus God revealed to Gabriel
the mystery of the 70. weeks, Dan. 8, and 9. And in the Apocalypse many things
are revealed to the Angels that they might reveal the^ to us. Experimental
knowledge, is that which they get by observing the dealings of God in the whole
world, but specially in the Church. And thus Paul says, Ephesians. 3 10.
that to principalities and powers in heavenly places is known the manifold
wisdom of God by the Church. IV. And as the knowledge, so also the power of
the good Angels is exceeding great. Psalm. 103.20.
They are able to do more then all men can. Therefore Paul calls them mighty
Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. Yea their power is far superior to the power of the
wicked angels, Aug. de Trin. lib. 3. cap. 3.
who since the fall are under them and can not prevail against them. V. The
place of the abode of Angels, is the highest heaven, unless they be sent
thence by the Lord, to do some thing appointed by him. This our Sa^iour Christ
teaches when he says, that the angels of little ones do already behold the
face of their father in heaven. And the wicked angels before their fall were
placed in heaven, because they were cast thence. VI. That there be certain
distinctions and diversities of angels, it is very likely, because they are
called thrones, and principalities, and powers, Ch^rubim and Seraphim. Col.
1.16.
But what be the distinct degrees and orders of Angels, and whether they are to
be distinguished by their natures, gifts, or offices, no man by scripture can
determine. VII. The ministry of angels to which the Lord has set them apart
is threefold, and it respects either God himself, or his church, or his
enemies. The ministry which they perform to God, it first of al, to adore,
praise, and glorify him continually. Thus the Cherubims in Esaies vision cry
one to another, Isa. 6.2.
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of hosts: the world is full of his glory. And
when they were to publish the birth of the Messiah, they begin on this manner,
Glory to God in the highest heavens, peace on earth. Luke 1.14.
And John in his vision heard the angels about the throne, crying with a loud
voice, Worthy is the Lamb, etc. to receive power, riches, and strength,
wisdom, and honor, and glory, and praise. Apoc. 5.11.
And indeed the highest end of the ministry of Angels is the manifestatio^
of the glory of God. The second, is to stand in Gods presence, evermore ready
to do his commandments, as David says, Praise the Lord, ye his Angels that
excel in strength that do his commandments in obeying the voice of his word.
And here is a good lesson for us. ^sal. 10^.^0.
We pray daily, that we may do the will of God as the Angels in heaven do
it: let us therefore be followers of the holy Angels in praising God and in
doing his commandments as they do.
Heb. 1.14.
The ministry of Angels concerning the Church, stands in this, that they are
ministering sprits for the good of them which shall be heirs of salvation. The
good is threefold; in this life, in the end of this life, and in the last
judgment: again, the good which they procure to the people of god in this
life, is either in respect of body or soul. In respect of the body, in that
they do most carefully perform al manner of duties which do necessarily tend
to preserve the temporal life of Gods children, even from the beginning of
their days to the end. David says, Psalm. 54.8. Gen 16.7.
that they pitch their tents about them that fear the Lord. When Agar was cast
forth of Abraham's family, and wandered in the wilderness, an angel comes unto
her and gives her counsel to return to her mistress and humble her self.
When Elias fled from Iesabel, he was both comforted, directed, and fed by an
angel. 1. King. 19. 2 King. 1.
And an angel bidds the same Elia^ be of good courage and without fear to go
to King Achazias and reproou^ him. Genesis 19.
Angels bring Lot and his family out of Sodom and Gomorrha, before they burn
the cities with fire and brimstone. When Jacob feared his brother Esau, he
saw angels coming unto him: and he plainly acknowledges that they were sent
to be his protectours and his guides in his journey. Genesis ^2.1,^.
Abraham being persuaded of the assistance of Gods angels in all his ways,
said to his servant, Genesis 24.7.
The Lord God of heaven, who took me from my fathers house, etc. will send his
angels before thee. The wise men that came to see Christ are admonished by
angels to return another way: Mat. 2.12,13. ^^od. 14.19. and 23.20. Dan. 3.
and 6.
and Joseph by the direction of an angel fled into Egypt, that he might
preserve Christ from the hands of the cruel tyrant. The tents of the Israelites
was guarded by angels. The three children are delivered from the fiery furnace:
and Daniel out of the Lions den by angels. When Christ was in heaviness they
ministered unto him and comforted him: Mat. 4.11. Act. 12.
and they brought Peter out of prison and set him at liberty.

Again, the angels procure good unto the souls of the godly, in that they are
maintainers and furtherers of the true worship of God, and of all good
means, whereby we attain to salvation. The law was delivered in Mount Sina
by angels: Act. 7.
and a great part of the Revelation of John. They expound to Daniel the seventy
weeks They instruct the Apostles touching the return of Christ to the last
judgment. Apoc. 5.2.
An angel forbids John to worship him, Apoc 19.2^
but to worship God the creator of heaven and earth. They fetch the Apostles
out of prison, Act. 5.20
and bid them teach in the temple. An angel bringes Philip to the Eunuch that
he may expound the Scriptures to him. Lastly, they reveal the mysteries and
the will of God: as to Abraham that he should not kill his son Isaac, Luke 1.
to Mary and Elizabeth the nativity of John Baptist, and of Christ our Savior,
and all this they do according unto the will of God, Gal. 1.8. Beside all
this, Luke 15.7.10.
angels rejoice at the conversion of sinners by the ministry of the Gospel.
And for the Churches sake, they protect not only particular men, but even whole
nations and kingdoms.

The ministry of Angels in the end of this life, is to carry the souls of
the godly into Abraham's bosom as they did the soul of Lazarus. Luke 16. Mat.
25.31.
And in the day of judgment to gather all the Elect that they may come before
Christ, and enter into eternal fruition of glory both in body and soul.

The third and the last part of the ministry of Angels, concerns Gods
enemies; and it is to execute judgments on all wicked persons and impenitent
sinners. Exodus 1^. Ios. 5.
Thus all the first borne of Egypt are slain by an angel. When Joshua was
about to sack Ierico, an angel appeared unto him as a captain, with a drawn
sword to fight for Israel. When the host of Zenacherib came against Israel, 2.
King. 19.15.
the angel of the Lord in one night slew an hundred eighty and five thousand.
Because Herod gave not glory unto God, the angel of the Lord smote him so as
he was eaten up of lyce and died.

And thus we see what points we are to mark touching the good Angels. Now
follows the use which we are to make in regard of their creation. First
whereas they are Gods ministers to inflict punishments upon the wicked, here is
a special point to be learned of us; that every man in the fear of God take
heed how he lives and continues in his sins, for the case is dangerous
considering that God has armies of Angels, which stand ready every where to
execute Gods heavy judgments upon them that live thus. When the people of
Israel had sinned against the Lord, Moses says, they were naked, that is, open
to all the judgments of god; eue^ destitute of the guard of his good angels.
Wretched Balaa^ that wizzard went to Balaac to curse the children of Israel:
and as he went it is said, the Angel of the Lord stood in his way with a drawn
sword: and if the ass had not bin wiser the^ his master, the angel had slain
him. Whereby it appears, that when we rush on into the practice of any sin, we
do as much as in us lies to cause god to send down his judgments upon us for
our sins, and that by the ministry of his angels. Secondly, we are taught
another lesson by Christ himself: See (says he) that you despise not one of
these little ones: Matthew 18.10.
now mark his reason: for I say unto you, that in heaven their angels do
always behold the face of my father. By little ones he means young infants
which are within the covenant; or others which are like to young infants in
simplicity and innocence of life and humility. And Christ will not have them
to be despised. A duty very needful to be stood upon in these times. For now
a days if a man carry but a show of humility, of good conscience^ and of
the fear of God, he is accounted but a silly fellow, he is hated, mocked,
and despised on every hand. But this should not be so. For him whom God
honors with the protection of his good angels, why should any mortal man
despise? And it stands mockers and scorners in hand to take heed whom they
mock. For though men for their parts put up many abuses and injuries, yet
their angels may take just revenge by smiting them with plagues and punishments
for their offenses.

Thirdly, seeing angles are about us, and serve for the good of men, we must do
whatsoever we do in reverent and seemly manner, as Paul gives counsel to the
Philippians, Brethren, says he, Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, just, pure, and
pertain to love, of good report: if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise, think on these things: many men do all their affairs orderly for
avoiding shame, but we must do the same upon a further ground, namely because
Gods holy angels wait on us. And considering that men have care to behave
themselves well when they are before men: what a shame is it for a man to
behave himself unseemly either in open or in secret, he then being before
the glorious angels. Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.10.
that the woman ought to have power on her head, because of the angels, that
is, not only the ministers of the Church, but gods heavenly angels, which
daily wait upon his children, and guard them in all their ways.

Fourthly, this must teach us modesty, and humility: for the angels of God are
very notable and excellent creatures; and therefore they are called in the
Psalms Elohim, Psalm. 8.5.
gods: yet how excellent soever they be, they abase themselves to become
guardians and keepers unto sinful men. Now if the Angels do so abase
themselves; then much more ought every man to abase and humble himself in
modestie^ and humility before God; and whatsoever our calling is, we must not
be puffed up but be content. This is a necessary duty for all, but especially
for those which are in the schools of the Prophets; whatsoever their gifts or
birth be, they must not think themselves too good for the calling of the
ministry. And if god have called us thereunto, we must be content to become
servants unto all in the matter of salvation: though the men whom we teach be
never so base or simple; for no man does so far excel the basest person in
the world, as the glorious Angels of God do exceed the most excellent man that
is; therefore seeing they vouchsafe to become servants unto us, we must not
think our selves too good to serve our poor brethren.

And thus much of the duties. Now follow the consolations that arise from
this, that God has given his glorious angels to serve for the protection and
safeguard of his church and people. If men's spiritual eyes were open, they
should see the devil and his angels, and all the wicked of this world to fight
against them: and if there were no means of comfort in this case, then our
estate were most miserable. But mark; as Gods servant has all these wicked
ones to be his enemies: so he has garrisons of angels that pitch their tents
about him and defend him from them all. So David says, Psalm. 91.
He shall give his Angels charge over thee, and they shall keep thee in all
thy ways, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone: where the angels of
God are compared to nources, which carry little children in their arms, feed
them, and are always ready at hand, to save them from falls and many other
dangers. When the king of Syria sent his horses etchariots to take Elisha the
Lords prophet, because he revealed his counsel to the king of Israel: his
servant saw them round about Dothan where he was, and he cried, Alas, master,
what shall we do? then Elisha answered, Fear not: for they that be with us,
are more then they that be with them: 2. King. 16 17.
and he besought the Lord to open his servants eyes, that he might see: and the
Lord opened his eyes, and he looked and behold, the mountains were full of
horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha. So likewise not many years
ago, our land was preserved from the invasion of the Spaniards, whose huge
Navy lay upon our sea coasts; but how were we delivered from them? surely by no
strength nor power, nor cunning of man; but it was the Lord, no doubt, by his
Angels that did keep our coasts, and did scatter our enemies, and drown them.
Let enemies rage, and let them do what they will, if a man keep himself in
the ways which God prescribes, he has Gods Angels to guide and preserve
him: which thing must move men to love and embrace the true religion, and to
conform themselves in all good conscience to the rule of Gods word. For when
a man does not so, all the Angels of God are his enemies, and at all times
ready to execute Gods vengeance upon him: but when men carry themselves as
dutiful children to God, they have this prerogative that Gods holy Angels do
watch about them, and defend them day and night from the power of their
enemies, even in common calamities and miseries. Before God sendes his
judgments on Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.4.
an angel is sent to mark them in the foreheades that mourn for the
abominations of the people. Exodus 12.23. with 1. Cor. 5. 7.
And this privilege none can have but he whose heart is sprinkled with the
blood of Christ, and that man shall have it unto the end.

And thus much of the creation of Angels. Now it follows to speak of the
creation of Man: wherein we must consider two things: I. the points of
doctrine: II. the uses. For the points of doctrine. First, Man was created and
framed hy the hand of God, and made after the image of God: for Moses bringes
in the Lord speaking thus, Genesis 1.26.
Let us make man in our image, etc. in the image of God created he them, which
also must be understood of Angels. The image of God, is nothing else but a
conformity of man unto God, whereby man is holy as God is holy: for Paul
says, Ephesians. 2.24^
Put on the new man which after God, that is, in Gods image, is created in
righteousness and true holiness. Now I reason thus: wherein the renewing of
the image of God in man does stand, therein was it at the first: but the
renewing of Gods image in man does stand in righteousness and holiness:
therefore Gods image wherein man was created at the beginning, was a
conformity to God in righteousness and holiness. Now whether Gods image does
further consist in the substance of man's body and soul, or in the faculties
of both, the Scripture speaks nothing. This Image of God has two principal
parts: I. wisdom: II. holiness. Concerning wisdom Paul says, Colos. 3.10.
Put ye on the new man which is created in knowledge, after the image of him
which created him. This wisdom consists in three points: I. in that he knew
God his creator perfectly: for Adam in his innocence knew God so far forth
as it was convenient for a creature to know his creator. II. He knew Gods
will so far forth as it was convenient for him, to show his obedience
thereunto. III. He knew the wisdom and will of his creator touching the
particular creatures: for after Adam was created, the Lord brought every
creature unto him, presenting them unto him as being lord and king over them,
that he might give names unto them. Whereby it appears that Adam in his
innocence did know the nature of all creatures, and the wisdom of God in
creating them, else he could not have given them fit names: and when God
brought Eve unto Adam, he knew her at the first, and said, Ge^. 2.23.
This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called
woman, etc. The second part of Gods image in man, is holiness and righteousness;
which is nothing else but a conformity of the will and affections, and of the
whole disposition of man both in body and soul, to the will of God his
creator. Yet we must remember that Adam in his innocence had a changeable
will, so as he could either will good or evil: he was created with such
liberty of will, as that he could indifferently will either. And we must not
think that the will of the creature was made unchangeably good: for that is
peculiar to the will of God, and hereby is the Creator distinguished from the
creature.

And here two things offer themselves to be considered. The first, why the man
is called the image of God, 1. Co^. 11.7.
and not the woman. Ans. He is so called, not because holiness and
righteousness is peculiar to him which is common to both: but because God has
placed more outward excellency and dignity in the person of a man then of a
woman. The second, how Christ should be called the image of God. Ans. Col. ^.16.
He is so called for two special causes. First, because he is of the same
substance with the father; and therefore is his most absolute image, and as the
author of the Hebrews says, Heb. 1.3.
the brightness of his glory and the ingraued form of his person. Secondly,
because God being invisible does manifest himself in Christ; in whom as in a
glass we may behold the wisdom, goodness, the justice and mercy of God.

The second point to be considered in the creation of man is the dignity of
his person: for David says, (...) 8.5.
Thou have made man little inferior to the Angels, and crowned him with
glory, and worship. This dignity stands in four points. I. A blessed
communion with the true God: for Paul speaking of the Gentiles which were not
called, Ephesians. 4.^3.
says they were strangers from the life of God. Where by the contrary we may
gather, that our first parents in their innocence lived the life of God, which
is nothing else but to lead such a life here on earth, as that the creature
shall have a blessed and immediate fellowship with God, which stands in this,
that before the fall of man, God revealed himself in a special manner unto
him, so as his very body and soul was a temple and dwelling place of the
Creator. This fellowship between God and man in his innocence, was made
manifest in the familiar conference which God vouchsafed to man: but since the
fall, this communion is lost: for man can not abide the presence of God. And
therefore when Peter had fished all night, and caught nothing, our Savior bad
him cast down his net to make a draught, ^uk. 5.8.
who did so; but when he saw the great multitude of fishes that were taken, at
this sight beholding but as it were some sparks of the glorious majesty of
God in Christ, he fell down at his feet, saying, Lord, depart from me, for I
am a sinner. The second point wherein man's dignity consists, is, that man
was made lord and king over all creatures, as David says, Psalm. 8.6.
Thou have made him to have dominion in the works of thy hands: and therefore
God having created him in his image, bids him rule over the fishes of the
sea, over the fowls of the heaven, and over every beast that moves upon the
earth: Genesis 1.2^.
and afterward he brought them all to him, as to a sovereign lord and king to
be named by him: and answerably every creature in his kind gave reverence and
subjection unto man before his fall, as unto their lord and king. Where by the
way we must remember, that when we see any creature that is hurtful and
noisome unto man, and would rather devour then obey him; it must put us in
mind of our sin: for by creation we were made lords and kings over all
creatures, and they durst not but reverence and obey us: but the rebellion of
man unto God is the cause of the rebellion of the creatures unto us. The third
part of man's dignity by creation is, that before his fall he had a wonderful
beauty and majesty above all creatures in his body: whereupon David says,
the Lord has crowned him with glory and worship. Psalm. 8.
And in the renewing of the covenant with Noe, God says, Psalm. 9.2.
that the dread and fear of man shall be upon all creatures: which now though
it be but small, yet does it plainly show what was the glory and majesty of
man's person at the first. The fourth dignity of man's estate in innocence is,
that his labor was without pain or weariness: if he had never fallen he
should have labored in the garden; but so as he should never have been
wearied therewith. For when Adam was fallen, God said, In the s^eate of thy
face, shall thou eat thy bread: now if the pain in labor come after as a
curse upon man for his transgression, then before his fall man felt no pain in
his affairs. And in these four things consists man's dignity which he had
in the creation.

Now in the third follows man's calling before his fall: which is twofold: I.
particular: II. general. Man's particular calling was to come into the garden
of Eden, to keep it, and to dress the trees and fruits thereof. This shows
unto us a good lesson, that every man must have a particular calling wherein he
ought to walk: and therefore such as spend their time idly in gaming and
vain delights, have much to answer to God at the day of judgment. This will
not excuse a man to say the^, that he had land and living to maintain
himself, and therefore was to live as he list, for even Adam in his innocence
had all things at his will, and wanted nothing; yet even then God employed him
in a calling: therefore none must be exempted, every man both high and low must
walk in his proper calling. Ada^s general calling, was to worship his
Creator, to which he was bound by the right of creation, considering the
moral law was written in his heart by nature. Which is signified in the
Decalogue; where the Lord requires worship and obedience of his people, because
he is Jehovah, Exodus 10.2.
that is, one which has being in himself, and gives being to all men by
creation. For the better understanding of this point, we are to consider three
things. I. The place where Adam did worship. II. The time. III. The
sacraments. For the first, God ever since the beginning had a place where he
would be worshipped, and it is called Gods house, which then was the garden of
Eden. Genesis 28.17.
For it was unto Adam a place appointed by God for his worship, as
Church Assemblies are unto us: where also the Lord at some time did in a
special manner show himself unto his creature. Touching the time of Gods
worship, it was the seventh day from the beginning of the creation, the Sabbath
day. And here we must note, that the keeping of the Sabbath is moral. Some
indeed do plead that it is but a ceremony; yet falsely: for it was ordained
before the fall of man, at which time Ceremonies signifying sanctification had
no place. Nay mark further: Adam in his innocence was not clogged with sin
as we are; and yet then he had a set Sabbath to worship God his creator: and
therefore much more need has every one of us of a sabbath day, wherein we may
sever our selves from the works of our callings, and the works of sin, to
the worship of God in the exercise of religion, and godly meditation of our
creation. This point must be learned of us, for when no occasion is offered of
business, then men will formally seem to keep the sabbath: but if there come
occasion of breaking the sabbath, as traffike, gaming, and vain shows, then
Sabbath farewell, men will have their pleasures, let them worship God that
will. But let us remember in the fear of God, that whosoever continues in the
breach of this law being moral, God will no less power forth his punishments
upon them, then for the breach of any other commandment: the consideration
whereof, must move every man to a reverent sanctifying of the Lords day.

Now for Adams sacraments they were two: the tree of life, and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil: these did serve to exercise Adam in obedience unto
God. The tree of life was to signify assurance of life for ever, if he did
keep Gods commandments: the tree of knowledge of good and evil, was a
sacrament to show unto him, that if he did transgress Gods commandments, he
should die: and it was so called, because it did signify that if he
transgressed this law, he should have experience both of good and evil in
himself.

Now in the fourth place follows the end of the creation of man, which is
twofold. First, that there might be a creature to whom God might make manifest
himself, who in a special manner should set forth and acknowledge his wisdom,
goodness, mercy, in the creation of heaven and earth, and of things that are
in them, as also his providence in governing the same. Secondly, God having
decreed to glorify his name in showing his mercy and justice upon his
creature, hereupon in time creates men to show his mercy in the salvation of
some, and to show his justice in the just and deserved damnation of other some.
And therefore he has appointed the creation specially of man, to be a means of
manifestation and beginning of the execution of his eternal counsel.

Thus much concerning man's creation in general. The special parts of man are
two; body, and soul. And the reason why the Lord would have him stand on
these two parts is this: Some creatures made before him were only bodily; as
beasts, fishes, fowls: some spiritual, as Angels: now man is both; spiritual
in regard of his soul, corporal and sensible in regard of his body; that
nothing might be wanting to the perfection of nature. If it be alleged that
man consists of three parts; body, soul, and spirit; because Paul prays that
the Thessalonians may be sanctified in body, soul, and spirit: 1 Thessalonians. 5.2^.
the answer is, that the spirit signifies the mind whereby men conceive and
understand such things as may be understood: and the soul is there taken for
the will and affections: and therefore these twain are not two parts, but
only two distinct faculties of one and the same soul.

The body of man at the first was formed by God of clay or of the dust of the
earth, not to be the grave of the body, as Plato said, but to be an excellent
and most fit instrument to put in execution the powers and faculties of the
soul. And howsoever in it self considered, it is mortal; because it is
compou^ded of contrary natures called Elements: yet by the appointment and
blessing of God in the creation, it became immortal till the fall of man.

As for the soul, it is no accidentarie quality, but a spiritual and
invisible essence or nature, subsisting by it self. Zach. ^2.
Which plainly appears in that the souls of men have being and continuance
as well forth of the bodies of men as in the same; and are as well subject to
torments as the body is. And whereas we can and do put in practice sundry
actions of life, sense, motion, understanding; we do it only by the power and
virtue of the soul.

Hence arises the difference between the souls of men, and beasts. The
souls of men are substances: but the souls of other creatures seem not to be
substances; because they have no being out of the bodies in which they are:
but rather they are certain peculiar qualities arising of the matter of the
body, and vanishing with it. And it may be for this cause that the soul of
the beast is said to be in the blood; Genesis 9.5.
whereas the like is not said of the soul of man.

And though men's souls be spirits as angels are, yet a difference must be
made. For angels can not be united with bodies so as both shall make one whole
and entire person; whereas men's souls may: yea the soul coupled with the
body is not only the moouer of the body, but the principal cause that makes
man to be a man.

The beginning of the soul is not of the essence of God; unless we will make
every man's soul to be God: neither does it spring of the soul of the parents,
for the soul can no more beget a soul, then an angel can beget an angel. And
Adam is called a living soul, 1. Cor. 10.
and not a quickening soul. And earthly fathers are called the fathers of our
bodies, Heb. 12.
and not of our souls. It remains therefore as being most agreeable to the
Scriptures, that the souls of men are then created by God of nothing, when
they are infused into the body.

And though the soule^ of men have a beginning, yet they have no end, but are
eternal. And when they are said to die, it is not because they cease at any
time to subsist or have being in nature, but because they cease to be
righteous or to have fellowship with God.

Whereas our bodies are Gods workmanship, we must glorify him in our bodies,
and all the actions of body and soul, our eating and drinking, our living and
dying, must be referred to his glory: yea we must not hurt or abuse our
bodies, 1. Cor. 16.31. ^om. 12.1.
but present them as holy and living sacrifices unto God. And whereas God made
us of the dust of the earth, we are not to glory and boast our selves, but
rather to take occasion to praise the great goodness of God, that has
vouchsafed to honor us being but dust and ashes. And after that man is
created, what is his life? alas, it is nothing but a little breath: stop his
mouth and his nostrells, and he is but a dead man. By this we are put in mind
to consider of our frail and uncertain estate, and to lay aside all confidence
in our selves: and for this cause the Prophet Esaias teaches us to have no
confidence in man, Isai 2.22.
because his breath is in his nostrills. Again, let us mark the frame and
shape of man's body. All other creatures go with their bodies and eyes to the
ground-ward; but man was made to go upright: and whereas all other creatures
have but four muscles to turn their eyes round about, man has a fifth to
pull his eyes up to heauen-ward. Columb. lib. 5. cap 9.
Now what does this teach us? surely that howsoever we seek for other things,
yet first of all, and above all, we should seek for the kingdom of heaven,
and the righteousness thereof: and that our whole desire should be set to
enjoy the blessed estate of Gods children in heaven. Secondly, it teaches us
in receiving Gods creatures, to return thankfulness unto God by lifting up the
heart to heaven for the same. These are very needful and profitable lessons in
these days; for most men indeed go upright: but look into their lives, and
they might as well go on all four: for in their conversation they set their
whole hearts upon the earth, as the beast does, and their eyes upon the things
of this world: hereby they do abase themselves, and deface their bodies, and
being men make themselves as beasts: we shall see great numbers of men that
run and ride from place to place, to provide for the body, but to seek the
kingdom of heaven where their souls should dwell after this life in joy for
ever, they will not stir one foot.

Thirdly, man's body by creation, was made a temple framed by Gods own hands
for himself to dwell in; ^. Cor. 6.15.
therefore our duty is to keep our bodies pure and clean, and not to suffer
them to be instruments whereby to practice the sin of the heart. If a man had
a fair house wherein he must entertain a prince, and should make hereof a
swinestie, or a stable, would not all men say, that he did greatly abuse both
the house and the prince: even so man's body being at the first made a palace
for the everliving God; if a man shall abuse it by drunkenness, swearing,
lying, fornication, or any uncleanness, he does make it in stead of a temple
for the holy Ghost, to be a stie or stable for the devil. For the more filthy
a man's body is, the more fit it is to be a dwelling place for sin and Satan.

Fourthly, man by creation was made a goodly creature in the blessed image of
God: but by Adams fall men lost the same, and are now become the deformed
children of wrath: our duty therefore is, to labor to get again our first
image, and endeavor our selves to become new creatures. If a noble man should
stain his blood by treason, after his death the posterity will never be at
rest, till they have got away that spot: Man by Adams fall, is become a limm of
the devil, a rebel and traitor against Gods majesty: and this is the state
of every one of us: by nature we are at enmity with God, and therefore we ought
to labor above all things in the world, to be restored in Christ to our first
estate and perfection, that so we may become bone of his bone, flesh of his
flesh, being justified and sanctified by his obedience, death, and passion.

Fifthly, man was created that there might be a way prepared, whereby God might
show his grace and mercy in the salvation of some, and his justice in the
deserved damnation of others for their sins: and in the creation of man Gods
eternal counsel begins to come into execution. Hereupon it stands us in
hand to make conscience of every evil way, being repentant for all our sins
past, and having a constant purpose never to sin more as we have done, that
by our good conversation here in this life we may have assurance that we be
eternally chosen to salvation by the Lord himself.

Lastly, whereas we have learned that the soul of man is immortal, we are
hereby taught to take more care for the soul then for the body. For it can
not be extinguished. When it is condemned, even then it is always in dying,
and can never die. But alas, in this point the case is flat contrary in the
wo^ld: for men labor all their lives long to get for the body, but for the
soul they care little or nothing at all: whether it sink or swim, go to
heaven or to hell, they respect not. This does appear to be true, by the
practice and behavior of men on the Lords day: for if the number of those
which come to hear Gods word, were compared with those which run about their
worldly wealth and pleasure, I fear me the better sort would be found to be
but a little handful to a huge heap, or as a drop to the Ocean sea, in
respect of the other. But will thou go an hundred mile for the increase of thy
wealth, and delight of thy body? then think it not much to go ten thousand
miles (if need were) to take any pains for the good of thy soul, and to get
food for the same, it being everlasting.

And thus much for the duties Now follow the consolation^. Although by reason
of the fall of man we can have but little comfort now: yet the creation does
confirm the unspeakable providence of God over his creatures, but especially
over man, in that the Lord created him the sixth day: and so before he was made
prepared for him a Paradise for his dwelling place, and all creatures for his
use and comfort. And if he were thus careful for us when we were not, then no
doubt he will be much more careful for us at this present, in which we live
and have being. Nay, mark further, since the fall man eats and drinks in
quantity a great deal, which in common reason should rather kill him, then
turn to the strength and nourishment of his body: yet herein does the
wonderful power of the Creator most notably appear, who has made man's
stomach as a lymbecke or still to digest all meats that are hole-some for his
nourishment and preservation.

And thus much for the Creation. Now in these words, maker of heaven and earth]
is more to be understood then the work of creation, namly Gods providence in
governing all things created, as he appointed in his eternal decree^ and
therefore Saint Peter says, God is a faithful creator, that is, God did not
only make heaven and earth, and so leave them, as masons and carpenters leave
houses when they are built: but by his providence does most wisely govern the
same. Now therefore let us come to speak of Gods providence. And first of all
the question offers it self to be considered, whether there be any providence
of God or no: for the minds of men are troubled with many doubtings hereof.
And to make the question out of all doubt, I will use four arguments to
confirm the providence of God. The first is the testimony of the Scripture,
which ascribes the event of all particular actions, even such as are in
themselves casual, as the casting of lots and such like to the disposition of
God: Prove. 16.33.
which very thing also teaches that even men themselves, endued with reason
and understanding, have need to be guided in all things and governed by God:
Prove. 20.24.
and it serves to confute those that deny Gods providence. Why say thou, O
Jacob, and speak, O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is
past over by my God? Ierem. 10.23. Isai 40.27.
The second argument may be taken from the order which appears in the whole
course of nature. First to begin with families; there is to be seen and
eutaxie or seemly order, in which some rule and some obey: and the like is to
be found in towns, cities, countries, and kingdoms: yea even in the whole
world: in which all things are so disposed, that one serves for the good of
another. Trees and herbs, and grass of the field serve for beasts and
cattle: beasts and cattle serve for men: the heavens above serve for them
which are beneath: and all the creatures which are above and beneath serve for
God. This argues that God is most wise and provident in ordering and disposing
all things whatsoever. The third argument is taken from the conscience
specially of malefactors. Suppose a man that co^mits a murder so closely that
no man knows thereof, and that the party himself is free from all the
danger of law: yet shall he have his own conscience to accuse, vpbraid, and
condemn him, yea even to fright him out of his wit, and to give him no more
rest then he can find upon the rack or gibbet. Now this accusation and terror
of conscience, is nothing else but the forerunner of an other most terrible
judgment of God, who is Lord of all creatures and judge of all men. And this
also proves the providence of God. For if the conscience can find a man out,
and lay his faults to his charge, how much more shall God himself the creator
of the conscience see and consider all his doings. The fourth and last argument
is this. The prophesies of things to come should be uncertain or false, if God
governed not the world. But now ^^^sidering things many years ago foretold,
come to pass in the same manner as they were foretold by the Prophets and
Apostles: hereby we must certainly conclude that there is a providence of God
whereby all and euerything is governed.

Against the providence of God sundry things be alleged. The first and
special is, that providence and disorder, confusion and order can not stand
together. Now in the world there is nothing but disorder and confusion in
seditions, treasons, conspiracies, and subuersions of kingdoms: where also
sin and wickedness preuailes. Ans. It is true indeed there has bin
confusion in the world ever since the fall of man and angels: and it arises
not from God, but from them alone: who as they did at the first transgress the
will of God, so they do what they can to turn all vpside down. Now then
coufusion, and disorder is only in respect of the devil and his instruments:
but in regard of God in the very midst of all confusion there is order to be
found, because he can and does despose it to the glory of his own name, and
to the good and salvation of his chosen, as also to the confusion of his
enemies.

Again it may be objected, that with ungodly and wicked men all things go
well, and contrariwise with the godly all things go hardly. For through the
world, none are more molested and more under outward misery then they: but if
there were any providence of God then it should be otherwise; the godly should
flourish, and the wicked perish. Ans. The consideration of the outward estate
of men in the world, was to David an occasion of a sore temptation. For when he
saw the wicked to prosper alwaie, and their riches to increase, he brake forth
and said, Psalm. 73.13.14. Verse. 17.
Certainly I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed mine hands in
innocence. Now if we would repel this temptation, as David afterward did,
then we must go into the Lords sanctuary with him, and learn to be resolved
in these points. I. Though the godly be laden with miseries, yet even that, by
the especial providence of God, turns to their great good. For every man
since the fall of Adam is stained with the loathsome contagion of sin. Now
the child of God that is truly regenerate, and must be fellow heir with Christ
after this life in the kingdom of glory, must in this life be cast into the
Lords furnace, that in the fire of afflliction he may more and more be skoured
and purified from the corruption of his nature, and be estranged from the
wickedness of the world. II. The prosperous success of the wicked, their
spoils, their revenues, and all their honor turns to their greater woe in
the end: as does appear in Jobs history, and in the examples of the
Chaldeans, of David's enemies, and of Dives and Lazarus.

Thirdly, it may be objected, that many things came to pass by chance, and
therefore not by Gods providence: because chance and providence cannot stand
together. Ans. We must distinguish between chance and mere chance. Chance
is, when any thing comes to pass, the cause thereof being unknown not simply
but in respect of man: aad therefore in regard of men which know not the
reason of things, we may say there is chance: and so the spirit of God
speaks, Eccles. 9.11. Luke 10.31.
Time and chance comes to them all. And again, By chance there came down
a priest the same way. Now this kind of chance is not against the providence of
God, but is ordered by it. For things which in regard of men are casual, are
certainly known and determined by God. Mere chance is, when things are said
or thought to come to pass without any cause at all. But that must be abhorred
of us as ouerturning the providence of God.

Thus seeing it is plain that there is a providence, let us in the next place
see what it is. Providence is a most free and powerful action of God, whereby
he has care over all things that are.

Providence has two parts; knowledge and government. Gods knowledge is,
whereby all things from the greatest to the least are manifest before him at al
times. As David says, Psalm. 11.^^
His eyes will consider: his eye lids will try the children of me^. And
again, Psalm. 113.6.
He abaseth himself to behold the things that are in the heaven and the
earth. And the Prophet Hanani said to Asa, 2. Chr. 16.9.
The eyes of the Lord behold all the earth. And Saint James says, Act. 15.18.
From the beginning of the world God knows all his works. This point has a
double use. First as Saint Peter says, it must move us to eschew evil and
do good: why? Because, says he, 1. Pet 3.11.
the eyes of the Lord are upon the just, and his countenance against evil
doers. Secondly it must comfort all those that labor to keep a good
conscience. For the eyes of God behole all the earth to show himself strong
with them that are of perfect heart toward him. ^. Chr. 16.9.


Government is the ^econd part of Gods providence, whereby he orders all
things and directs them to good ends. And it must be extended to the very
least thing that is in heaven or earth, Math. 6.26. Deuteronomy. 15.4. Mat. 10.10.
as to the sparrowes, and to oxen, and the hairs of our heads. And here we
must consider two things: the manner of government, and the means.

The manner of government is diverse, according as things are good or evil. A
good thing is that which is approved of God. As first of all the substances of
all creatures; even of the devils themselves: in whom whatsoever is remaining
since their creation is in it self good. Secondly, the quantities, qualities,
motions, actions, and inclinations of the creatures in themselves considered
with all their events are good. Again, good is either natural or moral.
Natural, which is created by God for the lawefull use of man. Moral, which is
agreeable to the eternal and unchangeable wisdom of God, revealed in the
moral law.

Now God governs all good things two ways. First by sustaining and
preserving them that they decay not: secondly by moving them that they may
attain to the particular ends for which they were severally ordained. For the
qualities and virtues which were placed in the Sun, Moon, stars, trees,
plants, seeds, etc. would lie dead in them and be unprofitable, unless they
were not only preserved, but also stirred up and quickened by the power of God
so often as he imploies them to any use.

Evil is the destruction of nature: and it is taken for sin, or for the
punishment of sin. Now sin is governed of God by two actions: the first is
an operative permission. I so call it, because God partly permits sin, and
partly works in it. For sin as it is commonly taken has two parts; the
subject or matter, and the form of sin: the subject of sin is a certain
quality or action; the form is the anomie or transgression of Gods law. The
first is good in it self, and every quality or action so far forth as it is
a quality or action is existing in nature, and has God to be the author of
it. Therefore sin though it be sufficiently evil to eternal damnation^ yet
can it not be said to be absolutely evil as God is absolutely good, because
the subject of it is good, and therefore it has in it respects and regards of
goodness. In respect of the second, that is, the breach of the law it self,
God neither wills, nor appoints, nor commands, nor causes, nor helps
sin; but forbids, condemns, and punishes it: yet so, as withal he
willingly permits it to be done by others, as men and wicked angels, they
being the sole authors and causes of it. And this permission by God is upon a
good end: because thereby he^ manifests his justice and mercy. Thus it
appears that in original sin, the natural inclination of the mind, will,
and affections in it self considered, is from God, and the ataxie or
corruption of the inclination in no wise from him, but only permitted: again
that in actual sin the motion of the body or mind is from God, but the
euilnes and disorder of the motion is not from him, but freely permitted to be
done by others. As for example in the act of murder, the actions of moving the
whole body, of stirring the several joints, and the fetching of the blow
whereby the man is slain, is from God; Act. 17.28.
for in him we live, move, and have our being: but the disposing and applying
of all these actions to this end, that our neighours life may be taken away,
and we thereby take revenge upon him, is not from God, but from the wicked will
of man and the devil.

Gods second action in the government of sin, is after the just permission of
it, partly, to restrain it more or less according to his good will and
pleasure, and partly to dispose and turn it against the nature thereof to the
glory of his own name, to the punishment of his enemies, and to the
correcting etchastisement of his elect.

As for the second kind of evil, called the punishment of sin, it is the
execution of justice, and has God to be the author of it. And in this respect
Esai says, Isai 45.7^ Amos. 3.
that God creates evil: and Amos, that there is no evil in the city which
the Lord has not done. And God as a most just judge may punish sin by sin,
himself in the mean season free from all sin. And thus the places must be
understood in which it is said, Neh. 9.37. Exodus 4. and 7. Isai 19.14. Romans
1.28. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. 1. King. 22.22.
that God gives kings in his wrath, hardens the heart, blinds the eyes,
mingleth the spirit of errors, gives up men to a reprobate sense, sends
strange illusions to believe lies, sends evil spirits giving them
commandment to hurt, and leave to deceive, etc.

Thus having seen in what manner God governs all things, let us now come to
the means of government. Sometimes god works without means, thus he created
all things in the beginning; and he made trees and plants to grow and
flourish without the heat of the sun or rain: sometimes he gouernes
according to the usual course and order of nature, as when he preserues our
lives by meat and drink: yet so, as he can and does most freely order al
things by means either above nature or against nature, as it shall seem good
unto him. As when he caused the sun to stand in the firmament, and to go
back in Achas dial: Ios. 10. Isai 38. Dan. 3. 1. King. 18. Exodus 17. 3. King.
2. 2. King. 6. Jonas 2. 2 King. 5. Matthew. 9. Ioh. 9.
when he caused the fire not to burn the three children: when he kept back
dew and rain three years in Israel: when he made waters to flow out of the
rock: when he caused Elias cloak to divide the waters of Jorden: when he
caused Iron to swim: when he preserved Jonas alive three days and three
nights in the whalles belly: when he cured diseases, by the strength of nature
incureable, as the leprosy of Naaman, the issue of blood, and blindness, etc.

Among all the means which God uses, the special are the reasonable
creatures, which are no passive instrument, as the tool in the hand of the
workman, but active: because as they are moved by God, so again being endued
with will and reason, they move themselves. And such instruments are either
good or evil. Evil, as wicked men and angels. And these he uses to do his
good will and pleasure, even then when they do least of all obey him. And
considering that the sinning instrument which is moved by God, does also move
it self freely without any constraint on Gods part: God himself is free from
all blame, when the instrument is blame-worthie. In directing the instrument,
God sins not: the action indeed is of him, but the defect of the action
from the instrument: which being corrupt, can it self do nothing but that
which is corrupt: God in the mean season by it bringing that to pass which is
very good. The whole cause of sin is in Satan and in us: as for God he puts
no wickedness into us, but the evil which he finds in us he mooues, that is,
orders, and gouerns, and bendes it by his infinite wisdom, when and in what
manner it pleases him, to the glory of his name, the evil instrument not
knowing so much, nay intending a far other end. As in the mill the horse
blindfolded goes forward, and perceiues nothing but that he is in the ordinary
way, whereas the miller himself whips him and stirs him forward for another
end, namely for the grinding of corn. And this is that which we must hold
touching Gods providence over wicked men and angels: and it stand^s with the
tenor of the whole Bible. Joseph's brethren sold him into Egypt very wickedly,
even in the testimony of their own consciences: yet Joseph having respect to
the counsel and work of God, which he performed by his brethren, says, that
the Lord sent him thither. Genesis 4.5.
And the Church of Jerusalem says, that Herod and Pontius Pilate did nothing
in the death of Christ but that which the hand etcounsell of god had determined
to be done: Act. 4.28.
because though they wickedly intended nothing but to show their malice and
hatred in the death of Christ: yet God propounding a further matter by them
then ever they dreamed of, showed forth his endless mercy to man in the work of
redemption. On this manner must all the places of Scripture be understood, in
which it is said, 2. Sam. 12.11. 3. Sam 24.1. 2. Sam 16.11. Isai. 10.5. and
13.6. 3. Chr. 11.4.
that God gave the wives of David to Absalom: that God moved David to number
the people; that he commanded Shemei to rail on David; that the Medes and
Persians are his sanctified ones: that the revolt of the ten tribes was done
by God, etc. By all these examples it appears, that we must not sever Gods
permission from his will or decree, and that we must put difference between the
evil work of man, and the good work of God which he does by man: and the
whole matter may yet be more clearly perceived by this comparison. A thief at
the day of assise is condemned, and the magistrate appoints him to be executed;
the hangman owing a grudge to the malefactor, uses him hardly and prolongeth
his punishment longer then he should. Now the magistrate and the hangman do
both one and the same work: yet the hangman for his part is a murderer, the
magistrate in the mean season no murderer, but a just judge putting justice in
execution by the hangman: so god though he use evil instruments, yet is he free
from the evil of the instruments.

And further we must here mark the difference which must be made in Gods using
of all kinds of instruments. When he uses good creatures, as angels, he
works his will not only by them but also in them: because he inspires them
and guides them by his spirit, so as they shall, will, and do that which he
wills and intends. As for evil instruments, he works by them only, and
not in them; because he holds back his grace from them and leaves them to
themselves, to put in practice the corruption of their own hearts.

Thus much of the parts of Gods providence: now follow the kinds thereof. Gods
providence is either general or special. General, is that which extends it
self to the whole world and all things indifferently, Act. 17.2^. Heb. 1.3.
even to the devils themselves. By this providence God continues and
maintains the order which he set in nature in the creation, and he preserues
the life, Job 37. and 38. Psalm. 104.
substance, and the being of all and every creature in his kind.

The e^peciall providence is that, which God shows and exercises toward his
Church and ^hosen people, Isa. 43.^. Zach. ^.8.
in gathering and guiding them, and in preserving them by his mighty power
against the gates of hell. And therefore Gods Church here upon earth is called
the kingdom of grace, in which he shows not only a general power over his
creatures, but withal the special operation of his spirit in bowing and
bending the hearts of men to his will.

Thus much concerning the doctrine of Gods providence. Now follows the duties.
First, seeing there is a providence of God over every thing that is, we are
hereby taught to take good heed of the transgression of the least of Gods
commandments. If men were persuaded that the Prince had an eye every where,
doubtless many subjects in England would walk more obediently to the laws of
the land then they do: and durst in no wise work such villainies as are daily
practiced. Well, howsoever it is with earthly princes, yet this
all-seeing-presence is least wanting in God: he has an eye every where:
wheresoever thou art, there God beholds thee, as David says, Psalm. 53.2.
God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were
any that would understand and seek God. Therefore except thou be brutish and
past shame take heed of sin. If men had but a spark of grace, the
consideration of this would make them loath the practice of any evil work.
Eliah says to Ahab, As the Lord God of Israel lives before whom I stand,
there shall be neither dew nor rain these three years. 1. King. 17.1.
Where the Prophet confirms his speech with an oath, saying, As the Lord of
hosts lives it shall be so. And least Ahab should think he made no conscience
what he said, he adds this clause, that he stood in the presence of God. As
if he should say: howsoever thou think of me, yet as it stands me in hand,
so do I make conscience of my word: for I stand in the presence of God, and
therefore know it, as the Lord lives there shall be no rain now dew these
three years. So Cornelius having an eye to Gods providence, does move
himself, and all his household to a solemn hearing of the word of God
delivered by the mouth of Peter, saying, Act. 10.33.
that they were all present before God, to hear all things commanded of him.
As these men had regard to Gods providence, so we likewise must behave our
selves reverently, making conscience of our behavior both in words and works:
because wheresoever we be, we are in the presence of God. Secondly, if there be
a providence of God over every thing, then we must learn contentation of mind
in every estate: yea, in adversity under the cross when all goes against us
we must be content, because Gods providence has so appointed. Psalm. 39.9.
So David in the greatest of his griefs was dumb and spoke nothing; his
reason was, because thou Lord did it. And when Shemei cursed David, Abisha
would have had the king to have given him leave to have slain him: but David
would not suffer it, but said, ^. Sam. 16.10.
He curses even because the Lord has bidden him curse David; who dare then
say, wherefore have thou done so? In whose example we may see a pattern of
quietness of mind. When a cross comes it is a hard thing to be patient;
but we must draw our selves thereunto by consideration of Gods especial
providence. Thirdly, when outward means of preservation in this life do
abound, as health, wealth, honor, riches, peace, and pleasure, then we must
remember to be thankful; because these things always come by the providence
of God. Thus Job was thankful both in prosperity and adversity: The Lord,
says he, gave, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord. Job.
1.22.
Indeed to be patient in every estate and thankful to God, is a very hard
matter: yet will it be more easy, if we learn in all things that befall us
in this life, never to sever the consideration of the things that come to pass
from Gods providence. For as the body and the soul of man (though we see only
the body) are always together, as long as a man lives: so is Gods providence
joined with the thing done: wherefore as we look on the thing done, so we must
also in it, labor to see and acknowledge the good pleasure and appointment of
God. As for example: a man's house is set on fire, and all his goods consumed;
this very sight would make him at his wits end: but now as he beholds this
event with one eye, so with the other eye he must at that very instant look
upon Gods blessed providence. When a man beholds and feels the loss of his
friends, he cannot but greiue thereat, unless he be more senseless then
stock or stone: yet that he may not be overwhelmed with grief, he must ever
with one eye look at the pleasure of God herein. This practice will be an
especial means to stay the rage of any headstrong affection ^r all our
afflictions. In the world the manner of men is if health^ wealth and ease abound
to think all is well: but if cros^es come, as loss of friends, and loss of
goods, then men cry out, as being straught of their wits: the reason is,
because they look only at the outward means, and tie Gods providence to
them; not being able to see any goodness or providence of God out of
ordinary means. Again, when a man is stored with riches, honor, wealth and
prosperity, he must not barely look on them, but behold withal Gods goodness,
and blessing in them: for if that be wanting, all the riches in the world are
nothing. Likewise in receiving thy meat and drink, thou must look further
into the blessing of God upon it: which, if it be away, thy meat and thy drink
can no more nourish thee then the stone in the wall. And the same must we do
in every busi^es of our callings: which if men could learn to practice, they
would not so much trust to the means, as honor, wealth, favor, etc. but
rather to God himself. The Lord by the prophet Habaccuc reprooueth the
Chaldeans for offering sacrifi^es unto their nets: H^b. ^.
which sin they committed, because they looked only upon outward things: and
like blind moles had no power to see further into them, and to behold the work
of God in all their proceedings. And this is the very cause why we are
unthankful for Gods benefits: for though we behold the bare creatures, yet
are we so poreblinde that we cannot discern any blessing and providence of God
in them. Therefore let us learn to look upon both jointly together, and so
shall we be thankful unto God in prosperity, and patient in adversity with
Job and David. This lesson Paul learned; Phil. 4.12.1^^
I can be abased (says he) and I can abound every where, in all things I am
instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry: and to abound, and to be in
want.

Fourthly, seeing Gods providence disposes all things, we are taught to
gather observations of the same, in things both past, and present: that we may
learn thereby to be armed against the time to come. Thus David when he was to
encounter with Goliath, gathered hope and confidence to himself for the time to
come, by the observation of Gods providence in the time past: for says he, 1.
Sam. 1^.37.
when I kept my fathers sheep, I slew a lion and a bear that devoured the
flock: now the Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of
the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistim.

Fifthly, because Gods providence disposes all things, when we make lawful
promises to do any thing, we must put in, or at the least conceive this
condition [ if the Lord will] for S. James says, Iam. 4.15.
that we ought to say, If the Lord will, and if we live, we will do this or
that. This also was David's practice: for to all the congregation of Israel he
said, 1. Sam. 13.^^
If it seem good to you, and if it proceed from the Lord our God, we will
send to and fro.

Sixthly, seeing Gods providence is manifested in ordinary means, it behooves
every man in his calling to use them carefully: and when ordinary means be at
hand, we must not look for any help without them, though the Lord be able to
do what he will without means Ioab when many Aramites came against him, he
heartened his soldiers though they were but few in number, 2. Sam. 10.12.
bidding them be strong and valiant for their people, and for the cities of
their god, and then let the Lord do that which is good in his eyes. Mat. 4.6.
And our Savior Christ avouches it to be flat tempting of God for him to
leap down from the pinnacle of the temple to the ground, whereas there was an
ordinary way at hand to descend by stairs. Hence it appears, that such
persons, as will use no means whereby they may come to repent and believe, do
indeed no more repent and believe, then they can be able to live which neither
eat, nor drink.

And thus much of the duties. Now follow the consolations: first this very
point of Gods special providence is a great comfort to Gods Church: for the
Lord moderateth the rage of the devil and wicked men, that they shall not hurt
the people of God. David says, Psalm. 16.8.
The Lord is at my right hand, therefore I shall not slide. And when Joseph's
brethren were afraid because they had sold him into Egypt, he comfort them,
saying, Genesis 4^.7.
that it was God that sent him before them, for their preservation. So king
David when his own soldiers were purposed to stone him to death, he was in
great sorrow; but it is said, 1. Sam. ^0.6.
he comforted himself in the Lord his God. Where we may see, that a man which
has grace to believe in God, and rely on his providence in all his afflictions
and extremities, shall have wonderful peace and consolation.

Before we can proceed to the articles which follow, it is requisite that we
should entreat of one of the greatest works of Gods providence that can be;
because the opening of it gives light to all that in^ueth. And this work is a
Preparation of such means whereby God will manifest his justice and mercy. It
has two parts, the just permission of the fall of man, and the giving of the
Covenant of grace. For so Paul teaches when he says, Romans 11.^^.
That god shut up all under unbelief that he might have mercy upon all. Gal.
3.2^.
And again, The scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
the faith of Christ Jesus should be given to them that believe.

Touching the first, that we might rightly conceive of man's fall, we are to
search out the nature and parts of sin. Sin is any thing whatsoever is
against the will and word of God: as S. John says, Sin is the transgression
of the law. 1. Ioh. 3.4. Romans 3.10. and 4.15. ^ 5.13.
And this definition Paul confirms when he says, that by the law comes the
knoweledge of sin, and, where no law is there is no transgression: and,
sin is not imputed where there is no law.

In sin we must consider three things: the fault, the guilt, the punishment.
The fault is the anomie or the inobedience it self, and it comprehends not
only huge and notorious offenses, as idolatry, blasphemy, theft, treason,
adultery, and all other crim^s that the world cri^s shame on: but every
disordered thought, affection, inclination: yea, every defect of that which the
law requires.

The guilt of sin is, whereby a man is guilty before God, that is, bound
and made subject to punishment. And here two questions must be skanned: where
man is bound? and by what? For the first, Man is bound in conscience. And
hereupon the conscience of every sinner sitts within his heart as a little
judge to tell him that he is bound before God to punishment. For the second, it
is the order of divine justice set down by God which binds the conscience of
the sinner before god: for he is Creator and Lord, and man is a creature, and
therefore must either obey his will and commandement^ or suffer punishment.
Now then by virtue of Gods law, conscience binds over the creature to bear
a punishment for his offense done against God: yea it tells him, that he is in
danger to be judged and condemned for it. And therefore the conscience is as it
were the Lords Sergeant to inform the sinner of the bond and obligation
whereby he always stands bound before God.

The third thing which follows sin is punishment, and that is death. So
Paul says, Romans 6.23.
The stipend of sin is death: where, by death we must understand a double
death, both of body and soul. The death of the body is a separation of the
body from the soul. The second death is a separation of the whole man, but
especially of the soul from the glorious presence of God. I say not simply
from the presence of God, for God is every where: but only from the joyful
presence of Gods glory. Now these two deaths are the stipends or allowance of
sin: and the least sin which a man commits, does deserve these two
punishments. For in every sin the infinite justice of God is violated: for
which cause there must needs be inflicted an infinite punishment, that there
may be a proportion between the punishment and the offense. And therefore that
distinction of sin which Papists make, namely, that some are in themselves
venial, and some mortal is false, and hereby confuted: otherwise in respect
of the diverse estate and condition of men, sins are either venial or
mortal. Venial they are to the elect, whose sins are pardonable in Christ:
but to the reprobate all sins are mortal.

Nevertheless we hold not all sins equal, but that they are greater or less
according to the diversity of objects and other circumstances.

Thus much of sin in general: now we come to the parts of it. The first sin
of all that ever was in man, Romans 5.5.
is the sin of Adam, which was his disobedience in eating the forbidden
fruit. In handling whereof sundry points are to be opened, but let us begin
with the causes thereof.

The outward efficient cause was the devil. And though he be not named by
Moses in the history of the fall, yet that is not to trouble us: for we must
not conceive otherwise of the serpent, then of the instrument and mouth of the
devil. For it is not likely that it being a brute creature should be able to
reason and determine of good and evil, of truth and falsehood. Now in this
temptation the devil shows his malice and his fraud. His malice, in that,
whereas he cannot ouerturne God himself, yet he labors to disturb the order
which he has set down in the creation, and especially the image of God in the
most excellent creatures on earth, that they may be in the same miserable
condition with himself. His fraud, first in that he begins his temptation with
the woman being the weaker person, and not with the man, which course he still
continues: as may appear by this, that Exodus 22. 13. a witch named in feminine
gender Mechashepha.
more women are entangled with witchcraft and sorcerie then men. Secondly he
shows his fraud, in that he proceeds very slily and intangles Eve by certain
steps and degrees. For first by moving a question, he draws her to listen
unto him, and to reason with him of Gods commandment. Secondly, he bringes her
to look upon the tree, and wishly to view the beauty of the fruit. Thirdly,
he makes her to doubt of the absolute truth of Gods word and promise, and to
believe his contrary lies. Fourthly, having blinded her mind with his false
persuasions, she desires and lusts after the forbidden fruit, and thereupon
takes it, eats it and gives it to her husband.

The inward cause, was the will of our first parents, even in the testimony of
their own consciences, as Solomon says, Eccles. 7 3^.
This have I found that God made man righteous; but they have found many
inventions. But it may be objected, that if Adam were created good, he could
not be the cause of his own fall, because a good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit. Answer. Freedom of will is fourefold: I. freedom to evil alone: this is
only in wicked men and angels, and is indeed a bondage: the second is freedom
to good alone, and that is in God and the good Angels by Gods grace: the third
is freedom to good in part, joined with some want of liberty by reason of
sin: and this is in the regenerate in this life: the fourth is freedom either
to good or to evil indifferently. And this was in Adam before his fall, who
though he had no inclination to sin, but only to that which was acceptable
to God: yet was he not bound by any necessity, but had his liberty freely to
choose or refuse either good or evil. And this is evident by the very tenor of
Gods commandment in which he forbids Adam to eat the forbidden fruit: and
thereby showing that he being created righteous and not prone to sin, had
power to keep or not to keep the commandment: though since the fall both he
and we after him cannot but sin. Wherefore Adam being allured by Satan, of
his own free accord changed himself and fell from God. Now then, as the good
tree changed from good to evil brings forth evil fruit: so Adam by his own
inward and free motion changing from good to evil, brings forth evil.

As for God, he is not to be reputed as an author or cause any way of this
sin. For he created Adam and Eve righteous, endued them with righteous wills:
and he told them what he would exact at their hands, and what they could
perform: yea he added threatenings, that with the fear of danger he might
terrify them from sin. Some may say, whereas God foresaw that Adam would
abuse the liberty of his will, why would he not prevent it. Answ. There is a
double grace, Dedit Adamo posse perseverare si vellet, non, and posse and vell^.
the one to be able to will and do that which is good, the other to be able to
persevere in willing and doing the same. Now God gave the first to Adam, and
not the second. And he is not to be blamed of us, though he confirmed him not
with new grace, for he is debtor to no man to give him so much as the least
grace; whereas he had already given a plentiful measure thereof to him. And
God did hold back to confer any further grace upon just grace. I. It was his
pleasure that this fact should be an occasion or way to exercise his mercy in
the saving of the Elect, and his justice in the deserved condemnation of
impenitent sinners. And unless Adam had fallen for himself and others, there
should have been found no misery in men, on whom God might take pity in his
Son, nor wickedness which he might condemn; and therefore neither
manifestation of justice, nor mercy. II. Again, it was the will of God in
part to forsake Adam, to make manifest the weakness that is in the most
excellent creatures, without the special and continual assistance of God.
III. There is a double liberty of will, one is to will good or evil: this
belongs to the creature in this world, and therefore Adam received it. The
other, is to will good alone. This he wanted, because it is reserved to the
life to come. And though he knew no cause of this dealing of God, yet is it one
step to the fear of God for us to hold that good and righteous which he
appoints or wills: and not to square the works and judgments of God by
our crooked reason. And yet to come to reason it self. Who can here complain
of God? Can the devil? but God did not cause him to tempt or deceive our first
parents. Can Adam and Eve? but they fell freely without any motion or
instigation from God, and their own consciences accused them for it. Can the
posterity of Adam? but the Elect receive more in Christ then they lost in
Adam: and the reprobate, overwhelmed with the burden of their own sins, and
thereupon receiving nothing but due and deserved damnation can not find fault.
But some may further reply and say, he that foreseeth an evil and does not
prevent it, is a cause of it: but God did foresee the fall of man, and did not
prevent it. Answ. The rule is generally true in man, that the foreseer of an
evil not preventing it, is in some sort a doer of it: for it is the sentence
of the law of God, to which man was bound from the first creation. But God is
above all his laws, and not bound to them: he is an absolute lord and
lawgiver; and therefore his actions are not within the compass of moral
laws, as men's are. Whereupon it follows, that though he did foresee man's
defection, yet is he free from all blame in not preventing of it. For with him
there be good causes of permitting evil.

And though God be no cause of man's fall, yet must we not imagine that it came
to pass by chance or fortune, whereas the least things that are, come to pass
with Gods providence. Neither was it by any bare permission without his decree
and his will; for that is to make an idle providence: neither did it happen
against the will of God, he utterly nilling it: for then it could not have
been, unless we deny God to be omnipotent. It remains therefore that this
fall did so proceed of the voluntary motion of Adam, August. ^uch. ad Laur.
c.99.
as that God did in part ordain and will the permitting of it, not as it was a
sin against his commandment, but as it was further in the counsel of God a
way to execute his justice and mercy. Against this which I say, diverse things
are objected. First, that if Adam did that which God in any respect willed,
then he did not sin at all. Answ. He that wills and does that which God
wills, for all that sins; unless he will it in the same manner with God
and for the same end. Now in the permitting of this fact, God intended the
manifesting of his glory: but our first parents intending no such thing,
sought not only to be like but also to be equal with God. Secondly, it is
alleged that Adam could not but fall necessarily if God did decree it. Answ.
Adams fall that came not to pass without Gods decree, and therefore in that
respect was necessary; was nevertheless in respect of Adams freewill
contingent and not necessary: Gods decree not taking away the freedom of will
but only ordering it. Lastly, it is alleged that Gods will is the cause of
Adams will, and Adams will the cause of his fall, and that therefore Gods will
shall be the cause of the fall. Ans. It must be granted that Gods will is a
moving cause of the wills of evil men; yet mark how: not as they are evil
wills simply, but as they are wills: and therefore when God inclines the evil
will of his creature to his good purpose, he is nothing at all entangled with
defect or evil of his will.

Touching the time of the fall, the received opinion in former ages has been
that our first parents fell the same day in which they were created, and
therefore Augustine writes that they stood but six hours. And though we
cannot determine of the certain time, yet in all likelihood was it very short.
For Moses presently after that he had set down the creation of man, without
the interposition of any thing else, comes immediately to the fall. And
considering the nature of the devil is without ceasing to show his malice, no
doubt he took the first occasion that possibly might be had to bring man to
the same damnation with himself. And our Savior Christ says, Ioh. 8.
that the devil was a manslayer from the beginning, namely from the beginning
not of the creation of the world, or of time, but of man. And Eve says, Genesis
3.4
We shall eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden, it may be, insinuating
that as yet she had not eaten when the devil tempted her.

Touching the greatness of man's fall, some have made a small matter of it,
because it was the eating of an apple or some such fruit But we must not
measure the greatness or the smalnesse of a sin by the object or matter
whereabout it is occupied, but by the commandment of God, and by the
disobedience or offense of his infinite majesty. And that this fact of Adam
and Eve was no small fault, but a notorious crime and Apostasy in which they
withdraw themselves from under the power of God, nay reject and deny him, will
evidently appear if we take a view of all the particular sins that be
contained in it. The first is unbelief, in that they doubted and distrusted of
the truth of Gods word which he spoke to them. The second is contempt of God,
in that they believed the lies of the devil rather then him. For when God
says, G^n. ^.4.
In the day that ye shall eat thereof, ye shall die the death, it is as
nothing with Eve: but when the devil comes and says, Ye shall not die at all,
that she takes hold on. The third, is pride and ambition. For they did eat
the forbidden fruit that they might be as gods, Gen 3.5.
namely as the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost. The fourth, is
unthankfulness. God had made them excellent creatures in his own image; that
is nothing with them to be like unto him, unless they may be equal unto him.
The fifth is curiosity, whereby they affected greater wisdom then God had
given them in creation, and a greater measure of knowledge then God had
revealed to them. The sixth is reproachful blasphemy, in that they subscribe
to the sayings of the devil, in which he charged God with lying and envy. The
seventh is murder. For by this means they bereave themselves and their
posterity of the fellowship and graces of Gods spirit, and bring upon their
own heads the eternal wrath of God. The eight is discontentation, in that
they sought for an higher condition then that was, in which God had placed
them. In a word, in this one single fact is comprised the breach of the whole
law of God. And we should often think upon this, that we may learn to wonder
at the just judgments of God in punishing this fall, and his unspeakable
goodness in receiving men to mercy after the same.

And here we must not omit to remember the largeness of Adams fall. Sins are
either personal, or general. Personal are such, as are peculiar to one or
some few persons and make them alone guilty. General, that is common to all
men: and such is Adams fall. It is a sin not only of the person of one man,
but of the whole nature of man. And Adam must be considered not as a private
man, but as a root or head bearing in it all mankind; or as a public person
representing all his posterity, and therefore when he sinned, all his
posterity sinned with him; as in a Parliament whatsoever is done by the
burgess of the shiere, is done by every person in the shiere. As Paul says,
Romans 5.1^.
By one man sin entered into the world, and so death went over all for as much
as all have sinned. And here lies the difference between Adams fall and the
sins of men, as Cains murder, which makes not the posterity of Cain guilty,
because he was never appointed by God to be the root of his posterity, as
Adam was: and therefore his sin is personal, whereas Adams is not. Yet this
which I say, must not be understood of all the sins of Adam, but only of the
first.

From the fall of Adam, springs original sin, so commonly called not only
as a fruit thereof, but also as a just punishment of it. And after the foresaid
fall, it is in Adam and his posterity, as the mother and root of all other
sin: yet with this distinction, that actual sin was first in Adam, and
then came original, but in us first is original sin, and then after
follows actual.

Original sin is termed diversely in Scriptures, as the flesh, the old man,
because it is in us before grace: (...) 12.1. Romans 7.^^.
concupiscence, sin that is ready to compass us about, the sinning sin:
and it is termed original, because it has been in man's nature ever since
the fall, and because it is in every man at the very instant of his conception
and birth, as David plainly says, Psalm 51.5.
Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me:
not meaning properly his parents sin (for he was borne in lawful marriage)
but his own hereditarie sin, whereof he was guilty even in his mothers
womb.

But let us a little search the nature of it. Considering it has place in man,
it must be either the substance of body or soul or the faculties of the
substance, or the corruption of the faculties. Now it cannot be the substance
of man corrupted: for then our Savior Christ in taking our nature upon him,
should also take upon him our sins, and by that means should as well have
need of a redeemer as other men: and again the souls of men should not be
immortal. Neither is it any one or all the faculties of man. For every one of
them as namely the understanding, will, affections, and all other powers of
body or soul were in man from the first creation, whereas sin was not
before the fall. Wherefore it remains that original sin is nothing else but
a disorder or evil disposition in all the faculties and inclinations of man,
whereby they are all carried inordinately against the law of God.

The subject or place of this sin, is not any part of man, but the whole
body and soul. For first of all, the natural appetite to meat and drink,
and the power of nourishing is greatly corrupted as appears by diseases,
aches, surfets, but specially by the abuse of meat and drink. Secondly, the
outward senses are as corrupt, Psalm. 119.
and that made David to pray that God would turn his eyes from beholding of
vanity: and Saint John to say, 1. Ioh. 2.16.
whatsoever is in the world is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and
the pride of life. Thirdly, touching the understanding, the spirit of God
says, Genesis 6.5. and 8.^1. 2. Cor. 3.5.
that the frame of the heart of man is only evil continually: so as we are
not able of our selves to think a good thought. And therefore withal, the
will of man and his affections are answerably corrupt; and hereupon the
doctrine of Christ is, that we must renounce our own wills. Lastly, all man's
strength in good things is nothing out of Christ.

The propagation of this sin, is the deriuing of it from Adam to all his
posterity, whereby it runs as a leprosy over all mankind. But in what
manner this propagation is made, it is hard to define. The common opinion of
Divines is, that it may be done two ways. The first is this. God when he
created Adam in the beginning, set down this appointment and order touching
the estate of man, that whatsoever Adam received of God, he should re^^iue it
not only for himself, but for his posterity, and whatsoever grace of God he
lost, he should loose not only to himself, but to all his posterity. And
hereupon Adam when he sinned, he deprived first of all himself, and then
secondly all his posterity of the image of God; because all mankind was in ^is
loins when he sinned Now then upon the former appointment, when the souls of
men are created and placed in the body, God forsakes them, not in respect of
the substance of the soul or the faculties, but only in respect of his own
image whereof the souls are deprived; after which follows the defect or want
of righteousness, which is original sin. And God in depriving man of that
which Ada^ lost, is not therefore to be thought to be the author or maintainer
of sin, but a just judge. For this deprivation of the image of God, so
farforth as it is inflicted by him upon mankind, Romans 5.^2.
it must be conceived as a deserved punishment for the sin of Adam and all
men in him, which punishment they pulled upon themselves. The second way is,
that the corruption of nature is derived from the parents in generation by the
body; for as sweet oil powered into a fustie ves^ell, loses his pureness
and is infected by the vessel: so the soul created good, and put into the
corrupt body, receives co^tagion thence. And this conjunction of the pure
soul with the corrupt body, is not against the goodness of God; because it is
a just punishment of the sin of all men in Ada^. It may be this which has bin
said will not satisfy the minds of all: yet if any will be curious to search
further into this point, let them know that there is an other matter which more
concerns them to look unto. When a man's house is on fire, there is no time
then to inquire how and which way and whence the fire came, but our duty is
with all speed and expedition to use all good means to stay it. And so
considering that our whole natures are really infected and poisoned with the
loathsome contagion of original sin, which is a weight sufficient to press
down the soul to the gulf of hell, it stands us in hand a thousand fold
more to use the means whereby it may be taken away, then to dispute how it
came.

Some may allege against the propagation of sin, that holy parents beget
holy children, which are void of original sin, because it stands not with
reason, that parents should convey that to their children which they themselves
want, namely the guilt and the punishment and the fault of sin in part. Answ.
I. Men are not in this life perfectly holy. For sanctification is but in part,
and therefore they can not possibly beget children pure from all sin.
Secondly, parents beget children as they are men, and not as they are holy men;
and by generation they derive unto their children nature with the corruption
thereof, and not grace which is above nature. Take any corn, yea the finest
wheat that ever was, winow it as clean as possibly may be: afterward sow it,
weed it also when it is sown, and reap it in due time, and carry it to the
barn; when it is thresht, you shall find as much chafe in it as ever was
before: and why? because God has set this order in the creation that it shall
spring and grow so often as it is sowed with the stalk, ear, blade, and all: so
likewise though the parents be never so holy, the children as they come of them
are conceived and borne wholly corrupt, because God took this order in the
creation, that whatsoever evil Adam procured, he should bring it not only on
himself, but upon all his posterity: by virtue of which decree, the
propagation of sin is continued without any interruption, though parents
themselves be borne anew by the spirit of God.

And here we must not omit to speak of the quantity or greatness of
original sin, for the opening whereof we must consider three points. The
first, that original sin is not diverse, but one and the same in kind in
every man, as the general and common nature of man is one and the same in all
men. The second, that this sin is not in some men more, in some men less,
but in every man equally, as all men do equally from Adam participate the
nature of man, and are equally the children of wrath. Some, it may be, will
say, that this can not be true, because some men are of better natures then
others are: some of disposition cruel and severe, some again gentle and
mild: some very licentious and disordered, some very civil. Answ. The
differences that be in men wanting the fear of God, arise not of this that
they have more or less original corruption, but of the restraint and
limitation of man's corruption. For in some God bridleth sin more then in
others, and in them is found civility: and again in some less, and in such
the rebellion of nature breaks forth unto all misdemeanour. And indeed if God
should not keep the untoward dispositions of men within compass, otherwhiles
more, otherwhiles less, as it shall seem good unto his Majesty; impiety,
cruelty, injustice, and all manner of sins would break out into such a
measure that there should be no quiet living for men in the world, and no place
for Gods Church. And thus it is manifest that although all men be not equal in
the practice of wickedness, yet that is no hindrance but they may be equal in
the corruption of nature it self. The third point is, that Original sin is
so huge and large every way, that it may truly be termed the root or seed not
of some few sins, but of all sins whatsoever, even of the very sin against
the holy Ghost. We must not imagine it to be an inclination or pronenes to one
or two faults, but a pronenes to all and every sin that is practiced in the
world; and that in all persons young and old, high and low, male and female. It
is a most horrible villainy for a man to kill his father, or his mother, or his
child: yet some there be that do so: at the hearing whereof we use to wonder,
and to testify our dislike by saying, that the doers thereof were wicked and
deuilish persons, and it is truly said. Nevertheless we must understand, that
although we abstain from such h^inou^ practices, yet the very root of such
sins, that is, a disposition unto them, is fo^^d in us also. Julian the
Apostata both living and dying blasphemed Christ^ ^^rod and Pontius Pilate and
the wicked Jews crucified him, and Judas (...)ed him. Men use to say that if
Christ were now alive, they would not do^ so for all the world. But let us
better consider of the matter. The same na^^^^^ corruption of heart that was in
them, is also in us, we being the children of Adam as well as they: and by the
force of this corruption, if Christ were now living on earth, thou would, if
like occasion were offered, either do as Judas did in betraying him, or as
Pilate did, deliver him to be crucified, or as the soldiers, thrust him through
with their spears, or as Julian, pierce him with all manner of blasphemies, if
God withheld his graces from thee, and leave thee to thy self. In a word, let
men conceive in mind the most notorious trespass that can be, though they do
it not, nor intend to do it, and never do it: yet the matter, beginning, and
seed thereof is in themselves. This made Jeremy say, Ier. 17 ^.
The heart of man is deceitful and wicked above all things, who can know it?
It is like a huge sea, the banks whereof can not be seen, nor the bottom
searched. In common experience we see it come to pass, that men, protestants
to day, to morrow papists; of Christians, heretics; now friends, but presently
after foes; this day honest and civil men, the next day cruel murderers. Now
what is the cause of this difference; surely the hidden corruption of the
heart, that will thrust a man forward to any sin when occasion is offered.
This point must be remembered and ^ften thought upon.

From original sin springs actual, which is nothing ^ls but the fruit of
the corrupt heart, either in thought, word, or deed.

Thus much touching man's fall into sin by Gods just permission. Now follows
the good use which we must make thereof. First by this we learn to acknowledge
and bewail our own frailty. For Adam in his innocence being created
perfectly righteous, when he was once tempted by the devil, fell away from
God: what shall we do then in the like case which are by nature sold under
sin, and in our selves a thousand times weaker then Adam was? Many men there
be that mingle themselves with all companies: tell them of the danger thereof,
they will presently reply that they have such a strong faith that no bad
company can hurt them. But alas, silly people, Satan bewitcheth them, and
makes them to believe falshoode to be truth: they know not their miserable
estate. If Adam, says Barnard, had a downfall in Paradise, what shall we do
that are cast forth to the dunghill? Let us therefore often come to a serious
consideration of our own weakness, and follow withal the practice of David,
who being privy to himself touching his own corruption, prays to God on
this manner, Psalm. 80.11.
Knit my heart to thee, O Lord, that I may fear thy name. Secondly, we learn
hereby absolutely to submit our selves to the authority of God, and simply to
resolve our selves, that whatsoever he commands is right and just, though the
reason of it be not known to us. For Eve condiscended to listen to the speech
of the serpent, and without any calling she reasoned with it of a most
weighty matter, and that in the absence of Adam her head and husband, namely
of the truth and glory of God: and hereby was brought to doubt of Gods word,
and so ouerturned. Thirdly, if all men by Adams fall be shut up under
damnation, there is no cause why any of us should stand upon his birth, riches,
wisdom, learning, or any other such gifts of God: there is nothing in us that
is more able to cover our vileness and nakedness, then figtree leaves were
able to cover the offense of Adam from Gods eyes. We are under the wrath of God
by nature, and can not attain to everlasting life of our selves. Wherefore it
does stand every one of us in hand to abase our selves under the mighty hand
of God, in that we are become by our sins the very basest of all the
creatures upon earth, yea utterly to despair in respect of our selves, and
with bleeding hearts to bewail our own cases. There is no danger in this: it
is the very way to grace: none can be a lively member of Christ till his
conscience condemn him, and make him quite out of heart in respect of
himself. And the want of this is the cause why so few perceive any sweetness
or comfort in the Gospel: and why it is so little loved and embraced now a
days. Lastly, if all mankind be shut up under unbelief, the duty of every
man is, to labor in using all good means whereby we may be delivered from
this bondage, and to pray to God with David, Psalm. 52.10.
Create in me a ^l^an heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. And
cry out with Paul, Romans 7.14.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? And
we must never be at rest till we have some assurance in conscience that in
Christ we have freedom from this bondage, Coloss. 1.13.
and can with the Colossians give thanks that we are delivered from the power
of darkness, and translated into the kingdom of Christ. This should be the
affection of every man, because the spiritual thraldom under sin is of all
miseries most loathsome and burdensome. And in this respect the day of death
should be unto us most welcome, because it does unloose us from this miserable
estate, in which we do almost nothing but displease God. For this is the
greatest grief that can be to such as are indeed the children of God, by their
sins to offend their merciful father. As for those which feel not the
weight of their natural guiltiness and corruption, but lie slumbring in the
security of their own hearts, they are therefore the more miserable, in that
being plunged in the gulf of all misery, yet they feel no misery.

Thus much of the permission of the fall of man. Now we come to the Covenant of
grace. Which is nothing else but a compact made between God and man touching
reconciliation and life everlasting by Christ. This covenant was first of all
revealed and delivered to our first parents in the garden of Eden, immediately
after their fall by God himself, in these words, Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head, and afterward it was
continued and renewed with a part of Adams posterity, as with Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, David, etc. but it was most fully revealed and accomplished at the
coming of Christ.

In the Covenant I will consider two things; the parties reconciled between
whom the Covenant is made, and the foundation thereof. The parties are God and
man. God is the principal, and he promises righteousness and life eternal in
Christ: Man again binds himself by Gods grace to believe and to rest upon
the promise. Here it may be demanded why man is more in the covenant then
angels. Ans. The will of God in this point, is not revealed unless it be
because angels fell of themselves, not moved by any other: but man did fall by
them. Again it may be asked, whether all mankind were ever in the covenant or
no? Ans. We can not say that all and every man has bin and now is in the
covenant, but only that little part of mankind which in all ages has bin the
Church of God, and has by faith embraced the covenant: as Paul plainly
avouches, Gal. 3.22.
The scripture (says he) has concluded all under sin: that the promise of the
says of Jesus Christ should be given [not unto all men] but to the^ that
believe. Without faith no man can please God; Heb 11.6.
and therefore God makes no covenant of reconciliation without faith. Again
since the beginning of the world there has bin always a distinction between
man and man. This appears in the very tenor of the words of the covenant made
with our first parents, where God says he will put difference between the
seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent: meaning by the seed of the
woman, Christ with all the elect whom the father has given unto him, who
shall bruise the serpents head, and tread Satan under their feet. Romans 16.20.
And by the seed of the serpent he means wicked men that live and die in
their sins, as S. John says, 1. Ioh. 3.8. Gen 6.3.
he that commits sin is of the devil. And according to this distinction in
times following was Abel received into the covenant, and Cain rejected: some
were the sons of God in the days of Noe, some the sons of men: In Abraham's
family, Ismael is cast out, and the covenant established in Isaac: Genesis 1^.21.
Romans 6.
Jacob is loved, Esau is hated. And this distinction in the families of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Paul approoueth when he makes some to be the
children of the flesh, and some other the children of the promise. And again,
the Jews a people of God in the covenant, the Gentiles no people. For Paul
makes it a privilege of the Jews to have the adoption, and covenants, and the
service of God, Romans 9.3.^
and the promises belonging unto them: whereas he says of the Ephesians that
they were alients from the common wealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12.
and were strangers from the covenants of promise, and had no hope, and were
without Christ and without God in the world. And the same may be said of the
whole body of the Gentiles excepting here and there a man, who were converted
and became Proselytes. And this is manifest in that they wanted the word and
the Sacraments, and teachers. And this saying of the prophet Ose, ^om. 9^ ^.
I will call them my people which were not my people: and her belooued which
was not beloved, is alleged by Paul to prove the calling of the Gentiles.
Some do allege to the contrary, that when the covenant was made with our
first parents, it was also in them made with all mankind, not one man excepted:
and that the distinction and difference between man and man arises of their
unbelief and contempt of the covenant afterward. Ans. Indeed in the estate of
Innocence Adam by creation received grace for himself and his posterity: and
in his fall he transgressed not only for himself but for all his posterity:
but in receiving of the covenant of grace it cannot be proved that he received
it for himself and for all mankind: nay the distinction between the seed of
the woman and the seed of the serpent, mentioned in the very first giving of
the covenant, shows the contrary: for, if after the fall, all and every part
of mankind were received into the covenant: then all men without restraint
should be the seed of the woman, bruising the serpents head, and the serpent
should have no seed at all. And again, all men can not be charged with
unbelief and contempt in respect of the Evangelical covenant, but only such
persons as have known it, or at the least heard of it. And therefore sundry
heads of the nations may be charged with unbelief, as Cain, Cham, Iaphet,
Ammon, Moab, Ismael, Esau, Madian, for they being near to the fathers heard
the promises concerning Christ, offered sacrifices, and observed external
rites of the Church, but afterward fell away from the sincere worship of the
true God to idolatry and all manner of wickedness, and became enemies of God
and his people. But we plainly deny, that there was or could be the like
unbelief and contempt of Gods grace in their posterity, which for the most
part never so much as heard of any covenant: their ancetours indeauouring
always to bury and extinguish the memory of that which they hated. It is
objected again, that the covenant was made with Abraham and with all mankind
after him, Genesis 18.22.
Because, says the Lord, thou have obeyed my voice, in thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed. Ans. Paul gives a double answer, first that
the place must be understood of many nations: secondly that it must be
understood not of all nations in all ages, but of all nations of the last age
of the world. For, says he, Gal. 3.8.
the scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles through faith,
preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, in the shall all thee nations
be blessed. Well, to conclude this point, in the making of the covenant there
must be a mutual consent of the parties on both sides, and beside the promise
on Gods part, there m^st be also a restipulation on man's part; otherwise the
covenant is not made. No^e then, it must needs follow that all unbelievers
contemning grace offered in Christ are out of the covenant; as also such as
never heard of it, for where there is no knowledge, there is no consent: and
before the coming of C^^ist^ the greatest part of the world never knew the
Messiah, nor heard of the covenant, as Paul says to the learned Athenians,
Act. 17^ 30.
the time of this ignorance God regarded not; but now he admonishes all men
every where to repent.

The foundation and ground work of the covenant is Christ Jesus the Mediator,
in whom all the promises of God are yea and amen, and therefore he is called
the angel of the conenant, Malac. 3.1. Isa. 49.8.
and the covenant of the people to be made with all nations in the last age.
Now then that we may proceed at large to open the substance of the covenant,
we are in the next place to come to that part of the creed which concerns the
second person in Trinity, set down in these words, And in Jesus Christ his
only son, etc. from which words to the very end of the Creed, such points
only are laid down as do notably unfold the benefits and the matter of the
covenant. Now the second person is described to us by three things; first, his
titles; secondly, his incarnation; thirdly, his twofold estate. His titles are
in number four. I. Jesus. II. Christ. III. his only son. IIII. our Lord.
His incarnation and his twofolde estate are set down afterward.

To come to his titles, the first is Jesus, to which if we add the clause, I
believe, on this manner, I believe in Jesus etc. the article which we now
have in hand will appear to be most excellent; because it has most notable
promises annexed to it. When Peter confessed Christ to be the son of the
living God, he answered, Math. 16.16. 1. Ioh. 4.15.
upon this rock will I build my church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. And again, He that confesses that Christ is the son of
God, God dwells in him, and he in God. And again, Act. 10.43.
To him give all the prophets witness that through his name all that believe
in him shall receive remission of sins. Paul says, Act. 16.31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved and all thy household. Thus
then the confession in which we acknowledge that we believe in Jesus Christ,
has a promise of fellowship with God and of life everlasting. But it may be
objected, 1. Ioh. 4.2.
that every spirit (as S. John says) which confesses that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh is of God. Now the devil and all his angels and unbelievers
do thus much: therefore why may not they also have the benefit of this
confession. Ans. By spirit in that place is neither meant angels nor me^, nor
any creature, but the doctrine which teaches that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh; and it is of God because it is holy and divine and has God to be the
author of it. As for the devil and his angels they can indeed confess that
Christ the son of God was made man, and a wicked man may teach the same; but
unto the confession whereunto is annexed a promise of eternal life, is
required true faith, whereby we do not only know and acknowledge this or
that to be true in Christ, but also rest upon him: which neither Satan nor
wicked men can do. And therefore by this confession the Church of God is
distinguished from all other companies of men in the world which believes
not; as Panyms, heretics, Atheists, turks, Jews, and al other infidels.

This name Jesus, Math. 1 21. Luke 1.31.
was given to the son of God by the father, and brought from heaven by an
angel unto Joseph and Marie: and on the day when he was to be circumcised, as
the manner was, this name was given unto him by his parent^^ as they were
commanded from the Lord by the Angel Gabriel. And therefore the name was not
given by chance, or by the alone will of the parents, but by the most wise
appointment of God himself.

The name in Hebrew is Iehosoua, and it is changed by the Grecians into Jesus
which signifies a Savior. And it may be called the proper name of Christ,
signifying his office and both his natures, because he is both a perfect and
absolute Savior, as also the alone Savior of man, because the work of
salvation is wholly and only wrought by him, and no part thereof is reserved
to any creature in heaven or in earth. As Peter says, Act. 4.11.
For among men there is no other name given under heaven whereby we may be
saved but by the name of Jesus, And the author to the Hebrews says, Heb. 7.25.
That he is able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them. If any shall object, that the
promises of salvation are made to them which keep the commandments: the
answer is, that the law of God does exact most absolute and perfect obedience,
which can be found in no man but in Christ, who never sinned and therefore it
is not given unto us now that we might by our selves fulfill it, and work out
our own salvation, but that being condemned by it, we might wholly depend
on Christ for eternal life. 1. Tim. 4.8.
If any further allege, that such as walk according to the commandments of
God, though their obedience be imperfect, yet they have the promises of this
life and of the life to come. The answer is, that they have so indeed, yet not
for their works, but according to their works which are the fruits of their
faith, whereby they are joined to Christ, for whose merits only they stand
righteous and are acceptable before God. And whereas it is said by Peter, 1.
Pet. 3.21.
that baptism saves us, his meaning is not to signify that there is any
virtue in the water to wash away our sins and to sanctify us, but that it
serves visibly to represent and confirm unto us the inward washing of our
souls by the blood of Christ. It may further be said, that others have been
Saviors beside Christ as Iosuah the son of Nun, who for that cause is called
by the same name with Christ. Heb. 4.8.
Ans. Joshua after the death of Moses was appointed by God to be a guide to the
children of Israel, which might defend them from their enemies and bring them
to the land of Canaan: but this deliverance was only temporal, and that only
of one people. Now the Son of God is called Jesus, not because he
delivers the people of the Jews only, or because he saves the bodies of
men only, but because he saves both body and soul, not only of the Jews
but also of the Gentiles, from hell, death, and damnation. And whereas Prophets
and ministers of the word are called Saviors; it is because they are the
instruments of God to publish the doctrine of salvation which is powerful in
men's hearts, Obed. v. ^1. 1. Tim. 4.^6.
not by any virtue of theirs, but only by the operation of the spirit of
Christ. Lastly, it may be objected that the father and the holy Ghost are
Saviors, and therefore not only the son. Ans. True it is, that in the work
of salvation all the three persons must be joined together, and in no wise to
be severed: the Father saves, the Son saves, the holy Ghost saves: yet
must we distinguish them in the manner of saving: the father saves by the
Son; the Son saves by paying the ransom and price of our salvation; the
holy Ghost saves by a particular applying of the ransom unto men. Now
therefore whereas the son paies the price of our redemption and not the
Father or the Holy Ghost, therefore in this special respect he is called in
Scriptures and entitled by the name of Jesus, and none but he.

By this which has been said, the Papists are faulty two ways. First, that
they give too much to the name of Jesus: for they write in plain terms,
Thyrrh. de demon. these. 567. 569.
that the bare name it self being used has great power and does drive away
devils, though the parties that use it be void of good affection: whereas
indeed it has no more virtue then other titles of God or Christ. Secondly,
they are faulty that they give too little to the thing signified. For Christ
must either be our alone and whole Savior or no Savior. Now they make him but
half a Savior, and they join others with him as partners in the work of
salvation, when they teach, that with Christ's merits must be joined our works
of grace in the matter of justification, and with Christ's satisfaction for the
wrath of God, our satisfaction for the temporal punishment; and when they add
to Christ's intercession the intercession and patronage of Saints, especially of
the Virgin Marie, whom they call the Queen of heaven, Officium E. Mariae
reform. a Pio 5. p^ntif.
the mother of mercy, withal requesting her, that by the authority of a
mother she would command her son. If this doctrine of theirs may stand,
Christ can not be the only Savior of mankind, but every man in part shall be
Jesus to himself.

But let us go on yet further to search the special reason of the name, which
is notably set down by the Angel. Math. 1.21.
Thou shall (says he) call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins. In which words we may consider three points, I. Whom the Son
of God shall save. II. By what? III. From what? For the first, he shall save
his people, that is, the elect of the Jews and Gentiles: and therefore he is
called the Savior of his body. Ephesians 5.23.
We must not here imagine that Christ is a Savior of all and every man. For if
that were true, then Christ should make satisfaction to Gods justice for all
and every man's sins: and Gods justice being fully satisfied he could not in
justice condemn any man: nay, all men should be blessed because satisfaction
for sin and the pardon of sin depend one upon an other inseparably.
Again, if Christ be an effectual Savior of all and every particular man, why
is any man condemned? It will be said, because they will not believe; Actus
primae causae ordinat actum secund^ causae.
belike then man's will must ouerrule Gods will, whereas the common rule of
divines is, that the first cause orders the second.

The means of salvation by Christ are two: his merit, and his efficacy. His
merit, in that by his obedience to the law and by his passion, he made a
satisfaction for our sins, freed us from death, and reconciled us unto God.
Some may object, that the obedience and the passion of Christ being long ago
ended, can not be able to save us now: because that which he did 1500. years
ago may seem to be vanished and come to nothing at this day. Ans. If Christ's
obedience be considered as an action, and his passion as a bare suffering, they
are both ended long ago: yet the value and price of the^ before God is
everlasting: as in Adams fall the action of eating the forbidden fruit is
ended, but the guilt of his transgression goes over all mankind, and continues
still even to this hour, and shall do to the end of the world in those which
shall be borne hereafter. The efficacy of Christ is, in that he gives his
spirit to mortify the corruption of our natures, that we may die unto sin
and live to righteousness, and have true comfort in terrors of conscience and
in the pangs of death.

The evils from which we are saved are our own sins, in that Christ freeth
us from the guilt and the punishment and fault of them all, when we believe.

Thus much for the meaning of this title Jesus. Now follow the uses which
arise of it. First of all, whereas we are taught to make confession that the
sonn^ of God is Jesus, that is, a Savior; hence it must needs follow that
we are lost in our selves. And indeed before we can truly acknowledge that
Christ is our Savior, this confession must needs go before, that we are in
truth, and therewithal do feel our selves to be miserable sinners under the
wrath of God, utterly lost in regard of our selves: for Christ came to save
that which was lost. Mat. 18.11.
And when he talked with the woman of Cannan, he checked her and said, he was
not sent, Mat. 15.24.
but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Christ Jesus came to pour oil
into our wounds: Christ came to set them at liberty which are in prison: and
to place them in freedom that are in bondage. Now a man cannot pour oil into
a wound, before there be a wound, or before it be opened and we feel the smart
of it. And how can we be set at liberty by Christ, except we feel our selves
to be in bondage, under hell, death, and damnation? When the Disciples of
Christ were upon the sea in a great tempest, they cried, Master, save us, we
perish. Mat. 8.25.
So no man can heartily say, I believe Jesus Christ to be my Savior, before he
feel, that in himself he is utterly lost and cast away without his help. But
after that we perceive our selves to be in danger and to be overwhelmed in the
sea of the wrath of God, then we cry out with the disciples, Lord Jesus save
us, we perish. Many protestants in these days hold Christ to be their Savior,
but it is only formably from the teeth outward, and no further: for they were
never touched with the sense of their spiritual misery that they might say
with Daniel, Shame and confusion belongs unto us: and with the Publicane, I
am a sinner, Lord be merciful to me. And therefore the conclusion is this,
that if we will have Christ to be our Savior, we must first believe that in
our selves we are utterly lost; and so must that place be understood where
Christ says, he is not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,
that is, to those which in their own sense and feeling are lost in themselves.

Secondly, if Christ be a Savior, then we must acknowledge him to be so. But
how shall we do this? I answer, Thus: A man is taken to be a skilful
Physician by this, that many patients come unto him, and seek for help at his
hands. And so should it be with Christ. But alas, the case is otherwise. Every
man can talk of Christ, but few acknowledge him to be a Savior, by seeking
to him for their salvation, because they judge themselves righteous, and feel
not themselves to stand in need of the help of Christ. Nay which is more, If a
man be known that can cure strange diseases, men will seek to him by sea and
land, and sell both goods and lands to get help at his hands. Even so, if men
were persuaded that Christ were a perfect Savior, and that they were sick and
utterly unable to be saved without him, they would never rest nor be in quiet
but seek unto him for his help, and cry with David, O Lord, say unto my soul
that thou art my salvation. Psalm. ^5.3.
The woman that was diseased with an issue of blood, came behind our Savior
Christ, and when she had but touched him, Mat. 9.20.
she was healed. In the same manner, if we shall seek to come to Christ, and
do but touch his precious body and blood by the hand of faith, the issues
and the bleeding wounds of our souls shall be dried up. When a man that had
been sick eight and thirty years was come to the poole of Bethesda, he was
feign to lie there uncured; Ioh. 5.7.
because when the angel troubled the water evermore some stepped before him: but
if we will seek to Christ for the salvation of our souls, no man shall
prevent us or step before us. And if we find our selves to be so laden with
the burden of our sins that we can not draw near unto him, let us then do
as the palsy man did: Mark. 2.4.
he got four men to carry him on their shoulders to the place where Christ
was: and when they could not by reason of the prease of people enter into the
house, they opened the roof and let him down in his bed by cords to Christ,
that he might be healed. And so let us use the help of such as be godly, that
by their instructions and consolations they may as it were put to their
shoulders, and by their prayers as with cords bring us to Christ, that we may
receive eternal salvation, being otherwise dead in sin and subject to
damnation.

Lastly, whereas Joseph and Marie gave this name not at their own pleasure,
but at the appointment of God himself; this ministers a good instruction to
all parents touching the naming of their children when they are baptized, that
they are with care and deliberation to give convenient names unto them, which
may put them in mind of duties either to God or men. This is worthy of our
observation, for many care not how they name their children, yea it is at this
day and ever has been, that some give such names to them, as that at the very
rehearsing thereof laughter ensues. But this ought not to be so; for the name
is given unto children at the time of their baptism in the presence of God, of
his Church, and angels, even then when they are to be entered into the Church of
God and that in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy ghost:
therefore though we do not place religion in titles, or names, yet
nevertheless a wise and godly choice in this matter is to be had, that the
names imposed may be in stead of instructions and admonitions to the parties
named: and for this cause in the old Testament names were given either by
prophetical instinct, or according to the event of things which came to pass
about the time of the birth of children, Luke 1.5.9.
or they were borrowed from the holy ancetours, to put the posterity in mind
to follow their steps.

And thus much of the duties: Now follow the consolations that Gods Church and
people r^ape from this, that the son of god is our Savior. When as all
mankind was included under sin and condemnation, then the Lord had mercy upon
us and gave unto man the covenant of grace in which he promised that his own
son should be our redeemer. This is a great and unspeakable comfort, as may
appear in that the angels so greatly reioiced herein when Christ was born,
Behold, say they, I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be to all the
people, Luke 2.10.11.
that is, that unto you is borne in the city of David a Savior which is
Christ the lord. Now if they rejoice thus exceedingly at Christ's birth, who was
not their Savior, because they stood not in need to be redeemed: then much
more ought the Church of God to rejoice herein whom it does principally
concern: and no marvel: for if we had wanted this blessed Savior, it had bin
better to have bin a bruit beast or any other cre^ture then a man; for the
death of a beast is the end of his woe, but the death of a man without a
Savior is the beginning of endless misery. Satan and his angels are fallen
and have no Savior, but when man was fallen, God of his mercy dealt not so
with him, but gave his own son to restore him to a better estate, whereas he
might as justly have damned all men for the fall of our first parents, as he
did the wicked angels for theirs; for God is not bound to any creature: behold
then a matter of unspeakable joy: let us therefore receive and embrace Christ
our Savior, fly to him for the pardon of all sins, and praise his name
therefore.

Now we come to the second title of the son of God, whereby he is termed
Christ: which title is as it were the surname of the second person as some do
think: yet according to the opinion of some others it is no name at all, but
only a mere appellation, as when in the like case a particular man is called
a Duke or a King. Tertul. contra ^ra^eam. Dan. 9.25.
It is all one with Messiah in Hebrewe wherewith the redeemer was named in the
old Testament, and both signify anointed.

Among the Jews before the coming of Christ three estates or orders of men
were anointed with oil: First of all Kings, as Saul, David, and the rest of
the Kings of Judah. Secondly, the priests that served in the Tabernacle and
Temple before the Lord when they were ordained, and as it were, installed into
the priesthood, were anointed with oil, as first of all Aaron and his sons,
but afterward the high priests alone. Thirdly Prophets were thus anointed, as
Elisha.

Now this legal anointing was a type and figure of the anointing of Christ:
which was not with bodily oil, but by the spirit, and it was more excellent
then all other annointings were. For David says, he was anointed with the
oil of gladness above all his fellows, ^sal. ^5.7.
signifying, that neither king, priest, nor prophet, was ever anointed in the
same manner as he was.

Christ's anointing is according to both his natures; for in what nature ^e is
a Mediator, in the same he is anointed: but according to both his natures
jointly he is a Mediator: the godhead is no mediator without the manhood, nor
the manhood without the godhead: and therefore his anointing extends it self
both to his godhead and to his manhood.

Christ's anointing has two parts, both of them figured by the anointing of
the Jews. The first is his consecration whereby he was set apart to do the
office of a Mediator between God and man: and therefore to be a king, a
priest, a prophet: a king, to gather and withal to govern his Church and
people: a priest, to make satisfaction and intercession for the sins of the
elect: a prophet, to reveal and teach his people the will of God his father.
And though it be true that Christ is set apart to the work of mediation as he
is mediator or as he is man: yet as he is God he does design and set himself
apart to the same work. For to design the mediator is a common action of the
three persons, the father, the sonne^ and the holy ghost: and yet considering
the father is first in order, and therefore has the beginning of the action;
for this cause he is said especially to design, as when S. John says; Him
has God the father sealed. Ioh. 6.17.


The second part of Christ's anointing is the pouring out of the fullness of
the spirit or grace into the manhood of Christ: Isai 61.1.
and it was particularly figured by the holy oil. For first, that oil had no
man but God alone to be the author of it: so the most excellent and
unspeakable graces of the manhood of Christ have their beginning from the
godhead of Christ. Again, though the same oil was most precious, Exodus 30.
yet was it compounded of earthly substances, as myrrh, calamus, and Casia,
and such like, to signify, that the spiritual oil of grace whereof the
manhood of Christ was as it were, a vessel or storehouse, did not consist of
the essential properties of the godhead, as Eutiches and his followers in
these days imagine, but in certain created gifts and qualities placed in his
human nature: otherwise we should not have any participation of them.
Thirdly, the sweet savor of the holy oil figured, that the riches of all
grace with the effect thereof in the obedience of Christ, does take away the
noisome sent of our loathsome sins from the nosthrilles of God, and withal
does make our persons and al our actions acceptable unto him as a sweet
perfume, as Paul says, 2. Cor. 2.16,
we are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, etc. And Christ's death is for
this cause termed a sacrifice of sweet smelling savor.

And we must further understand that the^e gifts of Christ's manhood are not
conferred in a small scantling or measure; for John says, Ioh. 3.34.
God gives the spirit not by measure; because the graces which are in Christ
are far more both in number and degree, then all men or angels have or shall
have: though the good angels and the saints of God in heaven are very excellent
creatures stored with manifold graces and gifts of God. For this cause Christ
is called the head of man; 1 Cor. 11.4.
because he is every way the most principal and glorious man that ever was. Yet
for all this are not the gifts of Christ's manhood infinite any way; because it
is a creature and finite in nature, and therefore not capable of that which is
infinite.

By Christ's anointing the people of God reap great benefit etcomfort, because
they are to be partakers thereof. For this cause the oil wherewith he was
anointed is called the oil of gladness, Psalm. 45^7.
because the sweet savor of it gladdeth the hearts of all his members, and
brings the peace of God which passes all understanding. Psalm. 133.^.
The holy oil poured upon Aarons head came down to his beard, and to the very
skirts of his garments: and it signified that the spiritual oil of grace was
first of all poured upon our head Christ Jesus, and from thence consequently
derived to al his members, that by that means he might be not only anointed
himself, but also our annointer.

Now the benefits which we receive by his anointing are two. The first is,
that all the elect when they are called to the profession of the Gospel of
Christ, are in and by him set apart and made spiritual kings, priests, and
prophets, as S. John says, Apoc. ^6.
He has made us kings and priests unto his father. And S. Peter out of Joel,
Act. 2.17^.
I will pour (says the Lord) my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and
daughters shall prophecy.

The second benefit it, that all the faithful receive the same oil, that is,
the same spirit of God in some little etconuenient measure which he received
above measure, as Saint John saith^ 1. Ioh. ^.27. Psalm. 10^.15^.
The anointing which ye have received of him dwells in you and teaches you
all things: where by anointing is meant the holy Ghost. And hence it is, that
men are called Christians of the name of Christ, that is, anointed with the
same oil wherewith Christ was anointed. And the holy oil might not be given
to a stranger, to signify, that to have the spirit of Christ, and to be
guided by it, is peculiar to them that are Christ's. Exodus 30.33.
Now then let us all lay these things to our hearts, and extol the unspeakable
goodness of God that has advanced us to the dignity of kings, priests,
prophets, before him, and has given us his spirit unto us to enable us to be
so indeed.

Now follow the duties which are to be learned hence. And first, whereas all
Christians receive anointing from the holy one Christ Jesus, 1. Ioh. 2.20.
Dan. 9.24.
to become prophets in a sort, we must do our endeauours, that the word of God
may dwell plentifully in us, Ioh. 5.39. (...).
and for that cause we must search the Scriptures, even as hunters seek for
the game, and as men seek for gold in the very mines of the earth. There is
nothing more unbeseeming a man, then gross ignorance a Christian. Hebr. 5.12.
Therefore the author of the epistle to the Hebrews reprooues them, that
whereas for the time they ought to have bin teachers, they had need again to
be taught the first principles of the word of God.

Again, that portion of knowledge which we have received of God is further to
be applied to the benefit and good of others: this is that most precious baulme
that on our parts should never be wanting to the heads of men. Psalm. 141.5.
And here every man that is set over others must remember within the compass
of his calling and charge to instruct those that be under him so far forth as
possibly he can. Governors of families must teach their children and servants
and their whole household the doctrine of true religion, that they may know the
true God and walk in all his ways in doing righteousness and judgment. If
householders would make conscience of this their duty, and in some sort and
measure prepare their families against they come to the public congregation,
the ministers of the Gospel with greater comfort and far more ease should
perform their duty: and see far more fruit of their ministry then now
they do. But whereas they neglect their duty, falsely persuading themselves
that it does not belong to them at all to instruct others; it is the cause of
ignorance both in towns and families, in masters themselves, in servants and
children and all. Lastly, by this we are admonished to take all occasions that
possibly can be offered, mutually to edify each other in knowledge, Is^. ^.3.
saying among our selves (as it was foretold of these times) Come, let us go
up to the mountain of the Lord to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will
teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: and withal, we should
confirm each others, as Christ says to Peter, 1. Pet. 2.5.
When thou art converted confirm thy brethren; and be ready at all times to
render an account of our faith and religion even before our enemies when we are
justly called so to do.

Secondly, because we are set apart in Christ, to become spiritual priests
unto God, we must therefore offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable unto him:
and they be in number seven. The first is an affiance whereby we rest upon God,
as David says, ^sa^. 4.5.
Offer the sacrifice of righteousness and trust in the Lord. The second is
wholly to subject our selves to the ministry of the Gospel, that we may be
changed and converted by it, as Paul says, Romans 15.16.
That he ministers the Gospel to the Gentiles, that the offering up of them
might be acceptable, being sanctified by the holy Ghost. The third is, all
manner of prayers and supplications made unto God. Let my prayer, says David,
Psalm. 141.2.
be directed in thy sight as incense, and the lifting up of mine hands as an
evening sacrifice. The fourth is praising and thanksgiving unto God. Heb. 13.15.
Let us by him offer the sacrifice of praise always to God, that is, the fruit
of the lips which confess his name. And in the Revelation the golden vials
full of odours are the prayers of the Saints. Rev. 5.8.
The fifth is the relief of our poor brethren according to our ability, as
Paul says, ^hil. 4.18.
I was even filled after that I had received of Epaphroditus that which came
from you, an odor that smells sweet, a sacrifice pleasant and acceptable to
God. The sixth is the denial of our selves with a contrite and broken heart.
The seventh is, Psalm. 51.19.
to resign our selves, bodies, and souls wholly to the service of God: Romans
6.13.
Set your selves (says Paul) to God, as they that are alive from the dead: and
your members as weapons of righteousness unto God. In which words he alludes
to the manner of the old Testament: when a man offered any sacrifice for
himself, he brought the beast into the temple or tabernacle and set it before
the altar, in token that he did resign it unto God: and so we for our parts
must not give our bodies and souls to become the instruments of sin and
satan, but we must have them always in read^nesse, freely presenting them unto
God that he may have the whole disposition of them according to his good
pleasure, to the honor and glory of his name. Again, in the whole burnt
offering all was consumed and turned to smoke, no man having benefit of it, to
signify, that we must give our selves not in part but wholly to the service
of God, even to death if need be. If this be so, miserable is the practice of
such that give up their bodies and souls to live in licentious wantonness, in
the pleasures of their beastly sins, in idleness. For they offer themselves a
sacrifice, not to God but to the devil.

Thirdly, considering we are anointed to be spiritual kings even in this
life, we must walk worthy so great a calling. That this may be so, first of
all such as are governors set over others, must rule not according to their
wills and pleasures, but in the Lord: withal, doing homage to their head and
king Christ Jesus himself. Secondly, we must every one of us rule and bear
sway even as kings over our own thoughts, wills, affections, ouer-mastering
them as much as we possibly can by Gods word and spirit: withal, maintaining
and proclaiming continual war against our corrupt natures, the devil, and
the world. And truly he which can bear rule over his own heart, is a right
king indeed: and having received some measure of grace to reign over himself
in this life, he shall reign for ever with Christ in the life to come. As for
such as are carried away with the swinge of their corruptions, having blindness
and ignorance to reign in their minds, rebellion in their wills and affections,
loosenes in their whole lives, they may carry the outward form and show of
Christians as long as they will, but indeed they are no spiritual kings but
very bondmen: the strong man Satan keeps as yet the hold of their hearts, and
as Lord and king holds up his scepter there.

Lastly, seeing Christ is anointed with the most precious baulme that ever
was, and that for our sakes, he must be sweet and sauourie unto us, and all
other things must be as unsavory dross and dung in regard of him. We must in
this case endeavor to say as the spouse of Christ does: Cant. 1.2.
Because of the savor of the good ointments, thy name is an ointment poured
out: therefore the virgins love thee. Isai 11.3.
O that we could savor in the fear of God, that we might feel how all his
garments smell of myrrh, aloes, and cassia, coming forth of his iuorie
palaces unto us. Psalm. 45.8.
And because the holy ointment of Christ is poured forth upon all his members
to make them sauorie and sweet in the presence of God, let us make conscience
of all manner of sin, least by the poison and stink thereof we infect not
only our selves, but all the creatures of God which we use, yea heaven and
earth it self. It stands not with equity that after we have been embaulmed
and sweetened by the precious merits of Christ that we should make our selves
two-footed swine, to return to the mire of our old sins.

The coupling and combining of these two former titles together, contains the
principal question of the whole Bible, which is, whether Jesus the son of
Marie be Christ or no; as S. John says, These things are written, that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that in believing
ye might have life everlasting. Ioh. 20.31.
This conclusion was denied by the Jews, but avouched and confirmed both by
Christ and by his Apostles; and their principal argument was framed thus. A^t.
18.5.
He which has the true notes of Christ is the Messiah or Christ indeed: but
Jesus the Son of Marie has the true notes of Christ: therefore Jesus is
Christ. The proposition is opened at large in the prophesies of the old
testament: the assumption is confirmed in the writings of the new testament:
and the principal reasons of the confirmation are couched in the articles
which concern the second person. The conclusion follows, and is set down as I
have said, in the knitting together of the titles, Jesus and Christ.

Thus much of the second title: now follows the third, his only Son: that
is, the only Son of the first person the Father. In this title we must
consider two things: the first, that he is the Son of God: the second, that
he is the only Son of God. Touching the first, Christ is called the Son of
God, because he was begotten of the Father. Now for the opening of this
eternal generation, we must consider three points: the thing begotten, the
manner of begetting, and the time. For the thing it self, it is Christ; who
must be considered two ways, as he is a son, and as he is God. Non (...)
tame^ (...).
As he is a son, he is not of himself, but the son of the father begotten of
him: nevertheless as he is God, he is of himself neither begotten nor
proceeding; for the essence or godhead of the father is of it self without all
beginning: but the Godhead of the son is one and the same with the godhead of
the father: because by what Godhead the father is God, by the same and no other
the son is God: therefore the son, as he is God, he is God of himself
without beginning even as the father. Whereupon it follows, that the son is
begotten of the father as he is a son, but not as he is God.

The manner of this generation is this. The son is begotten of the substance
of the father not by any flux, as when water is derived from the head of the
spring to the channel: nor by decision, as when a thing is cut in pieces: nor
by propagation, as when a grift is transplanted into a new stock: but by an
unspeakable communication of the whole essence or Godhead from the father to
the son; in receiving whereof the son does no more diminish the majesty or
godhead of the father, then the light of one candle does the light of the other
from which it is taken. Whereupon the Council of Nicene has said well, that
the son is of the father as light of light not proceeding but begotten.

The time of this generation has neither beginning, middle, or end: and
therefore it is eternal before all worlds: and it is a thing to be wondered
at, that the father begetting and the son begotten are coeternall, and
therefore equal in time. Prove. 8.24.
Wisdom in the Proverbs (which with one consent of all Divines is said to be
Christ) affirms that she was before the world was created, that is, from
eternity: for before the world was made there was nothing but eternity. But
it may be alleged to the contrary, that the saying of the father, This day
have I begotten thee, Isal 2.7. Act. 13.30,33.
is expounded by Paul of the time of Christ's resurrection. Ans. We must
distinguish between generation it self, and the manifestation of it: and of
the second must the place be understood, which was indeed accomplished at the
time of Christ's resurrection in which he was mightily declared to be the son
of God, Rom: 1.4.
and though this be so, yet the generation it self may be eternal. If any man
allege further that the person which begets must needs go before the
person begotten, the answer is, that there is a double prioritie; one of order,
the other of time: now in the generation of creatures there is prioritie both
of order and time; but in the generation of the second person in trinity there
is prioritie of order alone: the father being first, the son second, without
prioritie of time: because they both in that respect are equal, and neither is
before or after other: because the being or subsisting of the persons is not
measured by time.

Hence it follows necessarily, that Jesus Christ is true God: and the whole
tenor of the Scriptures confirm it sufficiently: I. He is made equal to God
the father, Phil. 2 6. Job. 16 15. Number. 14 2^,27 1. ^or. 10.9. Psalm. 102.15.
with Ioh. 1.3.
who being in the form of God thought it no robbery to be equal with God:
again, All things that the father has are mine. The children of Israel are
said to have tempted Jehovah: and Paul says, that he whom they tempted was
Christ. Jehovah founded the earth, and the same is said of Christ. II. Christ
the son of God is by name called God: Jesus Christ is very God and life
eternal. 1. ^ob. 5.20.
III. The properties of the godhead are ascribed unto him. He is eternal,
because he was then when there was no creature. Ioh 1.1. and 8.58.
In the beginning was the Word: and, before Abraham was I am. He is
omnipresent, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, ^here am I in
the midst amongst them. Math. 18.20. and 26
Lastly he is omnipotent, Ioh. 5.17.
What soever things the father does, the same does the son also. IV. The
works of creation and preservation are as well ascribed to the son as to the
father. By him the father made the world, and he bears up all things by his
mighty power: and miracles, which are works either above or against the order
of nature peculiar to God, were done by Christ. V. Divine worship is given to
him: for he is adored, invocated, and believed in, as God the father. Phil.
2.10.
To him is given a name, at which every knee does bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth.

As for the reasons which be alleged to the contrary, they are of no moment.
I. Object. The word of God can not be God: the son is the word of the father:
therefore he is not God. Answ. The word is taken two ways: first for a
sounding word standing of letters and syllables uttered either by God or by the
creatures: now on this manner Christ is not the word of God. Secondly there is
a substantial word, which is of the substance of him whose word it is. And
thus Christ is the word of God the father. And he is so termed, I. in respect
of the father: for as reason and speech has his beginning from the mind
without any passion in the mind, so has he beginning from the father. And as
the speech is in the mind and the mind in the speech, so the father is in the
son, and the son in the father. II. In respect of all creatures. The father
does all things by the son; Ioh. 1.1. He^. 1.3. Job. 5.25. 2. ^or. 13.3. Ioh.
17.
by whose powerful word the world was made, is now preserved and shall be
abolished. III. In respect of the Church. For the father by him speaks unto us
both in the outward ministry of the word, and by the inward operation of the
spirit: and again we by him speak to the father.

II. It may be objected thus, God has no beginning from any other; Christ has
beginning from the father: therefore he is not God. Answ. Christ must be
considered both in regard of his godhead and in regard of his person: in regard
of his godhead he came not of any but is of himself, as well as the father is:
yet in regard of his person he is from the father, who is a beginning to the
rest of the persons, (...)
both in respect of order (for the Scripture says not; the holy Ghost, the
Son, the Father: but the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost) as also in
respect of the communication of the Godhead. And whereas it is said that God is
of himself, if the name of God, be taken for the Godhead it self absolutely
considered, it is true: but if it be taken for any particular person in the
godhead, it is false. III. Ob. None is greater then God: but the father is
greater then Christ, for so he says, Ioh. 14.
the father is greater then I. Ans. Christ there speaks of himself as he was
a man abased in the form of a servant: in which respect he is less then the
father, who never was incarnate and abased in our nature. And though Christ in
respect of his nature assumed be inferior to the father, yet does it not
hinder but that he may be equal to him, as he is the second person in
trinity, or as he is God by one and the same Godhead with the father. IV.
Object. He that is made of God, this or that, is not God: but Christ is made
God, as Paul says, ^. Cor. 1.30.
Christ is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, etc. Answ. Christ is said to be
made, not because there was any beginning of his godhead, or any change or
alteration in his person: but because in the eternal counsel of the father,
he was set apart before all times to execute the office of a Mediator, and was
withal in time called, and as it were consecrated and ordained thereunto in
his baptism: he is made therefore in respect of his office, but not in respect
of his person, or nature. V. Object. God has no head, Christ has an head, as
Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.3.
God is Christ's head. Answ. God, that is, the father, is head of Christ, not as
he is God simply, but as he is God incarnate, or made manifest in the flesh,
and in respect of the office to which he willingly abased himself. VI. Object.
He which gives up his kingdom is not God, Christ gives up his kingdom. Then,
says Paul, ^. Cor. 15.24.
shall be the end, when he has delivered up the kingdom to God even the
father. Answ. Christ is king two ways, as he is God, and as he is Mediator:
as he is God, he reigns eternally with the Father and the holy Ghost: but as
he is Mediator, in the end of the world when all the company of the Elect
are gathered, his kingdom shall cease not simply but in respect of the outward
manner of administration: for the execution of civil and ecclesiastical
functions shall cease. And whereas in the same place, verse. 28.
it is said that Christ shall be subject unto God eternally after the end, it
must be understood partly in regard of the assumed manhood, partly in respect
of his mystical body the Church most nearly joined unto him in heaven. Rom
8.29. Col. 1.1^.
VII. Object. The first borne of every creature, and of many brethren, is a
creature and not God: but Christ is the first borne of every creature, and of
many brethren. Answ. He is called the first borne by resemblance or allusion to
the first borne in the old testament: Genesis 49.3. Deuteronomy. 2^.17.
for as they were principal heirs having double portions allowed them; and
the chief or governors of the family: so Christ is made heir of the world,
and the head of Gods family which is his church elected and adopted in him.
And again he is called the first borne of every creature, because he was
begotten of the substance of his father before any creature was made, and
therefore it is not here said that he was first created, but first begotten.

By the reasons which have bin alleged, as also by the insufficiency of the
contrary arguments, it is more then manifest against all heretics that Christ
is very God. Yet to stop the mouths of all Atheists, and to satisfy all
wavering and doubting minds, I will add one reason further. The Gospel of
Saint John was chiefly penned for this end, to prove the deity of Christ: and
among other arguments alleged; this is one, that Christ gave a resolute and a
constant testimony of himself, that he was the son of God, and very God.
Now if any man shall say, that sundry persons since the beginning of the world
have taken upon them and that falsely, to be gods: I answer, that never any
creature took this title and honor upon him to be called God, but the
fearful judgments of God were upon him for it. In the estate of man's
innocence the devil told our first parents that by eating the fruit of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil, they should be as gods knowing good and
evil: now, they believed him, and affected divine honor, but what came of it?
surely Adam with all his posterity is shut up for this very cause under
eternal damnation. Herod likewise araied in royal apparel, and sitting on
the judgment seat, made an oration to the men of Tire and Sidon, who gave a
shout, saying, the voice of God, and not of man. Now because he took the
glory of God to himself, and did not return it to him to whom it was due,
immediately the angel of the Lord smote him. And so, if Christ had bin but a
mere man, and not very god, as he avouched, undoubtedly the hand of God would
have bin upon him likewise for his confusion: but when he suffered for us, and
bare the punishment due for our sins, he most triumphed. And the judgments
of God were upon Herod, Pontius Pilate, Caiphas, and upon all those that were
enemies to him, and to his Church afterward, and that partly in life and partly
in death. Wherefore considering God cannot abide that his glory should be
given to any creature, and seeing for that cause he takes revenge on all those
that exalt themselves to be gods, it remains that the testimony which Christ
gave of himself that he was God, is infallibly true, and without all question
to be believed of us. And to conclude, I would have all the devils in hell
with the cursed order of Lucians, Porphyrians, and Atheists whatsoever to
answer ^his one point, how it could come to pass, that Christ by publishing
the doctrine of the Gospel, that is as contrary to man's reason, will, and
affections, as water to fire, should win almost the whole world to become his
disciples, and to give their lives for him, unless he were God indeed, as he
professed himself to be.

There be sundry special reasons wherefore it was necessary that Christ
should be God. I. There is none which can be a Savior of body and soul but
God. Isa. 4^.11.
I even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior. And, I am the Lord
the God from the land of Egypt, and thou shall know no God but me: for there is
no Savior beside me. Os^ 13.4.
II. There must be a proportion between the sin of man and the punishment of
sin: now the sin of man in respect of the offense of the majesty of God is
infinite, in that he is infinitely displeased with man for the breach of his
law: therefore the punishment of sin must be infinite: and hence it
follows, that he which suffers the punishment being man, must withal be
God, that the manhood by the power of the Godhead may be supported, that in
suffering it may vanquish death, and make a sufficient satisfaction. III. He
that must be a Savior, must be able first to deliver men from the bondage of
their spiritual enemies, namely sin and Satan: secondly to restore the image
of God lost by the fall of Adam, and to confer righteousness and life
everlasting: thirdly, to defend them from hell, death, damnation, the flesh, the
devil, the world: fourthly, to give them full redemption from all their
miseries both in body and soul, and to place them in eternal happiness: all
which none can do, but he which is very God. IV. It was the pleasure of God,
to show his incomprehensible goodness in this, that his grace should not only
be equal to our sin, but also by many degrees go beyond it. And therefore
the first Adam being but a mere man, the second Adam must be both God and
man: that as the second was more excellent then the first, so our comfort might
be greater in our redemption by the second, then our misery and discomfort was
by the fall of the first.

Hitherto we have showed how Christ is the son of God: now let us come to the
second point, namely that he is the only son of God. And he is so termed
because he is the son of the father, in a special manner, so as nothing can
be the son of God as he is. Angels indeed are termed the sons of God, but
that is only in respect of their creation: Job 1.
and all that believe in Christ are sons of God by adoption, being received
into the family of God which is his church by the merit of Christ, whereas by
nature they were the children of wrath. Christ also as he is man (I say not his
manhood which is a nature and no person) is the son of God by the grace of
personal union, and not by nature or adoption. Lastly Christ as he is the
second person in trinity, the eternal word of the father, coeternall and
consubstantiall with him, is also the son of God. But how? neither by
creation, nor adoption, nor by the virtue of personal union, but by nature; as
he was begotten of the very substance of the father before all world: and
therefore he is called the proper and only begotten son of God. Ioh. ^.18.
^om 8.32.
It may be objected on this manner. If the father beget the son, he does it
either willingly, or against his will: if willingly, the^ the son is begotten
by the free will of the father, and no son by nature. Ans. The father did
communicate to the son his whole godhead willingly without co^straint, yet
not by his will; and therefore he is the Son of the father by nature, not by
will. It may be further said, that if Christ be the son of God by nature, as
he is the essential word of the father, and by personal union as he is man,
then is he not one but two sons. Ans. As he is but one person, so is he but
one son: yet not in one but in two respects: two respects make not two
things, whereas one and the same thing not altered but still remaining one may
admit sundry respects.

Thus much of the meaning of the third title: now follow the comforts which
may be gathered hence. Whereas Christ Jesus is the son of God, it serves as a
means to make miserable and wretched sinners that are by nature the children
of wrath and damnation, to be the sons of God by adoption: as S. John
testifies. Ioh. 1.11.
Now what a benefit is this to be the child of God, no tongue can express.
Christ says, Blessed are the peacemakers: but why are they blessed? for, says
he, Man 5.9.
they shall be called the sons of God. Whereby he testifies that the right
of adoption is a most excellent privilege; and not without cause. For he which
is the child of God, is spiritually allied to Christ, and to all the Saints and
servants of God both in heaven and earth, having his own redeemer for his
elder brother, and all his members as his brethren and sisters; yea if we be
Gods adopted children, we are also heirs, even heirs of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ. Romans 8.17.
Well, how great soever this prerogative is, yet few there be that rightly way
it etconsider of it. Children of noble me^ and Princes heirs are had in
account and reputation of all men, they are the very speech and wonder of the
world. But it is a matter of no account to be the son of God and
fellow-heire with Christ. The dearest servants of God have been esteemed but
as the offscouring of the world. And no marvel, for they which are after the
flesh, savor the things of the flesh. Few men have their understandings
enlightened to discern of such spiritual things as these are, and therefore
are they little or nothing regarded. A blind man never seeing the sun, is
not brought to wonder at it: and earthly minded men neither seeing nor feeling
what an excellent thing it is to be the child of God, cannot be brought to
seek after it. But let all such as fear God enter into a serious
consideration of the unspeakable goodness of God, comforting themselves in
this, that God the father has vouchsafed by his own son to make them of the
vassals of satan, to be his own dear children.

Now follow the duties which are two. First, we believe that Jesus Christ who
was to be the Savior of mankind, must needs be God: what is the reason
hereof? surely because no creature, no not all the creatures in heaven and
earth were able to save one man: so vile, wretched, and miserable is our estate
by Adams fall. And therefore the son of God himself pitied our estate, and
being king of heaven and earth, was feign to come from heaven, and lay down
his crown and become a servant, and taking upon him our nature, was also feign
to take upon him our case and condition, and suffer death for our sins, which
otherwise every one of us should have suffered both in body and soul world
without end. To make this more plain, let us suppose that some one has
committed an offense against a prince; and the trespass to be so grievous,
that no man can appease the kings wrath, save only the kings only son; and
which is more, the kings son himself cannot release him, unless he suffer
the punishment for him in his own person, which is due unto the malefactor.
Now what is to be thought of this man's estate? surely all men will say that he
is in a most miserable taking, and that his trespass is notorious: and so it
is with every one of us by nature, whatsoever we are. No man could save our
souls, no not all the angels in heaven, unless the king of heaven and earth
the only son of God had come down from heaven and suffered for us, bearing
our punishment. Now the consideration of this must humble us and make us to
cast down our selves under the hand of God for our sins, and pray
continually that the Lord would send some Moses or other which might smite the
rocks of our hearts, that some tears of sorrow and repentance might gush out
for this our woeful misery.

Secondly, whereas God the Father of Christ gave his onley son to be our
Savior, as we must be thankful to God for all things, so especially for this
great and unspeakable benefit. Common blessings of God, as meat, drink,
health, wealth, and liberty, must at all times move us to be thankeful; but
this, that Christ Jesus the only son of God, redeemed us being utterly
lost, this I say, must be the maine point of all our thankfulness: but alas,
men's hearts are so frozen in the dreggs of their sins, that this duty comes
little in practice now adays. When our Savior Christ cleansed ten lepers,
there was but one of them that returned to give him thanks: and this is as
true in the leprosy of the soul, for though salvation by Christ be offered
unto us daily by Gods ministers, yet not one of ten, nay scarce one of a
thousand gives praise and thanks to God for it, because men take no delight in
things which concern the kingdom of heaven, they think not that they have
need of salvation, neither do they feel any want of a Savior. But we for our
parts must learn to say with David, Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits? yea we are to practice
that which Solomon says, Prove. 23.^6.
My son give me thy heart: for we should give unto God both body and soul
in token of our thankfulness for this wonderful blessing that he has given
his only son to be our Savior; and we are to hold this for truth, that
they which are not thankful for it, let them say what they will, they have no
soundnes of grace or power of religion at the heart.

And thus much of the third title. The fourth and last title is in these
words, our Lord. Christ Jesus the only son of God is our Lord three ways:
first by creation in that he made us of nothing, when we were not: secondly he
is our Lord in the right of redemption. In former times the custom has bin
when one is taken prisoner in the field, he that paies his ransom shall become
always after his Lord: so Christ when we were bondslaues under hell, death,
and condemnation, paid the ransom of our redemption, and freed us from the
bondage of sin and satan, and therefore in that respect he is our Lord.
Thirdly he is the head of the Church (as the husband is the wives head,) to
rule and govern the same by his word and spirit. And therefore in that respect
also Christ is our Lord.

And thus much for the meaning. Now follow the duties. And first of al, if
Christ be our Sovereign Lord, we must perform absolute obedience unto him,
that is, whatsoever he commandes us, that must we do. And I say, absolute
obedience, because Magistrates, Masters, Rulers, and fathers may command, and
must be obeyed, yet not simply, but so far forth as that which they command
does agree with the word and commandment of God: but Christ's will and word is
righteousness it self, and therefore it is a rule and direction of all our
actions whatsoever: and for this cause he must be absolutely obeyed. Thus he
requires the obedience of the moral law: but why? because he is the Lord our
god. Exodus 20.
And in Malachie he says, If I be your Lord where is my fear? Mal. 1.6.
And again, we must resign both body and soul, heart, mind, will,
affections, and the course of our whole lives to be ruled by the will of
Christ. He is Lord not only of the body, but of the spirit and soul of man:
he must therefore have homage of both. As we adore him by the knee of the
body, so must the thoughts and the affections of our hearts have their knees
also to worship him, and to show their subjection to his commandments. As for
such as do hold him for their Lord in word, but in the mean season will not
endeavor to show their loyalty in all manner of obedience, they are indeed
no better then stark rebels. Secondly, when by the hand of Christ strange
judgments shall come to pass, as it is usual in all places continually; we
must stay ourselves without murmuring or finding fault, because he is an
absolute Lord over all his creatures; all things are in his hands, and he
may do with his own whatsoever he will; and therefore we must rather fear
and tremble whenever we see or hear of them: so David says, Psalm. 119.120.
I was dumb and opened not my mouth because thou did it. And again, My
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. 1. Cor.
10.26^
Thirdly before we use any of Gods creatures or ordinances, we must sanctify
them by the direction of his word and by prayer: the reason is this, because he
is Lord over all, and therefore from his word we must fetch direction to teach
us whether we may use them or not, and when and how they are to be used: and
secondly we must pray to him, that he would give us liberty and grace to use
them aright in holy manner. Also we are so to use the creatures and ordinances
of God, as being always ready to give an account of our doings at the day of
judgment: for we use that which is the Lords, not our own; we are but
stewards over them, and we must come to a reckoning for the stewardship. Have
thou learning? then employ it to the glory of God, and the good of the Church:
boast not of it as though it were thine own. Have thou any other gift or
blessing of God, be it wisdom, strength, riches, honor, favor, or
whatsoever, then look thou use it so, as thou may be always ready to make
a good account thereof unto Christ. Lastly, every one must in such manner lead
his life in this world, that at the day of death he may with cheerefulnes
surrender and give up his soul into the hands of his Lord, and say with
Steven, Act. 7.
Lord Jesus receive my soul. For consider this with thy self, that thy soul
is none of thine own, but his who has bought it with a price, and therefore
thou must so order and keep it as that thou may in good manner restore it
into the hands of god at the end of thy life. If a man should borrowe a thing
of his neighbor, and afterward hurt it and make a spoil of it, he would be
ashamed to bring it again to the owner in that manner, and if he do, the
owner himself will not receive it. Ungodly men in this life do so stain
their souls with sin, that they can never be able willingly to give them up
into the hands of God at the day of death: and if they would, yet God accepts
them not, but casts them quite away. We must therefore labor so to live in the
world, that with a joyful heart at the day of death we may commend our souls
into the hands of our Lord Christ Jesus, who gave them unto us. This is a
hard thing to be done and he that will do it truly, must first be assured
of the pardon of his own sins, which a man can never have without true and
unfeigned faith and repentance: wherefore while we have time, let us purge and
cleanse our souls and b^dies, that they may come home again to God in good
plight.

And here all governors must be put in mind that they have an higher Lord,
that they may not oppress or deal hardly with their inferiors. This is Paul,
reason, Ephesians. 6.9.
Ye masters, says he, do the same things unto your servants, putting away
threatening: and know that even your master is also in heaven, neither is there
respect of persons with him. Inferiors again must remember to submit
themselves to the authority of their governors, especially of magistrates.
For they are set over us by our sovereign Lord and king Christ Jesus: as Paul
says, Romans 13.^.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. For there is no power but of
God, and the powers that be ordained are of God. And again, Ephesians. 6.5.
Servants be obedient to your Masters according to the flesh, with fear and
trembling, in singlenes of your hearts, as unto Christ.

The comfort which Gods Church may reap hence, is very great: for if Christ be
the Lord of lords, and our Lord especially whom he has created and redeemed,
we need not to fear what the devil or wicked men can do unto us. If Christ
be on our side, who can be against us? we need not fear them that can
destroy the body and do no more: Math. 10.28.
but we must cast our fear on him that is Lord of body and soul, and can cast
both to hell.

Thus much of the fourth title. Now follows Christ's incarnation, in these
words, Conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Marie. And they
contain in them one of the most principal points of the doctrine of godliness,
as Paul says, ^. Tim. 3.16.
Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness, which is, God is
made manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, etc. And that we may
proceed in order, in handling them, I will first speak of the incarnation
generally, and then after come to the parts thereof. In general we are to
propound five questions, the answering whereof will be very needful to the
better understanding of the doctrine following.

The first question is, who was incarnate^ or, made man? Answ. The second
person in Trinity, the son of God alone, as it is set down in this article
according to the Scripture. S. John says, Ioh. 1.14.
The Word was made flesh: and the angel says, Luk 1.35.
The holy one which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the son of the
most high. And Paul says, Romans 2.3.
that Christ Jesus our Lord was made of the seed of Abraham according to the
flesh. And there be sundry reasons, why the second person should rather be
incarnate then any other. I. By whom the father created all things, and man
especially; by him man being fallen is to be redeemed, and as I may say
recreated: now man was at the first created of the father by the son: and
therefore to be redeemed by him. II. It was most convenient, that he which is
the essential image of the father, should take man's nature that he might
restore the image of God lost and defaced in man, Heb. 1.3. Colo^^. 1.
but the second person is the essential image of the father, and therefore he
alone must take man's nature. III. It was requisite that that person which was
by nature the son of God, should be made the son of man, that we which are
the sons of men, yea the sons of wrath, should again by grace be made the
sons of God: now the second person alone is the son of God by nature, not
the Father, nor the holy Ghost.

As for the Father, he could not be incarnate. For to take flesh is to be sent
of an other, but the Father can not be sent of any person, because he is from
none. Again, if the Father were incarnate, he should be father to him which is
by nature God, and the son of a creature, namely the virgin Marie, which
things can not well stand.

And the holy Ghost could not be incarnate^ for then there should be more
sons then one in the Trinity, namely the second person the son of the
father, and the third person the holy Ghost, the son of the virgin Marie.

It may be objected to the contrary on this manner: The whole divine essence
is incarnate, every person in Trinity is the whole divine essence, therefore
every person is incarnate. Ans. The whole Godhead indeed is incarnate, yet not
as it is absolutely considered, but so far forth as it is restrained and
limited to the person of the son; and to speak properly, the godhead it
self is not incarnate, but the very person of the son subsisting in the
Godhead. And though all the persons be one and the same essence, yet do they
really differ each from other in regard of the peculiar manner of subsisting:
and therefore man's nature may be assumed of the second person, and be not
assumed either of the father or of the holy Ghost; as in the like case the
soul of man is wholly in the head and wholly in the feet, yea wholly in every
part: and yet the soul can not be said to use reason in the feet or in any
other part, but only in the head.

Again it may be alleged, that the incarnation being an outward action of
God to the creature, is not proper to the son. For the rule is, that all
outward actions of God are common to all the persons in Trinity equally. Ans.
Inchoative communis, termina ive no^: sic scholastici.
The incarnation stands of two actions, the first is the framing and creating
of that manhood which was to be assumed by the Son, or Word of the father:
and this action is common to all the three persons equally: the second is the
limiting or the receiving of it into the unity of any person, and in respect
of this action, the work of incarnation is peculiar to the Son. To this
purpose Augustine speaks, Aug. in E^ch. as Laur. c. ^8.
That creature (says he) which the Virgin conceived and brought forth, though
it appertain to the person of the son alone, yet was it made by the whole
Trinity: as when three men weaue one and the same garment, and the second
only wears it.

The second question is, what manner of man the son of God was made? Answ. He
was made a proper or particular man, and a perfect or a very man. I say that he
was a particular man, to show that he took not unto him the general form or
idea of man's nature conceived only in mind, nor the common nature of man as
it is existing in every man: but the whole nature of man, that is, both a body
and a reasonable soul, existing in one In vno indi^iduo.
particular subject. I say further that he was and is a true and perfect man,
being in every thing that concerns man's nature like to Adam, Abraham, David,
and all other men, saving only in sin. For first of all he had the substance
of a true body and of a reasonable soul: secondly, the properties of body and
soul: in the bodi^, length, breadth, thickness, circumscription, etc. in the
soul, the faculties of understanding both simply and compounde: will,
affections, as love, hatred, desire, joy, fear, etc. the powers also of
hearing, feeling, seeing, smelling, tasting, moving, growing, eating,
digesting, sleeping, etc. Thirdly, he took unto him the infirmities of man's
nature, which are certain natural defects or passions in body or mind, as
to be hungry, thirsty, weary, sad and sorrowful, Ignorantia ^^e^ae
priuationis non prauae dispositionis.
ignorant of some things, angry, to increase in stature, and wisdo^e, and
knowledge, etc. yet this which I say must be understood with two caueats. The
first is, that infirmities be either certain unblameable passions, or else
such defects as are sins in themselves: now Christ takes the first only,
and not the second. Secondly, infirmities be either general, or personal;
generall^ which appertain to the whole nature of man, and are to be found in
every man that comes of Adam: as to be borne unlearned, and subject to natural
affections, as sorrow, anger, etc, Personal, are such as appertain to some
particular men, and not to all, and arise of some private causes and particular
judgments of God, as to be borne a fool, to be sick of an ague,
consumption, dropsy, plurisie, and such like diseases. Now the first sort be
in Christ, and not the second: for as he took not the person of any man^ but
only man's nature, so was it sufficient for him to take unto him the
infirmities of man's nature, though he took not the private infirmities of any
man's person. And the reason why Christ would put on not only the substance and
faculties of a true man, but also his infirmities, was; that he might show
himself to be very man indeed, also that he might suffer for us both in body
and soul, and that he might give us an example of patience in bearing all
manner of evil for Gds glory and the good of our neighbor.

Now the things which may be alleged to the contrary for the infringing of
the truth of Christ's manhood, are of no moment. As first, because Christ
appeared in the form of a man in the old testament, being no man: Genesis
^8.9.13.
therefore he did so at his coming in the new testament: but the reason is not
like. For Christ in the old testament as the angel of his father in some
special affairs, took unto him the body of a man for some space of time;
but he did not receive it into the unity of his person; but laid it down when
the business which he enterprised with men was ended. Now in the fullness of
time he came from heaven, as the angel of the covenant, and for that cause he
was to unite into his own person the nature of man, which thing was never done
before. And when as Paul says, Romans 8.3.
that Christ came in the similitude of sinful flesh, his meaning is not to
signify, that he was a man only in resemblance and show; but to testify,
that being a true man which was indeed void of sin, he was content to abase
himself to that condition in which he became like to a miserable sinner in
bearng the punishment for our sin. For Paul does not say that he took upon
him the similitude of flesh simply as it is flesh, but of the flesh of sin or
sinful flesh.

The third question is, why the son of God must become man? Ans. There be
sundry reasons of this point, and the most principal are these. First of all
it is a thing that greatly stands with the justice of God, that in that nature
in which God was offended, in the same should a satisfaction be made to God for
sin: now sin was committed in man's nature: Adam sinned first and in him
all his posterity: therefore it is very necessary that in man's nature there
should be a satisfaction made to Gods justice, and for this cause the son of
God must needs abase himself and become man for our sakes. Secondly, by the
right of creation every man is bound in conscience to fulfill even the very
rigor and extremity of the moral law. But considering man is now fallen
from his first estate and condition, therefore it was requisite that the Son
of God should become man, that in man's nature he might fulfill all
righteousness which the law does exact at our hands. Thirdly, he that is
our redeemer must die for our sins; for there is no remission of sins
without shedding of blood: but Christ as he is God cannot die. For no passion
can befall the Godhead. Therefore it was needful that he should become man,
that in man's nature he might die and fully satisfy Gods justice for man's
offense. Lastly he that must make reconciliation between God and man, must be
such an one as may make request or speak both to God and man. For a Mediator
is as it were a middle person making intercession between two other persons,
the one offended the other offending. Therefore it is necessary that Christ
should not only be God, to speak unto the father for us and to present our
prayers unto him; but also man, that God might speak to us, and we to God by
Christ. For howsoever before the fall, man could speak to God even face to
face, yet since the fall, such fear possesses man's corrupt nature that he
cannot abide the presence of God, but flies from it.

Now whereas I say that it was necessary that the son of God for the causes
before alleged must become man; the necessity must be understood in respect
of Gods will, and not in respect of his absolute power. For if it had so
pleased God he was able to have laid down an other kind of way of man's
redemption, then by the incarnation of the son of God: August. de Agone
Christ.
and he appointed no other way, because he would not.

Thus much of the Incarnation in general. Now follow the duties which arise
of it. And first we are taught hereby to come to Christ by faith, and with all
our hearts to cleave unto him. Great is the deadness and sluggishnesse of man's
nature: for skarse one of a thousand care for him, or seek unto him for
righteousness and life everlasting. But we should excite our selves every
way to draw near to him as much as possibly we may: for when he was
incarnate, he came near unto us by taking our nature upon him, that we again
whatsoever we are, might come near unto him by taking unto us his divine
nature. 2. Pet. 1.4.
Again, when Christ was incarnate, he was made bone of our bone, and flesh of
our flesh; and therefore proportionally we must labor to become bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh: which we shall be, when we are mystically united
unto him by faith, and borne anewe by his spirit. Moreover Christ by his
incarnation came down from heaven to us, that we being partakers of his grace
might ascend up to heaven by him. And thus we see how the meditation of Christ's
incarnation should be a spur to prick us forward still more and more to come
to Christ.

Secondly, Christ's incarnation must be a pattern unto us of a most wonderful
and strange humility. For as Paul says, Phil. 2.6.7.
Being in the form of God and thinking it no robbery to be equal with God,
made himself of no reputation, and took on him form of a servant: and
humbled himself and became obedient to death, even to the death of the cross.
Yea so far forth he abased himself, that (as David says) he was a worm and
no man. Psalm. 22.
And this teaches us to lay aside al self-love and pride of heart, and to
practice the duties of humility, as the Apostle exhorts the Philippians in the
same place: and that shall we do when we begin to cast off that high opinion
which every man by nature conceiueth of himself, and become vile and base in
our own eyes. Secure and drowsy protestants think themselves blessed, and
say in their hearts as the Angel of the Church of Laodicea said, Rev. 3.17.
I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; whereas indeed
they are most miserable and wretched, and poor, and naked, and blind. And the
same fond opinion possesses the minds of our ignorant people, who chant it in
the very same tune, saying, that God loves them, and that they love God with all
their hearts, and their neighbors as themselves: that they have perfect faith
in Christ, and ever had, not once so much as doubting of their salvation: that
all is well with them, and that they are past all danger whatsoever, in the
matter of their salvation, and therefore need not take so much care for it.
Thus ye may see how men are commonly carried away with vain and fond
conceits of their own excellency. And truly so long as this ouerweening of
our own righteousness reigns in our hearts, let preachers speak and say
what they will, we can never become followers of Christ in the practice of
humility. Some will say peradventure, that they never had any such opinion of
their own righteousness; but I answer again; that there was never yet any man
descending of Adam, save Christ; but he had this proud fantasy ruling and
reigning in him, till such time as God gave grace to change and alter his
heart: and this inward pride the less we discern it the more it is, and the
more we discern it the less it is. Therefore though as yet thou see it not in
thy self, yet labor both to see it and to feel it, and to strive against it,
casting down thy self for thy own misery after Christ's own example, who being
God abased himself to the condition of a miserable man. For thou shall never
be filled with the good things of god, till thou be emptied of self-love and
selfe-liking. For this cause let us purge and empty our selves of all conceit
of our own righteousness that god may fill our hearts with his grace.

Furthermore, the incarnation of Christ is the ground and foundation of all our
comfort, as the names of Christ serving to express the same do testify. Ge^.
49.10.
I^akob in his last Testament says, P. Galatin de ^^culti ^^^hol veritas. l. 4
c. ^.
that the scepter shall not depart from Judah in Shilo, that is, the Messiah
come. Now the name Shilo signifies the tunicle or skin that lappeth the
infant in the mothers womb, called by the Physicians the secundine: and by a
kind of figure it is put for the Son of God in the womb of the virgin, made
man. And Job to comfort himself in his affliction says, Goel.
I know that my redeemer lives. Now the word which he uses to signify his
redeemer by, is very emphaticall, for it signifies a kinsman near allied
unto him of his own flesh that will restore him to life. And the Lord by the
prophet Esaias calls Christ Immanuel, that is, God with us: which name
imports very much, namely, that whereas by nature we have lost our
fellowshippe with God, because our sins are a wall of partition seuering us
from him: Isai 59.2. Colost 1.1^.
yet nevertheless the fame is restored to all that believe by the Mediator
Christ Jesus: because his divine nature is coupled to man's nature, and so the
word is made flesh. And this strait conjunction of two natures into one person,
ioynes God to men and men to God: yea by Christ we are brought to God and have
free access unto him, and again in him we apprehend God and are made one with
him.

And further whereas Christ beside our nature took our infirmities also, it is
a wonderful comfort unto Gods Church: for it shows, that he is not only a
Savior, but also a very compassionate and pitiful Savior. As the holy Ghost
says, Heb. 2.17.
In all things it became Christ to be like unto his brethren, that he might
be merciful and a faithful high priest in things concerning God. Let a man be
sick of a grievous disease, and let a friend come that has been troubled
with the very same disease, he will presently show more compassion then
twenty others: and so Christ having felt in his own soul and body the
anguish and the manifold perplexities that we feel in our temptations and
afflictions, has his bowels as it were yearning toward us, evermore being
pressed and ready to relieve us in all our miseries. In the days of his flesh,
he wept over Jerusalem when he saw it a far off, because she continued in
her old sins, and did not know the time of her visitation: and no doubt,
though now he be exalted in glory in heaven, yet his compassion to his poor
members upon earth is no whit diminished.

Now we come to speak of the Incarnation more particularly: and the creed yet
further expresses it by two parts; the first is the conception of Christ in
these words, Conceived by the holy ghost: the second is his birth, in the words
following, Borne of the virgin Marie.

The conception of Christ is set down with his efficient cause, the Holy
Ghost, as the angel said to Joseph, Mat. 1.20.
Fear not to take Marie for thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is of
the holy ghost. Here it may be demanded why the conception of Christ should be
ascribed to the Holy Ghost alone, which is common to all the persons in
Trinity, as all other such actions are. Ans. It Augu^t. enci^. c. 37 39.


In the conception of Christ we must observe and consider three things. The
framing of the manhood, the sanctifying of it, and the personal union of the
manhood with the Godhead. And howsoever I distinguish these three for orders
sake, yet must we know and remember, that they are all wrought at one and the
same instant of time. For when the holy Ghost frames and sanctifies the manhood
in the womb of the Virgin; at the very same moment it is received into the
unity of the second person.

In the framing of Christ's manhood two things must be considered, the matter
and the manner. The matter of his body was the very flesh and blood of the
virgin Marie; otherwise he could not have been the son of David, of Abraham,
and Adam according to the flesh. As for his soul, it was not derived from the
soul of the virgin Marie as a part thereof, but it was made as the souls of
all other men be, that is, of nothing, by the very power of God, and placed in
the body: both of them from the first moment of their being, having their
subsistence in the person of the son. And here we must take heed of two
opinions: the first is of the Anabaptists, which hold, that the flesh of
Christ came down from heaven, and passed through the virgin Marie as through a
pipe, without taking any substance from her: the places which they allege for
the purpose are manifestly abused. For whereas Christ says of himself that he
descended from heaven, Ioh. 3.13.
his speech must be understood in respect of his Godhead, which may be said in
some sort to descend, in that it was made manifest in the manhood here upon
earth. And whereas Paul calls him heavenly and the Lord from heaven, 1. Cor.
15.
it is not in respect of the substance of his body, but in respect of the
glorious qualities which he received after this resurrection. The other opinion
is of the Papists, that hold the bread in the sacrament to be turned
substantially into the body of Christ: which thing if it be true, then the
body of Christ is made of bread kneaded and tempered by the hand of the baker,
and not of the substance of the virgin Marie.

As for the manner of the making and framing of the humane nature of Christ, it
was miraculous; not by generation according to the ordinary course of nature,
but by an extraordinary operation of the holy Ghost above nature: and for this
cause, it is not within the compass of man's reason either to conceive or to
express the manner and order of this conception. The Angel ascribes two
actions to the holy Ghost in this great work; the one to come upon the virgin
Marie; the other, to ouershadow her: Luke 1.35.
by the first is signified the extraordinary work of the holy Ghost in
fashioning the humane nature of Christ, for so much the phrase Iud. 14.6.
elsewhere imports. The second signifies, that the holy Ghost did as it were
Act. 1.8. Luke 24.49.
cast a cloud over her, to teach us, that we should not search over much into
the mystery of the Incarnation.

It may be objected against this which has bin said, that if Christ be in this
manner conceived by the holy Ghost, then the holy Ghost shall be father to
Christ, and Christ his son. Answ. The reason is not good. For he that is a
father is not a bare efficient cause, but one which in the effecting of any
thing conferres the matter unto it from himself, whereof it shall be made. Now
the holy Ghost did not minister any matter unto Christ from his own substance,
but did only as it were, take the mass and lump of man's nature from the
body of the virgin Marie, and without ordinary generation made it the body
of Christ: as Basil says, Sermon. de S. nati^^t.
Christ was conceived not of the substance, but of the power, not by any
generation, but by the appointment and benediction of the holy Ghost.

The second point in the conception; is the sanctifying of that mass or lump
which was to be the manhood of Christ. And that was done upon special cause:
first, that it might be joined to the person of the Son, which could not have
been if it had been defiled with sin. Secondly, Christ was a Savior as he
is both God and man: now then being man, if he had been sinful himself,
he could not have saved others, but should have stood in need of a Savior
for himself.

This sanctification has two parts: the first is, the stay and stoppage of the
propagation of original sin, and of the guilt of Adams sin; which was on
this manner. God in the beginning set down this order touching man, that what
evil or defect soever he brought upon himself, he should derive the same to
every one of his posterity begotten of him: and hereupon when any father
begets his child, he is in the room of Adam, and conueies unto it beside the
nature of man the very guilt and corruption of nature. Now for the preventing
of this evil in Christ, God in great wisdom appointed that he should be
conceived by the holy Ghost without any manner of generation by man. And by
this means he takes substance from the Virgin without the guilt and corruption
of the substance. But it may further be objected thus. All that be in Adam have
sinned in him: but Christ was in Adam as he is man: therefore he sinned in him.
Ans. The proposition is false, unless it be expounded on this manner: All that
were in Adam have sinned in him so be it they come of him by generation. Paul
says not, out of one man, but, Romans 5.12.
by one man sin entered into the world, to show, that man propagates his
corruption to no more then he begets. Again, Christ is in Adam not simply as
other men are, but in some part: namely in respect of substance which he took
from him, and not in respect of the propagation of the substance by ordinary
generation: other men are both from Adam and by Adam, but Christ is from him
alone and not by him as a begetter or procreant cause. The second part of
sanctification is the infusion of all pureness and holiness into the manhood
of Christ, so far forth as was meet for the nature of a redeemer.

The duties to be learned hence are these: First, whereas Christ was sanctified
in the womb of the virgin Marie, we likewise must labor to be sanctified in
our selves, following the commandment of God, Be ye holy as I am holy. S. John
says, that he which has hope to be with Christ in glory in heaven, 1. Ioh.
3.3.
purifieth himself even as he is pure: no doubt setting before himself the
example of Christ as a pattern to follow in all his ways. And because our
hearts are as it were seas of corruptions, we must daily cleanse our selves of
them by little and little, following the practice of the poor beggar that is
always peecing and mending, and day by day pulls away some rags and puts
better cloth in the room. And if we shall continually endeavor our selves to
cast off the remnants of corruption that hang so fast on, and make a supply
thereof by some new portions of Gods heavenly grace; we shall be vessels of
honor sanctified and meet for the Lord, and prepared unto every good work.
Christ could not have been a fit Savior for us unless he had first of all
bin sanctified: neither can we be fit members unto him, unless we be purged of
our sins and in some measure truly sanctified.

The comfort which Gods people may reap of the sanctification of Christ's
manhood is great. For why was he sanctified? Surely if we mark it well, we
shall find it was for the good and benefit of his Elect. For Adam and Christ
be two roots as has been showed. Adam by creation, first received Gods
image, and after lost the same for himself and his posterity. Now Christ to
remove the sin of man is made the second Adam, and the root and very head
of all the Elect. His manhood was filled with holiness above measure: that
from thence as from a storehouse it might be derived to all his members. And
therefore by his most holy conception, our sinful birth and conception is
sanctified, and his holiness serves as a cover to hide our manifold
corruptions from the eyes of God. Yea it serves as a buckler to award the
temptations of the devil: for when he shall say to our hearts on this manner;
no unclean thing can enter into the kingdom of heaven; but thou by reason of
the remnants of original sin art unclean: therefore thou can not enter
into the kingdom of heaven: we return our answer, saying, that Christ's
righteousness is our righteousness, serving to make us stand without blame or
spot before God. And as Jacob put on Esaus garments that he might get his
fathers blessing: so if by faith we do put on the white garment of
righteousness of our elder brother Christ Jesus, and present our selves in it
unto our heavenly father, we shall obtain his blessing which is eternal
happiness.

Now remains the third and last part of the conception, which is the Union of
the godhead and the manhood: concerning which, many points are particularly to
be handled. The first is, what kind of Union this is? Ans. In the Trinity
there be two sorts of unions: union in nature, and union in person. Union in
nature is, when two or more things are joined and united into one nature, as the
Father, the Son, the holy Ghost being and remaining three distinct persons,
are one and the same in nature or Godhead. Union in person is, when two things
are in that manner united, that they make but one person or subsistence: as a
body created by God and a reasonable soul joined both together make one
particular man, as Peter, Paul, John, etc. And this second, is the union
whereof we entreat in this place: by which the second person in Trinity the
son of God did unite unto himself the humane nature, that is the body and
soul of man: so as the Godhead of the Son and the manhood concurring
together made but one person.

The second point is, in what thing this union does consist. Answ. It consists
in this, that the second person the Son of God does assume unto it a manhood
in such order, that it being void of all personal being in it self, does
wholly and only subsist in the same person. As the plant called Missell or
Misselto having no root of his own, Visen. Matthiol.
both grows and lives in the stock or body of the Oak or some other tree: so
the humane nature having no proper substance, is, as it were, ingrafted into
the person of the son, and is wholly supported and sustained by it so as it
should not be at all, if it were not sustained in that manner. And for the
better understanding of this point, we must consider, that there be four
degrees of the presence of God in his creatures. The first is his general
presence, and it may be called the presence of his providence, Act. 17 28.
whereby he preserves the substances of all creatures, and gives unto them to
live, move, and have being: and this extends it self to all creatures good
and bad. The second degree is the presence of grace, whereby he does not only
preserve the substa^ces of all his creatures, but also gives grace unto it:
and this agrees to the Church and people of God upon earth. The third degree
is the presence of glory peculiar to the Saints and angels in heaven: and this
stands in three things, for God not only preserues their substances, and gives
them plenty of his grace, but also admits them into his glorious presence, so
as they may behold his majesty face to face. The fourth and last is that,
whereby the Godhead of the son is present and dwells with and in the manhood,
giving unto it in some part his own subsistence. Whereby it comes to pass that
this manhood assumed is proper to the son, and can not be the manhood of the
Father, or of the holy Ghost, or of any creature whatsoever. And this is a
thing so admirable and so unspeakable, that among all the works of God there
can not be found an other example hereof in all the world.

Hence it follows necessarily, that the manhood of Christ consisting of body
and reasonable soul, is a nature only and not a person: because it does not
subsist alone as other men, Peter, Paul, John do; but wholly depends on the
person of the word, into the unity whereof it is received.

The third point is, in what order the divine and humane nature of Christ are
united together. Ans. The common consent of Divines is, Damas. l. 3. c 6. Cypr
in symb.
that, albeit all the parts of the manhood and the godhead of Christ be united
at one instant: yet in respect of order he unites unto himself first and
immediately the soul, and by the soul the body. And it seems unmeet that
God being a most simple essence should immediately be joined to a compound
body: and therefore it may well be said that he is united unto it by the more
simple part of man, which is the soul. Again the manhood of Christ is first
and immediately joined to the person of the son himself, and by the person
to the godhead of the son.

The fourth point is, whether there remain any difference or diversity of the
two natures after that the union is made. Answ. The two natures concurring make
not the person of the son to be compounded properly, but only by analogy:
for as body and soul make one man, so God and man make one Christ: neither
are they turned one into an other, the godhead into the manhood or the manhood
into the godhead, as water was turned into wine at Cana in Galile: neither are
they confused and mingled together as meats in the stomach: but they now are,
and so remain without composition, conversion, or confusion, really distinct
and that in three respects. First in regard of essence. For the godhead of
Christ is the godhead and can not be the manhood: and again, the manhood of
Christ is the manhood and not the godhead. Secondly, they are distinguished in
proprieties: the godhead is most wise, just, merciful, omnipotent: yea wisdom,
justice, mercy, and power it self: and so is not the manhood, neither can it
be. Again, Christ as he is God has his will eternal and uncreated, which is
all one with the will of the father and the holy Ghost. And as he is man he
has another will created in time, and placed in his reasonable soul: and this
Christ signifies when he says, Not my will but thy will be done. Thirdly,
they are distinct in their actions or operations; which though they go
together inseparably in the work of redemption: yet they must in no wise be
confounded but distinguished as the natures themselves are. Christ says of
himself, I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up
again: Ioh. 10.18.
and hereby he shows the distinction of operations in his two natures. For to
lay down his life is an action of the manhood, because the Godhead can not
die: and to take it up again is the work of the Godhead alone, which reunites
the soul to the body after death.

The fifth and last point is, what arises of this union? Ans. By reason of
this hypostatical union, though the godhead receive nothing from the manhood,
yet the manhood it self, which is assumed, is thereby perfected and enriched
with unspeakable dignity. For first of all it is exalted above all creatures
whatsoever, even angels themselves, in that it has subsistence in the second
person in Trinity. Secondly, together with the godhead of the Son, it is
adored and worshipped with divine honor, as in like case the honor done to
the King himself, redoundes to the crown on his head. Thirdly by reason of
this union, the godhead of Christ works all things in the matter of our
redemption, in and by the manhood. And hereupon the flesh of Christ though it
profit nothing of it self, yet by the virtue which it receives from that
person to which it is joined, it is quickening flesh and the bread of life.

Again from this union of two natures into one person, arises a kind of
speech or phrase peculiar to the Scriptures, called the communication of
proprieties when the property of one nature is attributed to the whole person
or to the other nature, as when Paul says, Act. 20.28 ^ Cor. 2.8. Ioh. 3.13.
that God shed his blood, that the Lord of glory was crucified. And when
Christ says that he talking with Nichodemus was then in heaven.

The use of the personal union is threefold. First it serves to show the
heinousness of our sins, and the greatness of our misery. For it had not
been possible to make a satisfaction to Gods justice in man's nature for the
least offense, unless the same nature had first of all been nearly joined to
the godhead of the son; that thereby it might be so far forth supported and
sustained that it might overcome the wrath of God. Secondly it sets forth unto
us the endless love of God to man. For whereas by reason of Adams fall we were
become the vilest of all creatures, except the devil and his angels: by his
mystical conjunction, our nature is exalted to such an estate and condition as
is far above all creatures even the angels themselves. Thirdly it is as it
were the keye of all our comfort: for all sound comfort stands in happiness, all
happiness is in fellowship with God, all fellowship with God is by Christ, who
for this cause being very God, became very man, that he might reconcile man to
God, and God to man.

Thus much of the conception of Christ: now follows his birth: whereby in the
ordinary time of travel according to the course of nature he was brought
forth into the world by the virgin Marie. (...). ^.6.
And it was the will of God, that Christ should not only be conceived, but
also borne, and that after the manner of men, that he might be known to be
very man indeed. In the birth we may consider four things; the time, the
place, the manner, the manifestation of it.

The time was in the last days, toward the end of the 70. weeks of Daniel,
Isai 2.2. Dan. 9.24.
which are to be accounted from the end of the captivity of Babylon, and make
in all 490 years: or more plainly 3900 years and more from the beginning of
the world, Gal. 4.4.
and as Paul says in the fullness of time. And the Evangelists have noted of
purpose the time to have been when Augustus Caesar taxed the Jews and all
nations under his dominions; Luke 2.1.
to signify that Christ was borne at the very time foretold by Iaacob, when
the crown and scepter was taken from Judah: and withal, to show that his
kingdom was not of this world. And it was the good pleasure of God that Christ
should not be borne either later or sooner, but so many ages from the beginning
of the world. And this consideration of the very time it self serves greatly
for the confirmation of our faith. For thus may we reason with our selves: If
God who in the beginning made a promise to our first parents concerning the
seed of the woman, deferred it almost 4000 years, and yet at length
accomplished the same to the very full: then no doubt God having promised the
resurrection of the dead and life everlasting, will in his good time bring them
to pass, though as yet we see them not. And thus by the accomplishment of all
things past, should we confirm our hope concerning things to come.

The place was not at Jerusalem nor Nazareth, nor any other city, but only a
village of Judah called Bethleem, that the prophecy of Micheas might be
fulfilled, Thou Bethleem Ephrata art little to be among the thousands of Judah,
yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that shall be the ruler in Israel.
And here we may observe a memorable example of Gods providence which ouerruleth
the proceedings of cruel tyrants, to the accomplishing of his own will, they
themselves for their parts intending nothing less. Augustus not so much as
dreaming of the birth of the Messiah, gave commandment that every man should
go to his own city to be taxed: and hereupon Joseph and Marie take their
journey from Nazareth to Bethleem: which journey God himself appointed and
disposed to this end, that the Messiah might be borne in the place which he
preordained and foretold by his Prophet.

The manner of Christ's birth was very base and poor: for the place where he
was borne was a stable, and the cradle where he lay was a cratch. And he
willingly took upon him this poverty for sundry causes. I. That the
Scripture might be fulfilled, which says, that he should be the shame and
contempt of the people: Psalm. 22.6, Isa. 53.2.
and that he shall grow up as a root out of a dry ground and have neither
form nor beauty. II. That he might afterward from this base condition be
exalted even in his manhood to that rich and glorious estate in which he
should manifest himself to be Lord of heaven and earth. III. He was borne in
exceeding poverty that he might shame the wise men of this world, who
exceedingly esteem of their riches, power, and glory, persuading themselves
that without such means no good thing can be done. And yet for all this they
can not so much as reconcile one man to God by all their might and wealth:
whereas Christ himself has done the same both in poverty and weakness; and
can enlarge and preserve his kingdom without earthly helps. When he hung upon
the cross the soldiers stripped him of his garments: and being naked he
brought that to pass which all the Monarchs of the earth in all their
royalties could never have performed. And whether Christ lie in the manger
between the Ox and the Ass, or in the palace of the King, it matters not in
regard of our salvation. IV. He came in this manner that there might be a
difference between his first coming in the flesh and his last oomming to
judgment. In the first he came only for this end, not to make any outward
alterations in the world, but to change the conscience and to put in execution
the work of our spiritual redemption: and therefore he has reserved the
ouerturning of all earthly estates with the manifestation of his own glory to
the latter. V. Lastly he was borne in a poor estate that he might procure true
riches for us in heaven: and withal, sanctify unto us our poverty upon
earth. As Paul says, ^. Cor. 8.9.
Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he being rich for your sakes
became poor, that ye thorough his poverty might be made rich. He was content
to lie in the manger that we might rest in heaven.

This serves to teach us to be content to bear any mean condition that the
Lord shall send upon us: for this is the very estate of the son of God
himself. And if for our cause he did not refuse the basest condition that ever
was, why should we murmr at the same: for what is the best of us but
miserable sinners, and therefore utterly unworthy either to go or lie upon the
bare earth? and though we fare and lie better then our Lord himself, yet such
is our daintiness, we are not pleased therewith: whereas he for his part
disdained not the manger of the Ox. And if the Lord of heaven and earth
coming into the world find so little entertainment or favor, we for our
parts being his members, should willingly prepare our selves to take as hard
measure at the hands of men.

Luke 2.
The last point is the manifestation of Christ's birth that it might be known to
the world. Where consider two circumstances, the first, to whom? namely to
poor shepherds tending their flocks by night, and not to great or mighty
men, lovers of this world, nor to the priests at Jerusalem contemners of Gods
grace; and that for two causes: one, because the shepherds were the fittest
persons to publish the same at Bethlehem: the other, it was Gods pleasure to
manifest that in the birth of Christ which Paul says, ^. Cor. 1.27.
Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called: but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise. The second is, by whom? by the angels of the Lord appearing in great
glory unto the shepherds. For the priests of Jerusalem and the rulers of the
Synagogues, to whom this o^fice did belong, held their peace: being blinded
in their manifold errors and wicked ways.

The duties to be learned of the birth of Christ are these. First we are
admonished hereby to magnify and praise the name of God, saying with Mary, My
soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. And
with Zachary, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for he has visited and
redeemed his people. And with the Angels of heaven, Glory to God in the
highest heavens. For in this birth is made manifest the wisdom, the truth, the
justice and mercy, and goodness of God toward us, more then ever it was
before: yea as Christ God and man, is more excellent then the first Adam
created according to Gods own image: and as the spiritual life is better then
the natural life, and as the eternal and most holy marriage of Christ the
husband and his spouse the Church arising as it were out of the blood that
trickled out of his side, is more wonderful then the creation of Eve of the
rib of Adam: lastly, as it is a far greater matter by death to overcome
death, and to turn it into eternal life, then to command that to exist and
be which was not before: so is the work of redemption begun in the birth of
Christ more unspeakable and admirable then the first creation of man. Hereupon
not 6. cherubims as in the vision of Isaiah, not 24. elders as in the
Apocalypse, but a great multitude of Angels like armies were heard to praise God
at the birth of Christ, and no doubt the like sight was not seen since the
beginning of the world. And the Angels by their example put us in mind to
consider aright of this benefit, and to praise God for it. But alas, this
practice is very rare in this fruitless and barren age of the world; where
sin and iniquity abounds, as may be seen by experience; for by an old
custom we retain still in the Church the feast of the nativity of Christ, so
commonly called: which nevertheless is not spent in praising the name of God
who has sent his son from his own bosom to be our redeemer, but
contrariwise in rifling, dicing, carding, masking, mumming, and in all
licentious liberty for the most part, as though it were some heathen feast of
Ceres or Bacchus.

Secondly, Christ was conceived and borne in bodily manner, that there might be
a spiritual conception and birth of him in our hearts, as Paul says, Gal.
4.19.
My little children of whom I travel till Christ he formed in you: and that
is, when we are made new creatures by Christ, and perform obedience to our
creator. When the people said to Christ that his mother and his brethren
sought him, he answered, Mark. 13.35.
He that does the will of God is my brother, my sister, and mother. Therefore
let us go with the sheapheards to Bethlehem, and finding our blessed Savior
swadled and lying in the cratch, let us bring him thence and make our own
hearts to be his cradle: that we may be able to say that we live not, but
Christ lives in us: and let us present unto him our selves, our bodies and
souls as the best gold, mirrhe, and frankincense that may be: and thus
conceiving him by faith, he remaining without change, we shall be changed
into him and made bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. The world, I know,
never so much as dreameth of this kind of conception and birth, for as David
says, Psalm. 7.14.
Men travel with wickedness, conceive mischief, and bring forth a lie. And
S. James says, Iam. 1.14.
Men are drawn away by their own concupiscence, which when it has conceived
brings forth sin. And these are the ougly and monstrons birthes of these
days. But let us, I pray you, contrariwise wail and mourn for the barrennes
of our hearts that do so little conceive the grace of Christ in heart, and
bring it forth in action. The mother of Christ undoubtedly was a blessed woman:
but if she had not as well conceived Christ in her heart, as she did in her
womb, she had not bin saved; and no more can we, unless do the same.

The birth of Christ to them that have touched hearts, is the comfort of
co^forts, and the sweetest balm or confection that ever was. Behold say the
Angel to the she^pheards, we bring tidings of great joy that shall be to all
people: but wherein stands the joy? they add further, unto you this day is
borne in the citi^ of David a S^uiour, which is Christ the Lord. (...) 10.
And no marvel: for in that birth is manifested the good will of God to man,
and by it we have peace, first with God, secondly with our selves in
conscience, thirdly with the good Angels of God, fourthly with our enemies:
lastly with all the creatures. For this cause the Angels sang, Peace on earth,
good will toward men.

In the last place the Creed notes unto us the parent or mother of Christ, the
Virgin Mary. And here at the very first it may be demanded, how he could
have either father or mother; because he was figured by Melchisedech who had
neither father nor mother. (...). 3.
Ans. Melchisedech is said to be without father and mother, not because he had
none at all. For according to the ancient and received opinion, (...) ep^st ad
(...).
it is very likely that he was Sem the son of Noe: but because where he is
mentioned under this name of Melchisedech in the 14. chapter of Genes. there is
no mention made of Father or Mother: and so Christ in some sort is without
father or mother: Man. 13.55. ^o^. 1 45. and 6.^2. Luk 4.22.
as he is man he has no father, as he is God he has no mother. And whereas
Christ is called the son of Joseph, it was not because he was begotten of
him, but because Joseph was his reputed father: or, which is more, because he
was a legal father, namely according to the Jews laws: in that (as sundry
divines think) he was the next of his kin, and therefore to succeed him as his
lawful heir.

Mary became the mother of Christ by a kind of calling thereto, which was by an
extraordinary message of an angel concerning the conception and birth of
Christ in and by her: to which calling and message she condescended, saying,
Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word. And
hereupon she conceived by the holy ghost. This being so it is more then sensles
folly to turn the salutatio^ of the angel, Hail freely beloved etc. into a
prayer. For it is as much as if we should still call her to become a mother of
Christ.

And she must be held to be the mother of whole Christ God and man: and
therefore the ancient Church has called the mother of God: yet not the mother
of the godhead.

Furthermore the mother of Christ is described by her quality, a virgin, and
and by her name Mary. She was a virgin, first that Christ might be conceived
without sin and be a perfect Savior: secondly, that the saying of the
prophet Esaias might be fulfilled, ^sal. 7.22.
Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son: according as it was
foretold by God in the first giving of the promise, the seed of the woman, not
the seed of the man, shall bruise the serpents head. Now the Jews to elude
the most pregnant testimony of the prophet, say, that Alma signifies not a
virgin, but a young woman which has known a man. But this is indeed a
forgerie. For Esaias there speaks of an extraordinary work of God above nature,
whereas for a woman having known man to conceive, is no wonder. And the word
Alma, (...)
through the whole bible is taken for a virgin, as by a particular search will
appear.

As Ma^ie conceived a virgin, so it may be well thought that she continued a
virgin to the end, though we make it no article of our faith. Ioh. 19.27.
When Christ was upon the cross, h^e commended his mother to the custody of
John; which probably argues, that she had no child to whose care and keeping
she might be co^me^ded. And though Christ be called her first born, yet does
it not follow that she had any child after him: for as that is called last
after which there is none, so that is called the first before which there was
none. Epiph. l. 2.10.^
And as for Joseph, when he was espoused to Marie, he was a man of eighty
years old.

And here we have occasion to praise the wisdom of God, in the forming of man.
The first man Adam was borne of no man; but immediately created of God: the
second, that is Eve, is formed not of a woman, but of a man alone: the third
and all after, begotten both of woman and man: the fourth, that is, Christ, God
and man, not of no man as Adam, not of no woman as Eve; not of man and woman as
we: but after a new manner, of a woman without a man he is conceived and
borne.

And hereupon our duty is not to despise, but highly to reverence the virgin
Marie, as being the mother of the son God, Luke 1.4^.
a prophetisse upon earth, a Saint in heaven. And we do willingly condescend to
give her honor three ways, first by thanksgiving to God for her, secondly by
a reverent estimation of her, thirdly by imitation of her excellent virtues:
yet far be it from us to adore her with divine honor, by prayer to call upon
her, as though she knew our hearts, and heard our requests, and to place her
in heaven as a queen above the son of God.

The name of the mother of Christ is added, to show that he came of the lineage
of David, and that therefore he was the true Messiah before spoken of. It may
be objected, that both Matthew and Luke sets down the genealogy of Joseph, of
whom Christ was not. Ans. Matthew sets down indeed in Christ's genealogy, the
natural descent of Joseph, the husband of Marie, having Iaacob for his natural
father: but Luke taking another course, propounds the natural descent of Marie
the mother of Christ: and when he says that Joseph was the son of Eli, he
means of a legal son. For sons and daughters in law, are called sons
and daughters to their fathers and mothers in law: Mary her self and not
Joseph, being the natural daughter of Eli. And whereas Luke does not plainly
say, that Marie was the daughter of Eli, but puts Joseph the son in law in
her room, Aphric. apud ^useb. (...) l. 4 c. 15.
the reason hereof may be, because it was the manner of the Jews to account
and continue their genealogies in the male and not in the female sex, the man
being the head of the family, and not the woman. And though Ruth, and Rahab,
and other women be mentioned by Matthew, yet that is only by the way: for they
make no degrees herein. Again it may be further demanded, how Christ could
come of David by Solomon, as Matthew says, and by Nathan as Luke says; they
twain being two distinct sons of David. Ans. By virtue of the law, whereby
the brother was bound to raise up seed to his brother: there was a double
descent in use among the Jews, the one was natural, the other legal.
Natural, when one man descended of another by generation, Deuteronomy. 25.
as the child from the natural father, Legal, when a man not begotten of
another, yet did succeed him in his inheritance; and thus Salathiel is the
natural son of Neri, and the legal son of Iechonias. M^t 1.12. and Luke
3.17.
Now Saint Luke setts down the natural descent of Christ from David by
Nathan, and Saint Mathewe the other descent, which is legal, by Solomon; whom
Christ succeeded in the right of the kingdom, being borne the King of the
Jews: none that could possibly be named, having more right to it, then he.

By this descent of Christ we have occasion to consider, that Christ was even
in his birth the most excellent and noble man that ever was, descending o^ the
eternal father as he is the son of God, and as he is man, descending of the
Patriarks, and of the renowned kings of Judah. And this his nobility he
conuaies in part to his members, in that he makes them the sons of God, a
royal priesthood, and a peculiar people to himself: enriching them also with
the revenues of the whole world, and with title and right to the kingdom of
glory in heaven, as their inheritance.

And withal, Christ being the lively pattern of true nobility, by his
example men of blood are taught not to stand so much on their pedigree, and
their ancetours, as though nobility stood in this, that man descends of man:
but to labor with all that they may be the sons and daughters of God by
regeneration in Christ. This indeed is the ornament of the blood, the best
part in the noble man's skutchin, and the finest flower in his garland. And
though a man be never so noble or great an estate, yet if he be not a
repentant sinner, he is base and vile, and his nobility stinkes in the
nosthrils of god. Christ in his genealogy does not so much as vouchsafe to
name those his ancetours that ruled wickedly; and hereupon Saint Mathewe
omitteth three kings of Judah, Achaziah, Ioas, and Amaziah: whereas
nevertheless heinous offenders that repented are mentioned, as Ruth, and
Thamar, and Bathshabe.

Thus much of the incarnation of Christ: now follows the third and last
point which is to be considered in the description of Christ, namely, the
estate of Christ after his birth, which is twofold, the estate of humiliation,
and the estate of exaltation.

The estate of humiliation, is the condition of Christ the Mediator, in which
he abased himself even to the death of the cross, that by that means he
might perform the office of a priest in making satisfaction to the justice of
his father.

This estate agrees to the whole person of Christ according to both natures.
For first of al his manhood was abased and humbled, in that it was made subject
to the infirmities of man's nature, as also to the miseries and punishments
which were due unto man for sin. Secondly, his Godhead was abased; not as it
is considered in it self. For so it admits no alteration or change. But in
respect of the flesh or manhood assumed; under the which as under a veil, the
Godhead lay hid from the first moment of the incarnation to the time of his
resurrection, without any great manifestation of his power and majesty therein.

The order of these two estates must be marked. First is the estate of
humiliation, and then in the second place follows the estate of exaltatio^. As
Christ says of himself, ^uk. 1^.26.
O fools, and slow of heart to believe, etc. ought not Christ to have suffered
these things and to enter into his glory. And here we for our parts must
learn a lesson. The same which was true in Christ the head, must be verified
in all his members; they must all have their twofold estate: first in this
life the estate of humiliation: secondly after this life the estate of glory.
And as Christ first entered into the state of his humiliation, and then into
glory: so it is with his members, first they must be abased in this life, and
secondly exalted in the world to come. He that will reign with Christ and be
exalted, must first suffer with him, and be humbled: he that will wear the
crown of glory, must wear first a crown of thorns: ^ev. 15.^.
they that will have all tears wiped from their eyes, must here first in this
life shed them. And the children of God before they can sing the song of
Moses, and of the servants of God, and of the lamb, must first swim through
the sea of burning glass: whereby it is signified, that those which after this
life would sing songs of praises to Christ, must in this life be cast into a
sea of misery. And if this be true, then we may hear learn, that it is a
wretched case for a man in this life to have perpetual ease, rest, and
quietness both in body and soul, goods, and good name: for we see by Christ's
example, that through adversity we must come to happiness: and if a man would
have rest and peace in the life to come, then in this life he must look for
trouble, persecution, and sorrow. Indeed in the judgment of the world, they
are blessed that always live at rest; but before God they are most miserable,
and (as oxen which are made fat in the best pasture) ready for the
slaughterhouse every day. Secondly, here is an excellent consolation for those
which profess the Gospel of Christ; in the time of trouble and persecution
they must rejoice, because the state of humiliation in this life is a sign
that they are in the plain and right way to salvation and glory. A man is to
take his journey into a far country, and inquiring for the way, it is told
him that there are many plain ways; but the straight and right way is by
woods, and hills, and mountains, and great dangers: now when he is
travailing, and comes into those places, he gathers certainly that he is in
the right way: so the child of God that is going to the kingdom of heaven,
though there be many ways to walk in, yet he knows that there is but one
right way, which is very straight and narrow, full of trouble, sorrow, and
persecution: full of all manner of crosses and afflictions: and when in this
life he is persecuted and afflicted for good causes, whether in body or in
mind, if he be content to bear his cross, it argues plainly that he is in
the right way unto salvation: Act. 14^^^.
for through many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of heaven.

The humiliation of Christ is first of all set down in the Creed generally,
and secondly by his parts or degrees. Generally, in these words, Suffered under
Pontius Pilate. Where we must consider two things; the Passion it self, and
under whom it was. For the first, that we may the better conceive the passion
in his own nature, seven special points must be opened. I. The cause
efficient. The principal cause of the passion, as it is the price of our
redemption, was the decree and providence of God; as Peter says expressly
that Christ was delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God.
Act. 2 2^.
The impulsive cause that moved God to work our salvation by this means, was
nothing in man (for all mankind was shut up under unbelief, and therefore
unable to procure the least favor at Gods hand) but the will and good pleasure
of God within himself. The instruments which the Lord used in this business,
were the wicked Jews and Gentiles, and the devil himself; by whom he
brought to pass the most admirable work of redemption, even then when they
according to their kind did nothing else but practice wickedness and malice
against Christ. II. The matter of the passion, is the whole malediction or
curse of the Law, containing in it all manner of adversities and miseries both
of body and mind. All which may be reduced to three heads, the temptations of
Christ, his ignominies and slanders, his manifold sorrows and griefs,
especially those which stand in the apprehension of the unsupportable wrath of
God. III. The form of the passion, is that excellent and meritorious
satisfaction which in suffering Christ made unto his father for man's sin. We
do not rightly consider of the passion, if we conceive (...) to be a bare and
naked suffering of punishment, but withal we must conceive it as a
propitiation or a means satisfactorie to Gods justice. The passion considered
as a passion, ministers no comfort: but all our joy and rejoicing stands in
this, that by faith we apprehend it as it is a satisfaction or a means of
reconciliation for our offenses. In this very point stands the dignity of the
passion, whereby it differs from all other sufferings of men whatsoever.
Therefore most damnable and wicked is the opinion of the papists, who besides
the alone passion of Christ, maintain works of satisfaction, partly of their
own, and partly of the Saints departed: which they add to the passion as an
appendance thereof. IV. The end of the passion is, that God might bring to
pass a work in which he might more fully manifest his justice and mercy,
then he did in the creation, and that is the reconciliation between God and
man. And here remember with the passion to join the active obedience of Christ
in fulfilling the law: for Christ in suffering obeyed, and in obeying suffered.
And they must be jointly conceived together for this cause. In reconciliation
with God, two things are required: the remoouing of sin in regard of the
guilt, of the fault, and the punishment, and the conferring or giving of
righteousness. Now the passion of Christ considered apart from his legal
obedience, No^ peccator.
only takes away the guilt and punishment, frees man from death; and makes him
of a sinner to be no sinner: and that he may be fully reconciled to God, ^.
Iustus.
and accepted as righteous to life everlasting, the legal obedience of Christ
must also be imputed. And therefore in the Scriptures, where all our redemption
is ascribed to the death and passion of Christ, this very obedience which
stands in the perfect love of God and man must be included and not excluded.
V. The time of the passion was from the very birth of Christ to his
resurrection: yet so, as the beginnings only of his sufferings were in the
course of his life, and the accomplishment thereof to the very full upon the
cross. VI. The person that suffered was the son of God himself: concerning
whom in this case two questions must be resolved. The first; how can it stand
with Gods iustice^ to lay punishment upon the most righteous man that ever was,
and that for grievous sinners: considering that tyrants themselves will not do
so. Ans. In the passion, Christ must not be considered as a private person: for
then it could not stand with equity that he should be plagued and punished
for our offenses; but as one in the eternal counsel of God set apart to be a
public surety or pledge for us, Hebr. 7.22.
to suffer and perform those things which we in our persons should have
suffered and performed. For this cause God the father is said to give his son
unto us, and the son again to give his life for his friends. Ioh. 3.16. and
15.13.
The ^econd question is, how by the short and temporary death of the son of
God, any man can possibly be freed from eternal death and damnation, which is
due unto him for the least sin. Ans. When we say that the son of God
suffered, it must be understood with distinction of the natures of Christ not
in respect of the Godhead, but in respect of the assumed manhood: yet
nevertheless the passion is to be ascribed to the whole person of Christ God
and man: and from the dignity of the person which suffered, arises the
dignity and excellency of the passion, whereby it is made in value and price,
to counteruaile everlasting damnation. For when as the son of God suffered
the curse for a short time, it is more then if all men and angels had suffered
the same for ever. VII. The difference of the passion of Christ, and the
sufferings of Martyrs: and that stands in two things. First Christ's passion
was a cursed punishment; the sufferings of the Martyrs are no curses, but
either chastisements or trials. Secondly, the passion of Christ is meritorious
for us even before god, because he becam our mediator and surety in the
covenant of grace, but the sufferings of Martyrs are not of value to merit for
us at Gods hand: because in suffering they were but private men, and therefore
they nothing appertain to us. By this it appears that the Treasury of the
Church of Rome, which is as it were a common chest containing the overplus of
the merits of saints, mingled with the merits of Christ, kept and disposed by
the Pope himself, is nothing else but a sensles dotage of man's brain. And
whereas they say that Christ by his death did merit that Saints might merit
both for themselves and others, it is as much as if they should say, the son
of God became Jesus, to make every one of us Jesus. And it is a manifest
untruth which they say. For the very manhood of Christ considered apart from
the Godhead, cannot merit properly: considering whatsoever it is, has, or
does; it is, has, and does the same, wholly and only by grace: whereas
therefore Christ meriteth for us, it is by reason he is both God and man in one
person. For this cause it is not possible that one mere man should merit for
another.

The use of the passion follows. It is the manner of Friars and Jesuits in
the Church of Rome to use the consideration of the passion of Christ, Lud. Gran.
as a means to stir up compassion in themselves, partly toward Christ, who
suffered grievous torments, and partly toward the virgin Marie, who for the
torments of her dear son was exceedingly troubled: and withal to kindle in
their hearts an indignation toward the Jews, that put Christ to death. But
indeed this kind of use is mere humane, and may in like manner be made by
reading of any humane history. But the proper and the special use of the
passion indeed is this: first of all we must set it before our eyes as a
looking glass, in which we may clearly behold the horriblenesse of our
sins, that could not be pardoned without the passion of the son of God: and
the unspeakable love of Christ, that died for us, and therefore loved his own
enemies more then his own self: and lastly our endless peace with God and
happiness: in that, considering the person of our redeemer, who suffered the
pangs of hell, we may after a sort find our paradise even in the midst of
hell.

Secondly, the meditation of Christ's passion serves as a most worthy mean^ to
begin and to confirm grace, specially when it is mingled with faith; and
that two ways. For first, it serves to breed in our hearts a godly sorrow
for our sins past, when we do seriously with our selves consider, that our
own sins were the cause of all the pains and sorrows etcalamities which he
suffered in life and death. Lev. 44.29.
When any man had sinned under the law, he brought unto the temple or
tabernacle some kind of beast for an offering, according as he was prescribed,
laying his hand upon the head of it, and afterward slaying it before the Lord.
Now by the ceremony of laying on the hand he testified that he for his part had
deserved death, and not the beast; and that it being slain and sacrificed,
was a ^igne unto him of the sacrifice of Christ offered upon the cross for his
^innes. And hereby we are taught, that so often as we remember the passion of
Christ, we should lay our hands as it were upon our own heads, utterly
accusing and condemning our selves, evermore keeping this in our hearts, that
Christ suffered not for himself, but for our offenses, which were the proper
cause of all his woe and misery. And as Christ's passion was grievous and
bitter unto him, so should our sins likewise be grievous and bitter unto us:
let us always remember this; otherwise we shall never reap any sound benefit
by the passion of Christ.

Again, the passion of Christ is a notable means to stir up in our hearts a
purpose and a care to reform our selves, and live in holiness and newnes of
life; on this manner. Has the son of God so mercifully dealt with me, as to
suffer the curse of the whole law for my manifold iniquities, and to deliver
me from just and deserved damnation? yea, no doubt, he has, I am resolved of
it: if I should go on in mine old course, I should be the most ungrateful of
all creatures to this my loving Savior: I will therefore by his grace return
and reform my life. And in this very point of reformation, the passion of
Christ is set before us as a most lively pattern and example to follow. ^
Pet. 4.^.
For as much (says S. Peter) as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm
your s^lues likewise with the same mind, which is, that he which has suffered
in the flesh, has ceased from sin. Where he teaches, that there must be in
us a spiritual passion answerable to the passion of Christ. For as his enemies
did lade him with miseries even to the death of the cross; so should we lade
our own flesh, that is, the corruption of our natures, with all such means as
may subdue and weaken, crucify and kill it. To the doing of this, three things
especially are required. First, we must consider that the corruption of our
rebebellious natures is like the great and mighty Goliath, and the grace of God
which we receive like young and little David: and therefore if we desire that
grace should prevail against corruption, we must disarme the strong man, and
strippe him of all his weapons: which is done, by giving all the members of our
bodies to be instruments of the service of God in righteosnesse and holiness.
Secondly, we must endeavor to keep in the corruption of nature as it were
choking and smothering it in the heart; that by it neither the world nor the
devil prevail against us. And this must be done by having a narrow regard
unto all the powers and faculties of body and soul, setting a watch before
our eyes, ears, lips, and all other parts of the body, that are in any
action the instruments of the soul; Psalm. 119.37. Job. 31.1. Prou. 4.23.
and above all, as Solomon says, by countergarding the heart with all
diligence. By the outward senses of the body, as through open windows the
devil creeps into the heart; and therefore our duty is, to stop all such
ways of entrance. Thirdly, when original corruption begins to rebel either in
the mind, will, or any of the affections, then must we draw out the sword of
the spirit which is the word of God, and encounter with that hydeous giant,
laying load upon him by the judgments and threatenings of the law, and as it
were beating him down with clubbes, as Paul speaks. 1. Cor. 9.17. (...).
And if it fall out that concupiscence begin to conceive and bring forth any
sin, we must cruise it in the head, and dash it against the ground, as a bird
in the shell, least it grow up to our utter confusion. These are the duties
which we should learn by the passion of Christ. But lamentable are our days,
in which all for the most part goes contrary: for commonly men are so far
from killing and subduing the rebellion of the natural concupiscence, that all
their study and care is, how they may feed and cherish it, and make it
stronger then the mighty Goliath. But let us for our parts be conformable to
Christ in his passion, suffering in our flesh as he suffered in body and soul
for. And let us daily more and more by the hand of faith apprehend and apply to
our hearts and consciences the passion of Christ, that it may as a fretting
corasiue eat out the poison of our sinful natures and consume it.

Now follows the second point concerning the passion of Christ, which is,
under whom he suffered, namely under Pontius Pilate. And Christ may be said
to suffer under him in two respects. First, because he was then the president
of Jury. For a little before the birth of Christ the kingdom of the Jews was
taken away by the Roman Emperor, Luke 3.1^
and reduced into a Province, and Pontius Pilate was placed over the Jews, not
as king, but as the Roman Emperors deputy. And this circumstance is noted in
the history of the Gospel, and here specified in the Creed, to show that the
Messiah was exhibited in the time foretold by the Prophets. Genesis 49.1^.
Jacob foretold that Shilo must be borne after the scepter is removed from
Judah. Isaiah says, Isa. 11.1.
that the family of Ishai shall be worn as it were to the root before Christ
as a branch shall spring out of it. Again, Christ suffered under Pontius
Pilate as he was a judge: whereby we are given to understand of a wonder,
namely that Christ the son of God, King of heaven and earth, was arraigned at
the bar of an earthly judge, and there condemned. For thus much the words in
meaning import, that Pontius Pilate sat as judge upon Christ, to examine him,
to arraigne him, and give sentence against him. Wherefore before we come to
speak of the degrees of the passion of Christ, we must needs entreat of his
arraignment upon earth. In handling whereof we must generally consider these
points. First that when he was arraigned before Pilate he was not as a private
man, Heb. 7^^^.
but as a pledge and surety that stood in the place and stead of us miserable
sinners, as the Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 52.4.
He bare our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: and withal in him was
mankind arraigned before God. Secondly, this arraignment was made not privately
in a corner, but openly in the public court, and that in a great feast of the
Jews, as it were in the hearing of the whole world. Thirdly, though Pilate in
citing, examining, and condemning Christ, intended not to work any part of
man's redemption, yet was this wholly set down in the counsel and good
pleasure of God, in whose room Pilate sat, ^. Chr. 19.6.
and whose judgment he exercised.

The general use of Christ's arraignment, is twofold. First, it is a terror
to all impenitent sinners: for there is no freedom or protection from the
judgment of God, but by the arraignment of Christ: and therefore such as in
this life receive him not by faith, must at the end of this world be brought
out to the most terrible bar of the last judgment, there to be arraigned
before the King of heaven and earth. And mark the equity hereof. Christ
himself could not have been our Savior and redeemer, unless he had bin
brought out to the bar of an earthly judge, and arraigned as a guilty
malefactor: and therefore there is no man upon earth that lives and dies out
of Christ, but he must whether he will or no, hold up his hand at the bar of
the great judge of all mankind, where he shall see hell underneath him burning
read hot, and opening it self wide to swallow him up: and on the right hand
of God standing all the Prophets, Apostles, and Saints of God giving judgment
against him: on the left hand, the devil and all his angels accusing him; and
within him a guilty conscience condemning him. And thus one day shall the
arraignment of those persons be, that with full purpose of heart cleave not to
Christ: and yet, alas, huge and infinite is the number of those which make more
account of transitory and earthly matters, even of their pigges with the
Gaderens, then of him and his benefits: and such persons should rather be
pitied then despised of us all, considering their estate is such, that every
day they are going as traitors pinnioned to their own judgment, that they
may go thence to eternal execution.

Secondly, Christ's arraignment is a comfort to the godly. For he was arraigned
before Pilate, that all such as truly believe in him, might not be arraigned
before God at the day of the last judgment: he was accused before an earthly
judge, that they might be cleared and excused before the heavenly judge: lastly
he was here condemned on earth, that we might receive the sentence of
absolution and be eternally saved in heaven.

The arraignment of Christ has three parts: his apprehension, his accusation,
his condemnation. In the apprehension, we must consider two things: the dealing
of Christ, and the dealing of Judas and the Jews. The dealing and proceeding
of Christ was this: when he saw that the time of his apprehension and death was
near, he solemnly prepared himself thereto. And his example must teach every
one of us, who know not the shortness of our days, every hour to prepare our
selves against the day of death, that the^ we may be found ready of the Lord.
What? shall the Son of God himself make preparation to his own death, and
shall not we most miserable sinners do the same, who stand in need of a
thousand preparations more then he? wherefore let us continually think with
our selves that every present day is the last day of our life, that so we may
address our selves to death again the next day.

The first thing which Christ does in this preparation, is to make ^hoice of
the place, in which he was to be apprehended, as will appear by conferring the
Evangelists together. S. Matthew says, Math. 26.36.
he went to the place called Gethsemane: S. Luke says, he went to the mount of
Olives as he was accustomed. Luke 22.39.
And that we might not imagine that Christ did this that he might escape and
hide himself from the Jews, S. John says, that Judas which betrayed him knew
the place, because oftentimes he resorted thither with his Disciples: Ioh. 18.2.
whereas if he had feared apprehension he would have rather gone aside to some
other secret and unwonted place. This then is the first point to be considered,
that Christ knowing the time of his own death to be at hand, does willingly of
his own accord resort to such a place in which his enemies in all likelihood
might easily find him, and have fit opportunity to attach him. For if he
should have still remained in Jerusalem, the Scribes and Pharisees durst not
have enterprised his apprehension, because of the people whom they feared: but
out of the city in the garden all occasion of fear is cut off. By this it is
manifest, that Christ yielded himself to death willingly, and not of
constraint: and unless his sufferings had bin voluntary on his part, they
could never have bin a satisfaction to Gods justice for our sins. Here a
question offers it self to be considered, whether a man may lawfully fly in
danger and persequution, seeing Christ himself does not. Answ. When good
means of flying and just occasion is offered, it is lawful to fly. When the
Jews sought to kill Paul at Damascus, the Disciples took him by night, and
put him through the wall, and let him down in a basket to escape their hands.
When Moses was called by God to deliver the Israelites, after he had slain the
Egyptian, and the fact was known, and Pharao sought to kill him for it, he
fled to the land of Madian. And our Savior Christ sundry times when he was
to be stoned, and otherways hurt by the Jews, withdrew himself from among
them. It is lawful then to fly in persecution, these caueats observed. First,
if a man find not himself sufficiently strengthened to bear the cross.
Secondly, his departure must be agreeable to the general calling of a
Christian, serving to the glory of God and the good of his brethren, and the
hurt of none. Thirdly, there must be freedom at the least for a time from the
bond of a man's particular calling. If he be a Magistrate, he must be freed from
ruling: if a Minister, from preaching and teaching, otherways he may not fly.
And in this respect Christ, who did withdraw himself at other times, would not
fly at this time; because the hour of his suffering was come, Ioh 18.4^.
wherein he intended most willingly to submit himself to the good pleasure and
will of his father.

The second part of the preparation, is the prayer which Christ made unto his
father in the garden. And herein his example does teach us earnestly to pray
unto God against the danger of imminent death, and the temptations which are to
come. And if Christ, who was without sin, and had the spirit above measure
had need to pray, then much more have we need to be watchful in all kind of
prayers, who are laden with the burden of sin, and compassed about with
manifold impediments and dangerous enemies.

In this prayer sundry points worthy our marking are to be considered. The
first, who prayed? Answ. Christ the Son of God: but still we must remember
the distinction of natures and of their operations in one and the same Christ;
he prays not in his Godhead, but according to his manhood. The second is, for
whom he prays. Ans. Some have thought that this and all other his prayers
were made for his mystical body the Church; but the truth is, he now prays
for himself, yet not as he was God, for the Godhead feels no want: but as he
was a man abased in the form of a servant; and that for two causes. First, in
that he was a man, he was a creature, and in that respect was to perform
homage to God the creator. Secondly, as he was man, he put on the infirmities
of our nature, and thereupon prayed that he might have strength and power in
his manhood to support him in bearing the whole brunt of the passion to come.

The third point is, to whom he prayed? Answ. To the father: neither must this
trouble us, as though Christ in praying to the father, should pray to himself,
because he is one and the same God with him. For though in essence they admit
no distinction, yet in person or in the proper manner of subsisting they do.
The Father is one person, the Son an other: ^n personis no^ est, ali^d and
^li^d: est tamen alius and alius.
therefore as the father saying from heaven, This is my well-beloved Son, spoke
not to himself, but to the Son: so again the Son when he prays, he
prays not to himself, but to the Father.

The fourth point, what was the particular cause of his prayer. Ans. His agony
in which his soul was heavy unto death; not because he feared bodily death,
but because the malediction of the law, even the very heat of the fury and
indignation of God was poured forth upon him, wherewith he was affected and
troubled, as if it had been defiled with the sins of the whole world. And
this appears, first by the words whereby the Evangelists express the agony
of Christ, Ma^h. 26.37. (...).
which signify exceeding great sorrow and grief: secondly, by his doleful
complaint to his Disciples in the garden, My soul is heavy unto the death:
thirdly, by his fervent prayer thrice repeated, full of doleful passions:
fourthly, by the coming of an Angel to comfort him: fifthly, by his bloody
sweat, the like whereof was never heard. And herein lies the difference
between Christ's agony, and the death of Martyrs: he put on the guilt of all
our sins, they in death are freed from the same: he was left to himself void
of comfort, they in the midst of their afflictions feel the unspeakable
comfort of the holy Ghost: and therefore we need not marvel why Christ
should pray against death, which nevertheless his members have received and
borne most joyfully. Again, this most bitter agony of Christ is the ground of
all our rejoicing, and the cause why Paul biddes all the faithful in the
person of the Philippians, to rejoice always in the Lord, and again to
rejoice. And here we are further taught, that when we are plunged into a sea of
most grievous afflictions, and overwhelmed with the gulfes of most dreadful
temptations, even then, then I say, we should not be discouraged, but lift up
our hearts by fervent prayer to God. Thus did Christ when in the garden he was
about to drink the cup of the wrath of God, and to suck up the very dregs
of it: (...)
and David says, that out of the deepes he called of the name of the Lord and
was heard.

The fifth point, what is the matter and form of this prayer. Answ. Christ
prays to be delivered from the death and passion which was to come, saying on
this manner, Father, let this cup pass from me: yet with two clauses added
thereto, If it be possible, and, Not my will, but thy will be done. But it may
be demanded, how it could be that Christ knowing that it was his Fathers will
and counsel that he should suffer death for man, and also coming into the
world for that end, should make such a request to his Father without sin.
Answ. The request proceeds only of a weakness or infirmity in Christ's manhood
without sin, which appears thus. We must still consider that when he made
this prayer to his father, the whole wrath of God and the very dolours and
pangs of hell seized upon him: whereby the senses and powers of his mind were
astonished, and wholly bent to relieve nature in this agony. For as when the
heart is smitten with grief, all the blood in the body flows thither to
comfort it: so when Christ was in this astonishment, the understanding and
memory, and all the parts of his humane nature (as it were for a time
suspending their own proper actions) concurred to sustain and support the
spirit and life of Christ, as much as possibly might be. Now Christ being in
the midst of this perplexed estate, prays on this manner, Father, if it be
possible let this cup pass. And these words proceed not from any sin or
disobedience to his Fathers will, but only from a mere Ioh. 1^.^7.
perturbation of mind, caused only by an outward means, namly the
apprehension of Gods anger; which neither blinded his understanding nor took
away his memory so as he forgot his fathers will, but only stopped and stayed
the act of reasoning and remembering for a little time: even as in the most
perfect clock that is the motion may be stayed by the air, or by man's hand,
or by some outward cause without any defect or breach, made in any part of it.
It may be objected that Christ's will is flat contrary to the will of his
father. Ans. Christ's will as he is man and the will of his father in this
agony, were not contrary, but only diverse, and that without any
contradiction or contrariety. Now a man may will a diverse thing from that
which God wills, and that without sin. Paul desired to preach the word of
God in Asia and Bithynia, Act. 16.6^^^
but he was hindered by the spirit. For all this, there is no contrariety
between Paul and the spirit of God; but in the show of discord great consent.
For that which Paul wills well, the spirit of God wills not, by a better
will: though the reason hereof be secret, and the reason of Paul's will
manifest. Again the minister in charity reputing the whole congregation to be
elect, in holy manner seeks and wills the salvation of every one, which
nevertheless the Lord in his eternal counsel wills not. Now between both
these wills there may be and is a difference without contrariety. For one good
thing as it is good may differ from another; but it cannot be contrary unto
it. It may further be alleged, that in this prayer there seems to be a
combat and fight in the mind, will, and affections of Christ, and therefore
sin. Ans. There are three kind of combats: the one between reason and
appetite, and this fight is always sinful, and was not in Christ: the
second is between the flesh and the spirit, and this may be in Gods child who
is but in part regenerate; but it did not befall Christ who was perfectly holy.
The third is a combat of diverse desires, upon sundry respects drawing a man
to and fro. This may be in man's nature without fault: and was in Christ, in
whom the desire of doing his Fathers will striving and struggling with another
desire; whereby nature seeks to preserve it self, caused him to pray in this
manner.

The sixth point is, in what manner Christ prayed. Answ. He prayed to his
Father partly kneeling, partly lying on his face, and that with strong cries
and tears, sweating water and blood: and all this he did for our sins. Here
then behold the agony of Christ as a clear crystal, in which we may fully
see the exceeding greatness of our sins, as also the hardness of our hearts. We
go vaunting with our heads to heaven as though it were nothing to sin
against God, whereas the horror of the wrath of God for our rebellions,
brought down even the son of God himself, and laid him groueling upon the
earth. And we cannot so much almost as shed one tear for our iniquities,
whereas he sweates blood for us. Oh let us therefore learn to abase our selves,
and to carry about us contrite and bleeding hearts, and be confounded in our
selves for our sins past.

The last point is the event of the prayer, which is to be heard, as the author
of the Hebrews says, Hebr. 5.7.
Christ Jesus in the days of the flesh, did offer up unto his father prayers,
and supplications, with strong cries and tears, unto him that was able to save
him: and was also heard in that thing which he feared. But some will say, how
was Christ heard, seeing he suffered death and bare the pangs of hell, and the
full wrath of God? if he had been heard he should have been delivered from
all this. Answ. We must know that God hears our prayers two ways: I. when he
directly graunts our request. II. when knowing what is good for us, he gives
not us our requests directly, but a thing answerable thereunto. And thus was
Christ heard: for he was not delivered from suffering; but yet he had strength
and power given him, whereby his manhood was made able to bear the brunt of
Gods wrath. And in the same manner God hears the prayers of his servants upon
earth. Paul prayed to be delivered from the angel Satan that buffeted him: but
the Lord answered that it should not so be, because his grace whereby he was
enabled to resist his temptation was sufficient: and Paul finding the fruit of
his prayers on this manner, 1. Cor. 11.9.
protests hereupon that he will rejoice in his infirmities. Others pray for
temporal blessings, as health, life, liberty, etc. which notwithstanding God
holds back, and gives in stead thereof spiritual graces, patience, faith,
contentation of mind. Augustine says, God hears not our prayers always
according to our wills and desires, Audit ad salu^^^^ non audit a^ voluntate^.
but according as the things asked shall be for our salvation. He is like the
Physician, who goes on to launch the wound and hears not the patient though he
cry never so, till the cure be ended.

Now follows the second thing to be considered in Christ's apprehension,
namely the dealing of the Jews: wherein we must consider four things: I. how
they consult together concerning Christ's apprehension. II. how they came to the
place and met him. III. how they laid hands on him. IIII. how they bound him
and took him away. For the first: before they enterprised this matter, they
did wisely and warily lay their heads together, to consult of the time and
place: and also of the manner of apprehending him. So Saint Matthew says,
M^^h. 26,3,^,5.
There assembled together the chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the El^ers
of the people into the hall of the chief Priest called Caiphas: and consulted
how they might take Jesus by subtlety. Whence we learn two good instructions:
first, the Jews having a quarrel against Christ, could never be at ^est till
they had his blood: and therefore they consult how they might take him: but God
did so order the matter, and dis^^ose of their purposes and consultations, that
even thereby he did confound them and their whole nation. ^or by reason of this
heinous sin against Christ, came the just wrath of God upon them, and so
remains unto this day. Whereby we see, that the Lord will overthrow such in
their own wisdom, that will be wise without the direction of Gods word, and
against Christ. And thus it was with Achi^ophel, who for wisdom was as the
oracle of God: yet because he rebelled against the Lords anointed, God
confounded him in his own wisdom. For when his counsel which he gave against
David was not followed, he thought hims^^^e despised as the text says, 2. Sam.
17.2^^
and sadled his ass, and arose and went home into his (...) and put his
household in order and hanged himself: and in this action he showed himself
more senseless then a bruit beast. And in our days the Leaguers that have
bound themselves by oath to root out the Church of God; by his most wonderful
providence turn their swords against themselves and destroy each other.
Therefore if we would be wise, we must learn to be wise in Christ: for else our
counsel will be our own confusion. Secondly, hence we learn, that if any
shall live in stubbernnesse and rebellion against Christ, t^^ Lord will so
carry and order those men, or that people, that in the (...) shall be the very
causes of their own perdition. This we see most p^^^n^^y in the example of
these Jews: for they evermore enuyed Ch^^st, and now they go on to take
counsel against him; but God so disposed thereof, that even by this means
they brought destruction upon themselves and their country. This must teach
thee to take heed how thou live in thy sins: for if thou do so, the Lord
has many ways to work thy confusion: as, thy conscience to condemn thee;
thy friends to forsake thee; the devil and his angels to torment and molest
thee; and his creatures to annoy thee. Yea, the Lord can leave all these, and
m^ke thine own self to be the direct means of working thine own confusion,
both in body and soul eternally: and that even then, wh^ thou art most wary
and wise in thine own behalf: and this is the reward of all those that walk
on in their evil ways without any true conversion.

Having consulted, in the next place they come to the garden, where Christ was
to be apprehended. Math. 2^.4^, Ioh. ^8^^
And here we are to consider who they were that (...), ^^mely, the Scribes, and
Pharisees, the high priests, and their servants; a ^^nd of s^^ldiers, and the
servants of Pontius Pilate, and the Elders of the Jews: a^^ which came with
one consent to the place where Christ was, that they might (...) him. Where we
learn a good lesson; that all sorts of wicked men disagreeing among
themselves, can agree against Christ. The Scribes and Pharise^ ^ere two
contrary sects, and at discord one with another in matters of re^^gio^^ and
Judas was one of Christ's disciples: the Elders differed from the^ all: (...)
soldiers were Gentiles: all these were at variance among themselves, and
could not one brook another. So also we read that Herod and Pontius Pilate
were not friends: Luk 23.12.
but at the same time when Christ was apprehended, Pilate sent him to Herod,
and they were made friends. Now as these wicked men did all conspire against
Christ; so do the wicked ones of this world in all countries and kingdoms
band themselves against the Church of Christ at this day. And howsoever such be
at discord among themselves, yet they do all join hand in hand to persecute
Christ in his members. And the reason is plain; because Christ and his
religion is as flat opposite to the corrupt disposition of all men, as light
is to darkness.

Again, whereas we see so many sorts of men so amiably consenting to take
Christ: we may note how all men naturally do hate and abhor him, and his
religion. And look as then it was with Christ, so has it bin with all his
members, and will be to the end of the world. They are accounted as the
offscouring of the world, men not worthy to live on the face of the earth: as
Christ told his Disciples, Math. 24.9.
saying, Ye shall be hated of all nations for my names sake.

Let us also mark how all these came furnished to apprehend Christ: the text
says, Luke 22.52.
they came with clubs and staves as unto a thief. All the whole nation of the
Jews knew right well that Christ was no man of violence, but meek and lowly:
and yet they came armed to apprehend him; as though he had been some mighty
potentate that would not have been apprehended, but have resisted them. Where
we see the property of an evil conscience, which is to fear where there is
no cause at all. This causes some to be afraid of their own shadows: and if
they see but a worm peep out of the ground, they are at their wits end: and
as Solomon says, Prove. 28.1.
The wicked flee when none pursues them.

After that they are now come to Christ, we are to consider two things in their
meeting: I. Christ's communication with them. II. The treason of Judas.
Concerning their conference, it is said, Job. 18.4,5,6.
Jesus knowing all things that should come unto him, went forth, and said unto
them, Whom seek ye? they answered him; Jesus of Nazareth: Jesus answered, I
am he. Now so soon as he had said, I am he, the stoutest of them fell to the
ground, as being astonished at the majesty of his word. Where note, that the
word of God is a word of power. The same power was in his word when he raised
up Lazarus: for when he had lien in the grave, and had entered into some degrees
of corruption, he did no more, but said, Lazarus come forth; and he that was
dead came forth. And hence we may also mark what a wonderful might and power
is in the word preached: for it is the very word of Christ, and therefore
being preached by his ministers lawfully called by him thereunto; has the
same power and force in it which Christ himself showed when he spoke on earth.
It is the savor of life unto life to save those that hear it: ^. Cor. 2.16.
or the savor of death unto death. It is like to a vapor or perfume in the
air, which in some men's nostrills is sauorie and pleasant, and does revive
them: and others again it strikes dead. And therefore every one that either
now, or heretofore has heard this word preached, shall find it to be unto
them either a word of power to save their souls, or through their corruption
the ministry of death and condemnation. Again, if a word spoken by Christ,
being in a base or low estate, be able to overthrow his enemies, then at the
last day when he shall come in his glory, and power, and majesty to judge both
the quick and the dead; what power shall his words have, Go you cursed of my
father into everlasting fire which was prepared for the devil and his angels?
The consideration of this, that the word of Christ shall even be as powerful
at that day, must be a motive to every one of us to cause us to come unto him:
and while we have time in these days of grace and mercy to seek to be
reconciled unto him for all our sins, least at the last day we hear that
dreadful voice of Christ sounding against us, Go ye cursed into everlasting
fire, etc.

And thus much for the communication. Now follows Judas his treason: wherein
we are to observe these things. I. the qualities and conditions of the man that
did the treason. He was by calling a disciple chosen to be an Apostle, which is
the chiefest in Ecclesiall callings: and among the disciples he was in some
account; because he was as it were a steward in Christ's family, and bare the
bag: but yet he was a traitor, and did more against Christ then all the
Jews did. For he brought them to the place where they might apprehend him: and
when they were come did point him out unto them, and delivered him into their
hands: nay he gave them a sign and token, saying, Whom I kiss, he it is:
take him and lead him away warily. Here we see the cause why Christ called
Judas a Devil: Man. 14.44.
for he said. Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil. Ioh.
6.70.
He became to be a devil and a traitor by nourishing a wicked and a covetous
heart. And hear we are taught that the ministers of the word, if they make no
conscience of sin, by the just judgment of God do prove devils incarnate:
this example of Judas does manifest the same: and the reason is plain, for the
more knowledge a man has, the more wicked he is if he want grace. They are
like in this case unto a man that has meat and drink enough, but no stomach
to digest meat: whereby the more he eats, the more it turns to his hurt.
This I speak not to deface the callings of ministers; but that those which
preach Gods word, should not do it with impenitent hearts, living in their
own sins. For it is a fearful thing for a man to speak unto the people of
the pardon of their sin, and yet himself not to apprehend the same by faith.
A lump of wax if you keep it from heat, Ier. 15.19,
or from the fire it keeps his own form still, but if it be held to the fire,
it melts and runs abroad: so ministers who by reason of their callings come
near God, if they be lumpes of iniquity and live in their sins, they shall
find that the corruptions of their hearts will melt abroad as wax at the
fire. And therefore every one that is designed to this calling, must first purge
himself of his own sins, Isai 6.5. Act. 20.18.
or else Gods judgments shall fall upon him, as they did on Judas that betrayed
Christ.

Secondly, let us consider what moved Judas to betray his master: namely, the
desire of wealth and gain: and this covetousness, which is an insatiable desire
of money, is the root of all sin: not that all sins came of it, but
because where it is, 1. Tim. 6.^0.
there all other sins are preserved, and do get strength. The desire of
thirty pieces of silver caused Judas to make an agreement with the Jews to
betray his master. Some man will happily say that this practice of Judas was
very strange, and that no man now living would do the like for any money.
Ans. Judas is dead indeed, but his practice is yet alive: for in the high and
weighty calling of the ministry, he that has charge of souls, and either
can not teach and feed his flock, or else will not though he betray not
Christ in his own person, yet he betraies the members of Christ unto the devil.
If a nour^e should take a man's child to bring up, and yet seldom or never
give it milk; in so much that the child pineth away for very hunger: is not
she the very cause of the death of it? yes verily. And so it is with him that
takes upon him the charge of Gods people, and never feeds them with the milk
of gods word, or else so seldom that their souls do famish: he is the
murderer of them, and has betrayed them into the hands of their enemy: and
shall be condemned for them as a traitor unto God unless he repent. Besides,
those that live by traffic in buying and selling, make gain by lying,
swearing, and breaking the Lords Sabbath: and they are also very Iudasses: for
they choppe away their souls with the devil for a little gain. And more
lamentable is their case, because it is hard to find one of an hundred in the
world that makes conscience of a lie, or of any badde dealing; if any gain at
all may come thereby. Men use to cry out on Judas for betraying Christ: and
they do well; yet they themselves for a little worldly pelf betray their own
souls. If such would not be counted Iudasses, they must leave off to sin and
keep a good conscience in gods worship, and the works of their callings.

Thirdly, let us consider what course Judas took in betraying Christ: he was
very submisse, saying, Hail, Master, and kissed him. Why did he so? Herein he
played the most palpable hypocrite: for having gotten a piece of money, he
thought that neither Christ, nor any of his fellow disciples should have
known of it (though Christ knew it well enough) and therefore he comes in
this manner to him, thinking that Christ would have conveyed himself from
amongst them all at the very pinch, as he had done sometimes before. And this
practice also of Judas is common in the world: Judas an enemy unto Christ's
speaks him fair, and salutes him, and so do most of our secure and drowsy
protestants in England: they salute Christ, both by hearing his word and
receiving his sacraments: and as the Prophet says, they honor God with their
lips, but their hearts are far from him. We may see daily experience of
this: every man will say, Lord, Lord, but in their lives and conuersations,
few there be that deny him not, both in the duties which they owe unto God,
as also in duties toward their brethren. Many come to hear Gods word because
they are compelled by the magistrates laws: but when they are come, they
worship not God in their hearts: which is plainly seen by the breach of Gods
holy sabbath in every place: and that they make more account of a mess of
pottage with Esau, then of their birthright: and of thirty pieces of silver,
then of Christ himself.

The third point to be handled in Christ's apprehension is, that they lay hold
on him: wherein we must consider two things. I. the resistance made by Christ's
disciples. II. their flight. For the first, Christ's disciples resisted, and
specially Peter drawing his sword, stroke one of the high priests servants, and
cut off his ear. This fact our Savior Christ reprooues: and that for these
causes. I. because his disciples were private men: Man. 2^.^.
and they that came to apprehend him were magistrates. Secondly, he was to
work the work of man's redemption: now Peter by this fact did what he could
to hinder him. And from this practice of Peter we may learn, that nothing in
the world is so hard to a man as to take up his cross and follow Christ. One
would think it should be a hard matter for him to encounter with enemies,
especially they being stronger then he: but Peter stoutly resisting makes
nothing of it: whereas a little before when Christ told him and the rest
concerning his passion, they were so heavy with grief that they could not
hold up their heads: so hard a thing it is to bear the cross; and for this
very cause afterward when Christ reproved him for striking, both he and all
the rest of the disciples fled away. Secondly, Peter in all man's reason was to
be commended, because he struck in the defense of his master: but Christ
reprooues him for it. Whence we learn, that if a man be zealous for Christ;
he must be zealous within the compass of his calling: and not be zealous
first, and then look for a calling, but first look for a calling, and then be
zealous. Which thing if Peter had marked he had not dealt so rashly; for being
without the compass of his calling he could not but do amiss. Here it may be
demanded, whether Christ and his religion may not be maintained by the sword?
I answer, that the magistrate, which is the vicegerent of the Lord, is the
keeper of both tables: and therefore is to maintain religion with the sword:
and so may put to death Atheists, which hold there is no God, of which sort
there are many in these days: and heretics, which maliciously maintain, and
hold any thing that overthrows the foundation of religion in the Churches
whereof they were members. But some object, that in the parable of the field,
the servants are commanded not to pluck up the tares from the wheat, Mar. 13.30.
but to suffer both to grow till harvest: and that therefore there must be no
separation of heretics, and true Christians before the last day of judgment.
Ans. The scope of that place is not to forbid the execution of heretics;
but it speaks only of the final separation which must be in the end of the
world. For there the master of the family does signify God himself, and the
field, the Church militant spread over the face of the whole earth: and by
tares is meant not only heretics; but also all those that are forth of the
church: the servants are Gods holy angels, and the harvest is the last
judgment. Here further it may be demanded, who may use the sword? Ans. All
m^n may use the sword to strike and to kill, into whose hands God puts the
sword. Now God puts it into the hand first and principally of the public
magistrate, who when just occasion serves may draw it out. And again it is
put into a private man's hand sometime. A private man when he is assailed of his
enemy may take the sword in way of his own defense, and may kill his enemy
therewith (if there be no other help) not doing it upon malice, but because he
can no otherwise escape, and save his own life: and so for want of a
magistrate, he is a magistrate unto himself.

In the ^light of the disciples we may consider two things: the time, and the
quality of the persons. The time was at the apprehension of our Lord and
Savior. And this came to pass not without the special providence of God:
that it might be known, that Christ had no helper or fellow in the
acco^plishment of the work of our redemption: and that, whereas we for our
sins deserved to be forsaken of all creatures, he being our pledge and surety
might be forsaken for us. As for the quality of the persons that fly, they
were the chosen disciples of Christ, such as had believed in him, confessed
him, and preached in his name. And this serves to teach us that God will
otherwhiles forsake his own children and servants and leave them to themselves
in some part, that they may feel their wants and miseries, and their
weakness in themselves, and by that means be humbled thoroughly, and be
touched with an hungring desire after Christ. As a mother sets down her child
and hides her self, suffering it to cry, fall, and break the face, not
becanse she hates it, but that she may teach it to depend upon her, and love
her: so god gives grace to his children, and yet again sometime he does in
part withdraw it from them, and then they fail in their duties sundry ways:
and this he does to make them ashamed of themselves, and to cause them to put
all their confidence out of themselves in the merits of Christ.

The fourth thing to be considered in Christ's apprehension, is their binding of
him. I^h. 18.12.
In which action of theirs we are to observe first of all the circumstance of
time, when this binding was. When our Savior Christ had said unto them, I am
he, they being astonished fell to the ground: and with all, when Peter had
smitten off Malchus ear with his sword, Christ healed the same miraculously.
Yet after all this, though they had seen his wonderful power both in word and
deed, they proceed in malice against him; and lay hands on him, and bind him
as a malefactor. In this we note what a fearful sin hardness of heart
is: the danger whereof appears in this, that if a man be overtaken with it,
there is nothing that can stay or daunt him in his wicked proceedings: no not
the powerful words and deeds of Christ himself. And indeed among Gods
judgments there is none more fearful then this: and yet (how fearful soever
it be) it is a rise sin amongst us in these our days. For it is very evident
by common experience, that the more men are taught the doctrine of the law,
and of the Gospel, the more hard and senseless are their hearts: like unto
the stithie; which, the more it is beaten upon with iron hammer, the harder it
is. And again, it is hard to find men that sorrow for their sins, and feel
the want of Christ: which argues the exceeding deadnes of spirit^ And let us
be resolved that it is a most terrible judgment of God, the rather to be
feared, because it is like a pleasant sleep, into which when a man is fallen,
he feels neither pain nor grief. And therefore we for our parts must look
unto it with fear and trembling, least it take such hold of us, that we be
past all hope of recovery.

Furthermore, this binding of Christ was prefigured unto us in the sacrifices
of the old testament: for the beast that was to be sacrificed, was tied with
cords and bound, and so brought to the altar. And whereas Christ was bound, we
must not consider him in his own person; but as he standing in our room and
stead bears the person of all sinners: and therefore whereas he is thus taken
captive by his enemies, to be brought before a mortal judge, there to be
arraigned for us: hence we learn two good instructions. First here is a
comfort to all the people of god: Christ was bound by his enemies, that they
might be unloosed from the bondage of Satan, sin, and their own corruptions
(under which they lie bound by nature) and might have free liberty in and by
him. Secondly all impenitent sinners are taught hereby to reform and amend
their hearts and lives. For what exceeding madness is, that they by Christ's
bonds being set at liberty, will yet live and die in their sins, and take
pleasure to lie bound hand and foot under the power of sin and Satan. And
indeed this shows unto us the fearful and dangerous estate of all those
that go on still in their sins. For what can they say for themselves at the
day of judgment, when as now they have freedom offered and will not accept of
it?

Thus much of Christ's apprehension: Now follows the indictment. For they
proceed against him iudicially, Math. 26.57. Mat. 14.53. Luke 22.66. Ioh. 18.19.
after the custom of the Jews Christ's indictment was twofold. One before
Caiphas the high priest in the great counsel as Jerusalem; the second before
the civil Judge Pontius Pilate, as is plainly set forth by all the
Evangelists. And Christ's arraignment before Caiphas was a preparation to the
second before Pontius Pilate, that the Jews might thoroughly proceed against
him. In the first we are to consider these points: I. the time in which Christ
was indicted. II. the end of his indictment. III. the whole tenor and
proceeding thereof. For the first: Christ was indicted early in the morning at
the break of the day: for he was apprehended in the night, and with all have
brought into Caiphas hall, where they kept him all might: and at the break of
the day Caiphas the high priest, and the Elders with the Scribes and Pharisees,
held a solemn council against him: and there they received accusations and
condemned him before morning, at which time they sent him to the common hall,
as Saint Matthew says, Math. 27.1.2.
When the morning was come, all the chief Priests and Elders of the people
took counsel against Jesus to put him to death: and led him away bound, and
delivered him to Pontius Pilate. In which action of theirs we are to mark two
points. First the diligence of ungodly men and the quickness of their nature
to practice sin and wickedness: Isai 59.7.
as it was said of the old Jews, their feet run to evil, and they make
have to shed blood. When the Israelites would sacrifice to the golden calfe
which they had made; Exodus 32.6.
it is said, they rose up early in the morning. Hence it appears, that if
God leave us to our selves, we are as ready to practice any mischief as the
fire is to burn without delay and that with much violence. Now the
consideration of this must move every one of us to take heed of all occasions
and prouocations to sin whatsoever they be, that the corruption of our nature
break not forth any way. Secondly, in the circumstance of time of this
council, we may mark the rashness of this solemn assembly in judicial
proceedings: whereas they examine him both of his doctrine, and also of his
disciples, omitting such circumstances as should have bin used; as the serious
examining of witnesses, and the weying of his contrary answers: for he is
taken and brought before the Judge and condemned on a sudden. Now as this was
the practice of this council, so on the contrary the common complaint of
these times is of the slow dispatch of matters in law, and of the long delay:
in so much that some be almost undone before their suits be ended; whereas
judicial proceedings were ordained by God, not for men's undoing, but for the
maintaining of the common peace, and liberty, and wealth. And therefore
justice ought to be dispatched with such speed, as men thereby might be
furthered, and not hindered.

Mat. 26.59. Mat. 14.55.
The end of Christ's indictment was directly to kill him, and to put him to
death. Here is no indifferent proceeding to be looked for, but plotting on
every h^nd for the very blood of Christ. Where note, that in the hearts of all
wicked men, there is an ingrafted hatred of Christ, and as it were bred in the
bone: and the same affection the world carries to the members of Christ. This
hatred is manifested in the first giving of the promise, I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed. It appears in
the hatred that Cain bare to his brother Abel, Ismael toward Isaac, Esau
toward Jacob: and the Gentiles that were without the covenant, toward the
Church of God at all times. And to come near to our selves, this ingrafted
hatred that is in the heart of the wicked against Christ and his members, is as
plentiful, and as evident as ever it was, even in these our days. For among
all men none are more maligned and hated then those that profess Christ: and
for none other cause, but because they profess Christ. And hereupon the very
profession of religion is laden with nicknames and reproachful terms by all
sorts of men.

And thus much of the end and intent of their counsel. The proceeding in
judgment stands in these points. I. they examine Christ. II. they bring
witnesses against him. III. they adjure him to tell the^ who he is: of these in
order. First, they examine our Savior Christ of his doctrine suspecting him to
be a false prophet: secondly, of his disciples, as suspecting him seditiously
to raise up a new sect unto himself, to make a faction amongst the Jews.
Now to this examination let us mark Christ's answer, in which he says
nothing at all concerning his disciples: Ioh. 18.19.
whereas notwithstanding he might have said, that one of them betrayed him,
another denied him, and the rest fled away: whereby we note, that it is not our
duty at all times, and in all places, to speak of the faults and wants that
we know by others. Secondly, the answer which he makes is only concerning
his doctrine: whereby the ministers of God and al men else are taught, ^. Pet.
3.15.
that being called before their enemies, to give reason of their doctrine:
they are (as Saint Peter says) to be always ready to give an account of the
hope that is in them. And further we are to consider the wisdom that Christ
uses in answering; for he says nothing of his doctrine in particular, but
said, Ioh ^8.19,^6.
I speak openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the
temple whither the Jews resorted: in secret have I taught nothing: ask them
therefore what I said which heard me: Behold they can tell you what I said. Now
the reason why he answered thus sparingly in general terms is; because their
examination served only to entangle him: and out of his words to gather matter
of accusation. After whose example we may learn, that being called to make
answer of our faith and doctrine before our enemies, we are to do it so, as
thereby we do not entangle our selves; nor give any advantage unto our
enemies: and hereof we have a notable example in the Apostle Paul, Act. 23. 6.
Again in the words of Christ's answer we must observe two things. First, that
the place where Christ taught was public. Now hence it may be demanmanded,
whether ministers may handle the word of God privately or no? Ans. The state
of Gods Church is twofold: peaceable or troublesome. In the time of peace
ministers must preach the word publicly: but in time of persecution, for the
safe^^ and preservation of the Church of God, they may with good warrant pr^^h
privately: Act. 12.1^.
and indeed at such times the assemblies of the church make private places
public. And hence we learn, that in time of peace, all those that are called
to the office of the ministry, must (if it be possible) spend their labor
publicly, so as they may do most good. Secondly whereas Christ says, he
preached in their synagogues and temple, which at that time were places full of
disorder; Mat. 21.1^.
in so much as he called the temple a den of thieves: and the Scribes and
Pharisees had corrupted the doctrine of the Law, Mat. 15.3.
transgressing the commandments of God in their own traditions: and they
taught justification by the works of the law, as Paul says, Romans 10.^.
they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to stablish
their own righteousness which is by works, and not submitted themselves to
the righteousness of God. Besides all this, they were loose and wicked men in
their lives and conuersations: and therefore Christ commanded the people that
they should observe, and do whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees bid them,
sitting in Moses chair: Mat. 2^.2.^.
but after their works they must not do; because they say and do not. Now
although these corruptions and deformities were in the Jewish Church, yet our
Savior Christ made no separation from it, but came and preached both in their
temple and synagogues, where these seducers and false teachers were. And hence
we gather, that the practice of all those men in our Church which separate
themselves from all assemblies for the wants thereof, holding that our Church is
no Church, that the grace which is wrought by the preaching of the word among
us is nothing else but a sathanicall illusion; that our Sacraments are no
Sacraments, I say, this their practice is condemned by our Savior Christ's
conuersing among the Jews. For if Christ should have followed their opinion,
he ought to have fled from amongst the Jews, and not so much as once to have
come into the temple, or taught in their Synagogues; but contrariwise he joined
himself with them: and therefore we can not in good conscience disioyne our
selves from the Church of England. The second thing to be observed in Christ's
answer is, that he referres Caiphas to the judgment of his hearers, being
resolved of the truth of his own doctrine, though sundry of them were his
utter enemies. Behold then a good example for all the ministers of Gods word to
follow; teaching them to deliver Gods word so purely and sincerely, that if
they be called into question about the same, they may be bold to appeal to
the co^scie^ces of their hearers although they be wicked me^.

Now after this answer, one of the servants of Caiphas smites Christ with a
rod: in whom the saying is verified, Ioh 18.^2.
Like master, like servant: that is, if the master be wicked, servants commonly
will be wicked also: if the master be an enemy to Christ, his servant will be
Christ's enemy also. And this is the cause why there are so many lewd
apprentises and servants, because there are so many lewd masters. Many masters
complain of servants now adays; but there is more cause why they should
complain of themselves: for usually servants will not become obedient to their
masters, till their masters first become obedient unto Christ: therefore let
masters learn to obey God, and then their servants will obey them also.

Further, Christ being smitten, makes this answer: If I have evil spoken,
bear witness of the evil: but if I have well spoken, why smitest thou me?
making complaint of an injury done unto him. Now hereupon scoffing Julian the
Apostata says, Christ keeps not his own laws, but goes against his own
precept; when as he said, Mat. 5.39.
If one strike thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other also. But we must
know, that in these words Christ's meaning is, that a man must rather suffer a
double wrong, then seek a private revenge. And before Christ spoke in his own
defense, which a man may lawefully do, and not seek any revenge: for it is
one thing to defend his own cause, and another to seek revenge.

Now follows the second point in their proceeding, which is, the producing of
false witnesses against him; as Saint Matthew says, Mat. 26.60.
The whole Counsel sought false witness against him, and thongh many came yet
found they none: for they could not agree together, because they alleged
false things against him, which they could not prove. And thus the members of
Christ have often such enemies as make no bones shamefully to avouch that
against them, which they cannot be able to justify. Ter^l. Apol. co^^ra g^^^.
The ten persecutions which were in the first 300. years after Christ, arose
oftentimes of shameless reports that men gave out, which said that Christians
lived of man's flesh: and therefore slew their own children: 2. that they
lived on raw flesh, 3. that they committed incest one with another in their
assemblies: 4. that they worshipped the head of an ass: 5. that they
worshipped the Sun and Moon: 6. that they were traitors and sought to
undermine the Roman Empire: and lastly, whersoeuer was thunder or earthquakes,
seditions or tumults, or any disquietnesse or trouble, Christians were accused
as the authors thereof. Such enemies have they had in all ages: and in these
our days the same is practiced, and will be to the worlds end. Now when
the first witnesses could not agree among themselves, then two other false
witnesses came forth, which avouched that Christ said, Man. 14 58.
I will destroy this temple made with hands, and within three days will build
another made without hands. Indeed Christ said some such words: for says
he, Ioh. 2.19. verse. 22.
Destroy this temple and within three days I will build it up again. But he
spoke this of the temple of his body: whereas they maliciously did interpret
him to have spoken of the temple in Jerusalem. And again they change the
words, for Christ said, Destroy this temple, etc. but these witnesses affirm
he said, I will destroy this temple made with hands, etc. And thus they change
both words and meaning: and therefore the Holy Ghost calls them false
witnesses. By this we must be advertised to take heed how we report men's
words: for if we change the meaning, though in part we retain the words, we
may soon become slanderers and false witnesses: and as this duty must be
performed toward all men, so especially toward the ministers of the Gospel:
and the neglect of this duty procures many slanders to the^ in this our
Church: whereof indeed the re^orters are the cause, and not the ministers
themselves.

Now at this false accusation Christ was silent, so as Caiphas asked him why he
answered nothing. Herein we are to consider many things: I. why Christ was
silent. The causes be two: first he was to show himself a pattern of true
humility and patience, therefore even then would he be silent when he was most
falsely accused of his adversaries. Secondly he is silent, that standing before
the judge to be condemned, the sentence might proceed against him, and he
might suffer the death appointed, which was due unto us, and so become our
redeemer. And in Christ's example we must note that it is a special duty to
know when to speak, and when to be silent. The ordering of the tongue is a
rare gift, and few attain unto it. Some will peradventure ask what rule we
have to direct us herein? Ans. The general rule for the ordering of the tongne,
is the law of God. We are commanded to seek the glory of God in the first
table; and in the second the good of our neighbor: when thy speech therefore
will serve either for Gods glory, or the good of thy neighbor, then thou must
speak: if it serve for neither, then be silent. Again, if thy silence be
either for Gods glory, or the good of thy neighbor, then be silent: if it will
not then speak. And because it is hard for a man to know when his speech or
silence will serve for these two ends: therefore we must pray unto God that he
will teach and direct us herein: as David does, Psalm. 141.3. Psalm. 51.^5.
Set a watch (says he) O Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my
lips: and again, Open thou my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth
thy praise.

Thus much for the false witnesses produced. Now follows the third point
which is, the adiuring of Christ: for Caiphas the high priest charged him to
tell him whether he were the Christ the son of God or no. To adjure a man, is
to charge and command him in the name of God, to declare a truth, not only
because God is witness thereof, but also because he is a judge to revenge, 1 Thessalonians. 5.27.
if he speak not the truth. Thus Paul adjured the Thessalonians, charging
them in the Lord, that his epistle should be read unto all the brethren the
Saints. And the like does Caiphas to Christ. And hea^e is a thing to be wondered
at; Caiphas the high priest adiureth him in the name of God, who is very God,
even the Son of God. And this shows what a small account he made of the
name of God; for he did it only to get advantage on Christ's words: and so do
many now adays, who for a little profit or gain make a matter of nothing to
abuse the name of God a thousand ways.

Christ being thus adjured, though silent before, yet now in reverence to
Gods maiestie^ answered and said: first, Thou have said it: and in Saint Mark,
Mat. 26.25. Mat. 14 62, Ioh. 19.7.
I am he. In this answer, appears the wonderful providence of god. For though
Caiphas take hence the occasion of condemning Christ, yet has he withal
drawn from him a most excellent confession, that he is the Son of God, and
our alone Savior. And by this means he proceeds to shut heaven against
himself, and to open the same for us.

Thus we have ended the first indictment of Christ before Caiphas. Ioh. 18.19.
Luke 23. Mat. 2^.2. Mat. ^^.^.
Now follows the second, which was before Pontius Pilate, in the common hall
at Jerusalem. The history of it is set down at large in all the Evangelists.
In this second inditeme^t of Christ (that we may refer every matter to his
place) we are to observe four things: I the accusation of Christ before
Pilate. II. his examination. III. Pilates policy to save Christ. IV. Pilats
absoluing of him; and then the condemnation of Christ in both courts,
Ecclesiastical and civil: of these in order. In Christ's accusation, we must
consider many points. The first is, who were his accusers, namely the high
Priest, the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Elders of the people, and the common
people: all these conspired together to accuse him. The cause that moved the
Pharisees and Elders of the people hereunto, is noted by Saint Matthew, Math.
^7.^8.
who says of envy they delivered him. Envy is nothing but a sadness in a
man's heart, at the prosperity of his better. And it reigned in the Scribes and
Pharisees, and the occasion was this. Christ had taught most heavenly doctrine,
and confirmed the same by most wonderful miracles, and did greatly exceed
them all, and was in more account among the people: and for this cause the
Scribes and Pharisees and high Priests, repined and grudged at him. Now their
example serves to admonish us to take heed of this sin, as being the mother
of many mischiefs. And we must rather follow the example of Moses, who when
Joshua desired him to forbid Eldad and Medad to prophecy, answered, Numb.
11.26, 27,28.
Enuiest thou for my sake? yea I would to God all the lords people were
prophets. And we must be of the same mind with John Baptist, who hearing by
his disciples that the people left him and followed Christ, said, Ioh. 3.29.
his joy was fulfilled, for Christ must increase, and he must decrease. And so
we must be glad and content when we see the prosperity of our neighbors any
way. Now the cause why the common people join with them was, Math. 27.20.
because the chief Priests and the Scribes and Elders had persuaded them to a
bad conceit of Christ. Hence it appears that it is most requisite for any
people, be they never so good, to have good magistrates, and godly rulers to
govern them by wise and godly counsel. The necessity hereof was well known
to Iethro Moses father in law, though he were a heathen man: Exodus 18.21.
for he bids Moses to provide among all the people men of courag^ fearing
God, men dealing truly, hating covetousness, and appoint them to be rulers
over the people. Teaching us, that if covetous, malicious, and ungodly men, not
fearing God^ go before the people, they also shall in all likelihood be
carried into the like sins by their example.

The next point concerns the place where they accuse him, which was at the
door of the common hall: Ioh. 1^^8.
for having brought him before the counsel at Jerusalem and there condemned
him of blasphemy, afterward they bring him into the common hall where Pilate
sat judge. Yet did they not enter in, but stayed without at the door, least
they should be defiled, and be made unfit to eat the passover. In which
practice of theirs, we are to mark an example of most notable both
superstition, and most gross hypocrisy. For they make no bones to accuse and
arraigne a man most just and innocent, and yet are very strict and curious in
an outward ceremony. And in like manner they make no conscience to give thirty
pieces of silver to betray Christ: Math. 27.6.
but to cast the same into the treasury, they make it a great and heinous
offense. And for this cause Christ pronounces a woe unto the Scribes and
Pharisees, calling them hypocrites: for, says he, ^ath. 23.23.
you tithe mynt, anyse, and commin, and leave the weighty matters of the law,
as judgment, and mercy. And the very same thing we see practiced of the
Church of Rome at this day, and of sundry Papists that live amongst us: they
will not eat flesh in Lent, or upon any of the Popes fasting days for any
thing: and yet the same men make no conscience of seeking the blood of the
Lords anointed, and their dread sovereign. And in this we see the most
palpable, and most gross hypocrisy of those that be of that Church. But shall
we think that our own Church is free from such men? no assuredly: for take a
view of the profession that is used among the people of England, and it will
appear that they place their whole religion for the most part in the
observation of certain ceremonies. The manner of most men is to come to the
place of assemblies, where God is worshipped, and there mumble up the Lords
prayer, the commandments, and the belief in stead of prayers, which being
done, God is well served think they: whereas in the mean season they neglect
to learn and practice such things as are taught them for their salvation by
the ministers of Gods word. At the feast of Easter, every man will be full of
devotion and charity, and come to receive the Lords Supper, as though he were
the holiest man in the world; but when the time is past, all generally turn to
their old by as again: and all the year after live as they list, making no
conscience of lying, slandering, fraud, and deceit in their affairs among men.
But we must know that there is no soundnes of religion, but gross hypocrisy
in all such men: they worship God with their lips, but there is no power of
godliness in their hearts.

The third point is, concerning the party to whom they make this accusation
against Christ, namely, not to a Jew, but to a Gentile: for having condemned
him in their Ecclesiastical court before Caiphas the high priest, they bring
him to Pontius Pilate the deputy of Tiberius Caesar in Judea. Where we must
observe the wonderful providence of God, in that not only the Jews, but the
Gentiles also had a stroke in the arraignment of Christ, that that might be
true which the Apostle says, God shut up all under sin, that he might have
mercy upon all. Romans 11.32,


The fourth point is, the matter of their accusation: they accuse our Savior
Christ of three things: I. that he seduced the people. II. that he forbad to
pay tribute to Caesar. III. that he said he was a king. Luke 23.^^
Let us well consider these accusations, especially the two last, because they
are flat contrary both to Christ's preaching, and to his practice. For when the
people would have made him a King, after he had wrought the miracle of the five
loaves and two fishes, the text says he departed from among them unto a
mountain himself alone. Secondly, when tribute was demanded of him for
Caesar, Ioh. 6.15. Math. 17.27.
though he were the Kings son, and therefore was freed; yet says he to
Peter, least we should offend them go to the sea, and cast in an angle and
take the first fish that comes up, and when thou have opened his mouth, thou
shall find a piece of twenty pence, that take and give unto them for thee and
me. And when he was called to be a judge to divide the inheritance between two
brethren, he refused to do it, saying, Who made me a judge between you?
Therefore in these two things, they did most falsely accuse him. Whereby we
learn, that nothing is so false and untrue, but the slanderer dare lay it to
the charge of the innocent: the tongues of the slanderers are sharp swords,
and venomous arrows, Psalm. 120.4. and 5.9.
to wou^d their enemies: their throats are open sepulchers, the poison of aspes
is under their lips. If a man speak gracious words, his tongue is touched
with the fire of Gods spirit: but as S. James says, the tongue of the wicked
is fire, Iam. 3.6.
yea a world of wickedness, and it is set on fire with the fire of hell:
therefore let this example be a caveat to us all, to teach us to take heed of
slandering, for the devil then speaks by us, and kindles our tongues with the
fire of hell.

The fifth point is, the manner of their accusation, which is diligently to be
marked: for they do not only charge him with a manifest untruth, but they
beseech Pilate to put him to death, crying, Injustice. For a bla^phemer by
their l^we should be stoned and not crucified. Math. 27^22,23.
Crucify him, crucify him: in so much that Pontius Pilate was afraid of them:
where we see how these shameless Jews go beyond their compass, and the
bounds of all accusers, whose duty is to testi^ie only what they know. Now in
the matter of this their accusation, appears their wonderful inconstancy.
For a little before when Christ came to Jerusalem riding upon an ass, showing
some signs of his kingly authority, they cut down branches from the trees,
and strawed them in the way, crying, Hosanna, Blessed is he that comes in the
name of the Lord: but now they sing another song, and in stead of Hosanna, they
cry, Crucify him, crucify him. And the like inconstancy is to be found in
the people of these our times. They use to receive any religion that is offered
unto them: for in the days of King Edward the sixth, the people of England
received the Gospel of Christ: but shortly after in Queen Mary's time, the
same people received the wretched and abominable doctrine of the church of
Rome. And not many years after when it pleased God to bring again the light
of his glorious Gospel by our gracious Prince, the same people turned from
popery, and embraced the true religion again. And thus with the Jews one
while they cry Hosanna to Christ, and receive his Gospel; and shortly after
they cry, Crucify him, crucify him, by embracing idolatrous popery. Let us
therefore learn in the fear of God, by the ficklenes of the Iewes^ that sing
two contrary songs in so short a space, to acknowledge our inconstancy and
weakness in the matter of religion: whereby if God leave us (...) ^itle to our
selves, we shall straightway forsake Christ, his Gospel, and all.

T^^^ ^^ch of the accusation. Now follows Christ's examination before ^o^^^us
Pilate: for when the Jews had thus falsely accused him, then Pontius Pilate
took him and brought him into the common hall, and asked him this question,
Art thou the King of the Jews? Now Christ being thus examined, made as Paul
also testifies, ^. Tim. 6.12.
a good confession. The sum thereof stands in four heads. The first is, that
he confesses himself to be a King; not such an one as they accused him to be,
Ioh. 18.36,37.
yet a true King. Whence we may learn diverse instructions: first, that every
Christian man in the midst of his misery and affliction, has one that is most
sufficient every way to defend him against all his enemies, the world, the
flesh, and the devil. For this King can do whatsoever he will: and therefore
when the legion of devils would enter into a herd of swine, they could not
without his leave. And when the Centurions daughter was dead, Math 8.31. M^^k.
5.41. Io^. 11 43.
he but spoke the word and she arose. And when Lazarus was dead, and had lien
in the grave four days, he but said, Lazarus come forth, and he came forth
bound hand and foot. Yea even hell and death give place to his word, and
nothing can resist his power. And therefore he that is a true member of Christ,
needs not to fear any enemies be they never so great or so many. And again,
as Christ is able, so is he ready and willing to save and defend all that
believe in him. For he it is that gave his life for his subjects, which no King
would do, and shed his blood for their redemption: which he would never have
done, if he had not desired their salvation. Secondly, whereas Christ is a
mighty King, which can do whatsoever he will, let all such among us that have
hitherto lived in ignorance, and by reason of ignorance live in their sins,
at length begin to come unto him, and do him homage, and with penitent hearts
fall down before him: otherwise if they continue in their old rebellions, let
them know whatsoever they be, high or low, that he has a rod of iron in his
hand to bruise them in pieces; Psalm. 2.9. and 110.2.
their souls shall smart for it: as both Pilate, Caiphas, and the rest of the
Jews were with a full cup rewarded for crucifying the Lord of life. And if
Christ cannot draw thee in this life from thy crooked ways, be sure at the
hour of death he will break thee in pieces like a potters vessel. This must
we learn in regard of the first point, that he said plainly, He was a King.

Now follows the second part of his confession, namely that his kingdom was
not of this world. Where he sets down what kind of King he is; he is no
earthly king, his kingdom stands not in the power of men, nor in earthly and
outward government; but his kingdom is spiritual, and his government is in
the very hearts and consciences of men. His kingdom is not outward to be seen
of men, but inward in the heart and ^oule; and therefore it is only begun in
this life, and is continued and accomplished in the world to come in the
kingdom of glory: where Christ shall be all in all in the hearts and
consciences of all the Elect. Now then, if this be so, howsoever Satan have
heretofore reigned in us, and made our hearts as it were his palaces: yet now
let us prepare a room for Christ that he may come and dwell in us: let him
rule our hearts, wills, and affections, that they may become conformable to his
will: let us resign our selves wholly to be ruled by him, that his spiritual
kingdom may be in us. This kingdom in the heart and conscience is the pearl
and hid treasure, Math. 13.4^.
which when a man finds, he sells all that he has and buieth it. Let us
therefore in the fear of God, esteem it as the most precious thing that may
be, and so live in this world, as that Christ may rule inwardly in us, by his
word and spirit. And again seeing this regiment of Christ is heavenly, and the
full manifestation of it is reserved till the life to come: we must therefore
use this world and all things in it, as honor, wealth, ease, and liberty, as
though we used them not. 1. Cor. 7.3^^
As a trauailer uses his staff in his journey; as long as it does further
him, so long he will carry it with him; but when it hinders him, then he
casts it away: so must we use the things of this life, namely as long as they
are helps to further and make us fit for the kingdom of heaven, but if they
be any hinderance to this spiritual regiment of Christ, we must renounce them
and cast them away, be they never so precious to us.

The third point of Christ's confession is, concerning the means whereby he
governs his kingdom: I came (says he) into this world to bear witness of
the truth, that is, to preach the Gospel and doctrine of salvation: and hereby
he teaches that the outward administration of his kingdom, stands specially
in the preaching of the word, which is a principal ordinance of his, serving
to gather his Church from the beginning of the world to the end thereof. And
for this cause he has in all ages set apart chosen ministers for the
publishing of the doctrine of the Gospel. And hence it is manifest that the
gift of prophecy, is the greatest gift that God bestows on his Church for the
building thereof. And therefore it ought to be most highly esteemed, as a most
precious jewel. And for this cause also the schools of learning are to be
reverenced and maintained, and all other means used for the furthering of
them; because they are under God the fountains and welsprings of this gift of
prophecy.

The last point is, concerning the subjects of Christ's kingdom, expressed in
these words, They which are of the truth, hear my voice. In which he sets down
the true mark of his servants and subjects, that they are hearers of that
heavenly and saving word which he revealed from the bosom of his father. It
may be alleged the most wicked men upon earth, yea the devils themselves may
be hearers of the truth of Christ. Math. 13.9.
Ans. There be two kind of hearers: one which hears only the outward sound
of the word with his bodily ears, and he having ears to hear does not hear:
the second, is he that does not only receive the doctrine that is taught with
his ears, but also has his heart opened to feel the power of it, and to obey
the same in the course of his life. This distinction is notably set forth by
David, saying, Psalm. 40.6.
Sacrifice and burnt offerings thou would not have: but my ears have thou
pierced: whereby he insinuates as it were two kinds of ears: one that is deaf
and cannot hear: and thus are the ears of all men by nature in hearing the
doctrine of salvation: the other is a new ear pierced and bored by the hand
of God, which causes a man's heart to hear the sound and operation of the
word, and the life to express the truth of it. Now the subjects of Christ's
kingdom are such, as with the outward hearing of the word, have an inward
hearing of the soul, and grace also to obey: and therefore all those that make
no conscience of obedience to the word of god preached unto them, are no less
then rebels to Christ. We may persuade our selves that we are good subjects,
because we hear the word and receive the Sacraments, but if our lives abound
with sin, and if our hearts be not pierced through by the sword of Gods
spirit, whether we be high or low, rich or poor, let us be what we will be, we
are no right subjects indeed, but rebels and traitors unto the everliving
God. It may be hereafter God will give further grace; but as yet all impenitent
persons, though living in the midst of Gods church, are no obedient and
faithful subjects: and therefore while we have time, let us labor to perform
in deed that which we do in word profess.

Thus much of the examination and confession of Christ. Now follows the third
point concerning the policies which Pilate used to save Christ: and they are
three. First, when he heard that Christ was of Galilee, he took occasion to
send him to Herod, thinking thereby to shift his hands of him, and not to shed
his blood. Luke 23.7.
In which policy, though he seem unwilling to put Christ to death, yet
herein he is a most unjust judge: for having given testimony of Christ, that
he is innocent, he ought to have acquitted him, and not have sent him to Herod
for further judgment. In Herod's dealing with Christ, we may observe these
points. The first, that he is wonderfully glad of his coming. Why so? the text
says, Lu^. ^3.8.
because he was desirous to see him of a long season, because he had heard many
things of him, and trusted to have seen some sign done by him. Here mark how
he rejoiced, not in Christ because he was Christ, that is, his Messiah and
redeemer, but because he wrought miracles, signs, and wonders. And so it is
among us at this day: it is a rare thing to find a man that loves Christ,
because he is Christ: some love Christ for honor, some for wealth, and others
for praise: that is, because they get honor, wealth, and praise by confessing
his name. Again, many profess Christ, only because it is the law and custom
of their nation. But we must learn to be of this mind, to love Christ,
because he is Christ, even for himself, and not for any other sinister
respect: and we must rejoice in Christ for himself, though we never have
profit nor pleasure, neither honor or wealth by him. And if we love him for
wealth or pleasure, or for any other end but for himself alone, when these
things are taken away, then we shall utterly forsake Christ in like manner. The
second point is, that Herod desires Christ to work a miracle. He can be
content to see the works of Christ, but he cannot abide to hear his word, and
to bear his yoke. Like to him are many in these days, which gladly desire to
hear the Gospel of Christ preached, only because they would here speech of
some strange things, laying aside all care and conscience to obey that which
they hear. Yea many in England delight to read the strange histories of the
Bible; and therefore can rehearse the most part of it, (and it were to be
wished that all could do the like:) yet come to the practice of it, the same
persons are commonly found as bad in life etconuersation, yea rather worse then
others. Let us therefore labor that with our knowledge we may join obedience,
and practice with our learning; and as well to be affected with the word of
Christ, as with his works. The third point is, that Herod derides Christ, and
sends him away, clothed in a white garment. This is that Herod whom Christ
called a fox; who also when he heard John Baptist preach, did many things, ^uk
13.3^.
and heard him gladly. How then comes Herod to this outrage of wickedness, thus
to abuse Christ? Ans. We must know, that although Herod at the first hea^d John
preach, yet withal he followed his own affections, and sought how to fulfill
the lusts of his flesh. For when John told him that it was not lawful ^or him
to have his brother Philips wife, he cast him in prison, and afterward ^ut off
his head for it: after which offense, he is grown to this height of impiety,
that he now despises Christ, etcan not abide to hear him. Where we learn,
that as we are willing to hear Gods word preached, so withal we must take
heed that we practice no manner of sin; but make conscience of every thing
that may displease God. Thou may, I grant, be one that fears and favors
John Baptist for a time, wallowing in thy old sins: but after a while,
yiedling to the swinge of thy corrupt heart, thou will never hear John, nor
Christ himself, but hate and despise them both. This is the cause why some
which have been professors of religion heretofore, and have had great measure
of knowledge, are now become very loose persons, and can not abide to hear the
word preached unto them; the reason is, because they could not abide to leave
their sins. Therefore that we may begin in the spirit and not end in the
flesh, let every one that calls on the name of the Lord depart from iniquity.

Now follows the second policy of Pilate. For when he saw the first would not
prevail, then he took a new course: for he took Jesus into the common hall
and s^ourged him, and the soldiers platted a crown of thorns and pu^ it on
his head, and they put on him a purple garment, Ioh. 19.1.
and said, Hail King of the Jews, and smote him with their rods. And thus
he brought him forth before the Jews, persuading himself that when they saw
him so abased, and so ignominiously abused, they would be content therewith,
and exact no greater punishment at his hands: thinking thus to have pacified
the rage of the Jews and so to have delivered Christ from death, by inflicting
upon him some lesser punishment. This policy is as it were a looking glass,
in which we may behold of what nature and condition all plotts and policies of
men are, which are devised and practiced without the direction of Gods word. In
it we may observe two things: the first is, the ground thereof; which is a most
silly, simple, or rather senseless argument. For he reasons us: Luke 23. 14,
15, 16.
I find no fault in this man, therefore I will chastise him and let him go. A
man would hardly have thought, that one having but common sense, would have
made such a reason, much less a great judge sitting in the room of God. But
in him we may behold and see the ground of all humane policy which is beside
the word of God, namely the foolish and blind reason of men. The second thing
to be considered is, the proceeding and is^ue of this policy. Pilate must
either whippe Christ being innocent; or put him to death: which are both
sins and great offenses. Now he makes choice of the lesser, which is to
whippe him, and is persuaded that he ought to do so: whereas of two sins or
evils, a man ought to do neither. And in doing this, Pilate begins to make a
breach in his conscience; and that is the fruit that all politics reap of
their deuis^s, which proceed by the light of their own reason, without the
word of God. By this example, we are admonished of two things: first, that
before we enterprise any business, we must rectify our judgments by Gods
word. David was a most wise King, and no doubt, had withal a grave and wise
counsel, but yet he preferred the word of God before all, saying, (...) ^4.
Thy tes^^m^^ies are my counselors. Secondly, in our proceedings we must keep
an vpr^ght, pure, and unblameable conscience, as Paul exhorts Timothy to
have the mystery of faith in a pure conscience; (...).
giving us thereby to understand, that a good conscience is at it were a chest
or cupboard, in which we are to keep and lock up our religion, and all other
graces of God, as the most precious jewels that can be: and that if we suffer
this chest to be broken up, all our riches and jewels are gone.

But let us yet view the dealing of Pilate more particularly: he whippes
Christ, puts on him a purple garment, puts a reed in his hand, sets a crown
of thorns upon his head, and causes the soldiers to mock him, and spit in
his face. Now in this that Christ standing in our room, was thus shamefully
abused, we must consider what was due unto every one of us for our sins,
namely shame and reproach in this life, and in the life to come endless
confusion. And we see the confession of Christ to be true which he made to
Pilate, that his kingdom was not of this world; for if it had been so, they
would have put a crown of gold upon his head, and not a crown of thorns,
which nothing at all beseemed an earthly king: and in stead of a reed they
would have put a scepter into his hand: and in stead of buffetting and spitting
on him, they would have adored him, and fallen down before him. Again,
whereas Christ our head in this world, ware no other crown but one made of
tho^ns, it serves to teach all those that are the members of Christ, that they
must not look for a crown of glory in this life; because that is reserved
for the life to come. And if we would then wear the crown of glory with
Christ; we must here in this life wear a crown of thorns, as he did: for as
Paul says, 2. Tim. 1.1^.
If we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him: and that which was
fully verified in Christ the head, must in some sort be verified in every true
member of Christ.

Pilates third policy was this; when he saw that neither of the two former
would prevail, he comes forth unto the Jews, and makes an oration to this
effect; that now was the feast of the passover, and that they had a custom
that the Governor should then deliver unto the people a prisoner whom they
would: therefore he asked them whether he should let loose to them Barrabas, or
Jesus which is called Christ: this Barrabas was a notable malefactor, that
with insurrection had committed murder. And thus Pilate cunningly matcheth
Christ with Barrabas, thinking that the Jews would rather choose him then
Barrabas being a notorious malefactor, not worthy to live on the face of the
earth: and by this means he thought to have delivered Christ from death,
though otherwise he accounted him as a malefactor. The ground of this policy
(as we see) is an old custom of the Jews, that a prisoner should be let loose
at Easter. And it may be the end of this custom was, to increase the
solemnity of the feast. But whatsoever in truth the end was, the fact it
self was but a profanation of the time, and an abomination before the Lord:
for Solomon says, Prou. 17.15.
He that justifies the wicked, etcondemneth the just, even they both are
abominatio^ before the Lord. The like practice takes place with many in these
days, who think the Lords day never well spent unless they may add
solemnity thereunto, by revel and riot, by freque^ting of tauerns and
alehouses. And furthermore, where Pilate matcheth Christ being innocent with
Barrabas, and the people prefer him before Christ, having liberty to choose
either; it shows that God in his providence had appointed that Christ should
not stand in his own room before Pilate, but in our room and stead, as a
Mediator between God and us. And in this fact of the people we see how sin
by degrees takes hold of men and that speedily. Who would have thought that
these Jews, which a little before cried Hosanna, and spread their garments
before Christ in the way, would ever have preferred a murderer before him? But
it was the doing of the high priests, the Scribes, and Pharisees, who did
animate and stir them up to this wickedness: and hereupon when they had
yielded first to to attach him, and then to accuse him, they are carried to an
higher degree of impiety, namely to seek his blood: and least he should
escape their hands, they plunge themselves deeper yet preferring a wretched
murderer, eue^ seditious Barrabas before him. This must teach every one of us
to take heed of the beginnings even of the least sins; for the devil is
cunning, he will not plunge a man into the greatest sins at the first: but
this manner is, by little and little to creep into the heart: and having once
possession thereof, by steps to bring men to the height of sin, and that
with speed. We must therefore in the fear of God prevent sin betimes, and
at the first motion cut off all occasions hereof: 2. Tim. 2.17.
that which Paul says of heresy, comparing it to a canker or gangrene, may be
said of all sin. The nature of the gangrene is to run from one joint to
another, from the toe to the foot, from the foot to the leg, from the leg
to the thigh, til it have wasted and destroyed the life of the body: so give
any sin but an entrance, and it will soon ouerspread the whole man: and if
the devil may be suffered but to put one talent into thy heart, he will
presently wind himself into thee, his head, his body and all. The Psalmist
says, Psalm. 137.9.
that he is blessed that takes the children of the Babylonians and dasheth
them against the stones; and as truly it may be said, blessed is the man that
dasheth the head of his sins against the ground while they are young, before
they get strength to ouermaster him.

Thus have we seen the policies of Pilate: now follows the absolution of
Christ: Mat. 27.23.24. Luke 23.14. 22. M^r. 15 14.
for when Pilate had used many means to deliver him, and none would prevail,
then he absolues him, by giving diverse testimonies of his innocence: for he
came forth three times, and bare witness thereof: and last of all he testified
the same by washing of his hands, Ioh. 18.38. and 19.4.
which rite signifies properly the defiling of the hands before, but as yet
Pilate had not defiled his hands, and therefore he used it as a token, to
show, that Christ was innocent, and that he would not defile his own hands
with innocent blood. There were three causes that moved Pilate to absolve
Christ. First he saw that he was a just man, Mat. 27.19.24.
as Saint Matthew notes, and that the high priests and people had delivered
him up of envy, Mar. 15.10.
as Saint Mark says. By this it is plain, that a very Pagan or infidel may
in some things go beyond such as be in Gods Church, having better conscience,
and dealing more justly then they. Pontius Pilate was a heathen man and a
Gentile, the Jews were the Church and people of the living God: yet he sees
plainly that Christ was a just man, and thereupon is moved to absolve him:
whereas the Jews which should be men of conscience and religion, seek his
death. And thus a very Pagan may otherwhiles see more into a matter then those
that be reputed of the Church. And this must admonish all such as profess the
Gospel to look unto their proceedings, that they do al things with upright
conscience: for if we deal unjustly in our proceedings, we may have
neighbors, men of no religion, that will look through us, and see the gros^e
hypocrisy of our profession, which also would be loath to do those things
which we do. The second cause that moved Pilate to absolve Christ, was his
wives dream: for when he was set down upon the judgment seat, she sent
unto him, saying, Mat. 17.19.
Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered many things
in a dream by reason of him. Dreams are of three sorts: natural, rising
from the constitution of the body: diabolical, such as come by the suggestion
of the devil: divine, which are from God. Some have thought that this dream
was of the devil; as though he had labored thereby to hinder the death of
Christ, and consequently our salvation: but I rather think it was occasioned
by the things which she had heard before of Christ, or that it was immediately
from God, as the dreams of Pharao and Nabuchodonoser, and served for a further
manifestation of Christ's innocence. Here it may be asked, whether we may regard
our dreams now, as Pilates wife did or no? Ans. We have the books of the old
and new testament to be our direction, as Esai says: Isa. 8.10.
to the law and to the testimony, they must be our rule and guide. In these
days we must not look to be taught by visions and dreams: yet shall it not be
amiss to observe this caveat concerning dreams, that by them we may guess
the constitution of our bodies, and oftentimes at the sins whereunto we are
inclined. The last motive which caused Pilate to absolve Christ was a speech of
the Jews: for they said, that Christ ought to die by their law, because he
said he was the son of God. And the text says, when Pilate heard that, he
was afraid. Ioh. 19.7,8.
Mark how a poor Painym that knew not Gods word, at the hearing of the name
of the son of God is stricken with fear. No doubt he shall rise in
judgment against many among us that without all fear rend the name of god in
pieces by swearing, blaspheming, cursed speaking. But let all those that fear
the Lord learn to tremble and be afraid at his blessed name.

Thus much for the causes that moved Pilate to absolve Christ: as also for the
second part of Christ's arraignment, namely his accusation. Now follows the
third part, which is his condemnation: and that is twofold. The first by the
Ecclesiastical assembly and counsel of the Jews at Jerusalem, in the high
priests hal before Caiphas. The tenor of his condemnation was this. Math.
26.66.
He has blasphemed, what have we any more need of witnesses, he is worthy to
die? The cause why they say not he shall die, but, he is worthy to die, Deuteronomy.
17.7,8,9.
is this. The Jews had two jurisdictions, the one Ecclesiastical, the other
civil, both prescribed and distinctly executed by the commandment of God,
till the time of the Machabees, in which both jointly together came into the
hands of the priests: but afterward about the days of Herod the great, the
Roman Emperor took away both jurisdictions from the Jews and made their
kingdom a province, so as they could do no more but apprehend; accuse, and
imprison: as does appear by the example of Saul, Act. 9.7.
who gate letters from the high priest to Damascus, that if he found any
either man or woman that believed in Christ, he might bring them bound to
Jerusalem, and imprison them: but kill or condemn they could not.

By the fact of this Counsel we learn sundry points: first, that general
counsels and the Pope himself sitting iudicially in his consistory may err.
If there were any visible Church of God at the time of Christ's arraignment upon
the face of the whole world, it was no doubt the Church of the Jews. For
Caiphas the high priest was a figure of Christ, the Scribes and Pharisees sat
in Moses chair, and Jerusalem is called by Christ, the holy city, Math. 4.5.
and 27.53. Yet for all this that which was foretold is now verified, namely that
the chief corner stone should be rejected of master builders. For by the
general consent of the counsel at Jerusalem, Christ the head of the Catholic
Church and the redeemer of mankind is accused of blasphemy, and condemned as
worthy of death. Wherefore it is a mere dotage of man's brain to avouch, that
the Pope cannot possibly err in giving a definitive sentence in matters either
of faith or manners. Neither can the Church of Rome plead privilege, for
Jerusalem had as many prerogatives as any people in the world could have. Rom
9.3.


Again, by this we see there is no reason why we should ascribe to any man or
to oecumenicall counsels themselves, absolute and sovereign power to determine
and give judgment in matters of religion, considering they are in danger to be
overtaken with notable slippes and errors. Mat. 23.20.
And therefore the soueraignitie of judgment is peculiar to the son of god,
who is the only doctor and lawgiver of the Church: and he puts the same in
execution in and by the written word. As for the speech of the papists calling
the Scriptures a dumb Judge, it is little to be regarded: for the Scriptures
are, as it were, the letter of the living God sent from heaven to his Church
upon earth: and therefore they speak as plainly and as sufficiently unto us
of all matters of faith, as a man can speak unto his friend by letter, so be
it, we have the gift of discerning. Yet do we not bar the Church of God from
all judgment. For the ministerial power of giving judgment both publicly
and privately is granted unto it of God: and that is to determine and give
sentence of matters in question according to the word as the lawyer gives
judgment, not according as he will, but according to the tenor of the law.

Thirdly we learn, that personal succession is no infallible mark of the
true faith, and of true pastors; unless withal be joined succession in the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. For Caiphas held his office by
succession from Aaron: and yet in public assembly condemned the Messiah spoken
of by Moses and the prophets. Therefore the succession of bishops of Rome from
Peter is of no moment, unless they can prove that their religion is the
religion of Peter, which they can never do.

And thus much of Christ's first condemnation. The second was by Pontius Pilate,
who sat in an other court as a civil judge, and the tenor of his sentence
was, that the Jews should take him and crucify him. Luke 13.24.
Here we must consider the reasons that moved Pilate to determine thus: the
first was, the impatience of the Jews: he for his part was loath to defile his
hands with innocent blood, but the Jews cried, Mat. 27.25.
his blood be upon us, and on our children: which according to their wish came
upon them within few years after, and so remains still unto this day. By
which we are taught to take heed of imprecations against our selves, our
children, or servants, or any other creatures: for God hears men's prayers two
ways: either in mercy, or in his wrath and danger. If thou curse thy self, or
any other, except thou turn unto the Lord by speedy repentance, he may hear
thy prayer in his wrath, and verify thy curse upon thee to thy utter
confusion. The second reason that moved Pilate to condemn Christ was, because
he feared men more then God: for being deputy under Tyberius Caesar over the
province of Judea, Ioh. 19.12.13.
for fear of loosing his office, and of displeasing the Jews, he condemned
Christ after he had absolved him: whereby we see, that it is a grievous sin
to fear dust and ashes more then the living God. And therefore Saint John
says, Revel 21.8.
that the fearful shall have their portion in the burning lake: that is, such
as are more afraid of man then of God. And this sin in Pilate wanted not his
just reward: for not long after he lost his deputie-shippe, and Cesars favor,
and fled to Vienna; Eusebius. hist. lib. ^. ^7.
where living in banishment, he killed himself. And thus God meets with them
that fear the creature more then the Creator. That we may therefore avoid the
heavy hand of God, let us learn to fear God above all: else we shall
dishonor God, and shame the religion which we profess.

The proper end of Christ's condemnation set down though not in Pilates will,
yet in Gods eternal counsel was, that he might be the cause of absolution at
the bar of Gods justice unto all those whatsoever they are which shall come
to life eternal. For we must still remember, that when Christ was condemned by
mortal Judges, he stood in our place, and in him were all our sins condemned
before God. Therefore to conclude this point; if this were the end of the
counsel of God, to have his own son condemned by Pontius Pilate a mortal
judge, that we might not be condemned but absolved before Gods judgment seat:
let us all labor to have this absolution sealed up in our hearts by the
testimony of Gods spirit. For one day we must come to the bar of Gods
judgment: and if we have not an absolution by Christ's condemnation at Pilates
earthly bar, let us look for nothing else but the fearful sentence of
condemnation at the celestial bar of Gods justice, to be uttered at the day
of the last judgment. If a man should commit such an heinous offense, as that
he could no other way escape death but by the Princes pardon, he neither would
nor could be at rest, till by one means or other he had obtained the same, and
had gotten it written and sealed: which done, he would carry it home, lock it
up safe and sound, and many times look upon it with great joy and gladness.
Well, this is the case of every one of us: by nature we are rebels and
traitors against God, and have by our sins deserved ten thousand deaths.
Now our only stay and refuge is, that Christ the son of God was condemned
for us: and therefore in Christ we must sue for pardon at Gods hands, and never
rest till we have the assurance thereof sealed up in our hearts and
consciences: always remembering, that ever after we lead a new life, and never
commit the like sins against God any more. It were a blessed thing if this
would enter into our hearts: but alas, we are as dead in our sins as a dead
carcass is in the grave. The Ministers of God may teach this often unto us,
and we may also hear the same: but satan does so possess men's hearts, that
they seldom or never begin to believe or receive it till it be too late. Every
one can say, God is merciful, but that is not enough: for Christ being most
righteous was condemned, that thou being a wretched sinner might be saved:
and therefore thou must labor for thy self, to have some testimony of thine
absolution by Christ's condemnation, sealed up in thine own conscience, that
thou may more assuredly say, God is and will be merciful unto thee.

Having spoken of the whole arraignment of Christ, and of his passion in
general. Now let us proceed to the parts of the passion, which are three:
Christ's Execution, his Burial, and his Descending into hell. This being
withal remembered, that these three parts, are likewise three degrees of
Christ's humiliation.

Christ's Execution is that part of his passion, which he bare upon the cross,
expressed in the words of the Creed, he was crucified, and died. In handling
of it we must observe five things: I. the person that suffered: II. the place
where he suffered. III. the time when he suffered. IV. the manner how he
suffered. V. the excellency of his passion. For the first, the person that
suffered was Christ the just, as Peter says, 2. Pet. 3.18.
Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just, for the unjust: and
again, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
Christ Jesus the just (says S. John) is the reconciliation for our sins.
And in his execution, we shall have manifest declarations of his righteousness
and justice, consisting in two most worthy points. First, when he was upon the
cross, and the soldiers were nailing his hands and feet thereunto, and
racking his body most cruelly, he prayed, Father, forgive them, they know not
what they do. Luke 23.34.
These soldiers were by all likelihood the very same that apprehended him, and
brought him before Caiphas, and from thence to Pontius Pilate, and there
platted a crown of thorns and set it on his head, and buffeted him, and
spitefully entreated him as we have heard: and yet Christ speaks no word of
revenge unto them, but with all patience in the very extremity of their malice
and injury, he prays unto his father to forgive them. Hence we are taught
that when injuries are done unto us, we ought to abstain from all affection of
revenge, and not so much as manifest the same either in word or deed. It is
indeed a hard lesson to learn and practice: but it is our parts to endeavor
to do it: and not only so, but to be ready for evil to do good: yea, even at
that instant when other men are doing us wrong: even then (I say) we must be
ready, if it be possible to do them good. When as Christ's enemies were
practicing against him all the treachery they could, even then he performs
the work of a Mediator, and prays for them unto his father, and seeks
their salvation. Again, whereas Christ prays thus, Father, forgive them, we
gather, that the most principal thing of all that man ought to seek after in
this life, is the forgiveness of sins. Some think that happiness consists
in honor, some in wealth, some in pleasure, some in this, some in that: but
indeed the thing which we should most labor for, is reconciliation with God in
Christ, that we may have the free remission of all our sins. Yea this is
blessedness it self, as David says, Blessed is he whose iniquity is forgiven,
and whose sin is covered. ^sal. ^^.2.
Here then behold the madness of the men of this world, that either seek
for this blessing in the last place or not at all.

The second testimony of Christ's righteousness given in the midst of his
passion was, that he beheld his mother standing by, and commended her to the
custody of John his disciple: Ioh. 19.
whereby he gave an example of most holy obedience unto the fifth commandment,
which prescribes honor unto father and mother. And this his fact shows,
that the observing of this commandment stands not in outward show and
reverence only; but in a godly recompense, in procuring unto parents all the
good we can, both concerning this and a better life. It often falls out that
children be as it were Cains to father and mother: some rail on them, some
fight with them; others see them pine away and sterue, and not relieve them.
But all dutiful children must here learn, that as their parents have done many
duties unto them, and brought them up: so they again must in all reverence
perform obedience unto them both in word and deed: and when occasion is
offered relieve them, yea in all they can, do good unto them. Again in this
we may see what a wretched state is that which the Church of Rome calls the
state of perfection; namely to live apart from the company of men, in fasting
and praying all the days of a man's life: for hereby the bond of nature is
broken, and a man can not do the duty unto his parents which Gods law
requires, and Christ here himself practices, nor the duties of a member of
Christ which are to be done to the whole Church, and to the rest of the members
thereof.

The place where Christ suffered is called Caluarie or Golgotha, that is, the
place of dead men's skulles, without the walls of Jerusalem. Concerning the
reason of this name, men be of diverse opinions. Jewish Rabbines.

Cypr. lib. de re^urrect.

August sermon. 71. de temp. Hieron. epist. ^aulae ad Marcellam.


Some say it was so called, because Adam was buried there, and that his skull
being there found gave the name to the place. And this is the very opinion of
some ancient divines, that Christ was there crucified where Adam was buried;
but because it has no certain ground, I leave it as uncertain. Others
think it was called Caluarie, because the Jews were wont to carry out the
bones of the dead men, and there to heap them together, as in times past the
manner was in the vauts of sundry Churches in this land. And some others
think it was called Golgotha or Caluarie, because thieves and murderers, and
malefactors were there executed, stoned, burned: whereby it came to pass that
many skulls and bones of dead men were found there.

The time when Christ was executed, was at the Jews passover, when not only
the Jews, but also many Proselytes of many countries and nations were
assembled: and therefore this execution was not in a private corner, but openly
in the view of the world. For as he was a Savior not to the Jews only but
also the Gentiles: so it was very requisite that his death should be public
before all men both Jews and Gentiles. As for the hour of the day, in which
he suffered, there is some difficulty in the Evangelists: Ioh. 19.14. Mark.
15.23.
for S. John says, that he was condemned about the sixth hour of the day: and
Saint Mark says, he was crucified the third hour. Hence it may be demanded,
how both these can stand together. Ans. Howesoeuer the Jews natural day
began at evening, yet the arti^ificiall day began at sunne-rising, and
ended at sunne-setting: and it was divided two ways. First, into twelve parts
called twelve hours, whether the days were longer or shorter. Secondly into
four parts or quarters, and every part contained three hours: as from the
first hour to the third was one part called morning: from the third hour to
the sixth, another part called the sixth hour: from the sixth hour to the ninth,
the third part called the ninth hour: and from the ninth hour to the twelfth,
the fourth part called evening. Now when Saint John says, Christ was
condemned about the sixth hour: it must be understood of the second quarter of
the day, called the sixth hour: and whereas Saint Mark says he was crucified
the third hour of the day, he speaks of the lesser hours, twelve whereof
made the whole day: and thus they both agree, for the third hour of the day
and the beginning of the second quarter follow each other immediately. Again
it may be answered, that Christ was condemned at six of the clock after the
Roman account, which begins the day at midnight; A. G^ll. noct. art. lib. 3.
c. 2.
and crucified at three (which is nine of the clock in the morning with us)
after the Jews account who begin their artificial day, as I said, at the
sun rising.

The fourth and last point, is the order and whole proceeding of Christ's
execution; which may be reduced to four heads: the I. his going to execution,
the II. his crucifying, the III. his death, the IV. the consequents of his
death. Again in his going to execution we may consider many points.

The first, that he is brought out of Jerusalem as a malefactor. Iosu. 7.24^
Lev 21.14. Act. 7.58.
For the old and ancient custom of the Jews was to put those whom they
judged to be notorious offenders to death without their te^ts when they
wandered in the wilderness, and without the walls of Jerusalem, least they
should any way be defiled with their blood. And this fell out by the special
providence of God, that that might be fulfilled in Christ which was prefigured
in the sacrifices of the old testament, when the bodies of beasts were not
eaten of the priests, but burnt without the camp: Lev. 6.36. H^br. 13.12.
therefore (says the holy Ghost) even Jesus that he might sanctify the
people with his own blood, suffered without the gates.

Hence may all Christians learn to know their own estate and condition:
first, in this world they must look to be accounted the ofscouring of the
earth, and the filth of the word, 1. Cor. 4.13.
as the Apostle says, and we must all prepare our selves to bear this
estate. They that will be Gods children must not look to be better accepted of
in the world then Christ was. Secondly by this every one of us must learn to
be content to use this world, as strangers and pilgrims; being every day
and hour and ready to leave the same. For if Christ the son of God himself
was brought out of Jerusalem, as not being worthy to have his aboade there,
then must every christian man look much more for the like extremity. And
therefore it is not good for us to have our hearts tied to the world, and to
seek always to be approved of the same: for that argues that we are not
like to Christ: but we must rather do as poor pilgrims in strange
countries; and that is only to look for safe conduct thorough the miseries in
this world, having in the mean season our hearts, wills, and affections set on
the kingdom which is in heaven. The second thing is, that Christ was made to
bear his own cross: for so it seems the manner of the Romans was to deal
with malefactors. And this must put us in mind of that notable lesson which
Christ himself taught his disciples; namely, that if any man will be his
disciple, he must deny himself, take up his own cross d^ily, and follow
him: Luke 9.23.
where by the cross we must understand, that portion of affliction, which god
has allotted to every one of his children: for there is no child of God to
whom he has not measured out as it were some bitter cup of misery in this
life. And therefore Paul says, Now rejoice I in my suffering for you, and
fulfill the rest of the fu^ferings of Christ in my fle^^. Colos^. 1.24.
By Christ's sufferings he means not the passion of Christ, but the sufferings
of the body of Christ, that is, the Church whereof Christ is the head.
Moreover we must suffer as he did, and that daily: because as one day follows
another, so one cross comes in the neck of another. And whereas Christ bears
the cross that was laid on him by the hands of the soldiers, it must teach
us not to pull crosses upon our selves, but wait til God lay them on us; and
when that time comes we must willingly bend our shoulders, stoop down, and
take them up; whether they be in body or in soul: and that every day if it
be Gods will so long as we live: and by this shall we most notably resemble our
Savior Christ.

Thirdly, when Christ had carried his cross so long til he could carry it no
longer, by reason of the faintness of his body, which came by buffets,
whippings, and manifold other injuries, then the soldiers meeting with one
Simo^ of Cyrene a stranger, made him to bear the cross: where we are put in
mind, Luke 23.^6.
that if we faint in the way and be weari^ed with the burden of our
aff^^ctions, God will give good issue, Mat. 11.28.
and send as it were some Simon of Cyrene to help us, and to be our comforter.

The fourth point is, that when Christ was carrying his own cross, and was
now passing on toward Golgotha, certain women met him, and pitying his case
wept for him: but Christ answered them and said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep
not for me, but for your selves, and your children, etc. Luke 23.27.
By this we are first of all taught to pity the state of those that be in
affliction and misery, especially those that be the children of God: as the
Apostle exhorts us, saying, Hebr. ^3.3.
Remember them that are in bonds, as though you were bound with them: and them
that are in affliction, as though you were afflicted with them. In this land
by Gods especial blessing we have enioied the Gospel of Christ with peace a
long time, whereas other countries and churches are in great distress: some
wallowe in palpable ignorance and superstition: others have liberty to enjoy
the Gospel and want teachers: and some have both the word and teachers and yet
want peace, and are in continual persecution. Now when we that have the
Gospel with peace do hear of these miseries in our neighbor churches, we
ought to be moved with compassion toward them, as though we our selves were
in the same afflictions. Secondly, whereas Christ says, Weep not for me, but
for your selves, he does teach us to take occasion by other men's miseries to
bewail our own estate: to turn our worldly griefs into godly sorrow for
our sins, which causes us rather to weep for our offenses, the^ for our
friends, although even this may also be done in a godly manner. When a man by
bleeding at the nose is brought into danger of his life, the Physician lets him
blood in another place, as in the arm, and turns the course of the blood
another way to save his life: and so must we turn our worldly sorrows for
loss of goods or friends, to a godly sorrow for our offenses against God:
for as S. Paul says; 2. Cor. 7.10.
Godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of: but
worldly sorrow causes death.

The fifth point is, that when Christ was brought to the place of execution,
they gave him vinegar to drink mingled with mirrhe and gall: Mar. 15.23.
some say it was to intoxicate his brain, and to take away his senses and
memory. If this be true, we may here behold in the Jews a most wicked part,
that at the point of death when they were to take away the life of Christ, they
for their parts had no care of his soul. For this is a duty to be observed
of all magistrates, that when they are to execute malefactors they must have a
special regard to the good and salvation of their souls. But some think
rather that this potion was to shorten and end his torments quickly. Some of
us may peradventure think hardly of the Jews, for giving so bitter a potion
of Christ at the time of his death: but the same does every sinner that
repents not. For whenever we sin, we do as much as temper a cup of
gall, or the poison of aspes, and as it were give it to God to drink: for so
God himself compares the sin of the wicked Jews to poison, saying, Deuteronomy.
32.^^,23.
There vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the vines of Gomorrha, their grapes
are grapes of gall, their clusters be bitter, their wine is the poison of
dragons, and the cruel gall of aspes. And for this cause we ought to think as
hardly of our selves as of the Jews, because so often as we commit any offense
against God, we do as much as mingle rank poison, and bring it to Christ to
drink. Now afterward, when this cup was given him he tasted of it, but drank
not, because he was willing to suffer all things that his father had appointed
him to suffer on the cross, without any shortening or lessening of his pain.

Thus we see in what manner Christ was brought ^orth to the place of execution:
Now follows his crucifying. Christ in the providence of God was to be
crucified for two causes: one, that the ^igures of the old testament might be
accomplished and verified. For the heaue-offering lifted up and shaked from the
right hand to the left, and the brazen serpent erected upon a pole in the
wilderness, prefigured the exalting of Christ upon the cross. The second,
that we might in conscience be resolved, Gal. 3.13.
that Christ became under the law and suffered the curse thereof for us, and
bare in his own body and soul the extremity of the wrath of God for our
offenses. And though other kinds of punishments were notes of the curse of God,
as stoning and such like; yet was the death of the cross in special manner
above the rest accursed, not by the nature of the punishment, not by the
opinions of men, not by the civil laws of countries and kingdoms, but by the
virtue of a particular commandment of God, Deuteronomy. 21.23.
foreseeing what manner of death Christ our redeemer should die. And hereupon
among the Jews in all ages this kind of punishment has been branded with
special ignominy, as Paul signifies when he says, Philip. 2.8. Number 25.4. ^
^am. 21.6.
He abased himself to the death, even to the death of the cross: and it has
been allotted as a most grievous punishment to most notorious malefactors. If
it be said that the repentant thief upon the cross dyed the same death with
Christ and yet was not accursed, the answer is, that in regard of his offenses
he deserved the curse and was actually accursed, and the sign of this was the
death which he suffered, and that in his own confession: but because he
repented, his sins were pardoned, and the curse removed. It may further be
said, that crucifying was not known in Moses days, and therefore not accursed
by any special commandment of God in Deuteronomie. Answ. Moses indeed
speaks nothing in particular of crucifying, yet nevertheless he does include
the same under the general. For if every one which hangs upon a tree be
accursed, then he also which is crucified; for crucifying is a particular kind
of hanging on the tree. Lastly it may be alleged, that Christ in his death
could not be accursed by the law of Moses, because he was no malefactor. Answ.
Though in regard of himself he was no sinner, yet as he was our surety he
became sin for us, and consequently the curse of the law for us, in that the
curse every way due unto us, by imputation and application was made his.

Furthermore Christ was crucified not after the manner of the Jews, who used
to hang malefactors upon a tree binding them thereto with cords, and that when
they were dead, but after the usual manner of the Romans; Psalm. 22.17.
his body being partly nailed to the cross, and partly in the nayling
extremely racked, otherwise I see not but that a man might remain many days
together alive upon the cross. And here we have occasion to remember that the
Papists who are so devout and zealous toward crucifixes are far deceived in
the making of them. For first of all, the cross was made of three pieces of
wood, one fastened upright in the ground to which the body and back leaned,
Iren. l. 2. c. 4^. Aug. l. 50. homil. 3.
the second fastened toward the top of the first overthwart, to which the
hands were nailed: the third fastened toward the bottom of the first, on
which the feet were set and nailed: Author libr^ de passione inter opera
Cypriani.
whereas contrariwise popish caruers and painters fasten both the feet of the
cross to the first: secondly the feet of Christ were nailed asunder with two
distinct nails, and not nailed one upon another with one nail alone as
Papists imagine, and that to the very body of the cross: for then the
soldiers could not have broken both the legs of the thieves, but only the
outmost: because one of them lay upon the other.

Let us now come to the use which may be made of the crucifying of Christ.
First of all here we learn with bitterness to bewail our sins: for Christ
was thus cruelly nailed on the cross, and there suffered the whole wrath of
God, not for any offense that ever he committed, but being our pledge and
surety unto God, he suffered all for us: and therefore just cause have we to
mourn for our offenses, which brought our Savior Christ to this low estate.
If a man should be so far in debt that he could not be freed, unless the
surety should be cast into prison for his sake; nay, which is more, be cruelly
put to death for his debt, it would make him at his wits end; and his very
heart to bleed. And so is the case with us by reason of our sins; Math. 6.^^.
we are Gods debtors, yea bankrupts before him, yet have we gotten a good
surety, even the son of God himself, who to recover us to our former liberty
was crucified for the discharge of our debt. And therefore good cause have we
to bewail our estate every day, as by the prophet it is said, Zach. 12.10^.
They shall look on him whom they have pierced, they shall l^ment for him as
one mourns for his own son: they shall be ^orie for him as one is sorry
for his first borne. Look as the blood followed the nails that were stricken
through the blessed hands and feet of Christ, so should the meditation of the
cross and passion of our Redeemer be as it were nails and spears to pierce
us, that our hearts might bleed for our sins: and we are not to think more
hardly of the Jews for crucifying him then of our selves, because even by our
sins we also crucified him. These are the very nails which pierce his hands
and feet, and these are the spears which pierce through his side. For the
loss of a little worldly pelf, oh how are we grieved! but seeing our
transgressions are the weapons whereby the son of God was crucified, let us
(I say it again and again) learn to be grieved for them above all things,
and with bleeding and melting hearts bow and buckle under them, as under the
cross.

Secondly, Christ says of himself, Ioh. 3.^4.
as Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be
lifted up: the comparison is excellent and worthy the marking. In the
wilderness of Arabia the people of Israel rebelled against God, and thereupon he
sent fiery serpents among them, which stung many of them to death: now when
they repented, Moses was commanded to make a brazen serpent, and to set it upon
a pole, that as many as were stung might look unto it and recover: and if they
could but cast a glaunce of the eye on the brazen serpent, when they were stung
even to death, they were restored to health and life. Now every man that lives
is in the same case with the Israelites; Satan has stung us at the heart, and
given us many a deadly wound, if we could feel it, and Christ who was figured
by the brazen serpent was likewise exalted on the cross, to confer
righteousness and life eternal to every one of us: therefore if we will
escape eternal death, we must renounce our selves, and lift up the eyes of our
faith to Christ crucified, and pray for the pardon of our sins: and then
shall our hearts and consciences be healed of the wounds and gripes of the
devil: and until such time as we have grace to do this, we shall never be
cured, but still lie wounded with the stings of Satan, and bleeding to death
even at the very heart, although we feel no pain or grief at all. But some
may ask how any man can see him crucified now after his death? Ans.
Wheresoever the word of God is preached, there Christ is crucified, as Paul
says, Gal. 3.2.
Oh foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that ye should not obey the
truth, to whom before Jesus Christ was described in your sight, and among you
crucified? meaning that he was lively preached among them. We need not to go
to wodden crosses, or to golden crucifixes to seek for him; but where the
Gospel is preached, thither must we go, and there lift up our eyes of faith to
Christ, as he is revealed unto us in the word; resting on him and his merits
with all our hearts, and with a godly sorrow confess and bewail our sins,
craving at his hands mercy and pardon for the same. For till such time as we
do this, we are grievously stung by Satan, and are every moment even at deaths
door. And if we can thus behold Christ by faith, the benefits which come
hereby, shall be great: for as Paul says, the old man, that is, the corruption
of our nature, and the body of sin that reigns in us, shall be crucified
with him: for when Christ was nailed on the cross, all our sins were laid
upon him; therefore if thou do unfeignedly believe, all thy sins are
crucified with him, and the corruption of thy nature languisheth and dies as
he languished and died upon the cross.

Thirdly, we must learn to imitate Christ: as he suffered himself to be
nailed to the cross for our sins, so answerably must every one of us learn
to crucify our flesh, and the corruption of our nature, and the wickedness of
our own hearts, as Paul says, Gal. 3.24.
They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the lusts and affections
thereof. And this we shall do, if for our sins past we wail and mourn with
bitterness, and prevent the sins to come into which we may fall by reason of
the corruption of our natures, by using all good means, as prayer and fasting,
and the word of God preached, and by flying all occasions of offense. We are
not to destroy our bodies or to kill our selves, but to kill and crucify sin
that lives in us, and to mortify the corruption of our nature that rebels
against the spirit. Christianity stands not in this, to hear the word of God,
and outwardly to profess the same, and in the mean season still to live in
our sins, and to pamper our own rebellious flesh; but it teaches us always
to have in readiness some spear or other to wound sin, and the sword of the
spirit to cut down corruption in us, that thereby we may show our selves to be
lively followers of Christ indeed.

Fourthly, by this we may learn that the wrath of God against sin is
wonderful great, because his own Son bearing our person, and being in our
place, was not only crucified, and racked most cruelly, but also bare the
whole wrath of God in his soul: and therefore we must leave off to make so
little account of sin as commonly we do.

Fifthly, whereas the person crucified was the son of God, it shows that
the love of God which he bare unto us in our redemption is endless; like a sea
without bank or bottom, it can not be searched into: and if we shall not
acknowledge it to be so, our condemnation will be the greater.

Sixthly, in this that Christ bare the curse of the law upon the cross; we
learn that those that be the children of God, when they suffer any judgment,
cross, or calamity, either in body or in mind or both, do not bear them
as the curses of God, but as the chastisments of a loving father. For it does
not stand with the justice of God to punish one fault twice: and therefore when
any man that puts his whole confidence in God, shall either in his own
person, in his good name, or in his goods feel the heavy hand of God, God
does not as a judge curse him, but as a father correct him. Here then is
condemned the opinion of the Church of Rome, which hold, that we by our
sufferings do in some part satisfy the justice of God: but this can not
stand, because Christ did make a perfect fatisfaction to the justice of his
father for all punishment. And therefore satisfaction to God made by man for
temporal punishment is needless, and much derogates from Christ's passion.

In the crucifying of Christ, two things specially must be considered: The
manner of the doing of it, and his continuance alive upon the cross. Touching
the manner, the spirit of God has noted two things. The first, that Christ was
crucified between two thieves, the one upon his left hand, the other upon his
right; in which action is verefied the saying of the Prophet Esai, Esai 53.6.
He was numbered among the wicked: and the Jews for their parts do hereby
testify, that they esteemed him to be, not some common wicked man, but even
the captain and ringleader of all thieves and malefactors whatsoever. Now
whereas Christ standing upon the cross in our room and stead, is reputed the
head and prince of all sinners, it serves to teach every one of us that
believe in him, to judge our selves most vile and miserable sinners, and to say
of our selves with Paul, that we are the chief of all sinners. 1. Tim. 3.3^,
The second thing is, that Christ was crucified naked: because he was stripped
of his garments by the soldiers when he was to be crucified. The causes why
he suffered naked, are these. First, Adam by his fall brought upon all mankind
death both of body and soul, and also the curses of God which befall man in
this life: among which this was one, that the nakedness of the body should be
ignominious; and hereupon when Adam had sinned, and saw himself naked, Genesis
3.^.
he fled from the presence of God, and hid himself even for very shame.
Christ therefore was stripped of his garments, and suffered naked, that he
might bear all the punishment and ignominy that was due unto man for sin.
Se^ondly, this came to pass by the goodness of God, that we might have a
remedy for our spiritual nakedness, which is, when a man has his sins
lying open before Gods eyes; and by reason thereof he himself lies open to
all Gods judgments. Hereof Christ speaks to the Angel of the Church of
Laodicea, saying, Rev. 3.17.
Thou say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing,
and know not how thou art wretched, miserable, blind, and naked. So when
the Israelites had committed idolatry by the golden calfe, Moses tells them
that they were naked, Exodus 32.25.
not only because they had spoiled themselves of their earings, but especially
because they were destitute of Gods favor, and lay open and naked to all his
judgments for that sin. And Solomon says, Where there is no vision, there
the people are made naked, that is, their sins lie open before God; Prove. 29.18.
and by reason thereof they themselves are subject to his wrath and
indignation. Now Christ was crucified naked, that he might take away from us
this spiritual nakedness; and also give unto us meet garments to cloth us
withal in the presence of God, called white raiment, as Christ says, Rev.
3.18.
I counsel thee to buie of me white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and
that thy filthy nakedness do not appear: Rev. 7.14.
and, Long white robes dipped in the blood of the Lamb, which serve to hide
the nakedness of our souls. What these garments are, the Apostle shows when
he says, All that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Gal. ^.27.
Ephesians. 4.^4.
And, Put on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. Our nakedness makes us more vile in the sight of God, then the
most loathsome creature that is, can be unto us; until we have put on the
righteousness of Christ to cover the deformity of our souls, that we may
appear holy, and without spot before God. Thirdly, Paul says, ^. Cor. 5. 1,
2,3.
We know if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a
building given of God, etc. For therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with
our house which is from heaven, because if we be clothed we shall not be found
naked. Where it is like that the Apostle alludeth to the nakedness of Adam
after his fall; and therefore gives us another reason why Christ was crucified
naked, namely that after this life he might cloth all his members with
eternal glory.

If this be so, that a part of our rejoicing stands in the glorious nakedness of
Christ crucified, there is no reason why we should be puffed up with the
vanity of our apparel. It should rather be an occasion to make us ashamed,
then to make us proud. The thief may as well brag of the brand in his hand,
or of the fetters on his heels, as we may of our attire; because it is but the
covering of our shame: and therefore should put us in mind of our sin and
shameful nekednesse.

Aug. sermon. 119. de tempore.
The abode of Christ upon the cross, was about the space of six hours. For
the death of the cross was no sudden but a Producta ^ors. Mat. 19.14.
lingering death. And in this space of time there fell out five notable events.
The first, that the soldiers having stripped Christ of his garments, divided
them into four parts, and cast lottes for his coat, because it was wouen
without seame. And by this appears the great love of Christ to man, who was
not only content to suffer, but also to loose all that ever he had, even to the
garments on his back to redeem us; teaching us answerably that if it please
god to call us to any trial hereafter, we must be content to part withal for
his sake, that we may win him. Again, in these soldiers we may behold a
picture of this world: when they had nailed Christ to the cross, they will not
loose so much as his garments, but they come and divide them and cast lottes
for them: as for Christ himself, the Savior and redeemer of mankind, they
regard him not. And thus fares the world; it is a hard to find a man to
accept of Christ, because he is Christ his redeemer: but, when gain comes by
Christ, then he is welcome. Esau that esteemed nothing of his fathers blessing,
made great account of his brothers pottage. The Gaderenes made more account of
their swine, then of Christ: for when they heard that they were drowned, they
beseech him to depart out of their coasts. Nay so bad is this age, that such as
will be taken to be the special members of Christ, do not only with the
soldiers strippe Christ of his garments, but more then this, they bereave him
of his natures and offices. The church of Rome by their transubstantiation
strippe him of his manhood: and by making other priests after the same order
with him, which do properly forgive sins, strippe him of his priesthood: and
of his kingly office, by joining with him a Vicar on earth, and head of the
Catholic church, and that in his presence: whereas all deputiships and
commissions cease in the presence of the principal. And when they have done
all this, then they further load him with a number of beggarly ceremonies; and
so do nothing else but make a Fic^^^^^m Christum.
feigned Christ, in stead of the true and alone Messiah.

The second event was, that Christ was mocked of all sorts of men. First, they
set up the cause written why he was crucified, Math. 27.^7. 38,39.
namely, This is the King of the Jews: then the people that passed by reviled
him, wagging their heads at him, and said, Thou that destroiest the temple and
buildest it in three days, save thy self, etc. Likewise the high Priest
mocking him, with the Scribes and Pharisees and the Elders, said, He saved
others, let him save himself. The same also did one of the thieves that was
crucified with him, cast in his teeth. Behold here the wonderful strange
dealing of the Jews: they see an innocent man thus pitifully and grievously
racked, and nailed on the cross, and his blood distilling down from hands
and feet: and yet are they without all pity and compassion, and do make but
a mock and a skoffe at him. And in this we may plainly see how dangerous and
fearful their case is, who are wholly given up to the hardness of their own
hearts: and we are further admonished to take heed how we give our selves to
jesting or mocking of others. And if any man think it to be a light sin, let
them consider what befell the Jews for mocking Christ. The hand of God was
upon them within a while after, and so remains to this day. 2. King. 2.23. 24.
Little children wickedly brought up, when they saw Elisha the man of God
coming, they mocked him, and said, Come up thou bald pate, come up thou bald
pate: but Elisha looked back on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord,
and two wild bears came out of the forest and tare in pieces two and forty
of them. Julian once a Christian Emperor, but after an Apostata, did nothing
else but mock Christ and his doctrine, and made ieasts of sundry places of
Scripture: but being in fight against the Persians, was wounded with a dart (no
man knowing how) and died scoffing and blaspheming. And such like are the
judgments of God, which befall mockers and scorners. Let us therefore in the
fear of God learn to eschew and avoid this sin.

Furthermore if we shall indifferently consider all the mocks and scornings of
the Jews, we shall find that they can not truly convince him to the least
sin; which serves to clear Christ, and to prove that he was a most
innocent man, in whose ways was no wickedness, and in whose mouth was found no
guile: and therefore he was most fit to stand in our room, and suffer for us
which were most vile and sinful. And here by the way a question offers it
self to be skanned. S. Matthew says, Math. 27.44.
The thieves which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth which
the Scribes and Pharisees did. S. Luke says, Luke 23.39.
that one of the thieves mocked him. Now it may be demanded, how both these can
be true? Ans. Some reconcile the places thus; that the Scripture speaking
generally of any thing, Syn^chdoche.
by a figure does attribute that to the whole, which is proper to some part
only; and so here does ascribe that to both the thieves which agrees but to
one. Others answer it thus: that at the first both of the evil doers did mock
Christ, and of that time speaks Matthew: but afterward one of them was
miraculously converted, then the other alone mocked him, and of that time spoke
S. Luke. And this I rather take to be the truth. But what was the behavior of
Christ, when he is thus laden with reproach? In wonderful patience he replies
not, but puts up all in silence. Where we are taught, that when a man shall
rail on us wrongfully, we must not return rebuke for rebuke, nor taunt for
taunt: but we must either be silent, or else speak no more then shall serve for
our just defense. This was the practice of the Israelites, by the appointment
of Hezekias, when Rabshakah reviled the Jews, and blasphemed the name of God;
the people held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the kings
commandment was, answer him not. So Hannah being troubled in mind, ^ King.
1^.36.
prayed unto the Lord, and Hely marked her mouth, for she spoke in her heart,
and her lips did move only, but her voice was not beard, therefore Hely
thought she had bin drunken, and said, How long will thou be drunken? put away
thy drunkenness from thee. Such a speech would have moved many one to very
hard words: but she said, ^. Sam. ^.14.
Nay, my lord, but I am a woman troubled in spirit, I have drunk neither wine
nor strong drink: but have powered out my soul before the Lord. This is a hard
lesson for men to learn; but we must endeavor our selves to practice it, if
we will be followers of Christ, and overcome evil with good.

The third thing that fell out in the time of Christ's crucifying, was the
pitiful complaint, in which he cried with a loud voice, El^, El^,
lamasabacthani, that is, Math. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? In the opening of this complaint
many points must be skanned. The first is, what was the cause that moved
Christ to complain? Ans. It was not any impatience or discontentation of mind,
or any despair, or any dissembling, as some would have it: but it was an
apprehension and a feeling of the whole wrath of God, which seized upon him
both in body and soul. The second, what was the thing whereof he does
complain. Ans. That he is forsaken of God the father. And from this point
arises another question. How Christ being God, can be forsaken of God? for
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are all three but one and the same
God. Ans. By God we must understand God the father the first person. According
to the common rule, when God is compared with the Son or the holy Ghost, then
the father is meant by this title, God; as in this place: not that the father
is more God then the Son, for in dignity all the three persons are equal:
but they are distinguished in order only, and the father is first. And again
whereas Christ complains that he was forsaken, it must be understood in
regard of his humane nature, not of his godhead. And Christ's manhood was
forsaken, not that his godhead and manhood were severed, for they were ever
joined together from the first moment of the incarnation: but the godhead of
Christ, and so the godhead of the father did not show forth his power in the
manhood, but did as it were lie a sleep for a time, that the manhood might
suffer: when a man sleeps, the soul is not severed from the body, but lies
as it were dead, and exercises not it self: even so the godhead lay still, and
did not manifest his power in the manhood, and thus the manhood seemed to be
forsaken. The third point is, the manner of this complaint; My God, my God,
says he: these words are words of faith, I say not of justifying faith,
whereof Christ stood not in need: but he had such a faith or hope, whereby he
did put his confidence in God. The last words, why have thou forsaken me?
seem at the first to be words of distrust. How then (will some say) can
these words stand with the former: for faith and distrust are flat contraries?
Ans. Christ did not utter any speech of distrust, but only make his moan and
complaint, by reason of the greatness of his punishment: and yet still relied
himself on the assistance of his father. Hence we learn first that religion
does not stand in feeling but in faith: which faith we must have in Christ,
though we have no feeling at all: for God oftentimes does withdraw his grace
and favor from his children, that he may teach them to believe in his mercy
in Christ then, when they feel nothing less the^ his mercy. And faith and
feeling cannot always stand together; because faith is a subsisting of things
which are not seen, and the ground of this hoped for, and we must live by
faith, and not by feeling. Though feeling of Gods mercy be a good thing, yet
God does not always vouchsafe to give it unto his children: and therefore in
the extremity of afflictions and temptations, we must always trust and rely
on god by faith in Christ; as Christ himself does when he is as it were
plunged into the sea of the wrath of God. Secondly, here we may see how God
deals with his children: for Christ in the sense and feeling of his humane
nature was forsaken, yet had he sure trust and confidence in God, that caused
him to say, My God, my God. God will oftentimes cast his dear children into
huge gulfes of woe and misery, where they shall see neither bank nor bottom,
nor any way to get out: yet men in this case must not despair, but remember
still that that which befell Christ the head, does also befall his members.
Though Christ himself at his death did bear the wrath of God in such
measure, as that in the sense and feeling of his humane nature he was forsaken:
yet for all this he was the son of God, and had the spirit of his father,
crying, My God, my God. And therefore though we be wonderfully afflicted either
in body or in mind, so as we have no sense or feeling of Gods mercy at all,
yet must we not despair and think that we are cast-awaies, but still labor
to trust and rely on God in Christ, and build upon this that we are his
children, though we feel nothing but his wrath upon us; against mercy
cleaving to his mercy. This was David's practice: In the day of trouble (says
he) I sought the Lord: my sore ran and ceased not in the night: my soul
refused comfort. I did think upon God and was troubled: my soul was full of
anguish: Psalm. 77.2.3.
and so he continues on, saying, verse. 10,11,12, etc.
Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he show no more favor? has
God forgotten to be merciful? but in the end he recouereth himself out of
this gulf of temptation, saying, Yet I remember the years of the right hand of
the most high: I remember the works of the Lord, certainly I remember the
wonders of old. Wherefore this practice of Christ in his passion, must then be
remembered of us all, when God shall humble us either in body or soul, or both.

The fourth thing which fell out when Christ was on the cross was this: after
Christ knew that all things were performed, and that the scriptures were
fulfilled; Ioh. 19.^8.
he said, I thirst, and then there standing a vessel full of vinegar, one ran
and filled a sponge therewith, and put it about an hyssop stalk, and put it to
his mouth: which when he had received, he said, It is finished. The points here
to be considered, are four. The first, that Christ thirsts. And we must
know that this thirst was a part of his passion; and indeed it was no small
pain, I^d. 4.19.
as we may see by this: when Sisera was overcome by Israel, and had fled from
his enemies to Iaels tent, he called for a little water to drink, being more
troubled with thirst, then with the fear of death at the hand of his enemies.
And indeed thirst was as as grieuour to men in the East country, as any
torment else. And hereupon Sa^pson was more grieved with thirst, then with
fear of many thousand Philistims. Iud. 15.18.


Again, whereas Christ complains that he thirsts; it was not for his own
sake; but for our offenses: and therefore answerably we must thirst after
Christ and his benefits, as the dry and thirsty land where no water is, does
after rain: and as the heart brayeth after the rivers of water, so must we say
with David, Psalm. 143.6. and 9^.1.
My soul pants after thee, O Lord, and the benefits of thy death.

The second that a sponge full of vinegar tied upon an hyssop stalk, was
reached to Christ upon the cross. Now it may be demanded, how this could be,
considering the stalk of the hyssop is not past a foot long. Ans. As the tree
of mustard seed with the Jews is far greater and taller then with us, in so
much that the birds of lieauen build their neasts in it: so it may be that
hyssop grows much longer in those countries then with us. Or, as I take it
rather, the hyssop stalk was put upon a reed, and by that means the sponge
was put up to the mouth of Christ. Mat. 35 36.


The third point is, that Christ drinks the vinegar offered: but when? Not
before all things were finished that were to be done on the cross. And by
this he shows his exceeding care for our salvation. He laid aside al things
that would turn to his own ease, that he mightfully work our redemption, and
sulfil the will of his father who sent him into the world for that end. The
like care ^ust every one of us have to walk dutifully; and, as it were, to go
with tho^ugh-stitch in our particular callings, that God may be glorified by
us. When Abraham's servant came: to Bethuel to get a wife for Isaac, meat was
set before him, but he said, I will not eat before I have said my message:
Genesis 24.13.
so likewise we must first see Gods glory procured in our affairs, and then
in the second place, if commodity or praise redound to us, we must afterward
take it.

The last point is, that when Christ had drunk the vinegar, he said, It is
finished. Which words may have a double sense: one, that such things as were
figured by the sacrifices of the old testament are accomplished; the other,
that now upon the cross he had finished his satisfaction to the justice of
his father for man's sin. And this of the twain I rather think to be his
meaning. If it be said, that the burial and resurrection and ascension of
Christ, etc. which are very necessary to man's redemption, were not yet begun,
the answer is, that the works of Christ's priesthood which follow his death
serve not to make any satisfaction to Gods justice for sin, but only to
confirm or apply it, after it is made and accomplished on the cross. And if
this be so, that Christ in his own person accomplished the work of
redemption, and made a full and perfect satisfaction for us, as these words
import, It is finished, then humane satisfactions to gods justice for sin are
altogether superfluous.

The fifth event that fell out when Christ was upon the cross was, that he
cried with a loud voice, and said, Father, into thy hands I lay down my
spirit, that is, I commend my soul as being the most precious thing which I
have in this world into thy custody, who art a most faithful keeper thereof.
These words are taken by Christ out of the Psalms: for when David was in
danger of his life by reason of Saul, and had no friend to trust, he makes
choice of God to be his keeper, Psalm. 31.5.
and said, Into thy hands, O Lord, do I commend my spirit. Now our Savior
Christ being in the like distress, both by reason of the Jews, who every way
sought his final destruction and confusion, and especially because he felt the
full wrath of God seazing upon him, does make choice of David's words, and apply
them to himself in his distress. And by his example was are taught not only
to read the general history of the bible, but also to observe the things
commanded and forbidden, and to apply the same unto our selves, and to our
particular estates and dealings whatsoever: thus the prophet David says, In
the roll of the book it is written of me, that I should do thy will, O my
God! Psalm 40.
How can this be? for no part of Scripture penned before the days of David
says thus of him. True indeed; but as I take it, David's meaning is, that he
read the book of the law, and found general precepts and commandments given
to Kings and Princes, that they should keep all the ordinances and
commandments of God: which, he being a King, applies particularly to his own
person, and thereupon says, In the volume of the book it is written of me,
etc. And this duty is well practiced by the people of God at this day; for the
Psalms of David were penned according to the estate of the Church in his time:
and in these days the Church of God does sing the same with the same spirit
that David did, and does apply their several estates and conditions.

Now in that Christ commends his soul into the hands of his father, he does
it to testify that he died not by constraint, but willingly: and by his own
practice he does teach us to do the like, namly to give up our own souls into
the hands of god: and because this duty is of some difficulty, we must
observe three motives or preparatiues which may induce us to the better doing
of it. The first is, to consider that God the father of Christ, is the creator
of our souls, and therefore he is called the father of spirits. And if he be a
creator of them, then is he also a faithful preserver of them. For sure it
is, that God will preserve his own workmanship. Who is or can be so careful
for the ornament and preservation of any work as the craftes-master? and shall
not God be more careful then man? Wherefore S. Peter exhorts us to commit
our souls unto God, as unto a faithful creator. The second motive is this:
we must look to be resolved in our consciences, that ^od the father of Christ
is our father: every man for himself must labor to have the assurance of the
pardon of his own sins, and that the corruption of his soul be washed away
in the blood of Christ, that he may say, I am justified, sanctified, and
adopted by Christ. And when any man can say thus, he shall be most desirous and
willing to commit his soul into the hands of God. This was the reason which
moved Christ to lay down his soul into the hands of God, because he is his
father. The third motive or preparatiue is, a continual experience and
observation of Gods love and favor toward us, in keeping and preserving him;
as appears by David's example, Psalm. 31.5.
Into thy hands (says he) I commit my soul: for thou have redeemed me, O thou
God of truth.

The time when we are specially to commend our souls into the hand of God, is
first of all the time of any affliction or danger. This was the time when David
commended his soul into the hands of God in the Psalm before named. We know
that in any common danger or peril, as the sacking of a city, or burning of
an house, if a man have any precious jewel therein, he will first fetch that
out, and make choice of a faithful friend, to whose custody he will commit
the same: even so, in common perils and dangers we must always remember to
commit our souls as a most precious jewel into the hands of God, who is a
faithful creator. Another more special and necessary time of practicing
this duty, is the hour of death, as here Christ does, and Steven, who when
the Jews stoned him to death, called on God, and said, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit. And as this duty is very requisite and necessary at all times, so
most especially in the hour of death; beca^se the danger is great by reason
that Satan will then chiefly assault us, and the guilt of sin will
especially then wound the conscience. Lastly, at al times we must commit our
souls into Gods hands: for though we be not always in affliction, yet we are
always in great danger: and when a man lies down to rest, he knows not
whether he shall rise again or no: and when he arises, he knows not whether
he shall lie down again. Yea, at this very hour we know not what will
befall the next.

And great are the comforts which arise by the practice of this duty. When
David was in great danger of his life, and his own people would have stoned
him, because their hearts were vexed for their sons and daughters which the
Amalekites had taken; 1. Sam. ^0.6.
it is said he comforted himself in the Lord his God. And the practice of
Paul in this case is most excellent: 2. Tim. ^.^^.
for the which cause (says he) I suffer those things, but I am not ashamed:
for I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to ke^pe
that which I have committed unto him against that day. This worthy servant of
God had committed his life and soul into Gods hand: and therefore he says, In
all my sufferings I am not ashamed: where we see, that if a man have grace in
his lifetime to commit his soul into Gods hand, it will make him bold even at
the point of death. And this must be a motive to cause every man daily and
hourly to lay down his soul into the hands of God, although by the course
of nature he may live twenty or forty years longer. But howsoever this
duty be both necessary and comfortable, yet few there be that practice the
same. Men that have children are very careful and diligent to bring them up
under some man's tuition; and if they have cattle, sheep, or oxen, they provide
keepers to tend them: but in the mean season for their own souls they have
no care: they may sink or swim or do what they will. This shows the
wonderful blindness or rather madness of men in the world, that have more care
for their cattle, then for their own souls: but as Christ has taught us by
his example, so let every one of us in the fear of God, learn to commit our
souls into the hand of God.

Again, in that Christ lays down his own soul, and withal the souls of
all the faithful into the hands of the father, we further learn three things.
The first, that the soul of man does not vanish away as the souls of beasts
and other creatures: there is great difference between them: for when the
beast dies, his soul dies also: but the soul of man is immortal. The
consideration whereof must moooue every man above all things in this world to
be careful for his soul: if it were to vanish away at the day of death as the
soul of beasts do, the neglect thereof were no great matter: but seeing it
must live for ever, either in eternal joy, or else in endless pains and
torments, it stands us upon, every man for himself, so to provide for his
soul in this life, that at the day of death when it shall depart from his
body, it may live in eternal joy and happiness. The second, that there is an
especial and particular providence of God, because the particular soul of
Christ is committed into the hands of his father, and so answerably the souls
of every one of the faithful are. The third, that every one which believes
himself to be a member of Christ, must be willing to die when God shall call
him thereunto. For when we die in Christ, the body is but laid asleep, and
the soul is received into the hands of a most lo^ing God and merciful father,
as the soul of Christ was. Lastly, whereas Christ surrendering his soul into
his fathers hands, calls it a spirit, we note, that the soul of man is a
spirit, that is, a spiritual, invisible, simple essence without composition
created, as the angels of God are. The question whether the soul of a child
come from the soul of the parents as the body does come from their bodies,
may easily be resolved. For the soul of man being a spirit, can not beget
another spirit, as the angels being spiritual do not beget angels: for one
spirit begets not an other. Nay which is more, one simple element begets
not an other, as the water begets not water, nor air begets air: and
therefore much less can one soul beget an other. Again, if the soul of the
child come from the soul of the parents, then there is a propagation of the
whole soul of the parent or of some part thereof. If it be said, that the
whole soul of the parents is propagated, then the parents should want their
own souls and could not live. If it be said that a part of the parents soul
is propagated: I answere^ that the soul being a spirit or a simple substance
cannot be parted: and therefore it is the safest to conclude, that the body
indeed is of the body of the p^rents, and that the soul of man while the
body is in making, is created of nothing: He^^ 11.^.
and for this very cause God is called the father of spirits.

Thus much of the crucifying of Christ: now follows his death. For having
laid down his soul into the hands of his father, the holy Ghost says, he
gave up the ghost: Luk ^^.46.
to give us to understand, that his death was no fantastical but a real
death, in that his body and soul were ^euered as truly as when any of us
die. In treating of Christ's death we must consider many points. The first, that
it was needful that he should die, and that for two causes. First, to satisfy
Gods justice: for sin is fo odious a thing in Gods sight, that he will punish
it with an extreme punishment: therefore Christ standing in our room must not
only suffer the mi^eries of this life, but also die on the cross, that the
very extremity of punishment which we should have borne, might be laid on
him: and so we in Christ, might fully satisfy Gods justice: for the wages of
sin is death. Secondly, Christ died that he might fulfill the truth of Gods
word which had said, that man for eating the forbidden fruit should die the
death. Genesis 2.17.
The properties of Christ's death are two: the first, that it was a volu^tarie
and willing death: the second, that it was a cursed death. For the first,
whereas I say Christ's death was voluntary, I mean that Christ died willingly,
and of his own free accord gave up himself to suffer upon the cross.
Howsoever the Jews did arraigne, and condemn, and crucify him, yet if he
had not willed his own death, and of his free accord given himself to die: not
the Jews nor all the whole world could ever have taken away his life from him
He died not by constraint or compulsion, but most willingly: and therefore he
says, Ioh. 10.18. Math. 27.46. Luke ^3.46.
No man takes my life from me, but I (says he) lay it down of my self: I
have power to lay it down, and have power to take it again. And our Savior
Christ gave evident tokens hereof in his death, for then Jesus cried with a
loud voice, and gave up the ghost. Ordinarily men that die on the cross,
la^guish away by little and little, and before they come to yield up their
lives they loose their speech, Isa. 18.14.
and only rattle or make a noise in the throat: but Christ at that very
instant when he was to give up the ghost, cried with a loud voice: which
shows plainly, that he in his death was more then a conqueror over death.
And therefore to give all men a token of his power, and to show that he died
voluntarily, it pleased him to cry with a loud voice. And this made the
Centurion to say that he was the Son of God. Man. 15.39.
Again, Christ died not as other men do; because they first give up the
ghost, and then lay their heads aside: but he in token that his death was
voluntary, first lays his head aside after the manner of a dead man, and then
afterward gives up the ghost. Ioh. 19.30.
Lastly, Christ died sooner then men are wont to do upon the cross, and this
was the cause that made Pilate wonder that he was so soon dead. Now this came
to pass not because he was loath to suffer the extremity of death: Mar. 1^.44.
but because he would make it manifest to all men that he had power to die or
not to die. And indeed this is our comfort that Christ died not for us by
constraint, but willingly of his own accord.

And as Christ's death was voluntary, so was it also an accursed death, and
therefore it is called the death of the cross. To signify this point the
Creed says that he was crucified and also died.
And it contains the first and the second death: the first is the separation
of the body from the soul: the second is the separation of body and soul
from God: and both were in Christ: for beside the bodily death, he did in
soul apprehend the wrath of God due to man for sin: and that made him cry,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

And here we must not omit a necessary point, namely how far forth
Christ suffered death. Answer. Some think that he suffered only a bodily
death, and such pains as follow the dissolution of nature: but they, no
doubt, come to short, for why should Christ have feared death so greatly if it
had been nothing but the dissolution of nature. Some again think that he
died, not only the first, but also the second death: but it may be they go
to far: for if to die the first death be to suffer a total separation of
body and soul, then also to die the second death is wholly and every way to
be severed from all favor of God, and at the least for a time to be
oppressed of the same death as the damned are. Now this never befell Christ,
no not in the midst of his sufferinges, considering that even then he was
able to call God his God. Therefore the safest is to follow the mean; namely
that Christ died the first death in that his body and soul were really and
wholly severed, yet without suffering any corruption in his body, which is the
effect and fruit of the same: and that withal he further suffered the extreme
horrors and pangs of the second death, not dying the same death nor being
forsaken of God, more then in his own apprehension or feeling. For in the very
midst of his sufferings the father was well pleased with him. And this which
I say does not any whit lesson the sufficiency of the merit of Christ: for
whereas he suffered truly the very wrath of God, and the very torments of the
damned in his soul, it is as much as if all the men in the world had died the
second death, and had bin wholly cut off from God for ever and ever. And no
doubt Christ died the first death only suffering the pangs of the second; that
the first death might be an entrance not to the second death which is eternal
damnation, but a passage to life eternal.

The benefits and comforts which arise by the death of Christ are specially
four. The first is the change of our natural death, I say not the taking of
it away, for we must all die; but whereas by nature death is a curse of God
upon man for eating the forbidden fruit, by the death of Christ it is changed
from a curse into a blessing: and is made as it were a middle way and entrance
to co^uaigh men out of this world into the kingdom of glory in heaven: and
therefore it is said, Christ by his death has delivered them from the fear of
death, which all the days of their lives were subject to bondage. Heb. 2.15.
A man that is to encounter with a scorpion, if he know that it has a sting,
he may be dismayed; but being assured that the sting is taken away, he need
not fear to encounter therewith. Now death in his own nature considered, is
this scorpion armed with a sting: but Christ our Savior by his death has
pulled out the sting of our death, and on the cross triumphantly says, O
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? (...). 15 55.
and therefore even then when we feel the pangs of death approach, we should
not fear but conceive hope, considering that our death is altered and changed
by the virtue of the death of Christ. Secondly, the death of Christ has quite
taken away the second death from those that are in Christ: as Paul says, Romans
3.1.
There is no no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit. Thirdly, the death of Christ is a means
to ratisie his last will and testament: Heb 9.15,16.
For this cause was Christ the Mediator of the new testament, that through
death (which was for the redemption of the transgressions which were in the
former testament) they which were called might receive the promise of the
eternal inheritance. For where a testament is, there must be the death of him
that made the testament: for the testament is confirmed when men are dead: for
it is yet of no force as long as he is alive that made it. And therefore the
death of Christ does make his last will and testament which is his covenant of
grace, authentical unto us. Fourthly, the death of Christ does serve to abolish
the original corruption of our sinful hearts. As a strong corasiue laid to
a sore, eats out all the rotten and dead flesh: even so Christ's death being
applied to the heart of a penitent sinner by faith, weakens and consumes the
sin that cleaues so fast unto our natures and dwells within us. Some will
say, how can Christ's death which now is not, because it is long ago past and
ended, kill sin in us now? Answ. Indeed if we regard the act of Christ's
death, it is past, but the virtue and power thereof endures for ever. And the
power of Christ's death is nothing else but the power of his Godhead, which
enabled him in his death to overcome hell, the grave, death, and condemnation,
and to disburden himself of our sins. Now when we have grace to deny our
selves, and to put our trust in Christ, and by faith are joined to him, the^ as
Christ himself by the power of his godhead overcame death, hell, and damnation
in himself; so shall we by the same power of his godhead kill and crucify
sin and corruption in our selves. Therefore seeing we reap such benefit by
the death of Christ, if we will show our selves to be Christians, let us
rejoice in the death of Christ: and if the question be, what is the chiefest
thing wherein we rejoice in this world? we may answer, the very cross of
Christ, yea the very least drop of his blood.

The duties to be learned by the death of Christ are two: the first concerns
all ignorant and impen^tent sinners. Such men whatsoever they be, by the death
of Christ upon the cross, must be moved to turn from their sins: and if
the consideration hereof will not move them, nothing in the world will. By
nature every man is a vassal of sin, and a bondslaue of Satan: the devil
reigns and rules in all men by nature, and we our selves can do nothing but
serve and obey him. Nay (which is more) we live under the fearful curse of
God for the least sin. Well now, see the love of the son of God, that gave
himself willingly to death upon the cross for thee^ that he might free thee
from this most fearful bondage. Wherefore let all those that live in sin and
ignorance reason thus with themselves: Has Christ the son of god done this for
us, and shall we yet live in our sins? has he set open as it were the ve^ie
gates of hell, and shall we yet lie weltring in our damnable ways and in the
shadow of death? In the fear of God let the death of Christ be a means to
turn us to Christ: if it can not move us, let us be resolved that our case is
dangerous. To go yet further in this point, every one of us is by nature a
sick man, wounded at the very heart by Satan: though we feel it not, yet we
are deadly sick: and behold, Christ is the good physician of the soul, and
none in heaven or earth, neither Saint, angel, nor man can heal this our
spiritual wound but he alone: who though he were equal with the Father, yet
he came down from his bosom and became man, and lived here many years in
misery and contempt: and when no herb nor plaster could cure this our
deadly wound or desperate sickness, he was content to make a plaster with his
own blood: the pain he took in making it caused him to sweat water and
blood: nay the making of it for us cost him his life, in that he was content by
his own death to free us from death: which if it be true, as it is most true,
then woeful and wretched is our case if we will still live in sin, and will
not use means to lay this plaster unto our hearts. And after the plaster is
applied to the soul, we should do as a man that has bin grievously sick, who
when he is on the mending hand, gets strength by little and little. And so
should we become new creatures going on from grace to grace, and show the same
by living godlily, righteously, and soberly, that the world may see that we
are cured of our spiritual disease. O happy, yea thrice happy are they that
have grace from god to do this. The second duty concerns them which are
repentant sinners. Has Christ given himself for thee, and is thy conscience
settled in this? then thou must answerably bear this mind, and if thy life
would serve for the glory of God and the good of his Church, thou would then
give it most willingly if thou be called thereto. Secondly, if Christ for thy
good has given his life, then thou must in like manner be content to die for
thy brethren in Christ, if need be: 1. John. 3.16.
He^ (says Saint John) laid down his life for us, therefore we^ ought to lay
down our lives for our brethren. Thirdly, if Christ was content to shed his
own heart blood not for himself, but for the sins of every one of us, then
we must be thus affected, that rather then by sinning we would willingly
offend God, we should be content to have our own blood shed: yea if these two
things were put to our choice, either to do that which might displease God, or
else to suffer death^ we must rather die then do the same. Of this mind have
been all the Martyrs of God, who rather then they would yield to Idolatry,
were content to suffer most bitter torments and cruel death. Yea, every good
Christian is so affected, that he had rather choose to die then to live, not
moved by impatience in respect of the mis^ries of this life: but because he
would cease to offend so loving a father. To sin is meat and drink to the
world, but to a touched and repentant heart there is no torment so grieuou^ as
this is, to sin against God, if once he be persuaded that Christ died for
him.

Thus much for Christ's death: now follow those things which befell Christ
when he was newely dead; and they are two especially. The first, that his
legs were not broken as the legs of the two thieves were. Of the first, S.
John r^ndreth a reason, namely, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which
says, Ioh. 19.36. Exodus 1^.46.
not a bone of him shall be broken: which words were spoken by Moses of the
paschall lamb, and are here applied to Christ, as being typically figured
thereby. And hence we observe these two things. First, that Christ crucified is
the true paschall lamb, as S. Paul says, Christ our passover is sacrificed:
and S. John says, 1. Co^. 5.7. Ioh. 1.29.
Behold the lamb of God, distinguishing him thereby from the typical lamb.
In this that Christ crucified is the true paschall lamb, the child of God
has wonderful matter of comfort. The Israelites did eat the passover in
Egypt, Exodus 12.23.
and sprinkled the blood of the lamb on the posts of their doors, that when
the angel of God came to destroy the first borne both of man and beast, and saw
the blood upon their houses might pass over them, that the plague should not
be upon them to destruction. So likewise if thou do feed on the lamb of God,
and by a lively faith sprinkle the door of thine heart with his blood, the
judgments of God in this life, and the terrible curse of death, with the
fearful sentence of condemnation at the day of judgment, and all punishments
due unto thy sins shall pass over thee, and not so much as touch thee. And
whereas the legs of our Savior Christ were not broken by the soldiers, who
sought by all means possible to work against him all the mischief they
could: we may note, that the enemies of Christ and his Church, let them intend
to show never so much malice against him, they can not go beyond that liberty
which God gives them, they can do no more for their lives then that which God
wills. The Medes and Persians are called the Lords sanctified ones: Cyrus is
called the man of Gods counsel, Isa. 13. 3. Isa 46.12.
because whatsoever they intended against the people of God, yet in all their
proceedings they did nothing but that which God had determined before to be
done. And when Senacherib came against the Jews as a wild beast out of his
den, the Lord tells Hezekiah concerning Ashur that he will put his hook in
his nostrills, and his bridle in his lips, and bring him back again the
same way he came, Isa. ^7.29.
that is, he will so rule him that he shall not do the least hurt unto the
Jews, more then God will. This is a matter of great comfort to Gods church
oppressed with manifold enemies, Papists, Jews, Turks and all infidels,
maliciously bent against it for Christ's sake. For though they intend and
practice mischief, yet more then Gods will and counsel is, they can not do:
because he has his ring in their nostrils, and his bridle in their lips to
rule them as he lists.

The second thing which fell out immediately upon the death of Christ is, that
the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and thence issued water and
blood. The use which arises of this point is twofold: first, it serves to
prove that Christ died truly, and not in show, or a fained death: for there is
about the heart a filme or skin like unto a purse wherein is contained clear
water to cool the heat of the heart, Columb. de re An it. l. 7.
and therefore when water and blood issued out after piercing of the side, it
is very likely that pericardium.
that very skin was pierced: for else in reason we can not conjecture whence
this water should come. Saint John an eye-witnes of this thing, being about to
prove that Jesus the son of Marie was the true Messiah, brings in six
witnesses: three in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost: and three
in earth, the Water, the Spirit, and the blood: 1. ^oh. 5^.
where no doubt he alludeth to the water and blood that issued out of the side
of Christ: by spirit we may understand the efficacy and operation of Gods
spirit making men to bring forth the fruits of the same, as love, peace, joy,
etc. And the second witness, namely water, has relation to the water that came
forth of Christ's side, which signifies the inward washing away of sin, and
the purging of the heart by Christ's blood: which also is and was signified by
the outward washing of the body with water in baptism. The third witness he
calls blood, alluding to the blood that issued out of Christ's side: whereby is
signified the expiation or satisfaction made to Gods justice for man's sin.
The same use had the ceremonial sprinkling in the old testament, typically
signifying the sprinkling of Christ's blood. Now these three witnesses are not
to be sought for in heaven, but every Christian man must search for them in his
own heart and conscience, and there shall he find them in some measure. And
this water and blood flowing out of the side of Christ being now dead,
signifies that he is our justification and sanctification even after his
death: and that out of his death springs our life: and therefore as Eve was made
of a ribbe taken out of the side of Adam: so springs the Church out of the
blood that flows out of the side of the second Adam.

Having thus entreated of Christ's execution, let us now come to the last point,
namely the excellency of Christ's passion, consisting in these two points: I. a
Sacrifice: II. a triumph. For the first, when Christ died he offered a
propitiatory and real sacrifice to his father: and herein his death and
passion differs from the sufferings and deaths of all men whatsoever. In this
sacrifice, we must consider four things: I. who was the priest. II. what was
the sacrifice. III. what was the altar. IV. the time wherein this sacrifice was
offered. The priest was Christ himself, as the author of the epistles to the
Hebrews proves at large from the third chap. to the 9. and of him we are to
consider these four points. The first, what is the office of Christ's
priesthood. Ans. The office of Christ's priesthood stands in three things: I. to
teach doctrine, and therefore he is called the high priest of our profession,
Hebr. 3.^^
that is, of the Gospel which we profess, because he is the author and Doctor
of the same. II. to offer up himself unto his father in the behalf of man, for
the appeasing of his wrath for sin. III. to make request or intercession to
God the father, that he would accept the sacrifice which he offered on the
cross for us. The second point is, According to which nature he was a priest:
whether in his manhood, or in his godhead, or both together? Ans. The office of
his priesthood is performed by him according to both his natures: and therefore
he is a priest not as the Papists would have him, according to his manhood
only, but as he is both God and man: for as he is a Mediator, so is he a
priest: but Christ is a Mediator according to both natures: each nature doing
that which is peculiar to it, and conferring something to the work of
redemption: and therefore he is a priest as he is both God and man. The third
point, After what order he is a priest? Ans. The Scripture mentions two
orders of priests: the order of Leui, and the order of Melchisedeck. Christ was
not a priest after the order of Aaron: and yet notwithstanding in that
priesthood were many notable rites whereby the priesthood of our Savior
Christ was resembled, and we may note five especially. First in the anointing
of the high priests, as of Aaron and his sons after him, oil was poured on
his head, Exodus 29.7. Psalm. 113.2.
and it ran down to the very edge of his garments, whereby was signified that
Christ the true high priest was anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows, Psalm. 45.7.
that is, that his manhood was filled with the gifts and graces of God, both
in measure, number, Exodus 28.2.
and degree above all men and angels. Secondly, the sumptuous and gorgious
apparel which the high Priest put on, when he came into the sanctuary, was a
sign of the rich and glorious robe of Christ's righteousness, which is the
purity and integrity of his humane nature and of his life. Thirdly, the
special parts of the high Priests attire were, first the Ephod, the two
shoulders whereof had two onyx stones, Exodus 28.12.21.
whereon were engraven the names of the twelve tribes of Israel: six names on
the one stone, and six on the other, as stones of remembrance of the children
of Israel to God ward: secondly, the brestplate of judgment like the work of
the Ephod, wherein were set twelve stones according to the names of the
children of Israel, graven as signets every one after his name. Now by these
two ornaments were figured two things in Christ: by the first, that he carries
all the Elect on his shoulders, and supports them by his spirit so long as they
are in this world, against the world, the flesh, and the devil. By the second,
that Christ our high priest being now in his sanctuary in heaven, has in
memory all the Elect, and their very names are written as it were in tables of
gold before his face, and he has an especial love unto them and care over
them. Upon this ground the church in the Canticles prays on this manner, Set
me as a seal on thy heart, and as a signe^ upon thy arm. Cant. 8.6.
And indeed this is a matter of comfort unto us all, that Christ has our
several names written in precious stones before his face, though he be now in
heaven and we on earth: and that the particular estate of every one of us is
both known and regarded of him. Again, God gave to Moses the Vrim and
Thummim, which was put on the breastplate of the high priest, when he was to
ask counsel from God of things unknown, before the mercy seat, whence God
gave answer. What the Vrim and Thummim was, it is not known: and it is like it
was not made by any art of man, but given by God; and how it was used we can
not tell: but yet the signification of the words affoardeth matter of
meditation. Vrim signifies lights, and Thummim signifies perfections. And by
this a further matter was prefigured in Christ, who has the perfect Vrim and
Thummim in his breast: first, because in him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge: Colos^ ^.3.
secondly, because he reueales to his Church out of his word such things as
none can know but the children of God: as David says, Psalm. 25.14. E^h. 1.17.
The secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him. And for this cause
the spirit of Christ is called the spirit of wisdom and revelation: ^. Cor.
2.^2.
and the spirit of God, whereby we know the things that are given unto us of
God: as namely, our election, vocation, justification, and sanctification in
this life, and our eternal glorification after this life: yea to every member
of Christ within his Church he gives a special spirit of revelation out of the
word, whereby he may know that God the father is his father; the son the
redeemer, his redeemer; and the holy Ghost his sanctifier and comforter.
Lastly, the high priest had a plate on his forehead, and therein was engraven
the holiness of Jehovah: Exodus ^8.36.
this signified the holiness of Christ: for as he is God, he is holiness it
self: and as he is man, he is most holy, being sanctified by the holy Ghost
for this end, that he might cover our sins and unrighteousness, with his
righteousness and holy obedience.

The second order of priesthood is the order of Melchisedeck, of which order
Christ was, as David says, Heb. 7.
Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck: and that in two
special respects. I. Melchisedeck was both a priest and a king: so was Christ.
II. Melchisedeck had neither father nor mother, because his history is set
down with mention of neither: so likewise Christ as he is God, had no mother;
and as he is man, he had no father. The Papists avouch Christ to be a priest of
this order in a new respect, in that as Melchisedeck offered bread and wine,
Genesis 14.18.
when Abraham came from the slaughter of the Kings: so (say they) Christ in his
last supper did offer his own body and blood under the forms of bread and
wine. But this is a frivolous device of theirs: for if we read Hebr. 7. where
this point is handled, there is no comparison at all made of their two
sacrifices; but the resemblances before named are set down, in which, person
is compared with person. Again, it is not said in Genesis that Melchisedeck
offered sacrifice; Protulit non obtu^it.
but that he brought forth bread and wine, and made a feast to Abraham and his
company. And if Christ should be of the order of Melchisedeck, in regard of
the offering of bread and wine, yet would this make much against the Papists.
For Melchisedeck brought forth true bread and true wine; but in the sacrifice
of the mass there is no true bread nor true wine: but (as they say) the real
body and blood of Christ under the form of bread and wine.

The fourth point is, whether there be any more real priests of the new
Testament beside Christ or no? Ans. In the old testament there were many
priests one following another in continual succession, but of the new
Testament there is one only real priest, Christ Jesus God and man, and no
more: as the author of the Hebrews says, He^. 7.24. (...).
because he endures for ever, he has an everlasting priesthood: and the word
translated [ euerlasting] signifies such a priesthood, which can not pass
from him to any other, as the priesthood of Aaron did. And therefore the
priesthood of Christ is so tied to his own person, that none can have the same
but he; neither man nor angel, nor any other creature, no not the Father nor
the holy Ghost. But the factours of the church of Rome will say, that Christ
may have men to be his deputies in his stead to offer sacrifice. Ans. We must
consider Christ two ways: I. as he is God: II. as he is Mediator. As he is
God with the father and with the holy Ghost, he has Kings and Magistrates to
be his deputies on earth: and therefore they are called Elohim, Psalm. 82^
that is, gods. But as he is Mediator, and so consequently a priest and a
King, he has neither deputy nor vicegerent; neither king to rule in his stead
over his Church, nor priest to offer sacrifice for him: nay he has no Prophet
to be his deputy, as he is the doctor of the Church. And therefore he says
to his disciples; be not called doctors, Ma^h. 23.10.
for one is your doctor. Indeed he has his ministers to teach men his will: but
a deputy to offer sacrifice in his stead he has not. And therefore we may
with good conscience abhor the massing priesthood of the church of Rome, as a
thing fetched from the bottom of hell: and their massing priests as instruments
of Satan; holding this for a very truth, that we have but one only priest even
Christ himself God and man. Indeed all Christians are priests to offer up
spiritual sacrifice: but it is the property of Christ alone to offer an
outward and real sacrifice unto God now in the new Testament.

Thus much of the first point who is the priest. The second follows: what is
the sacrifice. Answ. The sacrifice is Christ, as he is man, or the manhood of
Christ crucified. As the priest is both God and man; so the sacrifice is man,
or^ the god^^^^. He^. 10.10.
not God. So it is said, we are sanctified by the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ. Touching this sacrifice, sundry questions are to be skanned. The
first, what kind of sacrifice it was? Ans. In the old testament there were two
kind of sacrifices: one, propitiatory which served to satisfy for sin: the
other eucharisticall for praise and thanksgiving. (...) 1.8.
Now the sacrifice of Christ was a sacrifice propitiatory specially prefigured
by the typical sacrifice, called the whole burnt offering; for as it was all
consumed to ashes upon the altar, and turned into smoke, so the fire of Gods
wrath did seize upon Christ on the cross, and did consume him as it were to
nothing to make us something. Secondly, when Noe offered an whole burnt
offering after the flood, it is said, Genesis ^.21.
God smelled a savor of rest: not because he was delighted with the smell of
the sacrifice, but because he approved his faith in Christ. And hereby was
figured, that Christ upon the cross was an offering, Ep^. 5.2.
and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God: because God was well
pleased therewith. Now whereas Christ was content wholly to offer up himself
to appease the wrath of his father for us: it must teach us to give our bodies
and souls, as holy, living, and acceptable sacrifices, wholly dedicating them
to the service of God.

The second question is, how often Christ offered himself? Ans. Once only and
no more. This must be held as a principle of divinity: Heb. 10.14.
With once offering has he consecrated for ever, them that are sanctified: and
again, Heb. 9.28.
Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many. And it serves to
overthrow the abominable sacrifice of the mass, in which the true body and
blood of Christ is offered under the forms of bread and wine, really and
substantially (as they say) for the remission of the sins of the quick and
the dead, and that continually: but if this unbloody sacrifice of Christ be
good, then it is either the continuing of that which was begun on the cross
by Christ himself, or the iteration of it by the mass priest. Now let Papists
choose whether of these two they will: if they say it is the continuing of the
sacrifice of Christ, then they speak outrageous blasphemy: for it is in
effect to say, that Christ's sacri^ice was not perfect, but only begun on the
cross, and must be accomplished by the mass priest to the end of the world.
If they affirm the second, that it is an iteration of Christ's sacrifice, then
also they speak blasphemy: for hereby they make it also an imperfit
sacrifice, because it is repeated and iterated: for upon this ground does the
author to the Hebrews prove, that the sacrifices of the old testament were
imperfit, because they were daily offered. And whereas they say there be two
kinds of sacrifices, one bloody once only offered upon the cross: the other
unbloody, which is daily offered, I answer, that this distinction has no
ground out of Gods word: neither was it known to the holy Ghost who says,
Heb. 9.22.
that without blood there is no remission of sins.

The third question is, what is the fruit of this sacrifice? Ans. The whole
effect thereof is contained in these four things: I. the oblation of Christ
purges the believer from all his sins whether they be original or actual:
so it is said, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
If we walk in the light, we have fellowship one with another: and the blood
of Jesus Christ his son purges us from all sin: whether they be sins of
omission in regard of our duties: or of commission in doing evil. II. the
oblation serves for the justifying of a sinner before God, as Paul says, Romans
5.10.
We are justified by his blood, and are reconciled to God by his death. This
being here remembered, that in the passion of Christ we include his legal
obedience, whereby he fulfilled the law for us. III. the oblation of Christ
serves to purge men's consciences from dead works; Heb. 9.14.
How much more then shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternal
spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead
works to serve the living God. IV. the oblation of Christ procures us liberty
to enter to heaven, Heb. 10.20.
By the blood of Christ Jesus we may be bold to enter into the holy place, by
the new and living way which he has prepared for us through the veil, that
is, his flesh. By our sins there is a partition wall made between God and
us: but Christ by offering himself upon the cross, has beaten down this
wall, opened heaven, and as it were, trained the way with his own blood,
whereby we may enter into the kingdom of God, and without the which we can not
enter in at all.

The last question is, how this sacrifice may be applied to us. Ans. The means
of applying this sacrifice be two: I. the hand of God which offers. II. the
hand of the believer that receives the sacrifice offered. The hand of God
whereby he offers unto us his benefit, is the preaching of the word, and the
administration of the Sacraments, baptism, and the Lords supper; and
wheresoever these his holy ordinances are rightly administered and put in
practice, there the Lord puts forth his hand unto us, and offers most freely
the virtue and benefit of the death of Christ. And then in the next place
comes the hand of the believer which is faith in the heart; which, when God
offers does apprehend and receive the thing offered, and make it ours.

The third thing to be spoken of is, the altar whereon Christ offered himself.
The altar was not the cross, but rather the godhead of Christ. He was both the
priest, the sacrifice, and the altar: the sacrifice, as he is man; the priest,
as he is both God and man; the altar, as he is God. The property of an altar,
is to sanctify the sacrifice: as Christ says, Math. 23.9.
ye fools and blind, whether is greater the offering, or the altar that
sanctifies the offering? Now Christ as he is God, sanctifies himself as he
was man: Ioh. 17.19.
and therefore (says he) for their sakes sanctify I my self, by doing two
things: I. by setting apart the manhood to be a sacrifice unto his father for
our sins. II. by giving to this sacrifice merit or efficacy to deserve at
Gods hands remission of our sins: the manhood of Christ without the Godhead
has no virtue nor efficacy in it self to be a meritorious sacrifice: and
therefore the dignity and excellency which it has is derived thence. As for
the chalkie and stony altars of the Church of Rome; they are nothing else but
the toys of man's brain. Christ himself is the only real altar of the new
testament. And in stead of altars which were under the law, we have now the
Lords table whereon we celebrate the Sacrament of his body and blood, to show
forth his death till he come.

Luke 4.19.
The fourth point is, concerning the time of Christ's oblation, which he himself
calls the acceptable year of the Lord: alluding unto an other year under the
law called the year of Iubile, Lev. 25.10.
which was every fifty year among the Jews, in which at the sound of a
trumpet all that had set or sold their possessions received them again: all
that were bondmen were then set at liberty. This Iubile was but a figure of
that perfect deliverance which was to be obtained by Christ's passion, which was
not temporary deliverance for every fifty year, but an eternal freedom
from the bondage of sin, hell, death, and condemnation. And the preaching of
the word is the trumpet sounded which proclaims unto us freedom from the
kingdom of darkness, and inuites us to come and dwell in perfect peace with
Christ himself. Well, if the year of perpetual Iubile be now come, in what a
wretched estate all our loose and blind people that esteem nothing of that
liberty which is offered to them, but choose rather to live in their sins,
and in bondage under Satan and condemnation, then to be at freedom in Christ.

Now follow the uses which are to be made of the sacrifice of Christ. The
prophet Aggai says, Agg. 2.^.
that the second temple built by Zorubbabel was nothing in beauty unto the
first which was built by Solomon: and the reason is plain, for (as the Jews
write) it wanted five things which the first temple had: I. the appearing of
the presence of god at the mercy seat between the two Cherubims. II. the Vrim
and Thummim on the breast plate of the high priest. III. the inspiration of the
holy Ghost upon extraordinary Prophets. IIII. the Arc of the Covenant: for
that was lost in the captivity. V. fire from heaven to burn the sacrifices.
Yet for all this, the Prophet afterward says, Agg. 2.10.
The glory of the last House, shall be greater then the first. Now it may be
demanded, how both these sayings can stand together. Ans. We are to know, that
the second Temple was standing in the time when Christ was crucified for our
^innes; and it was the sacrifice of Christ which gave glory and dignity to
the second temple, though otherwise for building and outward ornaments it was
far inferior to the first. And by this we are taught, that if we would bring
glory unto our own selves, unto our houses and kindred, either before God or
before men, we must labor to be partakers of the sacrifice of Christ, and the
sprinkling of his blood to purge our hearts. This is the thing that brings
renown both to place and person, how base soever we be in the eyes of the
world. Secondly, all oblations and meat offerings were sprinkled with salt,
and every sacrifice of propitiation which was to be burned to ashes, Lev. 2.^^.
Ez^ch. 43.24.
was first salted: and hereby two things were signified. The first, that every
one of us in our selves are loathsome or vile in the sight of God; ^z^ch. 16.4.
like unto stinking carrion or raw-flesh kept long vnpoudered. A dead and
rotten carkeise is loathsome unto us; but we in our selves are a thousand times
more loathsome unto God. The second, that we are as it were salted and made
sauorie and acceptable to God by the virtue of the sacrifice of Christ upon the
cross. Our duty then is to labor that we may feel in our selves the biting
and sharpnes of the oblation of Christ, to wast and consume the superfluities
of sin and the corruptions of our natures. And we must withal endeavor,
that the whole course of our lives, and our speech it self be gracious and
poured with salt, Coloss. 4.6. Mat. 5.13.
least God at length spue us out of his mouth. To this end has God appointed
his ministers to be the salt of the earth, that by their ministry they might
apply the death of Christ, and season the people. And it has pleased God to be
sprinkle this land with more plenty of this salt then has been heretofore.
But, alas, small is the number of them that give any relish of their good
seasoning. The more lamentable is their case. For as flesh that cannot be
seasoned with salt, putrifies: so men, that cannot be sweetened and changed by
the sacrifice of Christ, do rot and perish in their sins. Eze. 47.8.11.
The waters that ishued from under the threshold of the Sancturie, when they
came into Mare mortuum.
the dead sea, the waters thereof were wholesome: but myrie places and marshes
which could not be seasoned, were made saltpits. Now these waters are the
preching of the gospel of Chrtst, which flowing through all the parts of this
I Will, if it do not season and change our nation, it shall make it as places of
nettles and saltpits, and at length be an occasion of the eternal curse of god.
Thirdly, Christ's priesthood serves to make every one of us also to be priests.
And being priests, we must likewise have our sacrifice and our altar. Our
sacrifice is the clean offering, Mal. 1.11.
which is the lifting up of pure hands to God without wrath or doubting in our
prayers: 1. Tim. 2.8.
also our bodies and souls, our hearts, and affections, the works of our
lives, and the works of our callings: all which must be dedicated to the
service of god for his glory, and the good of his Church. The altar whereon we
must offer our sacrifice, is Christ our redeemer, both God and man, because by
the virtue of his death as with sweet odours he perfumes all our obedience,
and makes it acceptable to God. Rev. 8.3. Heb. 13.10.
The ministers of the Gospel are also in this manner priests, as Paul
insinuates when he calls the Gentiles his offering unto God. Romans 15.16.
And the preaching of the word is as it were a sacrificing knife, whereby the
old Adam must be killed in us; and we made an holy and acceptable sweet
smelling oblation unto God, sanctified by the holy Ghost. Therefore every one
that hears Gods word preached and taught, must endeavor that by the
profitable hearing thereof, his sins and whole nature may be subdued and
killed; as the beast was slain and sacrificed upon the altar by the hand of
the Leuite. Lastly the exhortation of the holy ghost must here be considered.
Heb. 10.21.
Seeing (says he) we have an high priest, which is over the house of god, let
us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our hearts
from an evil conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water: the meaning
of the words is this, that if Christ have offered such a sacrifice of such
value and price, which procures pardon of sin, justification,
sanctification, and redemption, then we must labor to be partakers of it; to
have our bodies and souls purified and cleansed by his blood, and sanctified
throughout by the holy ghost, that thereby we may be made fit to do
sacrifice acceptable to God in Christ. This is the use which the Apostle makes
of the doctrine of Christ's priesthood in that place, which also every man
should apply unto himself: for why should we live in our sins and wicked
ways, every hour incurring the danger of Gods judgments, seeing Christ has
offered such a sacrifice whereby we may be purged and cleansed, and at length
freed from all woe and misery.

Thus much of Christ's sacrifice: now follows his triumph upon the cross. That
Christ did triumph when he was upon the cross, it is plainly set down by the
Apostle Paul, where he says, Col. 2.14.15.
that putting out the hand writing of ordinances that was against us, which was
contrary to us, he even took it out of the way, and fastened it upon the
cross, and has spoiled the principalities and powers, and has made show of
them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same cross. This triumph is
set forth by signs and testimonies of two sorts. I. By signs of his glory
and majesty. II. By signs of his victory on the cross. The signs of his
glory and majesty are principally seven. The first is the title set over his
head upon the cross, Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews. The end why titles
were set over the heads of malefactors was, that the beholders might know the
cause of the punishment, and be admonished to take heed of like offenses, and
be stirred up to a dislike of the parties executed for their offenses. And
therefore no doubt, Pilate wrote the title of Christ for the aggravating of his
cause, and that with his own hand. Yet mark the strange event that followed:
for when Pilate was about to write the superscription, God did so govern and
overrule both his heart and hand, that in stead of noting some crime, he sets
down a most glorious and worthy title, calling him, Jesus of Nazareth king of
the Jews: which words contain the very sum and pith of the whole gospel of
Christ, delivered by the Patriarchs and prophets from age to age. We must not
think that Pilate did this of any good mind; or upon any love or favor that
he bare to Christ: but only as he was guided and ouerruled by the power of God
for the advancement of the honor and glory of Christ. The like did Caiphas,
who though a sworn enemy to Christ, yet he uttered a prophecy of him, saying,
that it was necessary that one should die for the people: not that he had any
intent to prophecy: but because the Lord used him as an instrument to publish
his truth. And when Balaam for the wages of unrighteousness would have cursed
the Lords people, for his life he could not; nay all his cursings were turned
into blessings. By this then it appears, that it is not possible for any man,
do what he can, to stop the course of the gospel of Christ: nay: (as we see)
God can raise up the wicked sometime to spread abroad and to publish the truth,
though they themselves intend the contrary. Furthermore let us mark that when
the Jews did most of all intend to bring disgrace and ignominy upon our
Savior Christ, then did they most of all extol and magnify his name: they
could not for their lives have given him a more renowned title then this, that
he was King of the Jews. And the same is the case of all the members of
Christ: for let a man walk in good conscience before God and man, he shall
find this to be true, that when he is most disgraced in the world, then
commonly he is most honored with God and men.

Further, Pilate wrote this superscription in three languages, Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin. And no doubt the end thereof in the providence of God was, that the
passion of Christ, as also the publishing of his kingdom and Gospel might be
spread over the whole world. This shows the malice of the Church of Rome,
which will not suffer the word of God to be published but in the Latin tongue,
least the people should be entangled in errors.

Again, when Pilate had thus written the superscription, the high priests and
Pharisees offended thereat, came to Pilate willing him to change the title,
saying, Ioh. 19.12.
Write not the King of the Jews, but that he said, I am the King of the Jews:
but Pilate answered them again, That which I have written, I have written.
Though Pilate had been ouer-ruled before to condemn Christ to death, against
his own conscience, yet will he not in any wise condescend to change the
superscription. How comes this to pass? Surely, as he was ruled by the hand
of God in penning it, so by the same hand of God was he confirmed in not
changing it. Hence we learn sundry instructions. First, that no man in the
world, let him endeavor himself to the uttermost of his power, is able to
stop the course of the kingdom of God: it stands firm and sure, and all the
world is not able to prevail against it. Secondly, whereas Pilate being but
an heathen man was thus constant, that he will not have his writing changed; we
may note, how permanent and unchangeable the writings of the holy word of God
are. They are not the words of heathen men, but were spoken by the mouth of the
Prophets and Apostles, as God gave them utterance. The book of Scripture
therefore is much more immutable, so as no creature shall be able to change the
least part of it till it be fulfilled. Thirdly, by Pilates constancy, we learn
to be constant in the practice and profession of the religion of Christ: this
is a necessary lesson for these days, wherein men's professions do fleet like
water and go and come with the tide. Many zealous professors to day, but to
morrow as could as water. And the complaint of the Lord touching times past,
agrees to our days: Ose. 6.
O Ephraim, What shall I say to thee? thy righteousness is like the morning
dew.

The second is, the conversion of the theife: a most worthy argument of the
godhead of Christ. For by it when he was upon the cross, and in the very
midst of his passion, he gives unto all the world a lively and notable
experience of the virtue and power of his death, so as his very enemies might
not only behold the passion it self, but also at the same time acknowledge
the admirable efficacy thereof. And therefore with the passion of Christ, we
must join the conversion of the thief: which is as it were a crystal glass
wherein we may sensibly behold the endless merit and virtue of the obedidience
of Christ to his father, even to the death of the cross. And therefore I will
briefly touch the special instructions which are to be learned by it. First
let us mark that both the thieues in every respect were equal, both wicked
and lewd livers: and for their notorious faults both attached, condemned, and
executed both on the cross at the same time with Christ: yet for all this, the
one repenting was saved, the other, was not. And in their two examples we see
the state of the whole world, whereof one part is chosen to life eternal: and
thereupon attaines to faith and repentance in this life: the rest are rejected
in the eternal counsel of God, for just causes known to himself, and such
being left to themselves never repent at al. Secondly we are taught hereby,
that the whole work of our conversion and salvation must be ascribed wholly
to the mere mercy of God: of these two thieues the one was as deeply plunged
in wickedness as the other, and yet the one is saved, the other condemned. The
like was in Jacob and Esau; Romans 9 13.
both borne at one time, and of the same parents, and neither of them had done
good nor evil when they were borne: yet one was then loved, the other was
hated: yea if we regard outward prerogatives, Genesis 25.13.
Esau was the first borne, and yet was refused.

Furthermore, the theife on the cross declares his conversion, by manifest
signs and fruits of repentance, as appears by the words which he spoke to
his fellow, Luke 23.40.
Fear not thou god seeing thou art in the same condemnation. Though hands
and feet were fast nailed to the cross, yet heart and tongue are at liberty
to give some tokens of his true repentance. The people of this our land hear
the word, but for the most part are without either profit in knowledge or
amendment of life: yet for all this, they persuade themselves that they have
good hearts and good meanings, though they can not bear it away, and utter it
so well as others. But alas, poor souls, they are deluded by Satan: for a man
that is converted, can not but express his conversion, and bring forth the
fruits thereof. And therefore our Savior Christ says, If a man believe in me,
out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life. Ioh. 7.38. Job. 32.19.
The grace (as Elihu says) of God is like new wine in a vessel which must
have a vent; and therefore he that shows no tokens of Gods grace in this
life, is not as yet converted; let him think and say of himself what he will.
Can a man have life, and never move nor take breath? and can he that brings
forth no fruit of his conversion live unto God? Well, let us now see what were
the fruits of the thiefes repentance. They may be reduced to four heads.
First, he rebukes his fellow for mocking Christ, indeauouring thereby to bring
him to the same condition with himself, if it were possible: whereby he
discouers unto us the property of a true repentant sinner, which is, to labor
and strive, so much as in him lies, to bring all men to the same state that
he is in. Thus David having tried the great love and favor of God toward
himself, breaks forth and says, Psalm. 34.11.
Come children, harken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord:
showing his desire that the same benefits which it had pleased God to bestow on
him, might also in like manner be conveyed to others. Therefore it is a great
shame to see men professing religion, carried away with every company, and with
the vanities and fashions of the world, whereas they should rather draw even
the worst men that be to the fellowship of those graces of God which they have
received. That which the Lord spoke to the prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 15.19.
must be applied to all men: Let them return unto thee, but return not thou
unto them. In instruments of music the string out of tune must be set up to
the rest that be in tune, and not the rest to it.

Again, in that he checkes hi fellow, it shows that those which be touched
for their own sins, are also grieved when they see other men sin and
offend God. But to go further in this point, let us diligently and carefully
mark the manner of his reproof, Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the
same condemnation. In which words he rips up his lewdnes even to the quick,
and gives him a worthy item, telling him that the cause of all their former
wickedness, had been the want of the fear of God. And this point must every
one of us mark with great diligence. For if we enter into our hearts and make
a through search, we shall find that this is the root and fountain of all
our offenses. We miserable men for the most part have not grace to consider
that we are always before God; and to quake and tremble at the consideration
of his presence: and this makes us so often to offend God in our lives as we
do. Abraham coming before Abimelech, shifting for himself, said, that Sara
was his sister, and being demanded why he did so, answered, Genesis 20.1^.
because he thought the fear of God was not in that place: insinuating that he
which wants the fear of God, will not make conscience of any sin whatsoever.
Would we then even from the bottom of our hearts turn to God, and become new
creatures, then let us learn to fear God: which is nothing else but this, when
a man is persuaded in his own heart and conscience that wheresoever he be, he
is in the presence and sight of God, and by reason thereof is afraid to sin.
This we must have fully settled in our hearts, if we desire to learn but the
first lesson of true wisdom. But what reason uses the thief to draw his
fellow to the fear of God? Thou art (says he) in the same condemnation, that
is, by thy sins and manifold transgressions thou have deserved death, and it
is now most justly inflicted upon thee; will thou not yet fear God? Where we
are taught, that temporal punishments and crosses, ought to be means to work
in us the fear of God; for that is one end why they are sent of God. Psalm.
119.71.
It is good for me (says David) that I have been chastised, that I may learn
thy statutes. And Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.32.
When we are chastised, we are nurtured of the Lord. And the Jews are taught
by the prophet Micah to say, Mich. 7.9.
I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him.

The second fruit of his conversion is, that he condemns himself and his
fellow for their sins, saying, Indeed we are righteously here, for we
receive things worthy for that we have done, that is, we have wonderfully
sinned against Gods majesty, and against our brethren: and therefore this
grievous punishment which we bear, is most just and due unto us. This fruit of
repentance springs and grows very thin among us, for few there be which do
seriously condemn themselves for their own sins: the manner of men is to
condemn others, and to cry out that the world was never so bad, but bring
them home to themselves, and you shall find that they have many excuses and
defenses as plaister-worke to cast over their foul and filthy sins: and if
they be urged to speak against themselves, the worst will be thus; God help
us, we are all sinners, even the best of us. But certain it is, that he which is
thoroughly touched in conscience for his sins, both can and will speak more
against himself for his manifold offenses, then all the world besides. Thus
Paul when he was converted, 1. Tim. 1.15.
calls himself the chief of all sinners. And the prodigal child confessed
that he had sinned against heaven and against his father, and was not worthy
to be called his child.

The third fruit of his conversion is, that he excuses our Savior Christ, and
gives testimony of his innocence, saying, But this man has done nothing
amiss. Mark here: Pilate condemned Christ, Herod mocked him, all the learned
Scribes and Pharisees condemned him, and the people cry, away with him, let him
be crucified: and among his own disciples Peter denied him, and the rest ran
away: there remains only this poor silly wretch upon the cross to give
testimony of Christ's innocence: whereby we learn, that God chooses the
simple ones of this world, to overthrow the wisdom of the wise: and therefore
we must take heed that we be not offended at the Gospel of Christ, by reason
that for the most part simple and mean men in the world embrace it. Nay mark
further, this one theife being converted had a better judgment in matters
concerning Gods kingdom, then the whole body of the Jews. And by this all
students may learn, that if they desire to have in themselves upright
judgment in matters of religion, first of all they must become repentant
sinners: and though a man^haue never so much learning, yet if he be carried
away with his own blind affections and lusts, they will corrupt and darken his
judgment. Men which work in mines and coale-pits under the earth, are
troubled with nothing so much as with damps, which make their candle burn
dark, and sometimes put it quite out. Now every man's sins are the damps of
his heart, which when they take place, do dim the light of his judgment, and
cast a mist over the mind, and darken the understanding and reason: and
therefore a needful thing it is, that men in the first place should provide
for their own conversion.

The fourth fruit of his repentance is, that he prays for mercy at Christ's
hands, Lord (says he) remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: in which
prayer we may see what is the property of faith. This theife at this instant
heard nothing of Christ but the scornings and mockings of the people, and he
saw nothing but a base ^state full of ignominy and shame, and the cursed death
of the cross, yet nevertheless he now believes in Christ, and therefore
entreats for salvation at his hand. Hence we learn, that it is one thing to
believe in Christ, and another to have feeling and experience: and that even
then when we have no sense or experience we must believe: for faith is the
subsisting of things which are not seen: Heb. 11.1 ^om. 4.1^.
and Abraham above hope did believe under hope: and Job says, though thou kill
me, yet will I believe in thee. In Philosophy a man begins by experience,
after which comes knoweledge and belief; as when a man has put his hand to
the fire, and feels it to be hot, he comes to know thereby that fire burns:
but in Divinity we must believe though we have no feeling: first comes faith,
and after comes sense and feeling. And the ground of our religion stands in
this, to believe things neither seen not felt to hope above all hope, and
without hope: in extremity of affliction to believe that God loves us, when
he seems to be our enemy, and to persevere in the same to the end^

The answer which Christ made to his prayer was, This night shall thou be with
me in Paradise. Whereby he testifies in the midst of his sufferings the power
which he had over the souls of men: and verifies that gracious promise, Ask
and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened
to you: and withal confutes the popish purgatory. For if any man should have
gone to that forged place of torment, then the theife upon the cross, who
repenting at the last gasp wanted time to make satisfaction for the temporal
punishment of his sins. And by this conversion of the thief we may learn
that if any of us would turn to God and repent, we must have three things. I.
The knowledge of our own sins. II. From the bottom of our hearts we must
confess and condemn our selves for them, and speak the worst that can be of
our selves, in regard of our sins. III. We must earnestly crave pardon for
them, and call for mercy at Gods hands in Christ, withal reforming our lives
for the time to come: if we do, we give tokens of repentance; if not, we may
think what we will, but we deceive our selves, and are not truly converted.
And here we must be warned to take heed least we abuse, as many do, the
example of the thief, to conclude thereby that we may repent when we will,
because the thief on the cross was converted at the last gasp. For there is
not a second example like to this in all the whole Bible: it was also
extraordinary. Indeed sundry men are called at the eleventh hour, but it is
a most rare thing to find the conversion of a sinner after the eleventh hour,
and at the point of the twelfth. This mercy God vouchsafed this one thief;
that he might be a glass in which we might behold the efficacy of the death
of Christ, but the like is not done to many men, no not to one of a thousand.
Let us rather consider the estate of the other thief, who neither by the
dealing of his fellow, nor by any speech of Christ could be brought to
repentance. Let us not therefore defer our repentance to the hour of death:
for then we shall have sore enemies against us: the world, the flesh, the
devil, and a guilty conscience; and the best way is before hand to prevent
them. And experience shows that if a man defer repentance to the last gasp,
often when he would repent he cannot. Let us take Salomons counsel, Remember
thy creator in the days of thy youth, before the evil days come. If we will
not hear the Lord when he calls us, he will not hear us when we call on
him.

The third sign was, the ecclipsing or darkening of the sun from the sixth
hour to the ninth. And this eclipse was miraculous. For by the course of
nature the sin is never ecclipsed, but in the new moon: whereas
contrariwise this eclipse was about the time of the passover which was
always kept at the full moon. Question is made touching the largenes of it:
Luke 23.44. (...).
some moved by the words of Luke, who says that darkness was upon the whole
earth, have thought that the eclipse was universal over the whole world: but
I rather think that Saint Lukes meaning is, that it was over the whole region
or country of Jury. For if such a wonder had happened over the whole world,
all Historiographers Greek and Latin and Astronomers, diligent obseruers of
all ecclipses, would have made special mention thereof. And though some Eusebius.
Chro. Tertul. Apol. c. 12.

Ores. l. 7. c. 4.


writers say that it was over the whole earth, and that it was set down in
record both by the Romans and Grecians, yet all their writings prove no more
but this, that it was over Jury and Galely and the countries bordering near
unto. The uses of this miracle are manifold. I. This darkening of the sun
gives a check to the Jews for their crucifying of Christ: they were not
ashamed to apprehend, accuse, and condemn him: yet this glorious creature the
sun pulls in his beams, being as it were ashamed to behold that, which
they were not ashamed to do. II. It serves to signify the great judgment of
God to come upon the Jews. For when as Christ suffered, darkness was over
all the land of Jury, and all the world besides had the light of the sun, so
shortly after blindness of mind was over the whole nation of the Jews, and
all the world besides saw the son of righteousness shining unto them in
preaching of the gospel. 2. Cor. 3.5. Mal. 4.2.
III. It serves to advertise us that such as carry themselves toward Christ
as the Jews did, have nothing else in them but darkness, and they that sit in
darkness and shadow of death; Isa. 8.20. Luk 1.79.
and therefore not able any whit better to see the way that leads unto life,
then he which is cast into a dark dungeon can; who if they thus remain, shall
at length be cast into utter darkness. This being the estate of all them that
be forth of Christ, ^ Pet. 1.1.
we must labor to be freed from this darkness, that the day star may rise
in our hearts, and shine upon us, and put life into us. IV. This miraculous and
wonderful darkening of the sun does convince the Jews, that Christ whom
they crucified was the Lord of glory, and the Savior of the world: and it is
very like that this was the principal end of this miracle. For whereas
neither his doctrine, nor his former miracles could move them to acknowledge
him for that Messiah, yet this one work of God does as it were strike the
nail to the head, and stop al their mouths. V. Besides this, whereas at the
very instant when Christ was about to make a satisfaction to the justice of his
father for our sins; the sun was thus darkened: it teaches us first to
think of the passion of Christ, not as of a light matter, but as one of the
greatest wonders of the world, at the sight whereof the very frame of nature
was changed: secondly, to think of our own sins, as the vilest things in
the world, and that they deserve the intolerable wrath of God: considering
that at the time when they were to be abolished, the course of nature even in
the very heavens is turned vpside down.

The fourth sign is, the rending of the veil of the temple from the top to
the bottom. Mat. 27.11.
The temple was divided into two parts: the one more inward into which no man
might come but the high priest, and that once a year; and it was called the
holy of holies: the other was that where the people came and offered sacrifices
unto the Lord. Now that which parted the temple into these two parts was
called the veil, and at the time of Christ's passion it was rent from the top
to the very bottom. This has diverse uses: I. The holy of holies signified the
third heaven, where God shows himself in glory and majesty unto his Saints:
Heb. 9 8
and the rending of the veil sigureth unto us, that by the death of Christ
heaven which was otherwise shut by our sins is now set open, and a way made
to enter thereto. II. It signifies, that by the death of Christ we have
without impediment, Ioh. 1.51.
free access to come unto God the father by earnest prayer in the name of
Christ; which is a most unspeakable benefit. III. It signifies that by Christ's
death an end is put to all ceremonies, to ceremonial worship, and the
sacrifices of the old testament: and that therefore in the new testament there
remains one only real and outward sacrifice, that is, Christ crucified on
the cross: and the whole service and worship of God for outward ceremonies
most simple and plain. IV. The temple was the chief and one of the most
principal prerogatives that the Jews had; it was their glory that they had
such a place wherein they might worship and do service to the true God: and
for the temples sake God often spared them, and therefore Daniel prays: Dan.
9.17.
O Lord, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplication, and cause thy
face to shine upon the sanctuary that lies wast for the Lords sake. Yet for
all this, when they began to crucify the Lord of life, their prerogatives
helps them not, nay they are deprived thereof, and God even with his own hand
rendes the veil of the temple in sunder, signifying unto them, that if they
forsake him, he will also forsake them. And so may we say of the church of
England. No doubt for the gospels sake we have outward peace and safety, and
many other blessings, and are in account with other nations: yet if we make no
conscience to obey the word of God, and if we have no love of Christ and his
members, God will at length remove his candlestick from us, and utterly
deprive us of this ornament of the Gospel, and make our land as odious unto
all the world, as the land of the Jews is at this day. Let us therefore with
all care and diligence show forth our love both to Christ himself and to his
members, and adorn the gospel which we profess by bringing forth fruits
worthy of it.

The fifth sign is the earthquake, whereby hard rocks were cloven a sunder.
And it serves very fitly to signify further unto us, that the sin of the
Jews in putting Christ to death was so heavy a burden, that the earth could
not bear it, Mat. 27.5^.
but tre^bled thereat, though the Jews themselves made no bones of it. And it
is a thing to be wondered at: that the earth does not often in these days,
tremble and quake at the monstrous blasphemies and fearful oaths by the wounds
and blood and heart of Christ, whereby his members are rent asunder, and he
traitorously crucified again. Secondly, the earthquake shows unto us the
exceeding and wonderful hardness of the hearts of the Jews, and ours also:
they crucified Christ and were not touched with any remorse; and we can talk
and hear of his death, yea we can say he was crucified for our sins: and
yet are we nothing affected therewith, our hearts will not rende when as hard
rocks cleave asunder. Thirdly, the moving of the earth, and the rending of
the rocks asunder, may be a sign unto us of the virtue of the doctrine of the
gospel of Christ: which is nothing else but the publishing of the passion of his
death: which being preached, shall shake heaven and earth, sea and land. It
shall move the earthen, hard, and rockie hearts of men; Agg. 2.7.
and raise up of mere stones and rocks children unto Abraham. But the maine
use and end of this point is, to prove that he that was crucified, was the
true Messiah the son of God: and therefore had the power of heaven and earth,
and could move all things at his pleasure.

The sixth sign of the power of Christ is, Mat. 27.52.53.
that graves did open, and many bodies of the Saints which slept arose, and
came out of their graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city,
and appeared unto many. The use of this sign is this: it signifies unto us,
that Christ by his death upon the cross did vanquish death in the grave, and
opened it^ and thereby testified that he was the resurrection and the life: so
that it shall not have everlasting dominion over us: but that he will raise us
up from death to life, and to everlasting glory.

The seventh sign is the testimony of the Centurion with his soldiers which
stood by to see Christ executed: S. Mark says, when he saw that Christ thus
crying gave up the ghost, he said, Mar. 15.3^.
truly this was the son of God. Thus we see it is an easy matter for
Christ to defend his own cause: let Judas betray him, Peter deny him, and all
the rest forsake him, yet he can if it so please him make the Centurion that
stands by to see him executed to testify of his innocence. But what was the
occasion that moved him to give so worthy a testimony? S. Matthew says,
Math. 27.54.
it was fear, and that fear was caused, by hearing the loud cry of Christ,
and by seeing the earthquake and things which were done. And this must put us
in mind not to pass by Gods judgments which daily fall out in the world, but
take knowledge of them, and as it were, to fix both our eyes on them. For they
are notable means to strike and astonish the rebellious heart of man, and to
bring it in awe and subjection to God. After that the two first captains with
their fifties commanding the Prophet Elias to come down to king Achaziah, were
consumed with fire from heaven, the king sent his third captain over fifty
with his fifty to fetch him down: but what does he? it is said, he fell on his
knee before Eliah, and besought him, saying, ^. King. 1.1^.
O man of God, I pray thee, let my life and the lives of these fifty servants
be precious in thine eyes. But what was the cause why he prayed thus? Surely he
observed what judgments of God fell upon his two former fellow captains,
Behold, says he, there came down fire from heaven, and devoured the two
former captains with their fifties: therefore let my life be precious now in
thy sight. Thus laying to his own heart and making use of Gods judgments, he
humbled himself and was spared with his fifty. And Habaccuk says, Habac.
^.16.
When I heard the voice, namely of Gods judgments, rottennes entered into my
bones, and I trembled in my self that I might be safe in the day of the Lord.
Now what this fear of the Centurion was, there is a further question, and it
is very like that it was but a sudden motion or a certain preparatiue to
better things. For he was but an heathen man, and had as yet no knowledge of
Christ, and whether he repented or not it is uncertain: and we must not marvel
at this, for there are many sudden motions in show very good, that upon like
occasions rise in the hearts of natural men. When God plagued the land of
Egypt, then Pharaoh sent for Moses and confessed that the Lord was righteous,
Exodus 9.27. and 34.
but he and his people were wicked; and desired Moses to pray to God to take
away the plague, who did so: but so soon as the hand of God was stayed, he
returned to his old rebellion again. And as a dog that comes out of the
water shakes his cares, and yet returns into it again: so is the manner of
the world: when crosses and calamities befall men, as sickness, loss of
friends or goods, then with Ahab they outwardly humble themselves and go
softly: they use to frequent the place where the word is preached and Gods name
called upon: but alas, common experience shows that these things are but
fittes arising of uncertain and flittering motions in the heart. For so soon as
the cross is removed, they return to their old by as again, and become as
bad and as backward as ever they were: being like to the tree that lies in
the water, which for a while is green, but afterward withers. And therefore
we for our parts, when any good motions come into our hearts as the beginnings
of further grace, we (I say) must not quench them but cherish and preserve
them, remembering that the kingdom of heaven, is like a grain of mustard
seed, which when it is sown is the least of all seeds: but afterward it
grows up into a tree, that the souls of the heaven may build their nests in
it: and like to this are the first motions of Gods spirit, and therefore they
must be cherished and maintained.

And thus much for the seven signs of the power of Christ's godhead. Now
follows the second part of the triumph of Christ, which contains signs of
his victory upon the cross, notably expressed by Paul when he says, Col.
^.14,15.
And putting out the hand writing of ordinances which was against us, which was
contrary to us, he even took it out of the way and fastened it upon the
cross, and has spoiled the principalities and powers, and has made a show of
them openly, and has triumphed openly in the same. In which words he alludeth
to the manner of heathen triumphs: for it was the custom of the heathen
princes when they had gotten the victory over their enemies, first to cause a
pillar of stone, or some great oak to be cut down, and set up in the place of
victory, upon which either the names of the chief enemies were set, or their
heads were hanged, or words were written in the pillar to testify the
victory. This being done, there followed an open show, in which first the
conqueror prepares for himself a chariot of victory wherein he was himself
to ride, and then the chief of his enemies bound and pinioned, were led openly
after him. Now on the same manner upon the cross there was a pitched field;
the Emperor on the one side was Christ; his enemies on the other side were the
world, the flesh, hell, death, damnation, the devil, and all his angels: all
which, banding themselves against him were all subdued by him upon the same
cross: and he himself gave two signs of his triumph, one was a monument of
the victory, the other an open show of his conquest. Now the monument of
Christ's victory was the cross it self, whereon he nailed the obligation or
bill which was against us: whereby satan might have accused and condemned us
before God. For we must consider that God the father is as a creditour, and we
all debtors unto him: he has a bill of our hands which is the law, in that it
gives testimony against us; first by the legal washings, which did show and
signify that we were altogether defiled and unclean; secondly by the
sacrifices that were daily offered for the propitiation for our sins. Now
Christ was our surety, and paid every iotte of the debt which we should have
paid, and requiring the acquittance, takes the ceremonial law, and the curse
of the moral law, and nails them to the cross.

Furthermore in the show of conquest, the chariot is the cross likewise: for
it was not only a monument of victory, but also a chariot of triumph. And the
captives bound and pinioned which follow Christ, are the principalities and
powers, that is, the devil, and his angels, hell, death, and condemnation: all
which are as it were taken prisoners, their armor and weapons are taken from
them, and they chained and bound each to other.

The meditation of this point serves to admonish us to abandon all manner of
sin, and to make conscience of every good duty if we will aright profess
the gospel of Christ: for when we sin, we do as it were pull Christ out of
his chariot of triumph, and untie Satan's bonds, and give him weapons, and (as
much as we can) make him valiant and strong again. Now for any man to make
Satan and sin valiant and strong against himself, whereas Christ has
weakened him, and even bruised his head, is no better then to become an enemy
to the cross of Christ. ^hil. 3.18.
Again, hereby we are taught to pray unto God that our blind eyes may be
opened, that we may discern aright of the passion of Christ. It is a wonder to
see how men are carried away with a liking of vain shows, games, and
enterludes: how they spend even whole days in beholding them, and their money
also that they may come to the places where they are: oh then how exceedingly
ought our hearts to be ravished with this most admirable show, in which the
son of God himself rides most gloriously in his chariot of triumph, and
leads his and our most cursed enemies captive, yea treades them under his
foot. This triumph is set forth unto us in the preaching of the Gospel, and
may be seen of us all freely without money or money-worth. What wretches then
shall we be, if we suffer our hearts to be filled with earthly delights, and in
the mean season have little or no desire to behold with the eyes of our mind
this goodly spectacle that is to be seen in the passion of Christ, that serves
to revive and refresh our souls to life eternal.

Thirdly, if Christ when he was most weak and base in the eyes of men, did
most of all triumph upon the cross; then every one of us must learn to say
with the Apostle Paul, Gal. 6.14.
God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing but in the cross of Christ
Jesus our Lord. That we may say this truly, first of all we must labor to have
the benefit of the cross of Christ not only in the remission but also in the
mortification of our sins: secondly, we must not be discomforted, but rather
rejoice and triumph therein. A Christian man can never have greater honor then
to suffer for the Gospel of Christ when God calls him thereunto: 1. Cor. 4.9.
and therefore Saint Paul sets forth another most glorious show which all
those must make that suffer any thing for Gods cause. They must encounter with
the world, the flesh, and the devil, and are placed as it were on a theater:
and in this conflict the beholders are men and angels; yea, the whole host of
heaven and earth: the vmpire or judge is God himself, who will give sentence of
victory on their side, and so they shall overcome. We must not hereupon thrust
our selves into danger: but when it shall please God to call us thereunto, we
must think our selves highly honored of him. As when God sends loss of
friends, of substance, or good name, or any other calamity, we must not
despair, or be over grieved, but rather rejoice and address our selves then
with our Savior Christ to make a triumph.

Thus much of Christ's triumph, and the passion of his cross. Now follows the
second degree of his humiliation, in these words, And buried. Where we must
consider these points: I. why it was needful that Christ should be buried.
II. who was the author of his burial. III. the manner or preparation to his
burial. IV. the place and time where and when he was buried. Of these in
order. For the first; the causes are many, but especially four why Christ was
to be buried. I. that the truth and certentie of his death might be confirmed
unto us, and that no man might so much as imagine that his death was a
fantastical death, or his body a fantastical body: for men use not to bury
a living but a dead man, or a man in show but a true man. II. that his burial
might be unto him a passage from the estate of humiliation to the estate of
exaltation, which began in his resurrection: and he could not have risen again
if he had not been first buried. III. that the outward humiliation in the
form of a servant, which he took upon him, might be continued upon him to the
lowest degree of all: and therefore it was not sufficient that he should be
crucified even to death, but being dead, he must be also buried. IV. Christ
was buried, that he might not only vanquish death on the cross, but even
after the manner of conquerours subdue him at his own home, and as it were
pluck him out of his own cabine or den.

The authors of Christ's burial were Joseph of Arimathea, and Nichodemus, who
came to Jesus by night. Math. 27. Mar. 15.43. Ioh. 19.38.
Now concerning them and this their fact, there are many things worthy to be
considered in this place. First of all they were disciples of Christ, and the
difference between them and the rest is to be considered. The other disciples
though in number they were but few, yet in the feast before his passion they
openly followed him: but when Christ was to be arraigned, and the persecution
of the Church of the new testament began in him, then Judas betrayed him, Peter
denied him, and the rest fled away: yet even at the same instant these two
secret disciples of our Savior Christ, Joseph of Arimathea and Nichodemus take
courage to themselves, and in time of danger openly profess themselves to be
Christ's disciples by an honorable and solemn burial; God no doubt opening
their hearts and inabling them to do so. The like is to be seen in all ages
since the passion of Christ in the Church of God, in which men zealous for the
Gospel in peace have been timorous in persecution, whereas weak ones have
stood out against their enemies even unto death it self. The reason is,
because God will humble those his servants which are oftentimes endued with
great measure of graces, and contrariwise exalt and strengthen the weak and
feeble: and the same no doubt will be found true among us, if it should please
God to send any new trial into the Church of England. This serves to teach us
to think charitably of those which are as yet but weak among us: and withal
in our profession to carry a low sail and to think basely of our selves, and
in the whole course of our lives creep allow by the ground, running on in fear
and trembling, because the Lord oftentimes humbles those that be strong, and
give courage and strength to weak ones boldly to confess his name. Secondly,
whereas these two disciples have such care of the burial of Christ, we learn
that it is our duty to be careful also for the honest and solemn burial of
our brethren. The Lord himself has commanded it, Genesis 3.19.
Thou art dust and to dust thou shall return. Also the bodies of men are the
good creatures of God, yea the bodies of Gods children are the temples of the
holy Ghost, and therefore there is good cause why they should be honestly laid
in the earth. And it was a curse and judgment of God upon Iehoiakim that he
must not be buried, Ier. 22.19.
but like a dead ass be drawn and cast out of the gates of Jerusalem. And so
the Lord threatens a curse upon the Moabites, Amos 2.1.
because they did not bury the king of Edom, but burnt his bones into lime.
And therefore it is a necessary duty one neighbor and friend to look to the
honest burial of another. Hence it follows, that the practice of Spain and
Italy and all popish cuntries, which is to keep the parts of men's bodies and
such like relics of Saints unburied, that they may be seen of men and
worshipped, has no warrant: dust they are and to dust they ought to be
returned.

Furthermore the properties and virtues of both these men are severally to be
considered. And first to begin with Joseph, he was a Senator; a man of great
account, Luke 23.50.
authority, and reputation among the Jews. It may seem a strange thing that
a man of such account would abase himself so much as to take down the body
of Christ from the cross. It might have been an hinderance to him and a
disgrace to his estate and calling: as we see in these days, it would be
thought a base thing for a knight or lord to come to the place of execution and
take down a thief from the hand of the hangman to bury him: but this noble
Senator Joseph for the love he bare to Christ, made no account of his state
and calling, neither did he scorn to take upon him so base an office,
considering it was for the honor of Christ: where we learn, that if we truly
love Christ, and our hearts be ^et to believe in him, we will never refuse to
perform the basest service that may be for his honor, nothing shall hinder
us. It is further said that he was a good man and a just: and also a rich man.
Luke 23. 50,51.
And the first appears in this, that he would neither consent to the counsel
nor fact of the Jews in crucifying Christ. It is rare to find the like man in
these days. From this example we learn these lessons. I. that a rich man
remaining a rich man may be a servant of God, and also be saved: for riches are
the good blessings of God, and in themselves do no whit hinder a man in
coming to Christ. But some will say, Christ himself says, It is easier for a
Math. 19.24.
cable to go through the eye of a needle^ then a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Answ. It is to be understood of a rich man, so long as he
swells with a confidence in his wealth: but we know, that if a cable be
untwisted and drawn into small threeds, it may be drawn through the eye of a
needle: so he that is rich let him deny himself, abase himself, and lay
aside all confidence in himself, in his riches and honor, and be as it were,
made small as twine thread, and with this good Senator Joseph become the
disciple of Christ, he may enter into the kingdom of heaven. But Christ says
in the parable that riches are thorns, which choke the grace of God. Answ. It
is true, they are thorns in that subject or in that man that puts his trust
in them; not in their own nature, but by reason of the corruption of man's
heart, who makes of them his God. Saint John says further, that Joseph was a
disciple of Christ, but yet a close disciple for fear of the Jews. And this
shows, Ioh. 19 38.
that Christ is most ready to receive them that come unto him, though they come
laden with manifold wants. I say not this, that any hereby should take boldness
to live in their sins, but my meaning is, that though men be weak in the
faith, yet are they not to be dismayed, but to come to Christ, who refuses
none that come to him. ^^m. 4.8.
Draw near to God (says S. James) and he will draw near to you. Christ does
not forsake any, till they forsake him first. Lastly the holy Ghost says of
him, that he waited for the kingdom of God, that is, he did believe in the
Messiah to come, and therefore did wait daily till the time was come, when the
Messiah by his death and passion should abolish the kingdom of sin and
Satan, and establish his own kingdom throughout the whole world. The same is
said of Simeon that he was a good man and feared God, and waited for the
consolation of Israel. This was the most principal virtue of all that Joseph
had, and the very root of all his goodness and righteousness, that he waited for
the kingdom of God. For it is the property of faith whereby we have
confidence in the Messiah to change our nature, and to purify the heart, and
to make it bring forth works of righteousness. There be many among us, that can
talk of Christ's kingdom, and of redemption by him, and yet make no conscience
of sin, and have little care to live according to the Gospel which they
profess: and all is, because they do not soundly believe in the Messiah, and
they wait not for the kingdom of heaven, and therefore there is no change in
them: but we for our parts must labor to have this affiance in the Messiah
with Joseph, and to wait for the second appearance, that thereby we may be
made new creatures, having the kingdom of Satan battered and beaten down in
us, and the kingdom of God erected in our hearts.

Touching Nichodemus Saint John says, that he came to Jesus by night. Many men
build upon this example, that it is lawful to be present at the Mass; so be
it, in the mean season we keep our hearts to God: and indeed such men are
like Nichodemus in that they labor to bury Christ as much as they can, though
now after his resurrection he should not be buried again. But though
Nichodemus durst not openly at the first profess the name of Christ, yet after
his death when there is most danger he does: and by this means he reformeth
his former action.

Thus much of the persons that buried Christ. The third thing to be observed is
the manner of Christ's burial, which stands in these four points. First,
they take down his body from the cross: secondly, they wind it: thirdly,
they lay it in a tomb: fourthly, the tomb is made sure. Of these in order.
First, Joseph takes down the body of Christ from the cross whereon he was
executed, but mark in what manner: he does it not on his own head without
leave, but he goes to Pilate and beggeth the body of Christ, and craves
liberty to take it down, because the disposing of dead bodies was in Pilates
hand, he being deputy at that time: whereby we learn, that in all our
dealings and actions (though they have never so good an end) our duty is to
proceed as peaceably with all men as may be, as Saint James says: the wisdom
that is from above is first pure, then peaceable; gentle, etc. Iam. 3.17.
Again, this teaches us, that in all things which concern the authority of
the Magistrate, and belong unto him by the rule of Gods word, we must attempt
or do whatsoever we do by leave. And by this we see what unadvised courses
they take, that being private men in this our Church, will notwithstanding take
upon them to plant Churches without the leave of the Magistrate being a
Christian Prince. Having thus taken the body of Christ down, they go on to
wind it. And Joseph for his part brought linen clothes, and Nichodemus a
mixture of myrrh and aloes to the quantity of an hundred pounds for the
honorable burial of Christ. His winding was on this manner: Ioh. 19.40. Luke
24.1.
they wrapped his body hastily in linen clothes, sweet odours put thereto.
Besides all this, in the Jews burialls there was embalming and washing of the
body, but Christ's body was not P. Ram. theol. l. 1. c. 14. seems to be
deceived in that he puts Christ^ burial for his embalming, and his descending
into hell for his burial or lying in ^he grave.
embalmed or washed, because they had no time to do it, for the preparation to
the Passover drew near. And whereas these two men bury Christ at their own
cost and charges, we are taught to be like affected to the living members of
Christ: when they want we must relieve and comfort the^ liberally^ and freely.
It may here be demanded, whether men may not be at cost in making funerals,
considering even Christ himself is with much cost buried. Ans. The bodies of
all dead men are to be buried in seemly and honest manner, and if they be
honorable, they may be buried honorably: yet now there is no cause why men's
bodies should be washed, anointed, and embalmed, as the use was among the
Jews: 1. Cor. 15.29.
for they used embalming as a pledge and sign of the resurrection; but now
since Christ's coming we have a more certain pledge thereof, even the
resurrection of Christ himself, and therefore it is not requisite that we
should use embalming and washing as the Jews did. And the clause which is
specified in Saint Matthew is not to be omitted, Math. 27.59
that Joseph wrapped Christ's body in a clean linen cloth: whereby we
learn, that howsoever the strange fashions fetched from Spain and Italy are
monstrous and to be abhorred: Tit 2.^ 1 ^im. 3.2. (...). Ioh. 19.41. Math.
17.60, 66.
yet, seeing the body of a man is the creature of God, therefore it must be
araied in cleanly manner, and in holy comelines. Paul requires that the
minister of the Gospel in all things be seemly or comely: and herein he ought
to be a pattern of sobriety unto all men. Thirdly, after they have wound the
body of Christ, they lay it in a tomb, and lastly they make it sure, closing
it up with a stone rolled over the mouth of it. Also the Jews request Pilate
to seal it that none might presume to open it: besides, they set a band of
soldiers to watch the tomb, and to keep it that his body be not stolen
away. Many reasons might be alleged of this their dealing, but principally it
came to pass by the providence of God, that hereby he might confirm the
resurrection of Christ. For whereas the Jews would neither be moved by his
doctrine nor by his works and miracles to believe, he causes this to be done,
that by the certentie of his resurrection he might convince them of hardness
of heart, and prove that he was the son of God.

Thus much of the manner of his burial. Now follows the place where Christ
was buried. In the place we are to mark three things: first, that Christ was
laid in Joseph's tomb, whereby we may gather the greatness of Christ's poverty,
in that he had not so much ground as to make himself a grave in: and this must
be a comfort to the members of Christ that are in poverty. And it teaches
them, if they have no more but food and raiment, to be therewith content,
knowing that Christ their head and king has consecrated this very estate unto
them. Secondly, the tomb wherein Christ was laid was a new tomb wherein
never any man lay before. And it was the special appointment of Gods
providence that it should be so, because if any man had bin buried there
aforetime, the malicious Jews would have pleaded, that it was not Christ that
rose again but some other. Ioh 19 41. Genesis 3.8. Ioh. 18.1.
Thirdly we must observe, that this tomb was in a garden, as the fall of man
was in a garden, and as the apprehension of Christ in a garden beyond the
brook Cedron. And here we must note the practice of a good man. This garden
was the place of Joseph's delight and holy recreation, wherein he used to solace
himself in beholding the good creatures of God; yet in the same place does he
make his own grave long before he died: whereby it appears, that his
recreation was joined with a meditation of his end: and his example must be
followed of us. True it is, God has given us his creatures not only for
necessity, but also for our lawful delight; but yet our duty is, to mingle
therewith serious meditation and consideration of our last end. It is a brutish
part to use the blessings and creatures of God, and not at all to be bettered
in regard of our last end by a further use thereof.

The time when Christ was buried was the evening, wherein the Sabbath was to
begin according to the manner of the Jews, which began their days at sun
setting from evening to evening according to that in Genesis: Luke 23.54. Math.
27.17.
the evening and the morning was the first day. Now Joseph comes a little
before evening and beggeth the body of Christ and burieth it: where note, that
howsoever we are not bound to keep the sabbath so strictly as the Jews were,
yet when we have any business or work to be done of our ordinary calling, we
must not take a part of the Lords sabbath to do it in, but prevent the time,
and do it either before as Joseph did, or rather after the sabbath. This is
little practiced in the world. Men think if they go to Church before and
after noone to hear Gods word, then all the day after they may do what they
list, and spend the rest of the time at their own pleasure: but the whole day
is the Lords, and therefore must be spent wholly in his service both by public
hearing of the word, and also by private reading and meditation on the same.

To conclude the doctrine of Christ's burial. Here it may be demanded, how he
was always after his incarnation both God and man, considering he was dead and
buried, and therefore body and soul were sundered, and a dead man seems to be
no man. Ans. A dead man in his kind is as true a man as a living man: for
though body and soul be not united by the bond of life, yet are they united
by a relation which the one has to the other in the counsel and good pleasure
of god; and that as truly as man and woman r^maine coupled into one flesh by a
covenant of marriage, though afterward they be distant a thousand miles
asunder. And by virtue of this relation every soul in the day of judgment
shall be reunited to his own body, and every body to his own soul. But
there is yet a more straighter bond between the body and soul of Christ in
his death and burial. Damasc.
For as when he was living his soul was a mean or bond to unite his godhead
and his body together: so when he was dead his very Godhead was a mean or
middle bond to unite the body and soul: and to say otherwise is to dissolve
the hypostaticall union, by virtue whereof Christ's body and soul though
severed each from other, yet both were still joined to the godhead of the son.

The use and profit which may be made of Christ's burial is twofolde: I. It
serves to work in us the burial of all our sins. Romans 3.6.
Know ye not (says Paul) that all who have been baptized into Christ; have
been baptized into his death, and are buried with him by baptism into his
death? If any shall demand how any man is buried into the death of Christ,
the answer is this: Every Christian man and woman are by faith mystically
united unto Christ, and made all members of one body, whereof Christ is the
head. Now therefore as Christ by the power of his godhead when he was dead
and buried, did overcome the grave and the power of death in his own person: so
by the very same power by means of his spiritual conjunction does he work in
all his members a spiritual death and burial of sin and natural
corruption. ^. King. 3.21.
When the Israelites were in burying of a man, for fear of the soldiers of
the Moabites, they cast him for have into the sepulcher of Elisha. Now the
dead man, so soon as he was down, and had touched the body of Elisha, he
revived and stood upon his feet: so let a man that is dead in sin be cast
into the grave of Christ, that is, let him by faith but touch Christ dead and
buried; it will come to pass by the virtue of Christ's death and burial that
he shall be raised from death and bondage of sin to become a new man.

Secondly, the burial of Christ serves to be a sweet perfume of all our
graves and burials: for the grave in it self is the house of perdition; but
Christ by his burial has as it were consecrated and perfumed all our graves:
and in stead of houses of perdition, Isa. 57.2.
has made them chambers of rest and sleep, yea beds of down, and therefore
howesoeuer to the eye of man the beholding of a funeral is terrible, yet if
we could then remember the burial of Christ, and consider how he thereby
has changed the nature of the grave, even then it would make us to rejoice.
Lastly, we must imitate Christ's burial in being continually occupied in the
spiritual burial of our sins.

Thus much of the burial. Now follows the third and last degree of Christ's
humiliation: P. Viret. in symb. Erasm. in Colloq.
He descended into hell. It seems very likely that these words were not placed
in the Creed at the first, (or as some think) that they crept in by
negligence, because above threescore Creeds of the most ancient counsels and
fathers want this clause: and among the rest the Nicene Creed. But if the
ancient and learned fathers assembled in that Counsel had been persuaded, or
at the least had imagined that these words had bin set down at the first by the
Apostles, no doubt they would not in any wise have left them out. Ruff. in
exposit. symb.
And an ancient writer says directly, that these words, he descended into
hell, are not found in the Creed of the Roman Church, nor used in the
churches of the East: and if they be, that then they signify the burial of
Christ. And it must not seem strange to any^ that a word or twain in
process of time should creep into the Creed, considering that the original
copies of the books of the old and new testament have in them sundry Varia^.
lectiones.
varieties of readings and ^^ath. 27.9. Jeremy for Zachary.
words otherwhiles which from the margin have crept into the text.
Nevertheless considering that this clause has long continued in the Creed,
and that by common consent of the Catholic Church of God, and ^t may carry a
fit sense and exposition; it is not as some would have it, to be put forth.

Therefore that we may come to speak of the meaning of it, we must know that it
has four usual expositions, which we will rehearse in order, and then make
choice of that which shall be thought to be the fittest. The first is, that
Christ's soul after his passion upon the cross, did really and locally descend
into the place of the damned. But this seems not to be true. The reasons are
these. I. all the Evangelists, and among the rest S. Luke, Luk 1.3.
intending to make an Omnia asseq^^to. (...).
exact narration of the life and death of Christ, have set down at large his
passion, death, burial, resurrection, and ascension, and withal they make
rehearsal of small circumstances, therefore no doubt they would not have
omitted Christ local descent into the place of the damned, if there had been
any such thing. And the end why they penned this history was, that we might
believe that Jesus is Christ the son of God; Ioh. 20.31.
and believing, we might have life everlasting. Now there could not have
been a greater matter for the confirmation of our faith then this, that Jesus
the son of Marie who went down to the place of the damned, returned thence
to live in happiness for ever. II. If Christ did go into the place of the
damned, then either in soul or in body, or in his godhead. But his Godhead
could not descend, because it is every where, and his body was in the grave.
And as for his soul it went not to hell, but presently after his death it went
to paradise, that is, the third heaven, a place of joy and happiness, Luke
23.43. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: which words of Christ must
be understood of his manhood or soul, and not of his Godhead. For they are an
answer to a demand: and therefore unto it, they must be suitable. Now the
thief seeing that Christ was first of all crucified, and therefore in all
likelihood should first of all die, makes his request to this effect: Lord,
thou shall shortly enter into thy kingdom, remember me then; to which Christ's
answer (as the very words import) is thus much. I shall enter into paradise
this day, and there shall thou be with me. Now there is no entrance, but in
regard of his soul or manhood. For the Godhead which is at all times in all
places, cannot be said properly to enter into a place. Again when Christ
says, thou shall be with me in Paradise, he does intimate a resemblance, which
is between the first and second Adam. The first Adam sinned against God, and
was presently cast forth out of paradise. Christ the second Adam having made a
satisfaction for sin, must immediately enter into paradise. Now to say that
Christ in soul descended locally into hell, is to abolish this anolagie
between the first and second Ada^. III. Ancient councels in their confessions
and Creeds omitting this clause show, that they did not acknowledge any real
descent, and that the true meaning of these words, he descended, was
sufficiently included in some of the former articles, and that may appear,
because when they set down it, they omit some of the former: as Athanasius in
his Creed setting down these words, he descended, etc. omits the burial,
putting them both for one, as he expoundes himself Lib. de inca^. Chrysostom. hom.
1. and 2. in. symb.
elsewhere. Now let us see the reasons which may be alleged to the contrary.

Object. I. Matthew. 12.40. The son of man shall be three days and three
nights in the heart of the earth, that is, in hell. Ans. I. This exposition is
directly against the scope of the place: for the Pharisees desired to see a
sign, that is, some sensible and manifest miracle: and hereunto Christ answers
that he will give them the sign of Jonas, which cannot be the descent of his
soul into the place of the damned, because it was insensible; but rather his
burial, and after it his manifest and glorious resurrection. II. The heart of
the earth may as well signify the grave as the center of the earth. For thus
Tyrus bordering upon the sea, is said to be in the heart of the sea. Ezech.
27.4. In cord marium.
III. This exposition takes it for granted that hell is seated in the midst
of the earth: whereas the scriptures reveal unto us no more but this, that
hell is in the lower parts: but where these lower parts should be, no man is
able to define.

Object. II. Act. 2.37. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou
suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Answer. These words cannot prove any
local descent of Christ's soul. For Peter's drift in alleging of them is, to
prove the resurrection, and he says expressly, that the words must be
understood of the resurrection of Christ, verse. 31. He seeing this before
spoke of the resurrection of Christ. What? namely these words, his soul was
not left in hell, etc. Now there is no resurrection of the soul, but of the
body only, as the soul can not be said to fall, but the body. It will be
replied that the word (...) cannot signify the body, and the word (...) the
grave. Ans. The first word signifies not only the spiritual part of a man,
the soul; but also the whole person, or the man himself, Romans 13.1. 1. Cor.
15.41. And the second is as well taken for the grave, as for hell. Apoc. 20. 14.
Death and (...) are cast into the lake of fire. Now we can not say, that hell
is cast into hell, but the grave into hell. And the very same word in this
text, must needs have this sense. For Peter makes an opposition between the
grave into which David is shut up, and the hell out of which Christ was
delivered, verse. 29.31. Again it will be said, that in this text there be two
distinct parts: the first of the souls coming forth of hell, in these
words, Bellar. quest. de descen.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell. The second, of the bodies rising out of
the grave, in the next words: neither will thou suffer my flesh to see
corruption. Ans. It is not so. For flesh in this place signifies not the body
alone, but the humane nature of Christ, as appears verse. 30. unless we shall
say that one and the same word in the same sentence is taken two ways. And the
words rather carry this sense: Thou will not suffer me to continue long in the
grave; nay which is more, in the time of my continuance there, thou will not
suffer me so much as to feel any corruption; because I am thy holy one.

Object. III. 1. Pet. 3.19. Christ was quickened in spirit, by the which spirit
he went and preached to the spirits which are in prison. Answer. The place is
not for this purpose. For by spirit is not meant the soul of Christ, but his
godhead, which in the ministry of Noe preached repentance to the old world.
And I think that Peter in this place alludes to another place in Genesis 6.3.
where the Lord says, My spirit shall not always strive with man, because he
is but flesh. And if the spirit do signify the soul, then Christ was
quickened either by his soul or in his soul. But neither is true. For the
first, it can not be said, that Christ was quickened by his soul, because it
did not join it self to the body: but the godhead joined them both. Neither
was he quickened in soul: for his soul died not. It could not die the first
death, which belongs to the body: and it did not die the second death, which
is a total separation from God: only it suffered the sorrows of the second
death, which is the apprehension of the wrath of God; as a man may feel the
pangs of the first death, and yet not die the first death, but live. Again, it
is to no end that Christ's soul should go to hell to preach, considering that
it was never heard of that one soul should preach to another, especially in
hell, where all are condemned, and in conscience convicted of their just
damnation, and where there is no hope of repentance or redemption. It will be
answered, that this preaching is only real or experimental, because Christ
shows himself there to convince the unbelief of his enemies: but this is
flat against reason. For when a man is justly condemned by God, and therefore
sufficiently convicted: After just ex^cution convictio^ is needelesse.
what need the judge himself come to the place of execution to convict him.
And it is flat against the text. For the preaching that is spoken of here, is
that which is performed by men in the ministry of the word, as Peter expounds
himself, 1. Pet. 4.6. To this purpose was the Gospel also preached unto the
dead, that they might be condemned according to men in the flesh, that they
might live according to God in the spirit. Lastly, there is no reason why
Christ should rather preach and show himself in hell, to them that were
disobedient in the days of Noe, then to the rest of the damned.

And this is the first exposition, the second follows. He descended into hell,
that is, Christ descended into the grave, or was buried. This exposition is
agreeable to the truth, yet is it not meet or convenient. For the clause next
before, he was buried, contained this point: and therefore if the next words
following yield the same sense, there must be a vain and needless repetition
of one and the same thing twice, which is not in any wise to be allowed in so
short a Creed as this. If it be said that these words are an exposition of the
former, the answer is, that then they should be more plain then the former.
For when one sentence expounds an other, the latter must always be the
plainer: but of these two sentences, He was buried, he descended into hell, the
first is very plain and easy, but the latter very obscure and hard, and
therefore it can be no exposition thereof: and for this cause this exposition
neither is to be received.

Thirdly, others there be which expound it thus, He descended into hell, that
is, Christ Jesus, when he was dying upon the cross, felt and suffered the
pangs of hell and the full wrath of God seazing upon his soul. This exposition
has his warrant in Gods word, where hell often signifies the sorrows and
pains of hell, as Hanna in her song unto the Lord says, 1. Sam. 2.6
The Lord kills and makes alive, he brings down to hell and raises up,
that is, he makes men feel woe and misery in their souls, even the pangs of
hell, and after restores them. And David says, Psalm. 18.5
The sorrows of death compassed me, and the terrors of hell laid hold on me.
This is an usual exposition received of the Church, and they which expound
this article thus, gives this reason thereof: The former words, was crucified,
dead, and buried, do contain (say they) the outward sufferings of Christ: now
because he suffered not only outwardly in body, but also inwardly in soul,
therefore these words, he descended into hell, do set forth unto us his inward
sufferings in soul, when he felt upon the cross the full wrath of God upon
him. This exposition is good and true, and whosoever will may receive it. Yet
nevertheless it seems not so fitly to agree with the order of the former
articles. For these words, was crucified, dead, and buried, must not be
understood of any ordinary death, but of a cursed death in which Christ
suffered the full wrath of God, even the pangs of hell both in soul and body:
seeing then this exposition is contained in the former words, it cannot fitly
stand with the order of this short Creed, unless there should be a distinct
article of things repeated before.

But let us come to the fourth exposition, He descended into hell, that is,
when he was dead and buried, he was held captive in the grave, and lay in
bondage under death for the space of three days. This exposition also may be
gathered forth of the Scriptures. Saint Peter faith, Act. ^.^4.
God has raised him up, (speaking of Christ) and loosed the sorrows of death,
because it was impossible that he should be holden of it. Where we may see,
that between the death and resurrection of Christ, there is placed a third
matter, which is not mentioned in any clause of the Apostles Creed, save in
this; and that is his bondage under death, which comes in between his death
and rising again. And the words themselves do most fitly bear this sense, as
the speech of Jacob shows, Genesis ^^.53.
I will go down into o^^h^ grave.
hell unto my son mourning. And this exposition does also best agree with the
order of the Creed; first he was crucified and died, secondly he was buried,
thirdly laid in the grave, and was therein held in captivity and bondage under
death. And these three degrees of Christ's humiliatio^, are most fitly
correspondent to the three degrees of his exaltation. The first degree of
exaltation, he rose again the third day, answering to the first degree of his
humiliation, he died: the second degree of his exaltation, he ascended into
heaven, answering to his going down into the grave, was buried: and thirdly
his sitting at the right hand of God (which is the highest degree of his
exaltation) answering to the lowest degree of his humiliation, he descended
into hell. These two last expositions are commonly received, and we may
indifferently make choice of either: but the last (as I take it) is most
agreeable to the order and words of the Creed.

Thus much for the meaning of the words. Now follow the uses. And first of
all Christ's descending into hell, teaches every one of us that profess the
name of Christ, that, if it shall please God to afflict us, either in body or
in mind, or in both, though it be in most grievous and tedious manner, yet must
we not think it strange. For if Christ upon the cross not only suffered the
pangs of hell, but after he was dead, death takes him, and as it were carries
him into his den, or cabbin^ and there triumphs over him, holding him in
captivity and bondage, and yet for all this was he the son of God: and
therefore when Gods hand is heavy upon us any way, we are not to despair, but
rather think it is the good pleasure of God to frame and fashion us, that we
may become like unto Christ Jesus as good children of God. David a man after
Gods own heart was by Samuel anointed King over Israel, but withal God
raised up Saul to persecute him, as the fowler hunteth the partridge in the
mountain, in so much that David said, there was but one step between him and
death. So likewise Job a just man and one that feared God with all his heart,
Io^^. 5^9.
yet how heavily did God lay his hand upon him: his goods and cattle were all
taken away, and his children slain, and his body stri^k^n by Satan with
loathsome byles from the sole of his foot unto the crown^ of his head: so as
he was feign to take a potsheard and scrape himself sitting among the ashes.
And Jonah the servant and Prophet of the most high God, when he was called to
preach to Niniuie, because he refused for fear of that great city, God met
with him, and he must be cast into the sea, and there be swallowed up of a
Whale, that so he might chastise him: and thus does he deal with his own
servants, to make them conformable to Christ. And further, when it pleases God
to lay his hand upon our souls, and make us have a troubled and distressed
conscience, so as we do as it were struggle with gods wrath as for life and
death, and can find nothing but his indignation seazing upon our souls, which
is the most grievous and perplexed estate that any man can be in: in this case
howesoeuer we cannot discern or see any hope or comfort in our selves, we
must not think it strange, nor quite despair of his mercy. For the son of
God himself descended into hell, and death carried him captive, and triumphed
over him in the grave: and therefore though God seem to be our utter enemy,
yet we must not despair of his help. Psalm. 32.3.
In diverse Psalms we read how David was not only persecuted outwardly of his
enemies, but even his soul and conscience were perplexed for his sins, so as
his very bones were consumed within him, and his moisture was turned into the
drought in summer. Job. ^.4.
This caused Job to cry out that the arrows of God were within him, and the
venyme thereof did drink up his spirit, the terrors of God did fight against
him, and the grief of his soul was as weighty as the sand of the sea, by
reason whereof he says, that the Lord did make him a mark and a but to shoot
at: and therefore when God shall thus afflict us, either in body or in soul,
or in both, and 16.9.1^.
we must not always think that it is the wrathful hand of the Lord that
begins to bring us to utter condemnation for our sins, but rather his
fatherly work to kill sin in us, and to make us grow in humility, that so
we may become like unto Christ Jesus. Secondly, whereas Christ for our sakes
was thus abased even unto the lowest degree of humiliation that can be, it is
an example for us to imitate, as Christ himself prescribes: Mat. 11.29^
Learn of me that I am meek and lowely. And that we may the better do this,
we must learn to become nothing in our selves, that we may be al in all forth
of our selves in Christ: we must loath and think as basely of our selves as
possibly may be in regard of our sins. Christ Jesus upon the cross was
content for our sakes, to become a worm and no man, as David says, Psalm. 22.6.
which did chiefly appear in this lowest degree of his humiliation, when as
death did as it were tread on him in his den; and the same mind must likewise
be in us which was in him. The liking that we have of our selves must be mere
nothing, but all our love and liking must be forth of our selves in the death
and blood of Christ.

And thus much of this clause, as also of the state of Christ's humiliation.
Now follows his second estate, which is his exaltation into glory, set
down t^ these words, The third day he arose again from the dead, etc. And
of it we are first to speak in general, then in particular according to the
several degrees thereof. In general, the exaltation of Christ is, that
glorious or happy estate, into which Christ entered after he had wrought the
work of our redemption upon the cross. And he was exalted according to both
natures, in regard of his godhead, and also of his manhood. The exaltation of
the godhead of Christ, was the manifestation of the glory of his godhead in
the manhood. Some will peradventure demand, how Christ's godhead can be
exalted, seeing it admits no alteration at all. Answer. In it self it cannot
be exalted, yet being considered as it is joined with the manhood into one
person, in this respect it may be said to be exalted: and therefore I say,
the exaltation of Christ's godhead is the manifestation of the glory thereof in
the manhood. For though Christ from his incarnation was both God and man, and
his godhead all that time dwelt in his manhood; yet from his birth unto his
death, the same godhead did little show it self, and in the time of his
suffering did as it were lie hid under the veil of his flesh as the soul
does in the body, when a man is sleeping, that thereby in his humane nature he
might suffer the curse of the law, and accomplish the work of redemption for
us, in the love and base estate of a servant. But after this work was
finished, he began by degrees to make manifest the power of his Godhead in his
manhood. And in this respect his godhead may be said to be exalted. The
exaltation of Christ's humanity stood in two things. The first, that he laid
down all the infirmities of man's nature, which he carried about him so long as
he was in the state of a servant, in that he ceased to be weary, hungry,
thirsty, etc. Here it may be demanded, whether the wounds and skars remain in
the body of Christ now after it is glorified. Olev lib. de subst f^^d. and
(...).
Ans. Some think that they do remain as testimonies of that victory which
Christ obtained of his and our enemies, and that they are no deformity to the
glorious body of the Lord, but are themselves also in him in some unspeakable
manner glorified. But indeed it rather seems to be a truth, to say that they
are quite abolished; because they were a part of that ignominious and base
estate in which our Savior was upon the cross: which after his entrance into
glory he laid aside. And if it may be thought that the wounds in the hands
and feet of Christ remain to be seen, even to the last judgment, why may
we not in the same manner think that the veins of his body remain emptied
of their blood, because it was shed upon the cross.

The second thing required in the exaltation of Christ's manhood is, that both
his body and soul were beutified and adorned with all qualities of glory.
His mind was enriched with as much knowledge and understanding as can possibly
befall any creature, and more in measure then all men and angels have: and the
same is to be said of the graces of the spirit in his will and affections: his
body also was incorruptible, and it was made a shining body, a resemblance
whereof some of his disciples saw in the mount: and it was endued with
agilitie, to move as well upward as downeward^ as may appear by the ascension
of his body into heaven, which was not caused by constraint or by any violent
motion, but by a property agreeing to all bodies glorified. Yet in the
exaltation of Christ's manhood we must remember two caueats: first, that he did
never lay aside the essential properties of a true body: as length, breadth,
thicknes, visibilitie, locallitie which is to be in one place at once and no
more, but keeps all these still, because they serve for the being of his
body. Secondly, we must remember that the gifts of glory in Christ's body are
not infinite but finite: for his humane nature being but a creature, and
therefore finite, could not receive infinite graces and gifts of glory And
hence it is more then manifest that the opinion of those men is false, which
hold that Christ's body glorified, is omnipotent and infinite, every way able to
do whatsoever he will: for this is to make a creature to be the Creator.

Thus much of Christ's exaltation in general. Now let us come to the degrees
thereof, as they are noted in the Creed, which are in number three: I. He rose
again the third day: II. He ascended into heaven: III. He sits at the right
hand of God the father almighty. In the handling of Christ's resurrection we
must consider these points: I. why Christ ought to rise again: II. the manner
of his rising: III. the time when he rose: IV. the place where: V. the uses
thereof. For the first, it was necessary that Christ should rise again, and
that for three especial causes. First, that hereby he might show to all the
people of God that he had fully overcome death. For, else, if Christ had not
risen, how should we have been persuaded in our consciences, that he had made
a full and perfect satisfaction for us: nay rather we should have reasoned thus:
Christ is not risen, and therefore he has not overcome death, but death has
overcome him. Secondly, Christ which died, was the son of God; therefore the
author of life it self: and for this cause it was neither meet nor possible
for him to be holden of death, but he must needs rise from death to life.
Thirdly, Christ's priesthood has two parts: one, to make satisfaction for sin
by his one only sacrifice upon the cross: the other, to apply the virtue of
this sacrifice unto every believer. Now he offered the sacrifice for sin upon
the cross, before the last pang of his death, and in dying satisfied the
justice of God: and therefore being dead must needs rise again to perform
the second part of his priesthood, namely to apply the virtue thereof unto all
that shall truly believe in him, and to make intercession in heaven unto his
father for us here on earth. And thus much of the first point.

Now to come to the manner of Christ's resurrection, five things are to be
considered in it. The first, that Christ rose again not as every private man
does, but as a public person representing all men that are to come to life
eternal. For as in his passion, so also in his resurrection, he stood in our
room and place: ^ph. 2.6.
and therefore when he rose from death, we al, yea the whole Church rose in him,
and together with him. And this point not considered, we do not conceive
aright of Christ's resurrection, neither can we reap sound comfort by it.

The second is that Christ himself and no other for him, did by his own power
raise himself to life. This was the thing which he meant, when he said,
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will build it up again: Ioh. 10.1^.
and more plainly, I have (says he) power to lay down my life, and I have
power to take it again. From whence we learn diverse instructions. First,
whereas Christ raises himself from death to life, it serves to prove that
he was not only man, but also true God. For the body being dead, could not
bring again the soul and join it self unto the same, and make it self
alive again; neither yet the soul that is departed from the body, can
return again and quicken the body: and therefore there was some other nature
in Christ, namely his godhead, which did reunite soul and body together, and
there^y quicken the manhood. Secondly, if Christ give life to himself being
dead in the grave then much more now being alive and in heaven glorified, is
he able to raise up his members from death to life. We are all by nature even
stark dead in sin, as the dead body rotten in the grave: and therefore our
duty is, to come to Christ our Lord by humble prayer, earnestly entreating him
that he would raise us up every day more and more from the grave of our sins
to newness of life. He can of men dead in their sins, make us alive unto
himself to live in righteousness and true holiness all the days of our life.

The third thing is, that Christ rose again with an earthquake. And this
serves to prove that he lost nothing of his power by death, but still
remained the absolute Lord and King of heaven and earth, to whom therefore the
earth under his feet trembling does him homage. This also proves unto us
that Christ which lay dead in the grave did raise himself again by his own
almighty power. Lastly it serves to convince the keepers of the grave, the
women which came to embalme him, and the disciples which came to the sepulcher,
and would not yet believe that he was risen again. But how came this
earthquake? Ans. Saint Matthew says, there was a great earthquake. Math. 28.2.
For the Angel of the Lord descended from heaven, etc. This shows that the
power of angels is great, in that they can move and stir the earth. Three
angels destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha. Genesis 19.1,13. Ezech. 12.29. 2. King. 19.35.
An angel destroyed the first borne of Egypt in one night. In the host of
Senacherib one angel slew in one night an hundredth fourscore and five thousand
men. Of like power is the devil himself to shake the earth, and to destroy us
all, but that God of his goodness limits and restraines him of his liberty.
Well, if one angel be able to shake the earth, what then will Christ himself
do when he shall come to judgment the second time, with many thousand
thousands of angels? oh how terrible and fearful will his coming be! Not
without cause, says the holy Ghost, that the wicked at that day shall cry
out, wishing the hills to fall upon them, and the mountains to cover them for
fear of that great and terrible day of the Lord.

The fourth thing is, that an Angel ministered to Christ, being to rise again,
in that he came to the grave and rolled away the stone, and sat upon it. Where
observe, first how the angels of God minister unto Christ, though dead and
buried; whereby they acknowledge that his power, majesty, and authority is
not included within the bonds of the earth, but extends it self even to the
heavens themselves and the hosts thereof, and that according to his humanity.
Wicked men for their parts labored to close him up in the earth, as the basest
of all creatures: but the angels of heaven most readily accept him as their
sovereign Lord and king: Math. 4.1^.
as in like manner they did in his temptation in the wilderness, and in his
agony in the garden. Secondly, that the opinion of the Papists and others,
which think that the body of Christ went through the graue-stone when he rose
again, is without warrant. For the end, no doubt, why the angel rolled away
the stone was, that Christ might come forth. And indeed it is against the order
of nature that one body should pass through another, without corruption or
alteration of either; considering that every body occupies a place, and two
bodies at the same instant can not be in one proper place.

Furthermore it is said, that when the angel sat on the stone, his
countenance was like lightening, and his raiment as white as snow: and this
served to show what was the glory of Christ himself. For if the servant and
minister be so glorious, then endless is the glory of the lord and master
himself. Lastly it is said, that for fear of the angel, the watchmen were
astonished, and became as dead men: which teaches us, that, what God would have
come to pass, all the world can never hinder. For though the Jews had closed
up the grave with a stone, and set a band of soldiers to watch, least Christ
should by any means be taken away, yet all this avails nothing: by an angel
from heaven the seal is broken, the stone is removed, and the watchmen at
their wits ends. And this came to pass by the providence of God; that after
the watchmen had testified these things to the Jews, they might at length be
convicted that Christ, whom they crucified, was the Messiah.

The fifth and last point is, that Christ rose not alone, but accompanied with
others: as S. Matthew says, Math 27.32.
that the graves opened, and many bodies of the Saints which slept arose, and
came out of the graves, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many
after Christ's resurrection. And this came to pass that the church of God might
know and consider that there is a reviving and quickening virtue in the
resurrection of Christ, whereby he is able not only to raise our dead bodies
unto life, but also when we are dead in sin, to raise us up to newness of
life. And in this very point stands a maine difference between the
resurrection of Christ, and the resurrection of any other man. For the
resurrection of Peter nothing auailes to the raising of David or Paul: but
Christ's resurrection auailes for all that have believed in him: by the very
same power whereby he raised himself, he raises all his members: and therefore
he is called a quickening spirit. And let us mark the order observed in rising.
First Christ rises, and the^ the Saints after him. And this came to pass to
verefie the Scripture, which says that Christ is the first borne of the dead.
Col. 1.28.
Now he is the first borne of the dead^ in that he has this dignity and
privilege to rise to eternal life the first of all men. It is true indeed
that Lazarus and sundry others in time rose before Christ: but yet they rose
to live a mortal life, and to die again: Christ he is the first of all that
rose to life everlasting and to glory: never any rose before Christ in this
manner. And the persons that rose with Christ are to be noted, they were the
Saints of God, not wicked men: whereby we are put in mind that the elect
children of God only are partakers of Christ's resurrection. Indeed both good
and bad rise again, but there is a great difference in their rising: for the
godly rise by the virtue of Christ's resurrection, and that to eternal glory:
but the ungodly rise by the virtue of Christ, not as he is a redeemer, but as
he is a terrible judge, and is to execute justice on them. And they rise again
for this end, that besides the first death of the body, they might suffer the
second death, which is the pouring forth of the wrath of god upon body and
soul eternally. This difference is proved unto us by that which Paul says,
2. Cor. 5.^^.
Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep. Among the Jews such as had
corn fields gathered some little quantity thereof, before they reaped the
rest; and offered the same unto God, signifying thereby that they acknowledged
him to be the author and giver of all increase: and this offering was also an
assurance unto the owner, of the blessing of God upon the rest, and this being
but one handful did sanctify the whole crop. Now Christ to the dead is as the
first fruits to the rest of the corn, because his resurrection is a pledge and
an assurance of the resurrection of all the faithful. When a man is cast into
the sea, and all his body is under the water, there is nothing to be looked
for but present death; but if he carry his head above the water, there is good
hope of a recovery: Christ himself is risen as a pledge that all the just
shall rise again: he is the head unto his Church, and therefore all his
members must needs follow in their time. It may be demanded what became of
the Saints that rose again after Christ's resurrection. Answ. Some think they
died again, but seeing they rose for this end to manifest the quickening
virtue of Christ's resurrection, it is as like, that they were also glorified
with Christ, and ascended with him to heaven.

Thus much of the manner of Christ's resurrection. Now follows the time when he
rose again, and that is specified in the Creed, The third day he rose again.
Thus says our Savior Christ unto the Pharisees, Math. 12 30.
As Jonas was three days and three nights in the whales belly: so shall the
son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. And
though Christ was but one day and two pieces of two days in the grave; His
abode in the grave was about 38. hours.
(for he was buried in the evening before the Sabbath, and rose in the morning
the next day after the Sabbath) yet is this sufficient to verify this saying
of Christ. For if the analogy had stood in three whole days, then Christ
should have risen the fourth day. And it was the pleasure of God that he should
lie thus long in the grave, that in might be known that he was thoroughly dead:
and he continued no longer, that he might not in his body see corruption.
Again, it is said, Christ rose again in the end of the Sabbath, Math. 28.1.
when the first day of the week began to dawne. And this very time must be
considered, as the real beginning of the new spiritual world, in which we are
made the sons of God. And as in the first day of the first world, light was
commanded to shine out of darkness upon the deepes: so in the first day of this
new world, the son of righteousness rises and gives light to them that sit in
darkness, and dispells the darkness that was under the old Testament. And here
let us mark the reason why the Sabbath day was changed. For the first day of
the week, which was the day following the Jews sabbath, is our sabbath day,
which day we keep holy in memory of the glorious resurrection of Christ:
Apoc. 1.10.
and therefore it is called the Lords day. And it may not unfitly be termed
Hierome.
Sunday, though the name came first from the heathen, because on this day the
blessed son of righteousness rose from death to life.

Let us now in the next place proceed to the proofs of Christ's resurrection,
which are diligently to be observed, because it is one of the most principal
points of our religion. For as the Apostle says, Romans 4.25.
He died for our sins, and rose again for our justification: and again, 1.
Cor. 15.14.
If Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and our faith is also
vain. The proofs are of two sorts: first, Christ's appearances unto men:
secondly, the testimonies of men. Christ's appearances were either on the first
day, or on the days following. The appearances of Christ the same day he rose
again are five. And first of all early in the morning he appeared to Marie
Magdalen. (...) ^.16.9.
In this appearance diverse things are to be considered. The first, of what note
and quality the party was, to whom Christ appeared. Ans. Marie Magdalen was
one that had bin possessed with seven devils, but was delivered and became a
repentant sinner, and stood by, when Christ suffered; and came with sweet
odours when he was dead to embalme him. And therefore to her is granted this
prerogative, that she should be the first that should testify his resurrection
unto men. And hence we learn, that Christ is ready and willing to receive
most miserable wretched sinners, even such as have bin vassals and bondslaues
of the devil, if they will come to him. Any man would think it a fearful
case, to be thus possessed with devils, as Marie was: but let all those that
live in ignorance, and by reason thereof live in sin without repentance, know
this; that their case is a thousand times worse then Marie Magdalens was. For
what is an impenitent sinner? Surely nothing else but the castle and hold of the
devil, both in body and soul. For look as a captain that has taken some
hold or skonse, does rule and govern all therein, and disposes it at his will
and pleasure: even so it is with all blind and impenitent sinners; not one
devil alone, but even legions of devils possess them, and rule their hearts:
and therefore howsoever they may soothe themselves and say, all is well, for
God is merciful; yet their case is far worse then Mary's was. Now then,
would any be freed from this fearful bondage? let them learn of Marie
Magdalen to follow Christ, and to seek unto him, and then albeit the devil and
al his angels possess their hearts, yet Christ being the strong man, will
come and cast them all out, and dwell there himself.

The second is, what Christ in his appearance said to Marie. Ans. He said,
Touch me not: for I am not yet ascended to my father. Marie no doubt was glad
to see Christ, and therefore looked to have conuersed as familiarly with him as
she was wont before his death, but he forbids her to touch him, that is, not
to look to enjoy his corporal presence as before, but rather to seek for his
spiritual presence by faith, considering he was shortly to ascend to his
father. For this cause when he appeared to his disciples, he stayed not long
with them at any time, but only to manifest himself unto them, thereby to
prove the certentie of his resurrection. This prohibition shows first of all
that it is but a fond thing to delight in the outward picture and portraiture
of Christ, as the Jesuits do, who stand much upon his outward form and
lineaments. Secondly, it overthrows the popish crucifixes, and all the carved
and molten images of Christ, wherein the Papists worship him. For corporal
presence is not now required: therefore spiritual worship only must be given
unto him. Thirdly it overthrows the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament.
Many are of mind that they can not receive Christ, except they eat and drink
his body and blood corporally: but it is not much material whether we touch
him with the bodily hand or no, so be it we apprehend him spiritually by faith.
Lastly, as we must not have earthly considerations of Christ; so must we on the
contrary labor for the spiritual hand of faith, which may reach up it self
to heaven, and there lay hold on him. This is the very thing which Christ
insinuates unto Marie in saying, Touch me not. And Saint Paul says, 2. Cor.
5.19.
Henceforth know we no man after the flesh, yea though we had known Christ
after the flesh, yet now know we him no more, that is, we know him no more as a
man living among us, and therefore he adds, If any man be in Christ, he is a
new creature: and this new creation is not by the bodily presence of Christ but
by the apprehension of faith.

Math. 2^.9.
The second appearance was to Marie Magdalen and to the other Marie, as they
were going from the grave to tell his disciples: at which time, Christ meets
them, and bids them go tell his brethren that he is risen again. And whereas
Christ sends women to his disciples, he purposed hereby to check them for
their unbelief. For these women forsook him not at his death, but stood by
and saw him suffer, and when he was buried they came to embalme him: but all
this while what became of Christ's disciples? Surely Peter denied him, and all
the rest fled away, even James and John the sons of thunder, save that John
stood aloof to behold his death. Hereupon Christ to make them ashamed of their
fault, sends these women unto them to publish that to them which they by
their calling ought above all other to have published. Secondly this teaches,
that whereas Christ builds his kingdom and publishes his Gospel by
Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, teachers, he can if it so please him, perform
the same by other means. In this his second appearance, he used weak and
silly women to publish his resurrection, and thereby shows that he is not
bound to the ordinary means, which now he uses. Thirdly, he sent them to his
disciples, to show, that howsoever they had dealt unfaithfully with him by
forsaking him and denying him, yet he had not quite forsaken them, but if they
would repent and believe, he would receive them into his love and favor
again, and therefore calls them his brethren, saying, Go and tell my
brethren. This teaches us a good lesson, that howsoever our sins past are to
humble us in regard of our selves, yet must they not cut us off or dismay us
from seeking to Christ; yea even then when we are laden with the burden of
them, we must come unto him, and he will ease us. Fourthly whereas silly women
are sent to teach Christ's disciples, Mark. 16.7.
which were scholars brought up in his own school, we are admonished, that
superiority in place and calling, must not hinder us sometime to hear and to
be taught of our inferiors. Job says, he never refused the counsel of his
servant: and Naaman the Syrian obeyed the counsel of a silly maid which
advised him to go to the Prophet of the Lord in Samaria to be cured of his
leprosy: 2. King. 5.13.
and when he had bin with the Prophet, he obeyed the counsel of his servant,
that persuaded him to do all the Prophet has said, Wash and be clean.

Now after that the women are come to the disciples and make relation of
Christ's resurrection, the text says, Their words seemed as fained things unto
them, neither believed they them. Luke 24.11.
Hence we learn two things: the first, that men of themselves can not believe
the doctrine of Christian religion: it is a hard matter for a man to believe
sundry things in the work of creation. The temporal deliverance of the
children of Israel seemed to them as a dream: and the resurrection of Christ
even to Christ's own disciples seemed a feigned thing. The second, that it is
an hard thing truly and unfeignedly to believe the points of religion. Disciples
brought up in the school of Christ, and often catechized in this very point of
Christ's resurrection, yet dull are they to believe it. This confuteth and
condemns our carnal gospellers, that make it the lightest and easiest thing
that can be to believe in Christ: and therefore they say their faith is so
strong, that they would not for all the world doubt of gods mercy: whereas
indeed they are deceived and have no faith at all, but blind presumption.

The third appearance was on this manner. Luke 23.13.
As two of Christ's disciples were going from Jerusalem to Emmaus about
threescore furlongs, and talked together of all the things that were done,
Jesus drew near and talked with them, but their eyes were holden that they
could not know him: and as they went he communed with them; and proved out of
the Scripture his resurrection, expounding unto them all things that were
written of him: then they made him stay with them, and their eyes were opened,
and they knew him by breaking of bread; but he was taken out of their sight. In
this notable appearance we may observe these four points. The first, that
Christ held their eyes that they could not know him: they saw a man indeed, but
who he was, they could not tell. By this it is more the^ manifest, that the use
of our outward senses, as seeing, feeling, smelling, etc. is supplied unto us
continually by the power of Christ; and therefore even in these things we must
acknowledge the continual goodness of God. Now if one man can not so much as
discern another but by the blessing of Christ, then shall we never be able to
discern the way of life from the way of death without him: and therefore we
must pray unto God that he would give us his holy spirit to inlighten the eyes
of our understanding, whereby we may be able to see and know the way that
leads unto life, and also to walk in the same.

The second, that as Christ was in expounding the Scriptures unto them their
hearts burned within them. By this we learn, that howsoever the ministers of
God publish the Gospel to the outward ears of men; yet is it the proper work
of Christ alone to touch and inflame the heart by the fire of his holy spirit,
Luke 3 15.
and to quicken and raise men up to the life of righteousness and true holiness:
it is he only that baptizeth with the holy Ghost and with fire. And it further
admonishes us, that we should hear the word preached from the mouth of Gods
ministers with burning and melting hearts: but, alas, the ordinary practice is
flat contrary; men's eyes are drousie and heavy, and their hearts dead and
frozen within them: and that is the cause why after much teaching there
follows but little profit.

The third thing is, that Christ did eat with the two disciples and was known
of them in breaking of bread. It is very like that our Savior Christ did in
some special manner bless the bread which he brake, whereby his disciples
discerned him from others. And in like manner we must by blessing our meats and
drinks distinguish our selves, though not from such as are the servants of
God, yet from all ungodly and careless men. Many being silent themselves do
make their children to give thanks, and to bless their meats. And indeed it
is a commendable thing if it be done sometimes to nurture the child, but for
men to disburden themselves wholly of this duty is a fault. And it is a shame
that, that mouth which opens it self to receive the good creatures of God,
should never open it self to bless and praise God for the same. Therefore in
this action of eating and drinking, let us show our selves followers of Christ,
that as by blessing the same he was known from all other; so we may also
hereby distinguish our selves from the profane and wicked of this world.
Otherwise what difference shall there be between us and the very hog that
eats mast on the ground, but never looks up to the tree from whence it falls.
And as Christ revealed himself unto his disciples, at that time when they
caused him to eat meat with them; so let us suffer Christ to be our guest,
and let us entertain him in his members, and no doubt he will bless us, and
withal reveal himself unto us. The fourth thing is, that having eaten, he is
taken out of their sight. And this came to pass not because the body of
Christ bec^me spiritual, but because either he held their eyes as before, or
he departed with celeritie and speed according to the properties of a body
glorified.

The fourth appearance of Christ was to Peter alone, mentioned only by S.
Paul, 1. Cor. 15.5.
He was seen of Cephas.

The fifth appearance was to all the disciples together save Thomas. In it we
must consider three things, Ioh. 20.19.
which are all effectual arguments to prove Christ's resurrection. The first,
that he came and stood in the midst among them, the doors being shut. Now it
may be demanded, how this could be. Ans. The Papists say, his body was
glorified and so passed through the door, but (as I have said) it is against
the nature of a body, that one should pass through an other, as heat does
through a piece of iron, both bodies remaining entire and sound: therefore we
may rather think, that whereas Christ came in, when the doors were shut; it was
either, because by his mighty power he caused the doors to give place, the
disciples not knowing how: or else because he altered the very substance of the
doors, that his body might pass through, as he thickened the waters to carry
his body when he walked upon the sea. Now if this be true, as very like it is,
that these dumb creatures gave place to Christ, and became pliable unto his
commandment, then much more ought we to carry our hearts conformable and
pliant to the will of our Lord Jesus in all his commandments. The second point
is, that when as the disciples thought Christ to have been a spirit, he to
prove the truth of his manhood, shows unto them his hands and his feet, and
the wound in his side, and calls for meat, and eats it among them. But it may
be asked how this could be, considering that a glorified body has no blemish,
and needs not to eat, but is supported by God without meat: for if this be
true in our bodies when they shall be glorified, then much more was it true in
Christ. Ans. True it is, a glorified body has no blemishes; but our Savior
Christ had not yet entered into the fullness of his glory. If he had been
fully glorified, he could not so sensibly and plainly have made manifest the
truth of his resurrection unto his disciples: and therefore for their sakes and
ours he is content after his entrance into glory still to retain in his body
some remnants of the ignominies and blemishes, which if it had pleased him, he
might have laid aside; he is also content to eat, not for need, but to prove
that his body was not a body in show but a true body. This teaches us two
lessons: I. if Christ for our good and comfort be content to retain these
ignominious blemishes, then answerably every one of us must as good followers
of Christ refer the works of our callings to the good of others, as Paul
says, ^. Cor. 9.19.
He was free from all men, yet he was content to become all things unto all
men, that by all means he might win the more. Secondly we learn, that for
the good of our neighbor, and for the maintaining of love and charity, we
must be content to yield from our own right, as in this place our Savior
Christ yeeldes of his own glory for the good of his Church.

The third point is, that he then gave the disciples their Apostolical
commissions, saying, Go and teach all the nations: of which, three points are
to be considered: the first, to whom it is given. Answer. To them all, as
well to one as to another, and not to Peter only. And this overthrows the
fond and forged opinions of the Papists concerning Peter's supremacy. If his
calling had been above the rest, then he should have had a special commission
above the rest: but one and the same commission is given alike to all. The
second, that with the commission he gives his spirit; for whom he appoints
to publish his will and word, them he furnishes with sufficient gifts of his
holy spirit to discharge that great function: and therefore it is a defect,
that any are set apart to be ministers of the gospel of Christ, which have not
received the spirit of knowledge, the spirit of wisdom, and the spirit of
prophecy in some measure. The third point is, that in conferring of his spirit
he uses an outward sign, for the text says, He breathed on them, and said,
receive the Holy Ghost. The reasons hereof may be these. First when God created
Adam and put into him a living soul, it is said, he breathed in his face. And
so our Savior Christ in giving unto his disciples the holy Ghost, does the
same, to show unto them, that the same person that gives life, gives grace;
and also to signify unto them, that being to send them over all the world to
preach his Gospel, he was as it were to make a second creation of man, by
renewing the image of God in him which he had lost by the fall of Adam. Again
he breathed on them in giving his spirit, to put them in mind that their
preaching of the gospel could not be effectual in the hearts of their hearers,
before the Lord does breath into them his spirit, and thereby draw them to
believe: and therefore the spouse of Christ desires the Lord to send forth his
north and south wind to blow on her garden, that the spices thereof may flow
out. Cant 4.16.
This garden is the church of God, which desires Christ to comfort her, and to
pour out the graces of his spirit on her, that the people of God which are the
herbs and trees of righteousness, may bring forth sweet spices whose fruit
may be for meat and their leaves for medicines.

Thus much for the five appearances of Christ the same day he rose again: Now
follow the rest of his appeara^ces which were in the forty days following,
which are in number six. The first is mentioned by Saint John in these words,
Ioh. 20.16.
Eight days after when the disciples were within, and Thomas with them, came
Jesus when the doors were shut, and stood in the midst of them, and said,
Peace be unto you. In it we must consider two things: I. the occasion thereof.
II. the dealing of Christ. The occasion was this: after Christ had appeared
unto the other disciples in Thomas his absence, they told him that they had
seen the Lord: but he made answer, Except I see in his body the print of
his nails, and put mine hand into his side I will not believe. Now eight
days after, our S^uiour Christ appeared again unto all the disciples,
especially for the curing of Thomas his unbelief, which was no small sin,
considering it contains in it three great sins. The first is blindness of
mind, for he had been a hearer of our Savior Christ a long time, and had
been instructed touching the resurrection diverse times: he was also with
Christ and saw him when he raised Lazarus, and had seen, or at least wise had
heard the miracles which he did: and also he had heard all the disciples say
that had seen the Lord, and yet will it not sink into his head. The second is
deadness of heart. When our Savior Christ went to raise Lazarus that was
dead, Thomas spoke very co^fidently to him and said, I^h. 11.
Let us go, that we may die with him, yet when Christ was crucified he fled
away, and is the longest from Christ after his resurrection, and when he is
certainly told thereof he will not acknowledge it or yield unto it. The third
is wilfulness: for when the disciples told him that they had seen the Lord,
he said slatly, that unless he saw in his hands the print of the nails, he
would not believe, and that which is worse then all this, he continued eight
days in this wilful mind. Now in this exceeding measure of unbelief in
Thomas; any man, even he that has the most grace, may see what a mass of
unbelief is in himself, and what wilfulness and untowardness to any good
thing, in so much that we may truly say with David, Psalm. 3.
Lord, what is man, that thou so regardest him. And if such measure of
unbelief was in such men, as the disciples were, then we may assure our
selves, that it does much more exceed in the common professors of religion in
these days, let them protest to the contrary what they will.

Now the cause of his unbelief was this: he makes a law to himself that he
will see and feel or else he will not believe: but this is flat against the
nature of faith which consists neither in seeing nor feeling. Indeed in
things natural a man must first have experience in seeing and feeling, and
then believe: but it is contrary in divinity: a man must first have faith and
believe, and then comes experience afterward. But Thomas having not learned
this, does ouershoot himself: and herein also many deceive themselves, which
think they have no faith because they have no feeling. For the chiefest feeling
that we must have in this life must be the feeling of our sins and the
miseries of this life: and though we have no other feeling at all, yet we
must not therefore cease to believe.

Job. ^0.27.
In Christ's dealing with Thomas we may consider three actions. The first, that
he speaks to Thomas alone, and answers him according to the very words which he
had spoken of him in his absence, and that word for word. And by this he
labored to overthrow his unbelief, and to convince him, that being absent he
knew what he spoke. And by this we learn, that though we want the bodily
presence of Christ he being now in heaven, yet he knows well what we say,
and if need were could repeat all our sayings word by word: and if it were not
so, how could it be true that we must give an account of every idle word. Now
this must teach us to look that our speech be gracious according to the rule
of Gods holy word. Secondly this must make us willing and ready to direct our
prayers to Christ, considering he knows what we pray for, and hears every
word we speak. The second action is, that Christ condescends to Thomas, and
gives him liberty to feel the print of the nails, and to put his finger into
his side. He might have rejected Thomas for his wilfulnes, yet to help his
unbelief, he yields unto his weakness. This shows, that Christ is most
compassionate to all those that unfeignedly repent them of their sins and
cleave unto him, although they do it laden with manifold wants. ^sal. 103.1^^
David says, that the Lord has compassion on all them that fear him, as a
father has compassion on his children: and he adds the reason, For he knows
of what we are made. And the prophet Esaias, Isa. 4.3.
He will not break the bruised reed, and smoking flax he will not quench.
When a child is very sick, in so much that it casts up all the meat which
it takes, the mother will not be offended thereat, but rather pity it. Now
our Savior Christ is ten thousand times more merciful to them that believe in
him, then any mother is or can be. The third action is, that when Thomas had
seen and felt the wounds, Christ revived his faith, whereupon he brake forth
and said, Ioh. 1^ 28.
My Lord, and my God. In which words he does most notably bewail his
blindness and unbelief; and as a fire that has been smothered, so does his
faith burst forth and show it self. And in this example of Thomas we may see
the state of Gods people in this life. First, God gives them faith, yet
afterward for a time he does as it were, hide the same in some corner of their
hearts, so as they have no feeling thereof, but think themselves to be void of
all grace: and this he does for no other end but to humble them: and yet
again after all this, the first grace is further renewed and revived. Thus
dealt the Lord with David and Solomon (for whereas he was a penman of
Scripture, and therefore an holy man of God, we may not think that he was
wholly forsaken) with Peter, and in this place with Thomas. And the experience
of this shall every servant of God find in himself.

The second appearance of Christ was to seven of the disciples as they went on
fishing, Ioh. 1^.
in which he gives three testimonies of his godhead, and that by death his
power was nothing diminished. The first, that when the disciples had fished all
night and caught nothing, afterward by his direction they catch fish in
abundance, and that presently. This teaches us, that Christ is a sovereign
Lord over all creatures, and has the disposing of them in his own hands: and
that if good success follow not when men are painful in their callings, it
is because God will prepare and make them fit for a further blessing. Christ
comes in the morning and gives his disciples a great draught of fish: yet
before this can be, they must labor all night in vain. Joseph must be made
ruler over all Egypt, but first he must be cast into a dungeon where he can see
no sunn nor light, to prepare him to that honor. And David must be King over
Israel, but the Lord will first prepare him hereunto by raising up Saul to
persecute him. Therefore when God s^ndeth any hindrances unto us in our
callings, we must not despair nor be discouraged, for they are the means
whereby God makes us fit to receive greater blessings at his hands either in
this life or in the life to come. The second is, that the net was unbroke
though it had in it great fishes to the number of an hundred fifty three. The
third, that when the disciples came to land, they saw hot coals and fish
laid thereon and bread. Now some may ask, whence was this food? Answ. The
same Lord that was able to provide a Whale to swallowe up Jonas, and so to save
him: and he that was able to provide a fish for Peter's angle with a piece of
twenty pence in the mouth: and to make a little bread and a few fishes to
feed so many thousands in the wilderness: the same also does of himself
provide bread and fishes for his disciples. This teaches us, that not not
only the blessing, but also the very having of meat, drink, apparel is from
Christ: and hereupon all states of men, even the kings of the earth are taught
to pray that God would give them their daily bread. Again, when we sit down
to eat and drink, this must put us in mind that we are the guests of Christ
himself: our food which we have comes of his mere gift; and he it is that
entertaines us, if we could see it. And for this cause we must soberly and
with great reverence in fear and trembling use all gods creatures as in his
presence. And when we eat and drink, we must always look that all our
speech be such as may beseem the guests of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Usually the practice of men is far otherwise; for in feasting many take
liberty to surfeit, and to be drunk, to swear, and to blas^heme: but if we
serve the Lord, let us remember whose guests we are, and who is our
entertainer; and so behave our selves as being in his presence, that all our
actions and words may tend to his glory.

1. Cor. 15.7.
The third appearance was to James, as S. Paul records, although the same be
not mentioned in any of the Evangelists.

Mat 28.16.
The fourth was to all his disciples in a mountain, whither he had appointed
them to come.

(...) 1.12.
The fifth and last appearance was in the mount of Olives, when he ascended into
heaven. Of these three last appearances because the holy Ghost has only
mentioned them, I omit to speak, and with the repeating of them, I let them
pass.

Thus much of the appearances of Christ after his resurrection: the witnesses
thereof are of three sorts: I. angels. II. women that came to the grave to
embaulme him. III. Christ's own disciples who did publish and preach the same,
according as they had seen and heard of our Savior Christ: and of these
likewise I omit to speak, because there is not any special thing mentioned of
them by the Evangelists.

Now follow the uses, which are twofold: some respect Christ, and some respect
our selves. Uses which concern Christ are three: I. whereas Christ Jesus
being stark dead rose again to life by his own power, it serves to prove
unto us that he was the son of God. Thus Paul speaking of Christ says, Romans
1.4.
that he was de^lared mightily to be the son of God touching the spirit of
sanctification by the resurrection from the dead. And by the mouth of David God
said, Psalm. 2.7.
Thou art my son, this day I have begot thee. Which place must be understood
not so much of the eternal generation of Christ before al worlds, as of the
manifestation thereof in time after this manner. This day, that is, at the time
of thine incarn^tion, but especially at the day of thy resurrection, have I
begotten thee, that is, I have made manifest that thou art my son: so is this
place expounded by S. Paul in the Acts. Act. 13.32.33.
Secondly Christ's rising from death by his own po^er, proves unto us evidently
that he is Lord over al things that are: and this use S. Paul makes hereof, for
says he, Ro^. 1^9.
Christ therefore died that he might be Lord both of the dead and of the quick.
And indeed whereas he rose again on this m^ner, he did hereb^ show himself
most plainly to be a mighty prince over the graue^ death, hell, and
condemnation, and one that had al^ sufficient power to overcome them. Thirdly
it proves unto us, that he was a perfect priest, and that his death and passion
was a perfect satisfaction to the justice of god for the ^innes of mankind. For
whereas Christ died, he died for our sins: now if he had not fully satisfied
for them all (though there had remained but one sin for which he had made no
satisfaction) he had not risen again: but death which came into the world by
sin, and is strengthened by it, would have held him in bondage: and
therefore, whereas he rose again, it is more then manifest, that he has made
so full a satisfaction that the merit thereof does and shall counteruaile the
justice of God for all our offenses. To this purpose Paul says, 1. Cor. 15.^^.
If Christ be not risen again, your faith is vain, and you are yet in your
sins, that is, Christ had not satisfied for your sins, or at least you
could not possibly have known that he had made satisfaction for any of them,
if he had not risen again.

The uses which concern our selves are of two sorts: comforts to the children
of God, and duties that are to be learned and practiced of us all. The comforts
are especially three. First Christ's resurrection serves for the justification
of all that believe in him, even before God the father: as Paul says, Romans
4.25.
Christ was given to death for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification: which words have this meaning: when Christ died, we must not
consider him as a private man, as we have showed before, but as one that stood
in the stead and room of all the elect: in his death he bare our sins and
suffered all that we should have suffered in our own persons for ever, and the
guilt of our offenses was laid upon him: and therefore Esai says, he was
numbered among the wicked. Now in his rising again he freed and disburdened
himself not from any sins of his own, because he was without sin, but
from the guilt and punishment of our sins imputed unto him. And hence it
comes to pass that all those which put their trust and affiance in the merit
of Christ, at the very first instant of their believing have their own sins
not imputed unto them, and his righteousness imputed.

Secondly the resurrection of Christ serves as a notable means to work
inward sanctification, as S. Peter says, 1. Pet. 1.3.
We are regenerate to a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead. And S. Paul, Romans 6.3.
We are then (says he) buried with him by baptism into his death, that like
as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of his father, so we also
should walk in newness of life. For if we be grafted with him to the
similitude of his death, we shall be also to the similitude of his
resurrection. Which words import thus much, that as Christ by the power of his
own Godhead, freed his manhood from death and from the guilt of our sins: so
does he free those that are knit unto him by the bond of one spirit, from the
corruption of their natures in which they are dead, that they may live unto
God. In the natural body, the head is the fountain of all the senses and of
motion: and therefore by sundry nerves dispersed through the body, the power
of moving and of sense is derived even to the least parts; so as the hands and
the feet move by means of that power which comes from the head: and so it is
in the spiritual body of Christ, namely the church: he is the head and the
fountain of life, and therefore he conueyeth spiritual life to every one of
his members: and that very power of his Godhead whereby he raised up himself
when he was dead, he conueyeth from himself to his members, and thereby
raises them up from the death of sin to newnes of life. And look as in a
perfect body, when the head has sense and motion, the hand that is of the same
body has also the sense and motion convenient for it: so likewise Christ
being the resurrection and the life; as there is spiritual life in him, so
every member of his shall feel in it self spiritual sense and motion,
whereby it is raised up from sin and lives unto God. For the better
co^ceiuing of this, we must consider two things: the outward means of this
spiritual life, and the measure of it. For the means, if we will have common
water we must go to the well: and if we would have water of life, we must go
unto Christ, who says, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.
^oh. 7 37.
Now this well of the water of life is very deep and we have nothing to draw
with, therefore we must have our pipes and conduits to convey the same unto us,
which are the word of God preached, and the administration of the sacraments.
Christ says, The dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that
hear it shall live; where by the dead is meant, not the dead in the grave,
Ioh. 5.25^
but those that are dead in sin. And again Christ says, the words which I
speak are spirit and life, Ioh. 6.63.
because the word of God is the pipe whereby he conueieth into our dead hearts
spirit and life. As Christ when he raised up dead men did one^y speak the word
and they were made alive: and at the day of judgment by his very voice, when
the trumpe shall blow, all that are dead shall rise again. So it is in the
first resurrection: they that are dead in their sins, at his voice uttered in
the ministry of the word shall rise again. To go further, Christ raised
three from the dead. Iairus daughter newly dead: the widows son dead and
wound up and lying on the hearse: Lazarus dead and buried and stinking in the
grave; and all this he did by his very voice: so also by the preaching of his
word, he raises all sorts of sinners, even such as have lien long in their
sins as rotting and stinking carrion. The sacraments also are the pipes and
conduits whereby God conueieth grace into the heart, if they be rightly used,
that is, if they be received in unfeigned repentance for all our sins, and
with a true and lively faith in Christ for the pardon of the same sins. Can^.
2.4.
And so, I take it, they are compared to flagons of wine, which revive the
Church being sick and fallen into a swound. As for the measure of life
derived from Christ, it is but small in this life and given by little and
little, as Ose says, Ose 6.1,2.
The Lord has spoiled us, and he will heal us, he has wounded us, and he
will bind us up. After two days he will revive us, and in the third he will
raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. The prophet Ezechiel in a vision
is carried into the midst of a field full of dead bones, and he is caused to
prophecy over them, and say, ^ze. 37.4.5.8.
O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord: at the first there was a shaking,
and the bones came together bone to bone, and then sinews and flesh grew upon
them, and upon the flesh grew a skin. Then he prophesied unto the winds the
second time, and they lived and stood upon their feet, for the breath came
upon them, and they were an exceeding great army of men. Hereby it signified
not only the state of the Jews after their captiuitie^ but in them the state
of the whole Church of God. For these temporal deliverances signified further
a spiritual deliverance. And we may here see most pla^nely, that God works
in the hearts of his children the gifts and graces of regeneration by little
and little. First he gives no more then flesh, sinews, and skin: then after
he gives them further graces of his spirit, which quickens them and makes
them alive unto God. Eze. 47.3,4,5.
The same also we may see in the vision of the waters that ran out of the
temple: First, a man must wade to the ankles, then after to the knees, and so
to the loins: then after the waters grow to a river that cannot be passed
over: and so the Lord conueyeth his graces by little and little, till at the
last men have a full measure thereof.

Thirdly the resurrection of Christ serves as an argument to prove unto us our
resurrection at the day of judgment. Paul says, Romans 8.11.
If the spirit of Christ that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you: he
that raised Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies. Some
will say, that this is no benefit, for all must rise again, as well the wicked
as the godly. Answ. True indeed: but yet the wicked rise not again by the same
cause that the godly do. They rise again by the power of Christ, not as he
is a Savior, but as he is a judge to condemn them: For God had said to Adam;
at what time he should eat of the forbidden fruit, he should die the death;
meaning a double death, both the first and the second death. Now then the
ungodly rise again that God may inflict upon them the punishment of the second
death, which is the reward of sin, that so Gods justice may be satisfied: but
the godly rise again by the power of Christ their head and redeemer, who
raises them up that they may be partakers of the benefit of his death, which
is to enjoy both in body and soul the kingdom of heaven, which he has so
dearly bought for them.

Thus much for the comforts: Now follow the duties, and they are also three.
First as Christ Jesus when he was dead rose again from death to life by his
own power, so we by his grace, in imitation of Christ, must endeavor our
selves to rise up from all our sins both original and actual unto newenesse
of life. This is worthily set down by the Apostle, saying, Romans 6.4.
We are buried by baptism into his death, that as Christ was raised up from
the dead by the glory of the father, so we also should walk in newness of
life: and therefore we must endeavor our selves to show the same power to be
in us every day, by rising up from our own personal sins to a reformed
life. This ought to be remembered of us, because howesoeuer many hear and know
this point, yet very few do practice the same. For (to speak plainly) as
dead men buried would never hear though a man should speak never so loud: so
undoubtedly among us there be also many living men, which are almost in the
same case. The ministers of God may cry unto them daily, and iterate the same
thing a thousand times, and tell them that they must rise up from their sins
and lead a new life, but they hear no more then the dead carkas that lies in
the grave. Indeed men hear with their outward ears, but they are so far
from practicing this duty, that many judge it to be a matter of reproach and
ignominy. And those which make any conscience of this duty, how they are laden
with nicknames and taunts, who knows not? I need not to rehearse them: so
odious a thing now a days is the rising from sin to newness of life. Sound
a trumpet in a dead man's ears, he stirs not: and let us cry for amendment of
life till breath go out of our bodies, no man almost says, What have I done?
And for this cause undoubtedly, if it were not for conscience of that duty
which me^ owe unto God, we should have but few ministers in England. For it
is the joy of a minister to see the unfeigned conversion of his people: whereas,
alas, men generally lie snorting in their corruptions, and rather go forward
in them still, then come to any amendment; such is the wonderful hardness that
has possessed the hearts of most men. He which has but half an eye may see
this to be true. Oh! how exceedes Atheism in all places, contempt of Gods
worship, profanation of the sabbath: the whordomes and fornications, the
cruelty and oppression of this age, cry to heaven for vengeance. By these and
such like sins the world crucifies Christ again. For look as Pilats
soldiers with the wicked Jews took Christ and stripped him of his garments,
buffeted him, and slew him; so ungodly men by their wicked behavior strip him
of al honor, and slaie him again. If an infidel should come among us, and
yield himself to be of our religion, after he had seen the behavior of men,
he would peradventure leave all religion: for he might say, surely it seems
this God whom these men worship, is not the true God, but a God of licentious
liberty. And that which is more, whereas at all times we ought to show our
selves new creatures, and to walk worthy of our Savior and redeemer, and
therefore also ought to rise out of our sins, and to live in righteousness and
true holiness, yet we for the most part go on still forward in sin, and
every day go deeper then other to hel-ward. This has been heretofore the
common practice, but let us now learn after the example of Christ, being
quickened and revived by his grace, to endeavor our selves especially to come
out of the grave of sin, and learn to make conscience of every bad action.
True it is, a Christian man may use the creatures of God for his delight, in a
moderate and godly manner, but Christ never gave liberty to any to live
licentiously: 2. Cor. 7.22.
for he that is free is yet servant unto Christ, as Paul says: and therefore
we must not enterprise any thing but that which may be a work of some good
duty unto God; to which end the Apostle says, Ephesians. 5.14.
Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee life. If this will not move us, yet let the judgments of God draw us
hereunto, Rev. 20.6.
Blessed is he (says the holy Ghost) that has part in the first resurrection:
for on such the second death has no power: where mention is made of a double
death: the first is the separation of soul and body, the second is the
eternal condemnation of soul and body in hell fire. Would we now escape the
second death after this life? we must then labor in this life to be partakers
of the first resurrection, and that on this manner: Look what sins we have
lived in heretofore, we must endeavor to come out of them all, and lead a
better life according to all the commandments of God. But if it be so that ye
will have no care of your own souls, go on hardly to your own peril, and so
ye shall be sure to enter into the second death, which is eternal damnation.

Secondly, we are taught by the example of Saint Paul to labor above all
things, Phil. 3.10.
to know Christ and the virtue of his resurrection. And this we shall do, when
we can say by experience, that our hearts are not content with a formal and
drowsy profession of religion, but that we feel the same power of Christ
whereby he raised up himself from death to life, to be effectual and
powerful in us, to work in our hearts a conversion from all our sins,
wherein we have lien dead, to newenesse of life, with care to live godly in
Christ Jesus. And that we may further attain to all this, we must come to
hear the word of God preached and taught with fear and trembling; having
heard the word, we must meditate therein, and pray unto God, not only
publicly but privately also, entreating him that he would reach forth his
hand, and pull us out of the grave of sin, wherein we have lien dead so long.
And in so doing, the Lord of his mercy, according as he has promised, will
send his spirit of grace into our hearts to work in us an inward sense and
feeling of the virtue of Christ's resurrection. So dealt he with the two
disciples that were going to Emmaus; they were occupied in the meditation of
Christ his death and passion; and whiles they were in hearing of Christ who
conferred with them, he gave them such a measure of his spirit as made their
hearts to burn within them. Ephesians. 8.19.
And Paul prays for the Ephesians, that God would inlighten their eyes, that
they might see and feel in themselves the exceeding greatness of the power of
God, which he wrought in Christ Jesus, when he raised him from the dead.

Thirdly as Saint Paul says, Col. 3.1.
If we be risen with Christ, then we must seek the things that are above. But
how and by what means can we rise with Christ, seeing we did not die with
him? Ans. We rise with Christ thus. The burgess of a town in the parliament
house bears the person of the whole town, and whatsoever he says, that the
whole town says, and whatsoever is done to him, is also done to all the
town: so Christ upon the cross stood in our place, and bare our person; and
what he suffered, we suffered; and when he died, all the faithful died in him:
and so likewise as he is risen again, so are all the faithful risen in him.
The consideration whereof does teach us, that we must not have our hearts
wedded to this world. We may use the things of this life, but yet so as though
we used them not. For all our love and care must be for things above, and
specially we must seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, peace of
conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost. We must therefore sue for the pardon of
sin, for reconciliation to God in Christ, and for sanctification. These are
the precious pearls which we must seek, and when we have found them, we must
sell all that we have to buy them; and having bought them, we must lay them up
in the secret corners of our hearts, valuing and esteeming of them better then
all things in the world beside.

Thus much of Christ's resurrection, containing the first degree of Christ's
exaltation. Now follows the second in these words, He ascended into
heaven: in the handling whereof we are to consider these special points: I.
the time of his ascension. II. the place. III. the manner. IV. the witnesses.
V. the uses thereof. For the first, the time of Christ's ascension was forty
days after his resurrection, Act. 1 3 4.
when he taught his disciples the things which appertain to the kingdom of
God. And this shows that he is a most faithful King over his Church,
procuring the good thereof. And therefore Esaias says, Esay^ 9.6. Heb^ 5.6.
The government is on his shoulder: and the Apostle says, he was more
faithful in all the house of God, then Moses was. Hence we gather that whereas
the Apostles changed the sabbath from the seventh d^y to the eight, it was no
doubt, by the counsel and direction of Christ before his ascension: and
likewise in that they planted Churches and appointed teachers and meet
overseers for the guiding and instruction hereof, we may resolve our selves
that Christ prescribed the same unto them before his ascension: and for these
and such like causes did he ascend no sooner.

Now look what care Christ at his ascension had over his Church, the same must
all masters of families have over their households when God shall call them out
of this world. They must have care not only that their families be well
governed while they live; but also, that after their death; peace, love, and
good order may be continued in their posterity. And therefore the prophet Esaias
is sent to Ezechias King of Judah, to bid him set his house in order: for he
must die, Isa. 38.1.
signifying that it is the duty of a good master of a family, to have care
not only for the government of his house whilst he is alive, but also that it
may be well governed when he is dead. The same also must be practiced of Gods
ministers: a part of whose fidelity is this, that they have not only a care
to feed their particular flocks while they are alive, but also that they
further provide for the people after their departure, as much as they can.
Example whereof we have in Peter, who says, 2. Pet. 1.15.
I will endeavor always that ye may be able also to have remembrance of these
things after my departure.

^uk. 24.50. and 19.29. Act. 1.12.
The place of Christ's ascension was, the mount of Olives near Bethanie: and it
was the same place from whence Christ went to Jerusalem to be crucified. One
place served to be a passage both to pain and torments, and also to glory.
This shows that the way to the kingdom of heaven is through afflictions.
There are many which have Gods hand heavy upon them in lingering sicknesses,
as the dead palsy and such like; wherein they are saine to lie many years
without hope of cure, whereupon their beds which should be unto them places
of rest and ease, are but places of woe and misery. Yet may these men hence
have great comfort, if they can make good use of their sicknesses: for the
beds whereon they suffer so much torment, shall be places from whence they
shall pass to joy and happiness. Again, there be many that for the
testimony of the truth, and for religions sake suffer imprisonment, with many
afflictions; now if they can use their afflictions well, their prisons shall be
Bethanies unto them: although they be places of bondage, yet God will at length
make them places of entrance to liberty. Many a man for the maintaining of
faith and good conscience, is banished out of his country, and is feign to
live in a strange place among a people to whom he is unknown: but let him use
it well: for though it be a place of grief for a time, as Bethanie was to
Christ when he went to suffer, yet God will make it one day to be his passage
into heaven.

Thus much of the place of his ascending. The third thing to be considered, is
the manner of Christ's ascension; and it contains three points. The first,
that Christ being now to ascend, lifts up his hands and blessed his disciples.
Luke 24.50.
In the Scripture are mentioned diverse kinds of blessings. The first when one
man prays to God for a blessing upon an other: and this blessing do Kings
and princes bestow upon their subjects, and parents on their children: and for
this cause children are well taught to ask their fathers and mothers blessing,
that they may pray to God to bless them. There is an other kind of blessing,
when a man does not only pray for a blessing, but also pronounces it. This
did the priests in the old Testament: and thus Melchisedeck when he met Abraham
blessed him, saying, Genesis 14.19.
Blessed art thou Abraham of God, the most high possessour of heaven and earth.
And this was the ordinary duty of the priests, prescribed by God himself: and
therefore the very form of words which they used is set down after this
manner, Numb. 6.2^.
The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face to shine upon
thee, etc. The third kind of blessing is, when a man does not only pray to
God, and pronounce blessing, but by the spirit of prophecy does foretell a
particular blessing upon any. Thus Isaac blessed Iaacob and Esau, particularly
foretelling both their estates. Genesis 49.
And Iaacob blessed the twelve Patriarks by the same spirit, foretelling them
what should befall them many hundred years after. Now our Savior Christ did
not bless his disciples any of these three ways: and therefore there
remains a fourth kind of blessing which he used, and that was after this
manner: Christ in blessing his disciples did not only pronounce or foretell a
blessing that should come to his disciples, but did confer and give the same
unto them. For he is the fountain and author of all blessings. And therefore
Paul says, Ephesians. 1.3.
that God the father has blessed us in all spiritual blessings in Christ.
Hence we learn, first that al those which deny themselves and fly to Christ,
and put their affiance in him, shall be freed from the curse of the law, and
from the wrath of God, due unto them for their sins, whatsoever they are.
Secondly, that the curses of men must not discourage us from doing well. For
though men curse, yet Christ blesses: and for this cause he says, Luke 6.26.
Woe be unto you, when all men speak well of you: as if he should say, then
you want the blessing of God. And we must remember, that when men shall curse
us for doing our duty, even then the blessing of God shall be upon us; Genesis
12.3.
and the curse causeles shall not hurt. And God says to Abraham, he will curse
them that curs^ him. Thirdly, we learn that no witchcraft, nor sorcerie,
(which often are done with cursing) shall be able to hurt us. For look where
Christ will bless, there all the devils in hell can never fasten a curse.
This is found true by experience. For when Balaam the wizzard should have
cursed the people of Israel, and had assaied to do it many ways, but could
not; at length he said, Num^. 13 2^.
there is no sorcerie The english transla^ion being o^h^^wise here seem^s to
fa^^e.
against Jacob, nor soothsaying against Israel. This is a notable comfort to
the people of God, that witches and sorcerers, do what they can, shall never
be able to hurt them. It may be, that their badde practices may annoy men's
bodies and goods, yet the Lord will turn all to a blessing upon his servants
either in this life or the life to come.

The second point is, that Christ went apart from his disciples, and ascended
upward toward heaven in their sight. For the right understanding of this,
sundry special points must be observed. The first, that the lifting up of his
body was principally by the mighty power of his godhead, and partly by the
supernatural property of a glorified body, which is to move as well upward
as downward, without constraint or violence. The second, that Christ did go
from earth to heaven really and actually, and not in appearance only. The
third, that he went visibly in the sight of his disciples. The fourth, that he
went locally, by changing his place and going from earth to heaven, so as he
is no more on earth bodily, Ma^h. ^8.20.
as we are now on earth. It may be objected, that Christ made a promise that
he would be with his Church to the end of the world. Answ. That promise is
to be understood of the presence of his spirit, or godhead, not of the presence
of his manhood. Again it may further be alleged, that if the godhead be on
earth, then must the manhood be there also, because they are both united
together. Answ. It is not true, that of two things conioined, where the one is,
there must the other be also. For the sun it self, and the sunne-beames are
both joined together, yet they are not both in all places together. For the
body of the sun is only in the heavens, but the sunne-beames are also upon
the earth. The argument therefore follows not: Christ's manhood subsists in
that person which is every where: ergo his manhood is every where. Vide Thom.
contra Gent. li. ^. ^. 49.
And the reason is, because the Son of God subsists not only in his divine
nature, but also by it: whereas he does not subsist at all by the manhood, but
only in it: for he subsisted before all eternity, when the manhood was not.
Nay rather because the manhood does subsist by the person of the Son,
therefore the person extends it self further then the manhood which is assumed
and sustained by it; and has his existing thence. For that very thing whereby
any other thing either essentially or accidentally is, extends it self further
then the thing whereby it is. As the humane nature whereby Peter is a man,
extends it self further then to Peter, namely to all other men: and the
whiteness whereby the snow is white, extends it self further then to that
snow which a man holds in his hand.

The third point is, that in the ascension a cloud took Christ from the fight
of his disciples. Act. 1.9.
And whereas he caused a cloud to come between their sight and himself, it
signified unto them that they must now be contented with that which they had
seen, and not seek to know further what became of him afterward: and the same
thing is taught unto us also: we must content our selves with that which God
has revealed in his word, and seek no further specially in things which
concern God. For the like end in the giving of the law in Sinai, Exodus 19.9.
God appeared in a cloud: and when he did manifest his glory in the temple
which Solomon made, a thick cloud filled the same.

The fourth point to be considered, Luke 24.50. Act. 1.9.
is concerning the witnesses of his ascension, which were his own disciples in
the mount of Olives at Bethanie, and none but they. Now it may be demanded, why
he would not have all the whole nation of the Jews to see him ascend, that so
they might know that he was risen again, and believe in him. Answ. The reason
may be this: it was his good pleasure that the points of faith and religion,
whereof this article is one, should rather be learned by hearing, then by
seeing. Indeed Christ's own disciples were taught the same by sight, that they
might the better teach others which should not see: whereas now the ordinary
means to come by faith, is hearing.

The uses to be made of Christ's ascension, are of two sorts: some are comforts
to Gods Church and people, and some are duties. The comforts are especially
four. The first is this: Christ Jesus did ascend up into heaven, to lead
captivity captive; Ephesians. 4.8.
a most worthy benefit. By captivity is meant, first sin and Satan, which
did and do lead men captive into perdition: secondly death and the grave,
which held him captive and in bondage for the space of three days. And he
leads them all captive two ways: first in himself, in that he began his
triumph upon the cross, as I have showed, and continued the same till his very
ascension: secondly in all his members, because by his mighty power being now
ascended, he does subdue and weaken the power of sin and Satan; which he
manifests every day by killing the corruption of their natures, R^m. 16.20.
and the rebellion of their flesh. But it may be demanded, how Christ does
lead his enemies captive, considering the devil reigns every where, and the
world, and death, and hell. Answ. Christ's victory over his and our enemies
has five degrees. First, it is ordained by God, secondly it is foretold,
thirdly it is wrought, fourthly it is applied, lastly it is accomplished. The
ordaining of it was before all worlds: the foretelling of it was in all the
ages of the old testament: the working of it was upon the cross, and
afterward: the applying has been since the beginning of the world more or
less: and it is only in part in this life; that while Christ is in bruising
of the head of Satan, he again may bruise his heel: the accomplishment shall
not be before the last judgment. From this great benefit bestowed on Gods
Church, there are many duties to be learned. First here is an instruction for
all ignorant persons and impenitent sinners, which abound among us in every
place. Whosoever they be, that live in the blindness of their minds, and
hardness of their hearts; they must know this, that they are captives and
bondslaues of sin and Satan, of hell, death, and condemnation: and let no man
flatter himself of what state or degree soever he be (for it is Gods truth) if
he have not repented of all his sins, he as yet is no better then a servant
or vassal, yea a very drudge of the devil. Now then, what will thou do in
this case? The best thing is, to lay to thy heart this benefit of Christ. He is
ascended up to heaven to lead captive and to vanquish the devil and all his
angels, under whom thou lie bound, and that not only in himself, but in
his members. Now then if thou will become a true member of Christ, he will free
thee from this bondage. Therefore take heed how thou continuest longer in thy
old sins, and in thy gross ignorance: and seeing Christ has made a way to
liberty, let us seek to come out of this spiritual bondage: he is ascended
for this end and purpose to free us from it; therefore if we refuse this
benefit, our state will be the more damnable. A man lies bound hand and foot
in a dark dungeon, and the keeper comes and sets open the prison door, and
takes off his bolts, and bids him come out; if he refuse and say that he is
well: may it not be thought that he is a mad man, and will any be sorry for
his case? No surely. Well, this is the state of all impenitent sinners. They
lie fast fettered and bound under the power of sin and Satan, and Christ it
is who is ascended into heaven to unloose them of this bondage: he has set
open the prison door, and has unlocked our fetters: if we refuse to come out,
and lie still in our sins, there remains nothing for us but everlasting
thraldom. Let us therefore in the fear of God, if we have a care of our own
souls, receive and embrace this benefit which redoundes unto us by Christ's
ascension.

Secondly, in that Christ is ascended to heaven to lead captive sin and
Satan, here is a good consolation for all those that are afflicted in
conscience for their sins. There is no man in this case but he has great
cause to fear, yet must he not be discouraged. For Christ by his ascension
like a noble captain has taken sin and Satan prisoners, and has pinnioned
them fast, so as all the power they have, is in Christ's hand: and therefore for
this cause although they are suffered to exercise and afflict us, yet by his
grace they shall never be able to prevail against us. Therefore we may safely
cast our care upon God, and not fear overmuch. Hence also we may learn a
third duty. There is no man that knows what sin means, and what the
blood of Christ means, but in regard of the corruption of his own nature,
he will say with Paul that he is sold under sin, and in regard thereof will
cry out with him also, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of death? yea it will make his heart to bleed within him. Now what
shall he do in this case? surely let him remember the end of Christ's
ascension, which is to vanquish and subdue the rebellion of his nature, and
labor to feel the benefit thereof: and then he shall no doubt find that
Christ will dissolve in him the works of the devil, and tread Satan under his
feet. ^. Ioh. 3.^. Romans 16.20.
And thus also those that feel in themselves the law of their members
rebelling against the law of their mind, must come to Christ and he will help
and sree them.

The second benefit of Christ's ascension is, that he ascended up to heaven to
bestow gifts upon his Church, as it is said in the place before mentioned, He
ascended up an high, etc. he gave gifts unto men, that is, the gift of the
knowledge of Gods word, the gift of preaching, and prophecy, and all other
gifts needful for the good of his Church. The consideration of this, that
Christ who is the fountain of grace, and in whom are hid all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge, should be mindful of us and vouchsafe such special
favor to his Church, must cause every one of us who have received any gift of
God (as there is no man but he has received his portion) to be humbled in his
own eyes for the same. There is no cause why we should be proud of our gifts;
seeing we have nothing, but that which we have received. For to this end
Christ ascended, to give gifts unto men, and therefore our gifts whatsoever
they be, are not our own, but we had them from Christ; and we are stewards of
them a while, for the good of others. The more the Lord gives to a man, the
more he requires at his hands; and as for such as having good gifts abuse the
same, their sin is the more grievous, and their danger the greater. Men of
great gifts unless they use them aright with humbled hearts, shall want Gods
blessing upon them. For he gives grace to the humble. The high hills after
much tillage are often barren, whereas the low valleys, by the streams of
waters passing through them, are very fruitful: and the gifts of God joined
with a swelling heart are fruitless; but joined with love and the grace of
humility, they edify.

Secondly, if Christ ascend up to heaven to give gifts unto men; here we may
see how many a man and woman in these our days are ouerseene, in that they
plead ignorance, and say that they hope God will have them excused for it,
seeing they are not learned; they have dull wits, and it is not possible to
teach them now, they are past learning; and hereupon they presume they may live
in gross ignorance, as blind almost in religion as when they were first
borne. But mark, I pray you, who it is that is ascended up to heaven, namely
Christ Jesus our Lord, who made thee of nothing. Now was he able to give thee a
being, when thou was not, and is he not likewise able to put knowledge into
thy soul, if so be thou will use the means which he has appointed? and the
rather, seeing he is ascended for that end: but if thou will not use the means
to come to knowledge, thy case is desperate, and thou art the cause of thine
own condemnation, and thou bring confusion upon thine own head. Therefore
let ignorant men labor for knowledge of Gods word. Ignorance shall excuse
none: it will not stand for payment at the day of judgment. Christ is ascended
to this end to teach the ignorant, to give knowledge and wisdom unto the
simple, and to give gifts of prophecy unto his ministers, that they may teach
his people. Therefore, I say again, let such as be ignorant use the means
diligently, and God will give the blessing. Thirdly, whereas it is thought to
be a thing not possible, to furnish a whole Church with preaching ministers, it
seems to be otherwise. For wherefore did Christ ascend to heaven? was it not
to give gifts unto his Church? what, is Christ's hand now shortened? undoubtedly
we may resolve our selves, that Christ bestowed gifts sufficient upon men in
the Church: but it is for our sins that they are not employed. The fountains
of learning the Universities, though they are not dammed up, yet they stream
not abroad as they might. Many there be in them endued with worthy gifts for
the building of the Church, but the covetousness of men hinders the
comfortable entrance which otherwise might be. Lastly, seeing Christ ascended
to give gifts needful for his Church, as the gift of teaching, the gift of
prophecy, the gift of tongues, of wisdom, and knowledge, the duty of every
man is, especially of those which live in the schools of learning, to labor
by all means to increase, cherish, and preserve their gifts, and as Paul
exhorts Timothy, 2. Ti^. ^ ^ (...).
to stir up the gift of God, that is, as men preserve the fire by blowing it,
so by our diligence we must kindle and revive the gifts and graces of God
bestowed on us. Christ has done his part, and there is nothing required but
our pains and fidelity.

The third benefit that comes by Christ's ascension is, that he ascended to
prepare a place for all that should believe in him: In my fathers house (says
Christ) are many dwelling places, if it were not so, I would have told you. I
go to prepare a place for you. Ioh. 14.2.
For by the sin of Adam our entrance into heaven was taken away. Genesis ^.^4.
If Adam by his fall did exclude himself from the earthly paradise, then how
much more did he exclude himself from heaven? And therefore all mankind
sinning in him, was likewise deprived of heaven. The people of Israel being in
woe and misery, cried out that they had sinned, and therefore the Lord had
covered himself with a cloud, that their prayers could not pass through. Lam.
3.44.
And Esai says, that our sins are a wall betwixt God and us. And S. John,
that no unclean thing must enter into the heavenly Jerusalem. Rev. 22.^^.
Now seeing we have shut our selves out of heaven by our sins, it was
requi^ite that Christ Jesus our Savior should go before us to prepare a
place, and to make ready a way for us. For he is king over all, he has the
keys of heaven, he opens and no man shuts: and therefore it is in his
power to let us in, though we have shut our selves out. But some may say, if
this be the end of his ascension to prepare a place in heaven; then belike
such as died before the coming of Christ were not in heaven. Ans. As there are
two degrees of glory, one incomplete and the other complete or perfect, (for
the faithful departed are in glory but in part, and there remains fullness
of glory for them at the day of judgment, when soul and body shall be both
glorified together:) so answerably there are two degrees of preparation of
places in heaven. The places of glory were in part prepared for the faithful
from the beginning of the world, but the full preparation is made by Christ's
ascension. And of this last preparation is the place of John to be understood.

The use of this doctrine is very profitable. First it overthrows the fond
doctrine of the church of Rome, which teaches that Christ by his death did
merit our justification, and that we being once justified do further merit
salvation, and purchase for our selves a place in heaven. But this is as it
were to make a partition between Christ and us in the work of our redemption,
whereas in truth not only the beginning and continuance of our salvation, but
also the accomplishment thereof in our vocation, justification, sanctification,
glorification, is wholly and only to be ascribed to the mere merit of Christ:
and therefore having redeemed us on earth, he also ascends to prepare a place
in heaven for us. Secondly, this serves to condemn the fearful, lamentable,
and desperate security of these our days. Great is the love of Christ in that
he was content to suffer the pangs of hell to bring us out of hell: and withal
to go to heaven to prepare a place for us there: and yet who is it that cares
for this place, or makes any account thereof? who forsakes this world, and
seeks unto Christ for it? And further, least any man should say, alas, I know
not the way: therefore Christ before he ascended, made a new and living way with
his own blood, as the Apostle speaks. And to take away all excuses from men,
he has set marks and bounds in this way, and has placed guides in it, namely
his ministers, to show all the passengers a straight and ready course into the
kingdom of heaven. And though Christ have done all this for us, yet the
blindness and security of men is such, that none almost walks in this way,
nor cares to come into this mansion place; but in stead of this, they walk in
by ways, according to the lusts of their own flesh. When they are commanded
to go eastward to Jerusalem, they turn westward an other way: when they are
commanded to go on forward to heaven, they turn again backward, and go
straight to hell. Men run on all the days of their lives in the broad way
that leads to destruction, and never so much as once make inquiry for a
resting place in heaven; but when the hour of death comes, then they call
for the guide; whereas all their lives before, they have run out of the way
many thousand miles: but then, alas, it is too late, unless it be the
unspeakable mercy of God. For they have wandered so far astray, that in so
short a space they cannot be able to come into the right way again. Yet
generally this is the state of most among us, whose security is so much the
more grievous and fearful, because Christ has done all that heart can wish.
There is nothing else required, but only that by his grace we should walk in
the way. There was never any that knew the state of the people in these days,
but he will grant, that this is most true which I say. Besides, as by this, we
are brought to a sight of the desperate security of this age: so we may
further learn our own duties. Is Christ gone to heaven before hand to prepare
a place for thee, then practice that which Paul teaches: Phil. 3.10.
Have thy (...).
conversation in heaven. The words which he uses are very significant, and
the meaning of them is: Ye are free-denizens of the city of God, and therefore
as freemen in Gods house, let all your cares and studies, all your affairs and
doings be in heaven. In the world if a man make purchase of an house, his
heart is always there: there he pulls down and builds again: there he makes
him orchards and gardens: there he means to live and die. Christ Jesus has
bought the kingdom of heaven for us (the most blessed purchasse that ever was)
and has paid the dearest price for it that ever was paid, even his own
precious blood: and in this city he has prepared for us a dwelling place, and
made us freedenizens of it: therefore all our joy, and all our affairs ought
to be there. It will be said, how shall a man upon earth have his conversation
in heaven. Ans. We must converse in heaven, not in body but in heart: and
therefore, though our bodies be on earth, yet our hearts, joy, and comfort, and
all our meditation must be in heaven. Thus must we behave our selves, like
good freemen in Gods house. It must be far from us, to have our joy and our
hearts set on the things of this world.

Thirdly, the consideration of this; that Christ Jesus has prepared a place
for us in heaven, and also has trained the way with his own blood, must make
every one of us to strive to enter in at the straight gate, Luke 13.24.
as our Savior Christ counsels us: and that as wrastlers do, which strive
for life and death. Within this gate is a dwelling place of happiness ready for
us. If a man were assured that there were made for him a great purchasse in
Spain or Turkey, so as if he would but come thither, he might enjoy it; would
he not adventure the dangers of the sea, and of his enemies also, if need
were, that he might come to his own? Well, behold Christ Jesus has made a
purchase for us in heaven, and there is nothing required of us, but that we will
come and enjoy it. Why then should men refuse any pains, or fear in the way?
nay we must strive to get in. It may be, we shall be pinched in the entrance,
for the gate is both strait and low, and we must be feign to leave our wealth
behind us, and the pleasures of this life; and enter we must, though we should
be constrained to leave our flesh behind us. For the purchase that is made is
worth ten thousand worlds. And besides, if we loose it by fainting in the
way, our purchase shall be the blackness of darkness for ever with the devil
and all his angels: who therefore would not strive, though he lost his life in
the gate? The urging of this point is needful in these days. There is
striving enough for worldly preferment, but a man almost may go alone in the
straight way that leads to heaven, he shall have none to bear him company.
And where are they that strive to enter in? where is the violence offered to
the kingdom of heaven? where be the violent which should take it to
themselves as in the days of John Baptist.

Fourthly, if Christ have prepared a place for us in heaven, then we are in
this world as pilgrims and strangers, and therefore must learn the counsel
of Saint Peter: As strangers and pilstrimes abstain from fleshly lusts, which
fight against the soul. He that does esteem himself as pilgrim, is not to
entangle himself with the affairs of this world, nor put in practice the
behavior thereof, but to behave himself as a freeman of heaven, as strangers
use to live in foreign countries, according to the fashion of their own. And
therefore in thought, word, and deed, in life and conversation, he must so
carry himself, as thereby he may appear to all the world of what country he
is. An ancient divine speaking of such as had curled and embrodered hair,
Tertul. li^. de habit mul.
bids them consider, whether they must go to heaven with such hair or no:
and whereas they adorned themselves with winckles made of other women's hair, he
asks them whether it may not be the hair of a damned person or no. If it may
be, he further demands how it may beseem them to wear it which profess
themselves to be the sons and daughters of God. The like may be said of all
other sins: they that be of Gods house must behave themselves as freemen
there. And when God has made us free, it does not beseem us to make our
selves bondmen of sin and Satan and of this world.

Fifthly, seeing Christ went to heaven to prepare a place for all that believe
in him, here is a good duty for parents. Many of them are very careful to
prefer their children to great places and noble men's houses, and they are not
to be blamed therefore: but if they would indeed be good parents to their
children, they should first endeavor themselves to get rooms for them in
heaven: they that do this, are good parents indeed. Some will say, how shall
we get this preferment for them? Ans. God has two houses, his Church, and the
kingdom of heaven. The church is his house of grace, heaven is his house of
glory. Now if thou would bring thy child to a place in the house of glory,
then thou art first of all to get him a place in the house of grace: bringing
him up so in the fear of God, that both in life and conversation he may show
himself to be a member of the Church: and then assure thy self, that after
this life, he shall be removed to the second house of God, which is the house
of glory, and there be freeman for ever in the kingdom of heaven. And if thou
shall thus provide for thy child, thou shall not leave him as an orphan when
thou die, but he shall have God for his father and Christ for his brother,
and the holy Ghost his comforter. And therefore first of all and above all,
remember to make thy child a member of Gods Church. Let the example of David
excite all parents hereunto: Psalm. 8.3.10.
I had rather (says he) be a door keeper in the hou^e of God, then to dwell in
the tabernacles of wickedness. For a day in thy courts is better then a
thousand ^lse where.

Lastly, hence we may find remed^e against the tediousnes of sickness and fear
of death. Thou which fear death, remember that Christ is gone to heaven to
prepare a place for thy body, where it must be glorified and live for ever
with the blessed Trinity and all the Saints and angels, though for a while it
lie dead and rot in the grave. Remember this also, thou which continuest in any
lingering sickness, Christ Jesus has prepared a place for thee, wherein thou
shall rest in joy and bliss without all pain or faintnes.

The fourth benefit is, that Christ ascended up to heaven to send the comforter
unto his Church. This was a special end of his ascension, as appears by
Christ's own words: Ioh. 16.7.
It is (says he) expedient that I go away, for if I go not; the Comforter
will not come, but if I depart I will send him unto you. And again; Io^.
14.16.
I will pray unto the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, which
shall abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth. But some will say,
how can Christ send his spirit unto his Church, for the person sending and the
person sent are unequal; whereas all three persons in trinity are equal,
none greater or lesser then another, none inferior or superior to other. Ans.
It is true indeed: but we must know, that the action of sending in the
Trinity makes not the persons unequal, but only shows a distinction and
order among equals. The father sends the son, the father and the son both
send the Holy Ghost: yet the father is not above the son, neither the father
or the son above the holy Ghost, but all are equal in degree, though in
regard of order one is before another: and it stands with reason. For two
men that are equal in degree, may upon mutual consent one send another. But
it may be further demanded, how the holy Ghost can be sent which is every
where? Ans. The Holy Ghost indeed is every where, therefore he is sent not so
much in regard of the presence of his essence or substance, as of his operation
whereby he renueth and guides the members of Christ. Now then, this being
so, here first we have occasion to consider the misery of the world. When a
man is troubled in his mind (as no ungodly man, but sometime he feels the
terror of conscience for his sins) then he labors to remove it by merry
company and pleasant books, whereas Christ at his ascension sent his holy
spirit to be the comforter of his Church: and therefore when we are troubled
in conscience for our sins, we should not seek ease by such slender means,
but rather seek for the help and comfort of the holy ghost, and labor to
have our sins washed away and our hearts purified and cleansed by the blood
of Christ. As for wine and mirth and such like means of comfort, neither at
the day of death, nor at the day of judgment shall they stand us in stead, or
be able to comfort us. Again, when crosses and calamities fall, the counsel
of the minister is not sought for, but the help of such as are called cunning
men and cunning women is, that is, of charmers, inchanters, and figure-casters:
a badde practice. Christ at his ascension sent his holy spirit unto his Church
and people, to be their guide and comforter in their calamities and miseries:
and therefore when any man is in distress, he should have recourse to the right
means of comfort, namly the word and Sacraments, and there he should find the
assistance of the holy Ghost. Thus the prophet Isai informs the Jews: when
they shall say unto you: inquire at them which have a spirit of divination, and
at the southsayers which whisper and murmr: Esa. 8.19.
Should not a people inquire at their God from the living to the dead? to the
law and to the testimony. Rebecca, Genesis 25.22.
when the two twins strove in her womb, what did she? the text says, she
sent to ask the Lord. Yet commonly the men of these days leave God and seek
to the instruments of the devil. To go yet further, god uses for sundry
causes most of all to afflict his dearest children. Judgment, says Peter, 2
Pet. 4.17. Luke 13.16.
begins at Gods house. S. Luke says, that a certain woman was bound of
Satan eighteen years, but what was she? a daughter of Abraham, that is, a
child of God. When the like condition shall befall any of us, let us remember
the end why Christ ascended up to heaven: and pray unto God that he will give
us his spirit, that thereby we may be eased and delivered, or else enabled to
persevere and continue in patience: and this is the true way and means to
lighten and ease the burden of all afflictions. And for this cause Paul prays
that the Colossians might be strengthened with all might, through his glorious
power unto all patience and long suffering with ioyfulnesse. Col. 1.10.
For to whomesoeuer God gives grace to believe, to them also he gives power to
suffer affliction by the inward work of his spirit. Secondly, if Christ have
sent unto his church the holy spirit to be our comforter, our duty is, to
prepare our bodies and souls to be fit temples and houses for so worthy a
guest. If a man were certified that a prince would come to his house, he would
dress it up and have all things in as good order as might be: and shall not
we much more endeavor to purify and cleanse our souls and bodies from all
sin, that they may be fit temples for the entertainment of the Holy Ghost
whom Christ Jesus has sent to be our comforter. The Shunamite was careful to
entertain the man of God Elisha, for she said to her husband, ^. King. 4.10.
Let us make him a little chamber, I pray thee, with walls, and let us set him
there a bed and a stool, a table and a candlestick. Now how much more
careful ought we to be to entertain God himself, who is content to come and
dwell with us: and therefore we must adorn our bodies and souls with grace,
that he may lodge, and suppe, and dine with us, as he has promised; but on
the contrary, if we defile our bodies with sin, we banish the Holy Ghost
out of our hearts, and inuit the devil to come and dwell with us. For the
more a man defiles his body, the fitter and cleaner it is for him. And to
conclude this point, let us remember that saying, which is used of some, that
Christ when he went hence gave us his pawn, namely his spirit, to assure us,
that he would come to us again, and also he took with him our pawn, Tertul.
namely his flesh, to assure us further, that we should ascend up to him.

Thus much for the benefits of Christ's ascension: Now follow the duties
whereunto we are moved, and they are two. First, we must be here admonished,
to renounce the vbiquitie and the error of the real and essential presence
of the body of Christ in the Sacrament of the Lords supper; as flatly
oppugning this article of Christ's ascensio^ into heaven. For it is flat against
the nature of a true body to subsist in many places at once. Secondly, as the
Apostles then did, when they saw Christ ascending up into heaven, so must we
do also: while he was present with them, they gave him honor, but when they
saw him ascending, they adored him with far greater reverence: Luke 34.52.
and so must we now for the same cause bow the knees of our hearts unto him.

Thus much of the second degree of the exaltation of Christ. Now follows the
third in these words: And sits at the right hand of God the father
almighty. In the handling whereof, we are first to show the meaning of the
words: secondly the comforts and benefits that redound to Gods Church:
thirdly, the duties that we are moved unto. For the meaning of the words: if
we speak properly, God has neither right hand nor left, neither can he be said
to sit or stand; for God is not a body but a spirit: the words therefore
contain a borrowed speech from earthly kings and potentates, whose manner and
custom has been to place such persons at their right hands, whom they
purposed to advance to any special office or dignity. So, King Solomon when
his mother came to speak with him, ^ King. 2.19.
rose up from his throne, and met het, and caused a seat to be set at his own
right hand, and set her upon it, in token, no doubt, of honor which he gave
unto her. To the same purpose David says, Psalm. 45.9.
Upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in a vesture of gold. And the sons
of Zebedeus made suit to Christ, Math. 20.
that one of them might sit at his right hand, and the other at his left in his
kingdom. Now their request was to have the two special and principal
dignities of his kingdom. Thus we see it is manifest, that the sitting at the
right hand of an earthly prince signifies advancement into authority and
honor: and therefore the same phrase of speech applied to Christ signifies two
things. First, his full and manifest exaltation in dignity, honor, and
glory: and in this sense it is said, Phil. 2.^^
that to him is given a name that is above all names, that at the name of Jesus
every knee shall bow. Secondly it signifies his full and manifest exaltation
into the authority and government of his kingdom, which spreads it self
over heaven and earth: So David says, The Lord said unto my Lord, Psalm. 110.1^
Sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Which
place being alleged by S. Paul repeating the words but changing the phrase,
is thus set down: 1. Cor. 15.2^
He shall reign till he have put all his enemies under his feet. And to
speak in brief, the scope of the words is to show, that Christ God and man
after his ascension is advanced to such an estate in which he has fullness of
glory, power, majesty, and authority in the presence of his father and all
the Saints and holy angels. Furthermore in the words three circumstances must
be observed. The first is the place where Christ is thus advanced, noted in the
former article, he ascended into heaven, and sits (namely in heaven) at the
right hand of God. The place then where Christ Jesus in both his natures, as he
is God and also man, does rule in full glory, power, and majesty; is heaven
it self. To which effect Paul says, Ephesians. 1.20.
God raised Christ from the dead, and put him at his right hand in the heavenly
places. And in the Epistle to the Hebrews it is said, Heb. 1.3.
He sits at the right hand of the majesty in highest places. This ^oint
well considered, serves to discover the oversight of sundry Divines, which
hold and teach, that to sit at the right hand of God, is to be every where in
all places, and not in heaven only, that they might hereby lay a foundation
for the vbiquitie of Christ's manhood: which nevertheless the heavens must
contain till the time that all things be restored. The second circumstance, is
the time when Christ began to sit at the right hand of God the father, which is
to be gathered by the order of the articles. For first Christ died and was
buried, then he rose again and ascended into heaven, and after his ascension
he is said to sit at the right hand of his father. This order is also noted
unto us by S. Paul: Romans 8.24.
Who shall condemn (says he) it is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which
is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God. And S. Mark says, when
Christ was risen again he appeared to his disciples, Mark. 16.19.
and after he had spoken unto them he was received into heaven, and sat at the
right hand of God. But it may be demanded how this can stand with truth, that
Christ should not begin to sit at the right hand of his father before the
ascension, considering he is one God with the father, and therefore an absolute
and sovereign King from all eternity. Answ. As Christ is God or the Word of
the father, he is coequall and coeternall with him in the regiment of his
kingdom: and has neither beginning, middle, or ending thereof; yet as Christ
is God incarnate, and in one person God-man or Man-god, he began after his
ascension and not before, to sit at the right hand of his father: and as S.
Peter says, Act. 2.36.
was made Lord; partly because as he was God, he did then manifest himself to
be that which indeed he was before, namely God and Lord of heaven and earth:
and partly, because as he was man, he received dominion or Lordship from the
father, which he had not before; and thereby was even in his manhood exalted to
be king of heaven and earth: and in this sense Christ says of himself, Mat.
^8.19.
All power is given to me in heaven and earth. The third circumstance is
concerning the person, at whose right hand Christ sits, noted in the words of
the article of God the father Almighty; whereby is signified, that he receives
all the honor, power, and glory of his kingdom from his father: as he, that
is set at the right hand of a prince, receives the honor and authority which
he has, from the prince. Now if it be alleged, that by this means Christ
shall be inferior to his father, because he which receives honor of another
is inferior to him of whom he receives it: the answer is, that in Christ we
must consider his person and his office: in respect of his person as he is the
eternal son of God he is equal to the father, and is not here said to sit
at his right hand: yet in respect of the o^fice which he bears, namely as he
is mediator, and as he is man, he is inferior to the father, and receives his
kingdom from him. As he is God, he is our king and head, and has no head more
then the father: as he is mediator, he is also our head, yet so as he is
under the father as being his head. 1. Cor. 11.3.
And we must not think it strange that one and the same thing should be both
equal and inferior to another, diverse respects considered.

Now in that Christ's placing at the right hand of his father argues
inferioritie between the father and him, hence we learn that they are
deceived which from this article gather, that in the glorification of Christ
there is a transfusion of the proprieties of the godhead, as omnipotency,
omniscience, omnipresence, etc. into his manhood. For this is to abolish all
inferioritie and to make an equality between the creature and the creator.

And whereas again the word Almighty is repeated, it is done upon special
reason: because Christ's sitting at the right hand of God does presuppose
omnipotency. For in vain were all power in heaven and earth given to him,
unless he were omnipotent as the father to execute the same. And therefore the
song of the Elders was on this manner, Worthy is the Lamb that was killed to
receive power and riches, R^v. 5.12.
and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise.

The benefits which redound unto us by Christ's sitting at the right hand of God
are two, one concerns his priesthood, the other his kingly office. The benefit
rising from his priesthood is his Intercession for us: for this is one of the
ends why Christ is now exalted in glory, and sits at the right hand of his
father; namely to make request in the behalf of all that come unto him, as
Paul says, Rom 8.3^.
Christ is risen again, and sits at the right hand of God, and makes
request for us. Now that we may rightly understand what his intercession is,
we are to consider these points. First to whom it is made: secondly, in what
manner: thirdly, whether it be made by Christ alone or no: fourthly, what be
the fruits and benefits thereof: fifthly, the duties whereunto we are moved
thereby. For the first, Intercession is, to make suite, request, or entreaty in
some ones behalf to another: and this is done by Christ for us unto God, 1.
Tim. 2.5.
as Paul says, there is one God, and one mediator between God and man, which
is the man Christ Jesus. Here at the very first arises a difficulty: for in
every intercession there be three parties: the person offended; the person
offending; the intercessour, distinct from them both. Now if Christ the son
of God, make intercession to God for man, then he makes intercession to
himself, because he is true God, which cannot be: how then shall Christ be
mediator? Ans. This point has so troubled the Church of Rome, that for the
resolving of it, they have devised an error, auouching that Christ is
mediator only as he is man, not as he is God, which is untrue. For as both
natures do concur in the work of satisfaction, so likewise they do both
concur in the work of intercession: and therefore a more meet and
convenient answer is this: Christ Jesus God-man in both natures, is directly
our mediator to the first person the father, as S. John says, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the just.
And thus we have three persons in the work of intercession really
distinguished. The party offended is God the Father; the party offending is
man: and thirdly the intercessour distinct from them both is Christ the second
person in Trinity. For howsoever in Godhead he and the Father be one, yet in
person they are really distinguished, and he is as it were in the middle
between the father and us: for the father is God and not man: we that believe
in Christ are men not God: Christ himself both man and God. It may be further
replied that this answer will not stand, because not only the father is
offended, but also the son and the holy Ghost: and therefore there must be a
mediator to them also. Answer. The intercession of Christ is directed to the
father the first person immediately: now the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost have all one indivisible essence, and by consequent one and the same
will: whereupon the father being appeased by Christ's intercession, the Son
and the Holy Ghost are also appeased with him and in him. Thus then
intercession is made to the whole trinity, but yet immediately and directly to
the first person and in him to the rest.

The second point to be considered, is the manner of his intercession unto his
father. We must not imagine, that Christ now in heaven kneeles down on his
knees, and vtters words, and puts up a supplication for all the faithful to
God the father; for that is not beseeming the majesty of him that sits at the
right hand of God. But the manner of his intercession is thus to be conceived.
When one is to speak to an earthly prince in the behalf of another; first of
al he must come into the presence of the king, and secondly make his request:
and both these, Christ performs for us unto God. For the first, after his
ascension he entered into heaven, where he did present unto his father, first of
all his own person in two natures, and secondly the inualuable merits of his
death and passion, in which he was well pleased. And we must further
understand, that as on the cross he stood in our room, so in heaven he now
appears as a public person in our stead, representing all the elect that shall
believe in him, as the holy Ghost says, Heb. 9.24.
Christ Jesus ascended up into heaven to appear in the sight of God for us.
And for the second, Christ makes request for us; in that he wills according
to both his natures, and desires as he is man, that the father would accept
his satisfaction in the behalf of all that are given unto him. And that he
makes request on this manner I prove it thus. Look what was his request in
our behalf when he was here upon earth, the same for substance it continues
still in heaven: but here on earth the substance of his request was that he
willed and desired that his father would be well pleased with us for his
merits, as appears by his prayer in S. John, Father, Cap. 17. 24.
I will that those which thou have given me be with me even where I am, that
they may behold my glory which thou have given me: for thou louedst me before
the fou^datio^ of the world. Therefore he still continues to make request for
us by willing and desiring that his father would accept his merits in our
behalf. If it be alleged that Christ in this solemn prayer used speech and
prostration of his body, the answer is, that these actions were no essential
parts of his prayer. The prostrating of his body served only as a token of
submission to God, as Christ was a creature: and the speech which he used,
served only to utter and express his request. Furthermore, a difference here
must be marked between Christ's passion and his intercession. The passion serves
for the working and causing of a satisfaction to Gods justice for us; and it
is, as it were, the tempering of the plaster: the intercession goes further:
for it applies the satisfaction made, and lays the salve to the very sore. And
therefore Christ makes request not only for the elect generally, but for
particular men, as Paul, James, John, and that particularly, as he testifies
of himself, saying, I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith fail not. If
any shall say, that Christ's willing and desiring of a thing can not be a
request or intercession, the answer is, that in virtue and efficacy it
cou^teruailes all the prayers in the word. For whatsoever Christ wills, the
same also the father being well pleased with him, wills; and therefore
whatsoever Christ as a mediator wills for us at the hands of his father, in
effect or substance is a request or prayer.

The third point is, that Christ alone and none with him makes intercession for
us. And this I prove by induction of particulars. First of all this office
appertains not to the angels: They are indeed ministering spirits for the good
of Gods chosen: they rejoice when a sinner is converted; and when he dies,
they are ready to carry his soul into Abraham's bosom: and God otherwhiles
uses them as messengers to reveal his will: Luke ^.^3.
thus the Angel Gabriel brings a message to Zachary the priest, that God had
heard his prayer: but it is not once said in all the scriptures, that they make
intercession to God for us. As for the Saints departed, they can not make
intercession for us, because they know not our particular estates here on
earth, neither can they hear our requests. And therefore if we should pray to
them to pray for us, we should substitute them into the room of God, because
we ascribe that to them which is proper to him, namely, the searching of the
heart, and the knowledge of all things done upon earth; though withal we
should say, that they do this not by themselves but of God. As for the
faithful here on earth indeed they have warrant yea commandment to pray one
for another: yet can they not make intercession for us. For first, he that
makes interc^ssion must bring something of his own that may be of value and
price with God to procure the grant of his request: secondly, he must do it
in his own name: but the faithful on earth make request to God one for
another not in their own names, nor for their own merits, but in the name and
for the merits of Christ. It is a prerogative belonging to Christ alone to make
a request in his own name, and for his own merits, we therefore conclude that
the work of intercession is the sole work of Christ God and man not belonging
to any creature beside in heaven or in earth. And whereas the Papists can not
content themselves with his intercession alone, as being most sufficient: it
argues plainly, that they doubt either of his power or of his will: whereupon
their prayers turn to sin. Iam. 1.6.


The fruits and benefits of Christ's intercession are these. First by means of
it we are assured, that those which are repentant sinners shall stand and
appear righteous before God for ever: at what time soever Christ, being now
in heaven, and there presenting himself and his merits before his father,
shows himself desirous and willing, and they whosoever they are being
sinners, should be accepted of God for the same, even then immediately at that
very instant this his will is done, and they are accepted as righteous before
god indeed. When a man looks upon things directly through the air, they
appear in their proper forms and colors as they are: but if they be looked
upon through a green glass, they all appear green: so likewise if God
behold us as we are in our selves, we appear as vile and damnable sinners: but
if he look upon us as we are presented before his throne in heaven, in the
person of our Mediator Christ Jesus, willing that we should be approved for
his merits: then we appear without all spot and wrinkle before him. And this
is the use Paul makes hereof: Romans ^.^^.
It is God (says he) that justifies: and the reason is rendered: For it is
Christ that is dead, yea or rather which is risen again, who is also at the
right hand of God, and makes request for us.

Secondly Christ's intercession serves to preserve al repentant sinners in the
estate of grace: that being once justified and sanctified, they may so continue
to the end. For when any servant of God is overtaken by the corruption of his
own nature, and falls into any particular sin, then Christ's intercession is
made as a blessed hand to apply the salve of his death to that particular sore.
For he continually appears before God, and shows himself to be willing that
God the father should accept his one only sacrifice for the daily and
particular sins of this or that particular man: and this is done, that a man
being justified before God may not fall away quite from grace, but for every
particular sin may be humbled and receive pardon. If this were not so, our
estate should be most miserable, considering that for every sin committed by
us after our repentance, we deserve to be cast out of the favor of God.

Thirdly Christ's intercession serves to make our good works acceptable to God.
For even in the best works that a man can do, there are two wants. First they
are good only in part: secondly they are mingled with sin. For as a man is
partly spirit or grace and partly flesh: so are his works partly gracious and
partly fleshly. And because grace is only begun in this life, therefore all
the works of grace in this life are sinful and imperfit. Now by Christ's
intercession his satisfaction is applied to our persons, and by consequent the
defect of our works is covered and removed, and they are approved of God the
father. Rev. 8.3.
In a vision Saint John saw an angel, standing before the altar with a golden
censer full of sweet odours to offer up with the prayers of the Saints upon
the same. And this signifies, that Christ presents our works before the throne
of God, and by his intercession sanctifies them, that they may be acceptable to
God. And therefore we must remember that when we do any thing that is accepted
of God, it is not for our sakes, but by reason of the value and vigor of
Christ his merit.

Fourthly the intercession of Christ made in heaven, breeds and causes in
the hearts of men upon earth that believe another intercession of the spirit,
as Paul says, Romans 8.26.
He gives us his spirit, which helps our infirmities and makes request for
us with sighs which can not be expressed, but he which searches the hearts
knows what is the meaning of the spirit, for he makes request for the Saints
according to the will of God. Now the spirit is said to make request, in that
it stirs and mooues every contrite heart to pray with sighs and groans
unspeakable to God for things needful: and this grace is a fruit derived from
the intercession of Christ in heaven by the operation of the spirit. For as the
Sun though the body of it abide in the heavens, yet the beams of it descend
to us that are on earth. So the intercession of Christ made in heaven is tied
as it were to his person alone, yet the groans and desires of the touched
heart, as the beams thereof are here on earth among the faithful. And
therefore if we desire to know whether Christ make intercession for us or no,
we need not to ascend up into the heavens to learn the truth: but we must
descend into our own hearts and look whether Christ have given us his spirit,
which makes us cry unto God and make request to him with groans and sighs
that can not be expressed: and if we find this in our hearts, it is an evident
and infallible sign that Christ continually makes intercession for us in
heaven. He that would know whether the Sun shine in the firmament, must not
clime up into the clouds to look, but search for the beams thereof upon the
earth: which when he sees, he may conclude, that the sun shines in the
firmament. And if we would know whether Christ in heaven makes intercession for
us, let us ransacke our own consciences, and there make search whether we
feel the spirit of Christ crying in us, Abba, Father. As for those that never
feel this work of Gods spirit in them, their case is miserable, whatsoever
they be. For Christ as yet makes no intercession for them, considering these
two always go together; his intercession in heaven, and the work of his
spirit in the hearts of men, moving them to bewail their own sins with
sighs and groans that cannot be expressed, and to cry and to pray unto God
for grace: and therefore all such, whether they be young or old, that never could
pray but mumble up a few words for fashions sake, can not assure themselves to
have any part in Christ's intercession in heaven.

The duties to be learned hence are these. First, whereas Christ makes
intercession for us, it teaches all men to be most careful to love and like
this blessed Mediator, and to be ready and willing to become his servants and
disciples, and that not for form and fashion sake only, but in all truth and
sincerity of heart. For he ascended to heaven, and there sits at the right
hand of his father to make request for us, that we might be delivered from hell
and come to eternal life. Wicked Haman procured letters from king Ahashuerosh,
for the destruction of all the Jews, men, women, and children in his
dominions: this done, Hester the Queen makes request to the king that her
people might be saved, and the letters of Haman revoked; she obtaines her
request and freedom was given, and contrary letters of joyful deliverance
were sent in post have to all provinces where the Jews were. Whereupon arose a
wonderful joy and gladness among the Jews, and it is said, Hest 8.1^.
that thereupon many of the people of the land became Jews. Well now, behold a
greater matter among us then this: for there is the handwriting of
condemnation, the law; and therein the sentence of a double death, of body and
soul, and Satan as wicked Haman accuses us, and seeks by all means our
condemnation: but yet behold not any earthly Hester, but Christ Jesus the son
of God is come down from heaven, and has taken away this handwriting of
condemnation, and cancelled it upon the cross, and is now ascended into
heaven, and there sits at the right hand of his father, and makes request for
us: and in him his father is well pleased, and yields to his request in our
behalf. Now then what must we do in this case? Surely, look as the Persians
became Jews when they heard of their safety, so we in life and conversation
must become Christians, turn to Christ, embrace his doctrine, and practice the
same unfeignedly. And we must not content our selves with a formal profession
of religion, but search our own hearts, and fly unto Christ for the pardon of
our sins, and that earnestly as for life and death as the thief does at the
bar, when the judge is giving sentence against him. When we shall thus humble
our selves, then Christ Jesus that sit at the right hand of God will plead our
cause, and be our attorney unto his father, and his father again will accept
of his request in our behalf. Then shall we of Persians become Jews, and of
the children of this world become the sons of God. Secondly, when we pray to
God, we must not do as the blind man does, as it were, rush upon God in
praying to him without consideration had to the Mediatonr between us and him,
but we always must direct our prayers to God in the name of Christ, for he is
advanced to power and glory in heaven, that he might be a fit patron for us
who might prefer and present our prayers to God the father, Ioh. 16.2^^
that thereby they might be accepted and we might obtain our request. So
likewise we must give thanks to God in the name of Christ: for in him and for
his sake God does bestow on us his blessings.

Thus much of Christ's intercession: the other benefit which concerns Christ
kingly office is, that he sits at the right hand of his father for the
administration of that special kingdom which is committed to him. I say
special, because he is our king not only by the right creation governing all
things created together with the father and the holy Ghost, but also more
specially by the right of redemption in respect of another kingdom, not of
this world, but eternal and spiritual respecting the very conscience of man.
In the administration whereof he has absolute power to command and forbid,
to condemn and absolve, and therefore has the keys of heaven and hell to
open and shut; which power no creature beside no not the angels in heaven, can
have. For the better understanding of this which I say, we are to consider,
first the dealing of Christ toward his own Church; secondly his dealing in
respect of his enemies. And his dealing toward his own Church stands in four
things. The first is the collecting or gathering of it: and this is a special
end of his sitting at the right hand of his father. Christ said to his
disciples, I have chosen you out of this world: and the same may truly be said
of all the Elect, that Christ in his good time will gather them all to himself
that they may be a peculiar people to God. And this action of his in collecting
the Church, is nothing else but a translation of those whom he has ordained to
life everlasting out of the kingdom of darkness, in which they have served
sin and Satan, into his own kingdom of grace, that they may be ruled and
guided by him eternally. And this he does two ways: first by the preaching of
the word, for it is a powerful outward means, whereby he singleth and forteth
his own servants from the blind and wicked world, as Paul says, Ephesians. 4.11.
He gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
pastors and teachers, for the gath^ring together of Saints. And hence we
learn two things. The first, that every minister of Gods word, and every one
that intends to take upon him that calling, must propound unto himself
principally this end, to single out man from man, and gather out of this world
such as belong to the Church of Christ: and as Jeremy says, Ier. 15.19.
to separate the precious from the vile. The second, that all those which will
be good hearers of Gods word, must show themselves so far forth conformable
unto it, that it may gather them out of the world, and that it may work a
change in them, and make them the servants of Christ: and if the preaching of
the word do not work this good work in our hearts, then the end will be a
separation from the presence of God. Christ when he came near Jerusalem, and
considered their rebellion whereby they refused to be gathered unto him, wept
over it, and said, Math. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou which stonest the Prophets, and killest them that
are sent unto thee, How often would I have gathered thy children together, as
the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and thou would not. And by
this he teaches, that if the preaching of the word turn not us to Christ, it
turns to our destruction.

The other means of gathering the Church, and that the more principal is, the
inward operation of the spirit, whereby the mind is enlightened, the heart is
mollified, and the whole man is converted to God. And this ordinarily is joined
with the ministry or preaching of the word, as appears by the example of
Lydia. Saint Luke says, Act 16.
God opened her heart to be attentive to the doctrine of the Apostle. And by
the example of Paul, when Christ says, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? at
this very speech he is converted, and said, Act. 9.6.
Who art thou, Lord: what will thou that I do? And this is manifest also by
experience. There is nothing in the world more contrary to the nature of man,
then the preaching of the word: for it is the wisdom of God, to which the
flesh is enimitie. Here then it may be demanded, how it can be in force to
turn any man to God. Ans. The word preached is the scepter of Christ's
kingdom, which against the nature of man by the operation of the holy Ghost
joined therewith, does bend and bow the heart, will, and affections of man to
the will of Christ.

The second work of Christ is, after the Church is gathered, to guide it in
the way to life everlasting. He is the shepherd of his Church, which guides
his flock in and out, and therefore Paul says, Romans 8.14.
They that are Christ's, are guided by his spirit. And by Esai the Lord says,
those his servants which are turned from idolatry, he will guide in the way,
Esa 30 21.
and their ears shall hear a voice behind them, saying, This is the way,
walk in it, when thou turnest to the right hand and to the left. Which voice
is nothing else but the voice of the holy Ghost in the mouth of the ministers,
directing them in the ways of God. The children of Israel were traveling from
Egypt to the land of Canaan full forty years, whereas they might have gone
the journey in forty days. Their way was through the wilderness of Arabia,
their guides were a pillar of cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night: the
manner of their journey was this: when the pillars moved, they moved; when
the pillars stood still, they stood still: and so long as the pillars either
moved or stood still, they likewise moved or stood still. And by all this a
further matter, namely the regiment of Christ over his Church, was signified.
Every one of us are as passengers and trauailers, not to any earthly Canaan,
but to the heavenly Jerusalem: and in this journey we are to pass through the
wild and desert wilderness of this world: Isa. 4.5.
our guide is Christ himself, figured by the pillar of fire and the cloud:
because by his word and spirit he shows us how far we may go in every
action, and where we must stand, and he goes before us as our guide to life
everlasting.

The third work of Christ is, to exercise his Church unto spiritual obedience
by manifold troubles, crosses, temptations, and afflictions in this world, as
earthly kings use to train and exercise their subjects. (...)
When our Savior Christ was with his disciples in a ship, there arose a
great tempest upon the sea, so as the ship was almost covered with waves; but
he was asleep; and his disciples came and awoke him, saying, Save us master,
we perish. Behold here a lively picture of the dealing of Christ with his
servants in this life. His manner is to place them upon the sea of this world,
and to raise up against the^ bleake storms and flaes of contrary winds by
their enemies, the flesh, the devil, the world. And further in the midst of
all these dangers he for his own part makes as though he lay asleep for a
time, that he may the better make trial of their patience, faith, and
obedience. And the ends for which he uses this spiritual exercise are these.
The first to make all his subjects to humble themselves, and as it were to go
crooked and buckle under their offenses committed against his majesty in times
past. Thus Job after the Lord had long afflicted him, and laid his hand sore
upon him, says, Job 39 37. and 42.6.
Behold I am vile: and again, I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes.
In the same manner we being his subjects and people, must look to be exercised
with temptations and afflictions which shall make us bend and bow for our
sins past, as the old man goes crooked and doubles to the earth by reason
of age. The second, is to prevent sins in the time to come. A father when he
sees his child too bold and venterous about fire and water; takes it and holds
it over the fire or over the water, as though he would burn or drown it,
whereas his purpose indeed is nothing else but to prevent danger in time to
come. In like manner Christ's subjects are bold to sin by nature, and
therefore to prevent a mischief chief he does exercise them with affliction,
and seems for a season as though he would quite forsake his Church, but his
meaning is only to prevent offenses in times to come. The third end is, to
continue his subjects in obedience unto his commandments: so the Lord says,
when he would bring his Church from idolatry: Ose. ^.^.
Behold, I will stop thy way with thorns, and make an hedge, that she shall
not find her paths. The holy Ghost here borrowes a comparison from beasts,
which going in the way, see green pastures, and desire to enter in, and
therefore go to the hedge, but feeling the sharpnes of the thorns dare not
adventure to go in. So Gods people like unto wild beasts in respect of sin,
viewing the green pastures of this world, which are the pleasures thereof, are
greatly affected therewith: and if it were not for sharpnes of crosses and
temptations, which are Gods spiritual hedge by which he keeps the^ in, they
would range out of the way, and rush into sin, as the horse into the battle.

The fourth and last work of Christ in respect of his Church is, that he sits
at the right hand of his father to defend the same against the rage of all
enemies whatsoever they are: and this he does two ways. First by giving to his
servants sufficient strength to bear all the assaults of their enemies, the
world, the flesh, and the devil. For Paul says, those to whom the Lord has
given the gift of faith, Phil. 1.29.
to them also he has given this gift to suffer afflictions. And the same
Apostle also prays for the Colossians, Col. 1 11.
that they may be strengthened with all might through his glorious power unto
all patience and long suffering with ioyfulnesse. The evidence hereof we may
most plainly see in the most constant deaths of the Martyrs of Christ,
recorded both in the word of God, and in the Church histories. It is wonderful
to see their courage and constancy. For at such times as they have been
brought to execution, they refused to be bound or chained, willingly suffering
most cruel torments, without shrinking or fear; such courage and strength the
Lord gave them to withstand the violent rage of all their adversaries.

Secondly, he defends his Church by limiting the power and rage of all enemies.
And hence it is, that although the power of the Church of God on earth be weak
and slender in it self, and contrariwise the power of the devil exceeding
great, yet can he not so much as touch the people of God. And he more preuailes
by inward suggestions and temptations, then by outward violence. And if it were
not that the power of Christ does bridle his rage, there could be no abode for
the Church of Christ in this world.

Thus we have seen what are the works of Christ in governing his church: and
we for our parts that profess our selves to be members thereof, must show our
selves to be so indeed, by an experience of these works of his in our own
hearts. And we must suffer him to gather us under his own wing, and to guide
us by his word and spirit, and we are to acquaint our selves with those
spiritual exercises, whereby his good pleasure is to nurture us to all
obedience. Lastly, we must depend on his aid and protection in all estates.
And seeing we in this land, have had peace and rest with the Gospel of Christ
among us a long time, by Gods especial goodness, we must now after these
days of peace look for days of tribulation: we must not imagine that our
ease and liberty will continue always. For look as the day and night do one
follow another; so likewise in the administration of the church here upon
earth, Christ suffers a continual intercourse between peace and
persecution. Thus he has done from the beginning hitherto, and we may resolve
our selves that so it will continue till the end: and therefore it shall be
good for us in these days of our peace, to prepare our selves for troubles and
afflictions: and when troubles come; we must still remember the fourth work of
Christ in the government of his church, namely that in all dangers he will
defend us against the rage of our enemies, as well by giving us power and
strength to bear with patience and joy whatsoever shall be laid upon us, as
also bridle the rage of the world, the flesh, and the devil, so as they shall
not be able to exercise their power and malice to the full against us.

Thus much of the dealing of Christ toward his own Church and people. Now
follows the second point, namely his dealing toward his enemies; and here by
enemies I understand all creatures, but especially men, which, as they are by
nature enemies to Christ and his kingdom, so they persevere in the same
enimitie unto the end. Now his dealing toward them is, in his good time to
work their confusion, as he himself says, Luke 19.27.
Those mine enemies that would not that I should reign over them, bring them
hither and slay them before me. And David says, Psalm. 2.9.
The Lord will bruise his enemies with a rod of iron, and break them in
pieces like a potters vessel. And again, and 110.1.
I will make thine enemies thy footes^oole, As Iosuah dealt with the five Kings
that were hid in the cave; Ios. 10.24.
he first makes a slaughter of their armies; then he brings them forth and
makes the people to set their feet on their necks, and to hang them on five
trees. So Christ deals with his enemies: he treads them under his feet, and
makes a slaughter not so much of their bodies as of their souls. And this the
Church of God finds to be true by experience, as well as it finds the love of
Christ toward it self. Now he confounds his enemies two ways. The first is
by hardness of heart, which arises when God withdraws his grace from man,
and leaves him to himself, so as he goes on forward from sin to sin, and
never repents to the last gasp. And we must esteem of it as a most
fearful and terrible judgment of God: for when the heart is possessed
therewith, it becomes so flintie and rebellious, that a man will never rel^nt
or turn to god. This is manifest in Pharao, for though God sent most grievous
plagues both upon him and all the land of Egypt, yet would he not submit
himself, save only for a fit, while the hand of God was upon him: for after,
he returned to the former obstinacy in which he continued till he was drowned
in the sea. And this judgment of God is the more fearful; because when a man
is in the midst of all his misery, he feels no misery. And as in some kind
of sickness a man may die languishing; so where hardness of heart reigns wholly
and finally, a man may descend to the pit of hell triumphing and re^oycing. And
to come near to our selves, it is to be feared least this judgment of all
judgments be among us in these our days. For where is any ^u^ning to God by
repentance. Still men go forward in sin without remorse. We have had the
word preached among us a long time, but it takes no place in men's hearts. They
are not softened with the hammer of Gods word: nay they are like the smiths
stithy or anuil, which the more it is beat with the ha^nmar, the harder it is.
But in the fear of God, let us seek to be changed, and take heed: the
deceitfulnes of sin is wonderful. Let us not be carried away with an
ouerweening of our selves; a man may have good gifts of God, as the gift of
knowledge, the gift of prophecy, the gift of conceiving a prayer (I say not of
praying truly:) and hereupon think himself in good case; and yet for all this
have nothing but an impenitent and flintie heart. For this cause it stands
every man upon to look unto it, least this judgment of God take hold on him.
And that we may avoid the same, we must labor for two things: I. to feel the
heavy burden of our sins, and be touched in conscience for them, even as we
are troubled in our bodies with the aches and pains thereof: this is a token
of grace. II. We must labor to feel in our own souls the want of Christ: we
say indeed that we feel it, but it is a very great matter to have an heart
that does open it self, and as it were gape after Christ, as the dry and
thirsty land where no water is. Though we have knowledge and learning never so
much, and many other gifts of God, yet if we have not broken hearts that feel
the burden of our sins, and the want of Christ, and that we stand in need of
every drop of his blood for the washing away of all these our sins, our
case is miserable. And the rather we must prevent this hardness of heart,
because Christ Jesus in heaven sits at the right hand of his father in full
power and authority, to kill and confound all those that be his enemies, and
will not submit themselves to bear his yoke.

The second way is, by final desperation; I say, final, because all kind of
desperation is not evil. For when a man despaireth of himself and of his own
power in the matter of his salvation, it tends to his eternal comfort. But
final desperation is, when a man utterly despaires of the pardon of his own
sins and of life everlasting. Examples hereof we have in Saul that slew
himself, and in Achitophel and Judas, that hanged themselves. This sin is
caused thus: So many sins as a man commits without repentance, so many
most bloody wounds he gives unto his own soul: and either in death or life
God makes him feel the smart, and the huge weight of them all: whereby the
soul sinkes down into the gulf of despair without recovery. God said to
Cain, If thou do amiss, sin lies at ^hy door. Where he uses a borrowed
speech from wild beasts, who so long as they are sleeping stir not; but
being awaked, they fly in a man's face, and rend out his throat. In like manner
the sins which thou committest, lie at the door of thine heart, though thou
feel them not: and if thou do not prevent the danger by speedy repentance,
God will make thee to feel them once before thou die, and raise up such
terrors in thy conscience, that thou shall think thy self to be in hell
before thou art in hell: and therefore it is good for every man to take heed
how he continues an enemy to Christ. The best course is to turn betime from
our ^innes, and become the friends of Christ, that so we may escape these
fearful judgments.

And whereas Christ in this manner gouernes all things in heaven and earth, we
are bound to perform unto him three duties, reverence, obedience, thankfulness.
For the first, Paul says, P^il. 1.10.
God has exalted him and given him a name above all names, that at the name of
Jesus (which name, is his exaltation in heaven in full power and glory) should
every knee bow. We dare not so much as speak of an earthly king irreverently,
what reverence then do we owe unto Christ the king of heaven and earth? David's
heart was touched in that he had cut off but the lap of Saul's garment, when he
might have slain him, 1. Sam. 24.6.
because he was the Lords anointed. On then, how much more ought our hearts
to be touched, if we shall in the least measure dishonor Christ Jesus our Lord
and king. Secondly, we are here taught to perform obedience to him, and to do
him all the homage we can. The master of the family in all his lawefull
commandments must be obeyed: now the Church of Christ is a family, and we are
members thereof: therefore we must yield obedience to him in all things: for
all his commandments are just. When Saul was chosen king over Israel, 1. Sam.
10.^6.
certain men which feared God, whose hearts God had touched, followed him to
Gibea and brought him presents, but the wicked despised him: the same is much
more to be verified in us toward Christ our Lord. We must have our hearts
touched with desire to perform obedience unto him: if not, we are men of
Belial that despise him. If this obedience were put in practice, the Gospel
would have better success in the hearts of the people, and the Lords sabbath
would be better kept, and men would bear greater love both to God and to their
neighbors then now they do. The third duty which we owe unto him is
thankfulness, for the endless care which he shows in the governing and
preserving of us. When David waxed old, and had made Solomon his son king in
his stead, all the people shouted and cried, 1. King. 1.34.
God save king Solomon, God save king Solomon, so as the earth rang again.
Shall the people of Israel thus rejoice at the crowning of Solomon, and shall
not we much more rejoice when as Christ Jesus is placed in heaven at the right
hand of his father, and has the everlasting scepter of his kingdom put into
his hand? And we are to show this thankfulness unto him by doing any thing in
this world that may tend to his honor and glory, though it be with the
adventure of our lives. 2. Sam 25.15. 16.
When David desired to drink of the water of the well of B^thlem, three of his
mighty men went and brake into the host of the Philist^ms, and brought him
water. Thus they ventured their lives for David's sake: and shall not we much
more willingly venture our lives to do Christ service in token of
thankfulness for his continual preserving of us?

Thus much of the highest degree of Christ's exaltation in his kingeome: now
follows the last point to be believed concerning Christ in these words, From
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. And they contain a
proof or a particular declaration of the former article. For as on earth those
that are set at the right hand of kings do execute justice in courts or
assizes ^or the maintenance of the state and peace of the kingdom: so Christ
Jesus sitting at the right hand of his father, that is, being made sovereign
Lord of all things both in heaven and earth, is to hold a court or assise, in
which he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead. Now in handling
the last judgment, we are to consider these points: I. whether there shall be
a judgment or not? II. the time of it. III. the signs thereof. IV. the manner
of it. V. the use which is to be made thereof. Of these in order. For the first
point, whether there shall be a judgment or not? the question is needful:
for as Saint Peter says, ^. Pet ^^.
There shall come in the last days mockers, which shall walk after their
lusts, and say, Where is the promise of his coming? which days are now. The
answer to this question is set down in this article, in which we profess that
the coming of Christ to the last judgment, is a point of religion specially
to be held and avouched. The reasons to prove it, are principally two: first
the testimony of God himself in the books of the old and new testament,
which affoard unto us plentiful proofs touching the last judgment, so as he
which will but lightly read the same, shall not need to doubt thereof. The
second reason is taken from the justice and goodness of God, the property
whereof is, to punish wicked and ungodly men, and to honor and reward the
godly: but in this world the godly man is most of all in misery, (for
judgment begins at Gods house,) and the ungodly have their hearts ease.
Wicked Dives has the world at will, but poor Lazarus is hunger bitten, full
of sores, and miserable every way. This being so, it remains, that after
this life, ther^ must needs be a judgment and a second coming of Christ,
when the godly must receive fullness of joy and glory, and the ungodly
fullness of woe and misery. This second reason may stop the mouths of all
gainesayers in the world whatsoever. But it may be objected, that the whole
world stands either of believers or unbelievers, and that there is no last
judgment for either of these: for the believer, as Christ says, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into judgment; and the unbeliever is
condemned already, Ioh. 5.24. Job. 3.18.
and therefore needs no further judgment. Ans. Where it is said, he that
believes shall not come into judgment, it must be understood of the
judgment of condemnation, and not the judgment of absolution; and he that
believes not is condemned already in effect and substance three ways: I. in
the counsel of God, who did foresee and appoint his condemnation, as it is a
punishment of sin, and an execution of his justice. II. in the word of God,
where he has his condemnation set down. III. he is condemned in his own
conscience: for every ungodly man's conscience is a judge unto himself, which
does every hour condemn him, and it is a forerunner of the last judgment.
And notwithstanding all this, there may remain a second judgment, which is a
manifestation and finishing of that which was begun in this world: and
therefore the meaning of that place is this; he that believes not is already
judged in part, but so as the full manifestation thereof, shall be at the
second coming of Christ.

The second circumstance, is the time of his judgment: in handling whereof
first let us see what is the judgment of men, secondly what is the truth. For
the first, two opinions touching this time take place. The first is, that the
second coming of Christ shall be about six thousand years from the beginning
of the world, and that for the Elects sake some of these days must be
shortened: and now since the beginning of the world, are passed five thousand
and almost six hundred years so as there remains but four hundred. The
grounds of this opinion are these. First the testimony of Elias, two thousand
years before the law: two thousand years under the law: and two thousand
years under Christ. And for the elects sake some of these years shall be
shortened. Answer. This was not the sentence of Elias the Thisbite, but of
another. Elias which was a Jew no prophet. And whereas he says: two thousand
years before the law: and two thousand years under the law, he fails. From
the giving of the law to the coming of Christ, was about one thousand and five
hundred yeares^ and from the law to the creation above two thousand. Now if
Elias cannot set down a just number for the time past, which a mean man many
do, what shall we think that he can do for the time to come? And if he deceive
us in that which is more easy to find, how shall we trust him in things that be
harder? The second reason is this: How long god was in creating the world, so
long he shall be in governing the same; but he was six days in creating the
world, and in the seventh he rested, and so proportionally he shall be six
thousand years in governing the world; every day answering to a thousand
years, as Peter says: A thousand years are but as one day with God, and then
shall the end be. Ans. This reason likewise has no ground in Gods word: as
for that place of Peter, the meaning is, that innumerable years are but as a
short time with God: A certain number put for an uncertain.
and we may as well say, two thousand or ten thousand years are but as one
day with God. For Peter meant not to speak any thing distinctly of a thousand
years, but of a long time. Thirdly it is alleged, that within six thousand
years from the creation of the world, shall appear in the heavens strange
conjunctions, and positions of the stars, which signify nothing else but the
subversion of the state of the world: nay, some have noted that the end
thereof should have been in the year of our Lord, a thousand five hundred
eighty eight: their writings are manifest: but we find by experience that
this opinion is false and frivolous, and their grounds be as frivolous. For no
man can gather by the ordinary course of the heavens, the extraordinary
change of the whole world.

The second opinion is, that the end of the world shall be three years and an
half after the revealing of Antichrist. And it is gathered out of places in
Daniel and the Revelation, abused. Where a time and half a time signify not
three years and a half, but a short time. And therefore to take the words
properly, is far from the meaning of the holy Ghost. For mark, if the end
shall be three years and a half after the revealing of Antichrist, then may
any man know before hand the particular month wherein the end of the world
should be, which is not possible.

Now the truth which may be avouched against all, is this, that no man can
know or set down or conjecture the day, the week, the month, the year, or 100
years.
the age, wherein the second coming of Christ and the last day of judgment
shall be. For Christ himself says, Math. 24. 36.
of that day and hour knows no man, no not the angels in heaven, but God
only may Christ himself as he is man knew it not. And when the disciples
asked Christ at his ascension, whether he would restore the kingdom unto
Israel, he answered, Act. 1.7.
It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which the father has put in
his own power. And Paul says, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.
Of the times and seasons, brethren, you have no need that I write unto you.
For you your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord shall come, even
as a thief in the night. Now we know that a man that keeps his house, can
not conjecture or imagine when a thief will come: and therefore no man can set
down the particular time or age, when Christ shall come to judgment. This
must we hold steadfastly, and if we read the contrary in the writings of men,
we are not to believe their sayings, but account of them as the devices of men,
which have no ground in Gods word.

To come to the third point, namely the signs of the last judgment, they are
of two sorts: some go before the coming of Christ, and some are joined with
it. The signs that go before, are in number seven, recorded distinctly by the
holy Ghost. The first, is the preaching of the Gospel through the whole world.
So our Savior Christ says, Math 24.14.
this Gospel of the kingdom must be preached through the whole world for a
witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come. Which place must thus
be understood; not that the Gospel must be preached to the whole world at any
one time, for that (as I take it) was never yet seen, neither shall be; but
that it shall be published distinctly and successively at several times: and
thus understanding the words of Christ, if we consider the time since the
Apostles days, we shall find this to be true, that the Gospel has been
preached to all the world; and therefore this first sign of Christ's coming is
already past and accomplished.

The second sign of his coming, is the revealing of Antichrist, as Paul
says, 1 Thessalonians. 2.3.
The day of Christ shall not come before there be a departure first, and that
man of sin he disclosed, even the son of perdition, which is Antichrist.
Concerning this sign, in the year of our Lord 602. Gregory the eight pope of
Rome, avouched this solemnly as a manifest truth, that whosoever did take to
himself the name of Universal Bishop, the same was Antichrist. Now five years
after, Boniface succeeding him, was by Phocas and Emperor entitled,
Universal Bishop, pastor of the Catholic Church, in the year of our Lord
607. and of all Popes he was the first known Antichrist, and since him all his
successors have taken unto the^ the same title of Universal and Catholic
Bishop, whereby it does plainly appear, that at Rome has bin and is the
Antichrist. And this sign is also past.

The third is, a general departing of most men from the faith. For it is said
in the place before named, let no man deceive you: for the day of Christ shall
not come, except there be a departing first. ^. The^s. 2 3.
General departure has bin in former ages. When Arius spread his heresy, it
took such place that the whole world almost became an Arian. And during the
space of 900. years from the time of Boniface, the popish heresy spread it
self over the whole earth, and the faithful servants of God were but as an
handful of wheat in a mountain of chafe, which can scarce be discerned. This
sign is in part already past, nevertheless it shall continue to the end,
because men shall continually depart from the faith. And the nearer the end of
the world is, the more Satan rages and seeks to bring me^ into his kingdom.
Therefore it stands us in hand to labor for the knowledge of true religion,
and having learned it, most heartily to love the same.

The fourth sign is, a general corruption in manners. This point the Apostle
sets down at large, saying, ^. Tim. 3.^.
Toward the latter days shall come perilous times, wherein men shall be lovers
of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, and without natural affection, truce breakers,
false accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of them which are good^
traitors, headie, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of god,
etc. This general corruption in the manners of men, is noted by our Savior
Christ, when he says, When he comes he shall scarce sinde faith upon the
earth. This sign has bin in former ages, and is no doubt at this day in the
world. For it is hard to find a man that walks justly, soberly, and
faithfully, doing the duties of his calling to God and man.

The fifth sign of Christ's coming stands in terrible and grievous calamities.
For Christ's disciples asking him a sign of his coming, and of the end of the
world, he says, Math. 24.6,1^
There shall be wars and rumors of wars, nation shall rise against nation,
and realm against realm: and there shall be pestilence and famine and
earthquakes in diverse places, and men shall be at their wits ends. These
have bin in former ages. In the first three hundred years after Christ, were
ten most fearful persecutions: and since in Europe the Church of God has
bin wonderfully persecuted by the Antichrist of Rome in the hundred years last
past.

The sixth sign is, an exceeding deadnes of heart, so as neither judgments
from heaven, nor the preaching of the word shall move the hearts of men. So
Christ says, It shall be in the coming of the son of man, as it was in the
days of Noe, and in the days of Sodom: Luke 17.26.
they knew nothing till the flood came, and fire from heaven destroyed them
all. This sign undoubtedly is manifest in these our days, howsoever it has
been also in former times. For where are any almost that are moved with Gods
judgments, or touched at the preaching of the word, nay rather men harden
their hearts, and become secure and careless. The small fruit that the word of
God brings forth in the lives of men, shows this to be most true.

The seventh and last sign, set down by the Apostle Paul is, Romans 11.25.
that there shall be a calling of the Jews before the Lord come to judgment:
but of the time when this calling shall be, of the manner how, or the number of
them that shall be called, there is no mention made of in the word of God. Now
it is likely that this sign is yet to come.

These are the signs that go before the coming of Christ, all which are
almost past, and therefore the end can not be far off. Now follows the sign
that is joined with the coming of Christ, called the sign of the son of
man. What this sign is, we find not in the Scriptures. Some think it to be
the sign of the cross; but that is frivolous: some, the glory and majesty
of Christ, which shall be made manifest in his appearance: which seems to be
otherwise by the very words of Christ. Math. 24 30.
Then (says he) shall appear the sign of the son of man, etc. and then
they shall see him come in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory:
where he distinguishes the one from the other. But I rather conjecture it to
be the burning of heaven and earth with fire, at the very instant of Christ's
coming, mentioned by Peter. We must not here dispute whence this fire shall
come, or how it shall be kindled, for that the word of God has concealed: and
where God has not a mouth to speak, there we must not have an ear to hear.

The uses to be made hereof, are these. When S. Peter had set down the change
that shall be at the coming of Christ, and that heaven and earth must be
purged with fire, he makes this use thereof. Seeing all things must be
dissolved, what manner of men ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness?
and the reason is good. For if heaven and earth must be changed and purged at
Christ's coming, then much more ought we to be changed, and to put off the old
man of sin, and to become new creatures created after the image of God in
righteousness and true holiness. If the bruit creatures must be renewed by
fire, then much more are we to labor that the heat of Gods spirit may burn
up sin and corruption in us, and so change us that we may be ready for him
against his coming: else heaven and earth it self shall stand in judgment
against us to our condemnation. Secondly, the consideration of this, that the
world shall be consumed with fire, teaches us moderation and sobriety in the
use of Gods creatures, as in costly buildings, gorgeous attire, and such like.
What madness is this, to bestow all that we have, on such things, as at the day
of judgment shall be consumed with fire. For look whatsoever abuse shall come
to Gods creatures by our folly, the same shall then be abolished. Thirdly we
must consider that the cause why heaven and earth must be consumed with fire,
is man's sin, by means whereof, they are made subject to vanity and corruption.
Here then we have just occasion to acknowledge the greatness and wretchedness of
our sins. If any of us had but seen the Jews leprosy, it would have made
us to wonder: for the contagion thereof did infect not only the whole man but
his garments also that were about him, and sometime the walls of his house: but
howesoeuer we cannot see that leprosy among us, yet we may see a worse. For
the leprosy of our sins does not only infect our garments, and the things
about us, with our bodies; but even the high heavens and the earth are stained
with the contagion thereof, and are made subject to vanity and corruption: yea
by sin in us the most glorious creatures in them, as the Sun, Moon, and
stars are become subject to vanity. Oh then, how wretched is the heart of
man, that makes no bones of sin, which is the most noisome thing in all the
world, the stink whereof has infected both heaven and earth. If we could
consider this, we would not be so slack in humbling our selves for the same
as we are. We can not abide to look on a poor lazar full of blanes and sores:
but if we could see our sins in their right colors, they would make us seem
unto our selves ten thousand times more ougly then any lazar man can be; the
contagion thereof is so great and noisome, that the very heavens which are many
thousand miles distant from us, are infected therewith. Yet here we are to
know, that this fire shall not consume the substance of heaven and earth, but
only change the quality, and abolish the corruption which our sins have
brought upon them.

The fourth point to be considered, is the manner of the last judgment, in
which we may obeserue two things: I. who shall be judge: II. the proceeding of
this judge. The first is expressed in this article; From thence he shall come
to judge. He, that is, Christ Jesus the second person in Trinity. For the
father has committed all judgment unto him. It is indeed an action common to
all the three persons in trinity, but yet the execution thereof appertains
unto the son. The father indeed does judge the world, but yet by the son.
But some may object, (...). ^9. 8.
that the Apostles shall sit on twelve thrones and judge the twelve tribes of
Israel. And S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 6.2.
The Saints shall judge the world. How then is this true, that christ is the
only judge of the world. Ans. The authority of judgment and giving sentence
at the last day is proper to Christ alone, and does not belong either to the
Apostles or to the Saints: and they shall judge at the last day only as
witnesses and approouers of Christ's judgment. At the great day of assise
beside the judge, the justices on the bench are also in a manner judges, not
that they give sentence, but because by their presence they approve and
witness the equity of the sentence of the judge: so the definitive sentence
does belong to Christ: and the Apostles and Saints do nothing but approoue^
and being present give assent to his righteous sentence.

The whole proceeding of the last judgment may be reduced to seven points or
heads. The first is the coming of the judge in the clouds. Here at the first
may be demanded, why Christ holds the last judgment rather on earth then in
heaven. Ans. He does it for two causes. One, the creature to be judged has
sinned here upon earth: and he proceeds after the manner of earthly judges,
who hold their sessions and assizes there where trespasses are commonly
committed. The second, because the devil and his angels are to be judged, and
it is a part of their punishment to be cast out of heaven. For no unclean thing
may come into this heavenly Jerusalem, and therefore they now remain in the
lower parts of the world, and there must be judged. Luke 21.35.
Furthermore, the second coming of Christ is sudden, as the coming of a
thief in the night. He will come when the world thinks not of him, as the
snare does on the bird. The consideration whereof must teach us the same duties
which our Savior Christ taught the men of his time. First he teaches them
what they must not do: for he knowing all things knew also the disposition of
man's heart, and therefore he says, Take heed to your selves, least at any time
your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this
life, least that day come upon you unawares. For these sins benumme the
heart, and steal away all grace. This exhortation in these our days is most
needful. For men's hearts are like the smithes stithie, the more they are
beaten with the hammar of Gods word, the harder they are. Secondly he teaches
them what they must do: Watch therefore (says he) and pray continually: that
ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass,
and that ye may stand before the son of man. But you will say: how may we be
found worthy to stand before Christ at that day? Ans. Do but this one thing:
for your lives past be humbled before God, and come unto him by true, hearty,
and unfeigned repentance, be changed and become new creatures: pray unto him
earnestly for the pardon of your sins in Christ, and pray continually that
God will turn your hearts from your old sins every day more and more: and
then come the last judgment when it will, ye shall be found worthy to stand
before Christ at his coming. The repentant sinner is he, that shall find
favor in the sight of God at that day. The consideration hereof may move us
to change our lives. Those which were never yet humbled for their sins, let
them now begin: and those which have already begun, let them go forward
and continue. But the devil will cry in the hearts of some men, that this
exhortation is as yet needelesse: for the day of judgment is not near,
because all the signs thereof are not yet passed. Ans. Suppose the day of
judgment be far off, yet the day of thy death cannot be so: for the common
saying is true, to day a man, to morrow none. Now look as death leaves
thee, so shall the day of judgment find thee. Impenitent Cain died long
since, and yet the day of judgment when it comes, shall find him impenitent
still. The same thing may be said of Saul, Achitophel, and Judas. They died
desperately and impenitent, and the Lord shall find them so at his coming. So
will it be with thee, whatsoever thou art that repentest not. Death may come
upon thee, the next day or the next hour, therefore watch and pray. Prepare
thy self against the day of death, that at the day of judgment thou may be
found worthy to obtain favor in the sight of the Lord. Security does
ouerwhelme the world; but let us for our parts learn to prepare our selves
daily: for if the day of death do leave thee unworthy, then the Lord Jesus at
his coming shall find thee unworthy: and the devil shall stand before thee
and accuse thee, thy conscience shall condeme thee, and hell shall be ready to
swallowe thee up. If this admonition take no place in thy heart, then at the
day of judgment it shall stand against thee, and be a bill of indictment to
thy further condemnation.

Math. ^5.31.
The second point follows, that Christ after that he is come in the clouds
shall sit in a throne of glory, as the sovereign judge of heaven and earth,
after the manner of earthly kings, who when they will show themselves unto
their subjects in majesty, power, and glory, use to ascend into the thrones
of their kingdoms, and there to show themselves and appear in state unto all
the people. Now what this throne is, and how Christ sits in the same, the
scripture has not revealed, and therefore I will not stand to search. Yet here
must we further mark, that this appearance of his in endless glory and
majesty shall be most terrible and dreadful to the ungodly, and therefore in
Daniel his throne is said to be like a flame of fire, Dan. 7.^.
and at the very sight hereof men shall desire the mountains to fall upon
them, and the hills to cover them.

The third point, is the citing of all men and of the angels before his
majesty in that day, there to answer for themselves. This citing shall be done
by the voice of Christ, as he himself says, Ioh. 5.23.
In that day all that are in the graves shall hear his voi^e, and they shall
come forth. And here we are to consider two things: I. the power of this voice:
II. the ministry whereby it shall be uttered. For the first, no doubt the
power of this voice shall be unspeakable, and therefore it is compared to a
trumpet, Mat. 24.31.
the lowdest and shrillest of all musical instruments; and to the cry of the
mariners, 1. These. 4.6.
whose manner has been in the doing of any business with all their strength at
one instant to make a common shout. And sensible experience shall manifest the
force thereof. For it shall cause all the dead even from the beginning of the
world to rise again, though they have lien rotten in the earth many thousand
years: and all unclean spirits shall be forced and compelled, will they, nill
they, to come before Christ; who shall be unto them a most fearful and
terrible judge, neither man nor angel shall be able to absent or hide himself;
all without exception must appear, as well high as low, rich as poor: none
shall be able to withdraw themselves, no not the mighty Monarchs of the
earth.

Furthermore, this voice shall be uttered by angels. As in the Church Christ
uses men as his ministers by whom he speaks unto his people: Mat^. 4.31.
so at the last day he shall use the ministry of Angels, whom he shall send
forth into the four winds to gather his elect together: and therefore it is
likely that this voice shall be uttered by them. And by this which has been
said, we must be moved to make conscience of all sin. For there is no
avoiding of this judgment, we can not absent our selves, no excuse will serve
the turn: even the most rebellious of all creatures whether man or angel,
shall be forced to appear: and therefore it stands us in hand, while we have
time in this life, to look unto our estates, and to practice the duties of
christianity, that when we shall be cited before his glorious majesty at the
last day, we may be cleared and absolved.

The fourth point is, the separation of the sheep from the goats, the good
from the badde; Math. 25.32.
for when all the kinreds of the earth, and all unclean spirits shall stand
before Christ, sitting in the throne of his glory: then as a good sheapheard
he shall separate them one from another, the righteous from the wicked, and the
elect from the reprobate. He which knows the hearts of all men, knows also
how to do this, and he will do it. This full and final separation is
reserved to Christ, and shall not be accomplished till the last day. For so it
is in the parable, Math. 13.10.
that the tares must grow with the wheat til harvest, and the reapers must
separate them, and gather the wheat into the barn, but the tares must be
burned with unquenchable fire. By the consideration of this one point, we
learn diverse things: I. that in the Church of God in this world, good and
badde are mingled together, elect and reprobate: and we are not to imagine any
perfection of the church of God upon earth, as many have dreamed, which when
they could not find, they have therefore forsaken al assemblies. I confess
indeed that the preaching of the word is the Lords fan, whereby he cleanses
his Church in part, but yet the finishing of this work shall not be before the
last judgment. For when the ministers of God have done all that they can, yet
shall the wicked be mingled with the godly. Therefore the Church is compared to
a barn flore, where is both wheat and chafe: and a corn field, where is
both tares and good corn: and a draw net, wherein is both good fish and badde.
Secondly, whereas this separation must not be before the end of the world,
hence we learn the state of Gods Church in this life. It is like a flock of
sheep mingled with goats, and therefore the condition of Gods people in this
world, is to be troubled many ways by those with whom they live. For goats
use to strike the sheep, Ezech. 34.18.
to annoy their pasture, and to make their water muddie that they can not
drink of it: and therefore we must prepare our selves to bear all annoyances,
crosses, and calamities that shall befall us in this world by the wicked ones,
among whom we live. Thirdly, we are taught, that howesoeuer the goats and the
sheep be very like, and feed in one pasture, and lie in one fold all their
life time: yet Christ can and will sever them asunder at the last day.
Therefore, considering as we are borne of Adam we have the nature of the
goat, yea of the wild beast, and not of the sheep; it stands us in hand to
lay aside our goatish conditions, and to take unto us the properties of the
sheep of Christ, which he expresses in these words, Ioh. 10.^7.
My sheep (says he) hear my voice, I know them, and they follow me. And the
properties are three; to know him, to be known of him, and to follow him,
namely in obedience: and he that finds them all in himself, wears the brand
and mark of the true sheep of Christ: but contrariwise they that make
profession of Christ, and yet therewithal join not obedience, howsoever the
world may account of them, they are but goats and no sheep. Let us therefore
with the knowledge of Christ join obedience to his word, that when the day
shall come that the goats must be separated from the sheep, we may be found
to be in the number of the true sheep of Christ. We may deceive men both in
life and death, and bear them in hand that we are sheep, but when the
judgment shall come, we cannot deceive Christ: he it is that formed us, he
knows our hearts, and therefore can easily discern what we are.

The fifth thing is the trial of every man's particular cause, a point
especially to be considered. For as at the bar of an earthly judge, the
malefactor is brought out of prison and set before the judge, and there
examined: even so in that great day, shall every man without exception be
brought before the Lord, to be tried. But how shall this trial be made? Ans.
By works: as the Apostle says, ^. Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil. And the reason is, because works are the outward
signs of inward grace and godliness. And though we be justified by faith
alone without works, yet may we be judged both by faith and works. For the
last judgment does not serve to make men just that are unjust, but only to
manifest them to be just indeed, which were just before and in this life truly
justified. The consideration of this very point should move us al to repent us
of our sins past and to reform our selves throughout, and to be plentiful
in all good works. And undoubtedly if we seriously think upon it, it will hold
us more straightly to all good duties, then if with the Papists, we held
justification by works.

Furthermore, in this trial two things must be skanned: I. how all men's works
shall be made manifest: II. by what means they shall be examined. Of the
manifestation of every man's work, S. John speaks, Rev. 10.12.
And I saw (says he) the dead both great and small stand before God, and the
books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life,
and the dead were judged of these things which were written in the books
according to their works. God is said to have books not properly, but because
all things are as certain and manifest to him, as if he had his Registers in
heaven to keep rolls and records of the^. His books are three; the book of
Providence, the book of Judgment, the book of Life. The book of his
providence is the knowledge of all particular things past, present, to come. Of
this the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 136.16.
Thine eyes did see me when I was without form: for in thy book were all
things written which in continuance were fashioned, when there was none of them
before. The book of judgment is that whereby he gives judgment: and it is
twofold. The first is Gods knowledge or prescience, in which all the affairs
of me^, their thoughts, words, and deeds, are as certainly known and set
down, as if they were put in books of record. We may forget our sins, but
God keeps them in a register; he knows them every one. The second book is
every man's particular conscience, which also brings to remembrance and
testifies what men have done, and what they have not done. Isa. 4.3.
The book of life is nothing else but the decree of Gods election, in which
God has set down who be ordained to life eternal.

Now the opening of these books is a thing wherein the endless power of God
shall most notably show it self. For when we shall stand before the judgment
seat of Christ, he then knowing all things in his eternal counsel, shall
reveal unto every man his own particular sins, whether they were in
thought, word, or deed, and then also by his mighty power he shall so touch
men's consciences, that they shall afresh remember what they have done. Now
indeed, the wicked man's conscience is shut up as a closed book; but then it
shall be so touched, and as it were opened, that he shall plainly see and
remember all the particular offenses which at any time he has committed; and
his very conscience shall be as good as a thousand witnesses: whereupon he
shall accuse and utterly condemn himself. The consideration of this ought to
terrify all those that live in their sins: for howsoever they may hide and
cover them from the world; yet at the last day, God will be sure to reveal
them all.

Now after that men's works are made manifest, they must further be tried
whether they be good or evil. And that shall be done on this manner. They that
never heard of Christ must be tried by the law of nature, which serves to make
them inexcusable before God. As for those that live in the Church, they shall
be tried by the Law and the Gospel, as Paul says, Romans 2.12.
As many as have lived by the law, shall be judged by the law. And again,
verse. 16.
At the day of judgment God shall judge the secrets of our hearts according to
his Gospel. And, Heb. 11.7.
By faith Noah builded an arc, whereby he condemned the old world. If this be
true, then we must in the fear of God hear his word preached and taught with
all reverence, and make conscience to profit by it. For otherwise in the day of
judgment when all our works shall be tried by it, the same word of God shall
be a bill of indictment, and the fearful sentence of condemnation against us.
Therefore let us be humbled by the doctrine of the law, and willingly embrace
the sweet promises of the Gospel: considering it is the only touchstone,
whereby all our words, thoughts, and works must be examined.

The sixth point in the proceeding of the last judgment, is the giving of
sentence, which is twofold: the sentence of absolution, and the sentence of
condemnation, both which are to be observed diligently, that we may receive
profit thereby. And first of all Christ shall begin his judgment with the
sentence of absolution; which shows, that he is ready to show mercy and slow
to wrath. In this sentence we are to consider four points: I. a calling of the
Elect to the kingdom of heaven: II. the reason thereof: III. a reply of the
Elect: IV. the answer of Christ to them again. The calling of the Elect is set
down in these words, Math. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. And the words are to be observed one by one. Come ye
blessed] Though Christ now sit in glory and majesty in judgment, yet he
cease not to show his tender a^fection of love unto his chosen. And this
overthrows the opinion of the Church of Rome, which would have us rather to
come unto Christ by the intercession of saints, then by our selves immediately,
because he is now exalted in glory and majesty. But mark, when he was here
on earth, he said, Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden and I will ease
you. And when he shall be most glorious in majesty and power at the day of
judgment, he will then also say, Come ye blessed of my father: and therefore
we may resolve our selves, that it is his will now, that we should come unto
him without any intercession of Saints. Ye blessed of my father] The Elect are
here called the blessed of God, because their righteousness, salvation, and all
that they have, springs of the mere blessing of God. Nothing therefore must be
ascribed to the work of man. Inherit] that is, receive as your inheritance:
therefore the kingdom of heaven is Gods mere gift. A father gives no
inheritance unto his son of merit, but of his free gift: whereupon it
follows, that no man can merit the kingdom of heaven by his works. The
kingdome] that is, the eternal estate of glory and happiness in heaven:
therefore in this life we must so use this world, as though we used it not: all
that we have here is but vain and transitory: and all our study and
endeavor must be to come to the kingdom of heaven. Prepared] Here note the
unspeakable care of God for the faithful. Had he such care to provide a
kingdom for his children before they were? then we may assure our selves, he
will have greater care over them now when they have a being. For you] that is,
for the elect and faithful. Hence it appears that there is no universal
election whereby (as some suppose) God decrees that all and every man shall be
saved. Indeed if he had said, Come ye blessed of my father inherit the
kingdom prepared for all but received of you, it had bin something, but he
says only, prepared for you: and therefore all were not chosen to salvation.

The reason of this calling, is taken from works as from signs, in these
words, For I was hungry and ye gave me meat, etc. When he says, for I was
hungry, he means his poor and distressed members upon earth: and thereby he
signifies unto us that the miseries of his servants are his own miseries. Thus
the Lord says in Zachary, Zach. 2.8.
He which touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. And when Saul was going
to persecute them in Damasco and else where that called on the name of Christ,
he cried from heaven, Act. 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And this is a notable comfort to Gods
Church and people, that they have an high priest who is touched with the
feeling of our infirmities: Heb 4.15.
and if he account our miseries his own miseries, then no doubt he will pity
our estate and make us able to bear the worst. And ye gave me meate] Here we
note, that the principal works of men are those which are done to the poor
members of Christ. We are indeed to help all, in as much as they are our very
flesh and the creatures of God; but the rule of S. Paul must be remembered, Gal.
6.10.
Do good to all, but especially to those that are of the household of faith,
Many are of mind that the best works are to build Churches and Monasteries, but
Christ tells us here, that the best work of all is to relieve those that be
the living members of his mystical body.

The third point is the reply of the Saints to Christ again, in these words,
Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? etc. They do not deny that
which Christ avouched, but do, as I take it, standing before the tribunal
seat of God, humble themselves, having still an after-consideration of the
infirmities and offenses of their lives past. Here note then, that it is a
Satanicall practice for a man to brag of works and to stand upon them in the
matter of justification before God. And we must rather do as the Saints of God
do, abase our selves in regard of our sins past.

The last point is the answer of Christ to them again, in these words, Verily,
I say unto you, in as much as ye did it to the least of those my brethren, you
did it to me. A most notable sentence: and it serves to teach us, how we
should behave our selves in doing works of mercy, which are duties to be
performed in this life. We are not to do them of any sinister respect, as for
praise of men or commodity, but we must propound unto our selves the party to
whom we do any good, and in him look on Christ, and so do it, as unto
Christ and for Christ's sake only: and this is a good work indeed. Christ
says, Mark. 10.41.
Whosoever shall give a cup of cold water to a disciple in the name of a
disciple, shall not loose his reward. It is but a small gift, but yet the
manner of doing it, namely in the name of a disciple, that is, in respect that
he is a member of Christ, does make it an excellent work of mercy. It is a
special mark of a child of God to show mercy on a christian because he is a
Christian. If any would know whether he be a christian or no, let him search
himself, whether he love a man, and can do good unto him, because he is a
child of God, and a member of Christ. For this is a plain argument, that he
also is the child of God. Many can love, because they are loved again, but to
love for Christ his sake, is a work of Christ in us and a special gift of God.

The sentence of condemnation follows in the second place: and it contains
four points: I. the reiection of the ungodly: II. the reason of their
reiection: III. the defense which the wicked make for themselves: lastly, the
answer of Christ to them again. The reiection of the wicked is uttered by a
terrible sentence, Away from me ye cursed into hell fire. The use hereof in
general is twofold. First it serves to awake and excite all men and women in
the world whosoever they be that shall hear it, to look unto their own
estates. It is wonderful to see what great security reigns every where in
these our days. Men go on in sin from day to day and from year to year
without repentance, nothing at all fearing the sentence of condemnation at the
last day; like unto many which for the obtaining of other men's goods are
neither by the fear of arraignment or imprisonment kept in good order. The
occasions of security are twofold: I. the prosperity of the wicked, who of
all men live most at ease without trouble, either in body or in mind. II.
Gods patience and long suffering; as Solomon says, Eccles. 8 11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the hearts of the children of men are fully set in them to do evil. But to
awake all those which live in this security; they must remember that howsoever
the Lord God does now defer his judgment, yet there is a day wherein he will
no way show mercy and long suffering, when they shall hear this fearful
sentence of condemnation pronounced against them, Away from me ye cursed. The
second use is to the godly: It serves to nurture them and to keep them in awe
before God: and no doubt, this was a principal cause why this sentence was
here penned by the holy Ghost. A wise master of a family will check his
servant, and if the cause require, correct him in his child's presence, that the
child it self may learn thereby to fear and stand in awe of his father: so
Christ the most careful and wise governor of his Church has set down this
sentence of condemnation against the wicked, that the children of God in this
world whenever they shall hear or read the same, might be moved thereby to
stand in fear of God, and more dutifully perform obedience unto his
command^ments. Away from me] Here we may learn, what a blessed thing it is for
a man to have true fellowshippe with Christ in this world. For in the day of
judgment the punishment of the wicked is to be cut off from him, and driven
away from his presence. Now he that would have fellowship with God after this
life, and escape that punishment, must seek to have it in this life: and he
that will not seek to have fellowship with him in this life shall never have
it after in the day of judgment. Again, let us mark that it is nothing to
draw near unto Christ with our lips, if the heart be not with him: for such
as come near with the lip and keep aloof in the heart, shall hear the
sentence pronounced, Away from me ye cursed; and shall be severed as far from
Christ as hell from heaven. Therefore let us not content our selves with
formal profession, but open the doors of our hearts, that the king of glory
may come in. Ye cursed] They are cursed who are borne in sin and live in
their sins, and all the days of their lives so persevere to the last gasp
without seeking recovery. Whosoever he be, that is in this estate, the curse
of God hangs over his head, and will so do till he get reconciliation with
God in Christ. This being so, above all things in this world we must labor to
be at peace with God, and never cease nor be quiet with our selves till we have
the same wrought and sealed in our hearts. For before such time as we be in
Gods favor, his fearful curse hangs over our heads, and if we so persevere
without repentance, the day will come when we shall hear this fearful
sentence pronounced against us: Away from me ye cursed into hell fire. What
hell fire is, we must not curiously search, but rather give our whole endeavor
to learn how we may avoid it: as when a man's house is on fire, his care must
be, not to search how it came, but rather how to quench it: yet we are to know
thus much, that by hell fire is not meant any bodily flame, but it signifies
the seazing of the fearful and terrible wrath of God both on body and soul
for ever. For howsoever the body be subject to burning with bodily fire, yet
the soul being spiritual can not burn; and therefore hell fire is not a
material fire, but a grievous torment, fitly resembled thereby. Prepared for
the devil and his angels.] There is in every man's heart by nature this
corruption; whereby when he sins, he thinks that there is no danger but all
is well, having as Esai says, made a covenant with hell. But here consider,
that, although the devil was once an angel of light, yet when he had sinned,
he could not escape hell: it was prepared even for him. How then shall ungodly
men, which are not half so wily, think to escape?

Now follows the reason of their reiection in these words: For I was an
hungered and ye gave me no meat, etc. Hence we learn these two points: I. that
all man's religion and serving of God is in vain, if so be we show no
compassion toward the poor members of Christ, in feeding, clothing, lodging,
and visiting of them. For we must think, that many of those against whom this
reason shall be brought, did know religion and profess the same, yea they
prophesied in the name of Christ, and called on him, saying, Lord, Lord: and
yet the sentence of condemnation goes against them, because they show no
compassion toward the members of Christ, and therefore it is a principal
virtue, and a special note of a Christian, to show the bowels of compassion
toward his needy brethren. Here again we note, that it is not sufficient for
us to abstain from evil, but we must also do good. For it is not said, I
was an hungered and ye took from me, but, Math. 3.
When I was hungry ye gave me no m^ate. They are not charged with doing evil,
but, for not doing good. S. John says, The axe is laid to the root of the
tree, and the reason follows, not because the tree bare evil fruit, but
because it bare not good fruit: therefore it must be cast into the fire. This
condemns a bad opinion of all worldly men, who think that all is well, and
that God will be merciful unto them, because they do no man harm. Thus we
see how the devil blinds the eyes of men: for it will not stand for payment at
the day of judgment to say, I have hurt no man, unless we further do all the
good we can.

The third point is the defense which impenitent sinners make for themselves in
these words, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or thirsty, or naked, or in
prison, or sick, and did not minister unto thee? Thus in their own defense,
that which Christ says, they gainsay, and justify themselves. Here mark the
nature of all impenitent sinners, which is to sooth and flatter themselves in
sin, and to maintain their own righteousness, like to the proud Pharisie in
his prayer, who bragged of his goodness, and said, Luke 18.10.
Lord, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, etc. and in
the very same manner ignorant persons of all sorts among us, justify
themselves in their strong faith, and brag of their zeal of Gods glory, and
of their love to their brethren, and yet indeed show no signs thereof. And
truly we are not to marvel when we see such persons to justify themselves
before men, whereas they shall not be ashamed to do it at the day of judgment
before the Lord Jesus himself.

The last point, is Christ's answer to them again in these words: Verily, I say
unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it
not to me. This sentence being repeated again, does teach us the lesson which
we learned before, that when we are to show compassion to any man, especially
if he be a member of Gods Church, we must not consider his outward estate or
his baseness, in that he wa^ts food or raiment, but behold Christ in him, not
respecting him as a man, but as a member of Christ. This it is, that must move
us to compassion, and cause us to make a supply of his wants more then any
respect in the world beside. And surely when Christ in his members comes to our
doors and complains that he is hungry and sick, and naked, if our bowels
yearne not toward him, there is not so much as a spark of the love of God in
us.

The seventh point in the proceeding of the last judgment is, the retribution
or reward in these words: and they shall go into everlasting pain, and the
righteous into life eternal. How do the wicked enter into hell and the godly
into heaven? Answ. By the powerful and commanding voice of Christ, which is
of that force, that neither the greatest rebel that ever was among men, nor
all the devils in hell, shall be able to withstand it. And seeing that after
the day of judgment we must remain for ever either in heaven or in hell, we
are to look about us and to take heed unto our hearts. Indeed if the time
were but a thousand or two thousand years, then with more reason men might
take liberty to themselves: but seeing it is without end we must be most
careful through the whole course of our lives so to live and behave our
selves, that when the day of judgment shall come, we may avoid that fearful
sentence of everlasting woe and condemnation, which shall be pronounced against
the wicked. And whereas all wicked men shall go to hell at Christ's
commandment, it teaches us, willingly to obey the voice of Christ in the
ministry of the word. For if we rebel against his voice in this world, when
in the day of judgment sentence shall be pronounced against us, we shall hear
an other voice, at the giving whereof, we must obey whether we will or no, and
thereupon go to everlasting pain, whither we would not. Let us therefore in
time deny our selves for our sins past, and only rely upon Christ Jesus
for the free remission of them all; and for the time to come, lead a new
reformed life.

Thus much of the order of Christ his proceeding at the day of judgment. Now
follow the uses thereof, which are either comforts to Gods Church or duties for
all men. The first comfort or benefit is this, that the same person which died
for us upon the cross to work our redemption, must also be our judge. And
hence we reap two special comforts. I. The people of God shall hereby enjoy
full redemption from all miseries and calamities which they had in this life. So
Christ himself speaking of the signs of the end of the world says to his
disciples; ^^k. 21.28.
When you see these things, lift up your heads: for your redemption draws
near. Then he shall wipe all tears from their eyes. Secondly, we shall hereby
have a final deliverance from all sin. Now what a joyful thing it is, to be
freed from sin, may plainly appear by the cry of S. Paul: O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? And certain it is,
that he which knows what sin is, and seriously repents him of the same,
would wish with all his heart to be out of this world, that he might leave off
to sin, and thereby cease to displease God.

The second comfort is this: the godly in this world have many enemies: they
are reviled, slandered, and oftentimes put to death: well, Christ Jesus at the
day of judgment will take every man's case into his own hand: he will then
hear the complaint of the godly, howsoever in this world they found no
remedy: and then he will revenge their blood that is shed upon the earth,
according to their prayer. A^^c. 6.10.
This comfort is to be considered especially of all those that are any way
persecuted or molested by the wicked of this world.

Now follow the duties to be learned of every one of us, and they are diverse.
First, the consideration of the last judgment serves to teach all ignorant
persons and impenitent sinners, repentance and humiliation for their sins,
and to move them with all speed to seek unto Christ for the pardon of the
same. When Paul preached to the Athenians, he willed them to repent upon this
ground and reason, (...) ^7.3.
because the Lord has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness. To speak plainly; we can be content to hear the word, and to
honor him with our lips, yet for the most part, all is done but for fashions
sake: for still we live in our old sins: our hearts are not turned: but in
the fear of God let us bethink our selves of the time, when we shall come
before the judge of heaven and earth, and have all our sins laid open, and
we must answer for them all. This is the point which the holy Ghost uses as a
reason to move men unto repentance: and assuredly if this will not move us,
there is nothing in the world will. Secondly, to this purpose Paul says. 1.
Cor. 11.^1.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. Would thou then
escape the judgment of Christ at the last day? then in this life judge thy
self. Now a man in judging of himself, must perform four things: I. he
must examine himself of his own sins: II. he must confess the^ before the
Lord. III. he must condemn himself and as a judge upon the bench, give
sentence against himself. Lastly, he must plead pardon, and cry unto God as
for life and death, for the remission of all his sins: and he that does this
unfeignedly shall never be judged of the Lord at the last day: but if we slack
and neglect this duty in this life, then undoubtedly there remains nothing
but eternal woe in the world to come.

Thirdly, by this we may learn, one not to judge or condemn another, as Paul
says, 1. Cor. 4 3.
Judge nothing before the time until the Lord come, who lighten all things
that are in darkness, and make the counsels of the hearts manifest. And Christ
says, Romans 14.10.
Judgment is mine: and judge not, and ye shall not be judged. And again Paul
says to the Romans, Why do thou judge thy brother? for we must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ: but some will ask, how does one judge
another? Ans. Thus: I. when a man does well, to say of him that he does evil:
II. when a man does evil, then to make it worse: III. when a thing is
doubtful, to take it in the worst part. And by any of these three ways we are
not to judge either of men's persons or of their actions.

Fourthly, we must endeavor our selves to keep a good conscience before God
and before all men. This is the practice of S. Paul, Act. 24.15.
who in consideration and hope of a resurrection unto judgment as well of the
just as of the unjust, endeavored himself to have always a clear conscience
both toward God and toward men. His example is worthy our marking and
imitation; for few there be that upon this occasion make any conscience either
of duty to God or to their brethren.

Fifthly, the last judgment must stir us up to a reverend fear of God, and
cause us to glorify him: as the Angel says in the Revelation, Rev. 14 17.
Fear God and give glory to him: for the hour of his judgment is come. And
doubtless if any thing in the world will move a man to fear the Lord, it is
this, to remember the fearful and terrible day of judgment.

Now having spoken hitherto of the first person the father, and also of the
son, it follows in the next place to speak of the third person in these
words, I believe in the holy Ghost. In which we may consider two things, the
title of the person, and the action of faith, repeated from the beginning. The
title is, Holy Ghost, or spirit. It may here be demanded, how this title can
be fit to express the third person, which seems to be common to the rest:
for the father is holy, and the son is holy: again, the father is a spirit,
and the son is a spirit. Ans. Indeed the father and the son are as well to
be termed holy in respect of their natures, the third person: for all three
subsisting in one and the same godhead, are consequently holy by one and the
fame holiness: but the third person is called holy, because beside the
holiness of nature, his office is to sanctify the Church of God. Now if it
be said that sanctification is a work of the whole Trinity, the answer is,
that although it be so, yet the work of sanctification agrees to the Holy
Ghost in special manner. The father sanctifies by the son and by the holy
Ghost: the son sanctifies from the father and by the Holy Ghost: the holy
Ghost sanctifies from the father and from the son by himself immediately:
and in this respect is the third person termed holy. Again the third person
is termed a Spirit, not only because his nature is spiritual (for in that
respect the father is a spirit and the son is a spirit;) but because he is
spired or breathed from the father and from the son, in that he procedes from
them both. Thus we see there is a special cause why the third person is
called the Holy Ghost.

Now the action of faith which concerns the third person, is to believe in
him. Which is, I. to acknowledge the Holy Ghost as he has revealed himself in
the word. II. In special to believe that he is my sanctifier and comforter.
III. To put all the confidence of my heart in him, for that cause. In these
words are comprised four points of doctrine, which are to be believed
concerning the holy Ghost. The first, that he is very God. For we are not to
put our affiance or confidence in any but in God alone. And no doubt the
penners of the Creed in that they prefixed these words, I believe in, before
the article of the third person, meant thereby to signify, that he is true
God, equal with the father and the son, according to the tenor of the
Scriptures themselves. Peter says to Ananias: Why has Satan filled thine
heart, that thou should lie unto the Holy Ghost? Act. 54.4.
and continuing the same speech, he changes the term only, and says, Thou
have not lied unto men, but unto God. Whereby hei nsinuateth that the Holy
Ghost is very God. In the vision of the Prophet Isai, Isa. 6.9.
the words by him set down are thus: I heard the voice of Iehoua, saying,
Whom shall I send, etc. and he said, God and say to this people: Ye shall
hear indeed, but ye shall not understand. But Paul quoting the same place,
spoke on this manner: Act. ^8.15.
Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet, saying, Go unto this people
and say unto them. Now these places being compared together make it plain,
that the title of Iehova, agrees to the holy Ghost. But yet the enemies of
this truth which think that the Holy Ghost is nothing else but the action or
operation of God, object out of the Scriptures to the contrary: I. God knows
the son: Mat. 11.^7.
the holy Ghost knows not the son: for none knows the son but the
father: ergo the holy Ghost is not God. Ans. That place excludes no person in
Trinity, but only creatures, and false gods, and the meaning is this: None,
that is, no creature, or idol god; knows the son of God, but the father.
And the opposition is made to exclude creatures, not to exclude the holy Ghost.
^om. 8.16.
Again they object, that the holy Ghost makes request for us with groans and
sighs that can not be uttered: therefore (say they) the Holy ghost is not God,
but rather a gift of God. For he that is true God, can not pray; groan, or
sigh. Ans. Paul's meaning is thereby to signify that the Holy Ghost causes us
to make requests, and stirs up our hearts to groan and sigh to God: for he
said before, we have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
father. Romans 8.1.
Yet further, they object the words of the Angel Gabriel to the virgin Marie,
saying, The virtue of the most high has ouershadowed thee: Luke 1.3^.
and hence they gather, that if the holy Ghost be the virtue of God, then he is
not God indeed. Ans. As Christ is called the Word of God, not a word made of
letters or syllables, but a substantial word, that is, being for ever of the
same substance with the father: so in this place the holy ghost is called the
virtue of the most highest, not because he is a created quality, but because
he is the substantial virtue of the Father and the son: and therefore God
equal with them both. Furthermore they allege, that neither the scriptures
nor the practice of the Primitive Church does warrant us to pray to the holy
Ghost. Ans. It is not true. For whensoever we direct our prayer to any of the
three persons, in him we pray to them all. Besides we have example of prayer
made to the holy Ghost in the word of God. For Paul says to the Corinthians,
2. Co^. 13^1^.
The grace of our Lord Jesus, the love of god the father, and the fellowship of
the holy ghost be with you all. And the words are as if S. Paul had said thus;
O Father, let thy love, O Son, let thy grace, O holy Ghost, let thy
fellowship be with them all. And therefore this first doctrine is true, and as
well to be believed as any other, that the Holy Ghost is God.

The second point is, that the Holy Ghost is a distinct person from the father
and the son. Hereupon the articles touching the three persons are thus
distinguished: I believe in the father, I believe in the son, I believe in
the holy Ghost. This point also is consonant to the Scriptures which make the
same distinction. In the baptism of Christ, the father utters a voice from
heaven, saying, Mat. 15.16.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: and not the son, or the
holy ghost. Secondly the son stood in the water, and was baptized by John,
and not the father, or the holy Ghost. Thirdly, the holy Ghost descended from
heaven upon Christ in the form of a dove; and not the father, or the son,
but the holy Ghost alone. Christ in his commission unto his disciples, says,
Mat. 28.1^.
Go teach all nations, baptizing them into the name of the father, the son,
and the Holy Ghost. Now if the Holy Ghost had been the same person either with
the father, or with the son, then it had been sufficient to have named the
father and the son only. And the distinction of the third person from the
rest, may be conceived by this, that the Holy Ghost is the Holy Ghost, and not
the father or the son.

The third point to be believed is, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the
father and the son. For a further proof hereof, consider these places. Paul
says, Romans 8.9.
Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit: for the spirit of God dwells in
you. But if any man have not the spirit of Christ, Gal. 4.6.
he is not his. And again, Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the
spirit of the son into your hearts: where we may observe, that the holy Ghost
is the spirit both of the father and of the son. Now the holy Ghost is called
the spirit of the father, not only because he is sent of him, but because he
proceeds from the father; as Christ says to his disciples: Ioh. 15.26,
When the comforter will come, whom I shall send unto you from the father,
even the spirit of truth which proceeds of the father, he shall testify
of me. And therefore likewise he is the spirit of the son, not only because
he is sent of the son, but also because he proceeds from him. Again, in
the Trinity the person sending does communicate his whole essence and
substance to the person sent. As the father sending the son does communicate
his essence and substance to the son. For sending does presuppose a
communication of essence. Now the father and the son send the holy Ghost:
therefore both of them communicate their substance and essence unto the same
person. Thirdly Christ says, The holy Ghost has received of mine which he
shall show unto you, Ioh. 14.16.
namely knowledge and truth, to be revealed unto his Church. Whence we may
reason thus: the person receiving knowledge from another, receives essence
also: the holy Ghost receives truth and knowledge from Christ to be revealed
unto the Church: and therefore first of all he has received substance and
essence from the son. But some peradventure will say, where is it written in
all the bible in express words, that the holv Ghost proceeds from the son
as he proceeds from the father. Answer. The scripture says not so much in
plain terms, yet we must know that that which is gathered forth thence by
just consequence, is no less the truth of god, then that which is expressed in
words. Hereupon all Churches, save those in Greece, with one confent
acknowledge the truth of this point.

The fourth and last point is, that the holy Ghost is equal to the father and
the son. And this we are taught to acknowledge in the Creed, in that we do
as well believe in the Holy Ghost, as in the father and the son. And though
the holy Ghost be sent of the father and the son, yet (as I have said before)
that argues no inequality (for one equal may send another by consent) but
order only, whereby the Holy Ghost is last of all the three persons. Again in
that the holy Ghost receives from the son, it proves no inferiority.
Because he receives from the son whatsoever he receives by nature, and not by
grace. And he receives not a part, but all that the son has, saving the
propriety of his person.

Now follow the benefits which are given by the holy Ghost, and they are of
two sorts: some are common to all creatures, and some are proper to men. The
benefit of the Holy Ghost common to all creatures, is the work of creation and
preservation. For all things were created and made, and afterward perserued by
the holy Ghost. So Elihu says, Job. 33.4.
The spirit of God has made me. And Moses says, Genesis 1.2.
In the beginning the spirit moved upon the waters. The phrase is borrowed
from a bird, who in hatching of her young ones, sits upon the eggs, mooues her
self upon them, and heats them. And so likewise the holy Ghost in the
beginning did by his own power cherish and preserve the mass or lump whereof
all things were made, and caused it to bring forth the creatures. This being
evident, that the Holy Ghost has a stroke in the work of creation and
preservation, we must unfeignedly acknowledge that we were first created, and
since that time continually preserved by the benefit even of the third person.

The benefits proper unto men, are of two sorts: some are common to all men
both good and bad, and some proper to the elect and faithful. The benefits
common to all men are diverse: I. the gift of practicing a particular calling.
As in the body several members have several uses; so in every society
several men have several offices and callings, and the gifts whereby they are
enabled to perform the duties thereof, are from the holy Ghost. When Gedeon
became a valiant captain to deliver the Israelites, Iud. 6.34.
it is said he was clothed with the spirit. Bezaleel and Aholiab being set
apart to build the tabernacle, Exodus 31.^.
were filled with the spirit of God in wisdom and in understanding, and in all
workmanship, to find out curious works, to work in gold and in silver and in
brass; also in the art to set stones, and to carue in timber, etc. By this it
is manifest, that the skill of any handicraft is not in the power of man, but
comes by the holy Ghost. And by this we are taught to use al those gifts well,
whereby we are enabled to discharge our particular callings; that they may serve
for the glory of God, and the good of his Church: and those that in their
callings use fraud and deceit, or else live inordinately, do most unthankfully
abuse the gifts of God, and dishonor the spirit of God the author of their
gifts, for which thing they must give an account one day.

The second gift common to all, Heb. 6.4.
is Illumination, whereby a man is enabled to understand the will of God in his
word. The Jews in the reading of the old testament had a veil over their
hearts: and the like have all men by nature, to whom the word of God is
foolishnes. Paul at his conversion was smitten blind, and skales were upon his
eyes: the like also be over the eyes of our minds, and they must fall away,
before we can understand the will of God. Now it is the work of the holy Ghost
to remove these skales and filmes from our eyes. 1. Ioh. 2.20. Apoc. 3.18.
And for this very cause he is called the anointing and eye-salue: for as it
does clear the eyes, and take away the dimmenes from them; so does the holy
Ghost take away blindness from our minds, that we may see into the truth of
Gods word. This being a common gift, and received both of good and bad, it
stands us in hand not to content our selves with the bare knowledge of the
word, but therewithal we must join obedience, and make conscience thereof, or
else that will besall us which Christ foretold, that he which knows his
masters will and does it not, Luke 12. 47.
shall be beaten with many stripes.

The third gift of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 12.10.
is the gift of prophecy, whereby a man is made able to interpret and expound
the Scriptures. Now albeit this gift be very excellent and not given to every
man, yet is it common both to good and badde. For in the day of judgment when
men shall come to Christ and say, Master, we have prophesied in thy name, he
shall answer again, I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity.
Hereupon those that are in the calling of the ministry, and have received the
gift of prophecy, must not herewithall be puffed up. For if they be not as
well doers of Gods will, as teachers, their gifts will turn to their further
condemnation. As the carpenters that built Noah's arc when the flood came were
drowned, because they would not obey Noah's preaching: so those that have the
gifts of prophecy, and are builders in Gods house, if they build not
themselves as well as others; for all their preaching, at the day of judgment,
they shall be condemned: and therefore it stands them in hand, not to content
themselves with this, that they know and teach others Gods will, but they
themselves must be the first doers of the same.

The fourth common gift of the Holy Ghost, is Ability to bridle and restrain
some affections, so as they shall not break out into outragions behavior.
Haman a wicked man, and an enemy to Gods Church, when he saw Mordecai the
Jew sitting in the kings gate, and that he would not stand up nor move unto
him, he was full of indignation: nevertheless the text says, that he refrained
himself. And when Abimelech an heathen king had taken Sara Abraham's wife, God
said unto him: Hest. 5.10. Genesis ^0.6.
I know that thou did this with an upright heart: and the text adds
further, I have kept thee, that thou should not sin against me. And thus
the Lord gives to men, as yet without the spirit of sanctification, this gift
to bridle themselves, so as in outward action they shall not practice this or
that sin. For why did not Abimelech commit adultery? surely because God kept
him from it. Again in the histories of the heathen we may read of many that
were just, liberal, meek, continent, etc. and that by a general operation of
the holy Ghost that represseth the corruption of nature, for the common good.
Here then if any man ask, how it comes to pass that some men are more
modest and civil then others, seeing all men by nature are equally wicked, the
answer may be, not as the common saying is, because some are of better nature
then others (for all the sons of Adam are equal in regard of nature: the
child new borne in that respect is as wicked as the eldest man that ever
lived) but the reason is, because God gives this common gift of restraining the
affections more to some then to others. This must be considered of us all. For
a man may have the spirit of God to bridle many sins, and yet never have the
spirit to mortify the same, and to make him a new creature. And this being
so, we must take heed that we deceive not our selves. For it is not sufficient
for a man to live in outward ciuility, and to keep in, some of his affections
upon some occasion (for that a wicked man may do) but we must further labor
to feel in our selves the spirit of God, not only bridling sin in us, but
also mortifying and killing the same. Indeed both of them are the good gifts of
Gods spirit, but yet the mortification of sin is the chiefest, being an
effectual sign of grace and proper to the elect.

The fifth grace and gift of the holy Ghost is, to hear and receive the word
of God with joy. In the parable of the sower, one kind of badde ground are
they, Luke 8.13.
which when they have heard, receive the word with joy. And this is that,
which the author of the Hebrews calls the the tasting of the good word of God,
and of the powers of the world to come. We know that there is great difference
between tasting of meat and eating of it. They that sit down at the table do
both taste and eat, but they that dress the meat do only see and taste
thereof: so it is at the Lords table. Many there be that have this gift; truly
both to taste and eat of the body and blood of Christ offered in the word and
Sacraments: and some again do only taste and feel the sweetness of them
and rejoice therein, but yet are not indeed partakers thereof. Now if this be
so, then all those which hear the word of God must take heed how they hear,
and labor to find these two things in themselves by hearing: I. that in heart
and conscience they be thoroughly touched and humbled for their sins: II. that
they be certainly assured of the favor and love of God in Christ, and that the
sweet promises of the Gospel do belong to them: and in consideration hereof
they must make conscience of all sin both in thought, word, and deed,
through the whole course of their lives. And this kind of hearing brings that
joy which vanishes not away.

Thus much of the benefits of the holy Ghost common to all men both good and
badde: now follow such as are proper to the elect, all which may be reduced
unto one, namely, the inhabitation of the spirit, whereby the elect are the
temples of the holy Ghost: who is said to dwell in men, not in respect of
substance (for the whole nature of the holy Ghost cannot be comprised in the
body or soul of man) but in respect of a particular operation: and this
dwelling stands in two things. The first, that the holy Ghost does abide in
them, not for a time only, but for ever: for the word dwelling, notes
perpetuity. Secondly, that the holy Ghost has the full disposition of the
heart, as when a man comes to dwell in an house, whereof he is lord, he has
liberty to govern it after his own will. Now this disposition of the hearts
of the faithful by the holy Ghost, stands in five special and notable gifts;
every one worthy our observation.

The first is a certain knowledge of a man's own reconciliation to God in
Christ. As it is said in Esai, Esai. 53.11. Ioh. 17.3.
By his knowledge my righteous servant shall justify many. And Christ says,
This is life eternal that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ. This knowledge is not general, for then the
devils might be saved; but it is particular, whereby a man knows God the
father to be his father, and Christ the redeemer, to be his redeemer, and the
holy Ghost to be his sanctifier and comforter. And it is a special work of
the holy Ghost, as Paul says, Romans 8.16. 1. Cor. 2.12.
The spirit of God bears witness to our spirits, that we are the children of
God. And, we have received the spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are given unto us of God.

The second gift is regeneration, whereby a man of a limme of the devil is
made a member of Christ, and of a child of Satan (whom every one of us by
nature do as lively resemble as any man does his own parent) is made the
child of God. Ioh. 2.5. Mat. 3.11.
Except a man (says our Savior Christ) be borne again by water and the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. John Baptist in saying
that Christ baptized with the holy Ghost and fire, compares the spirit of god
to fire and water. To fire for two causes: I. as it is the nature of fire to
warm the body that is benumbed and frozen with cold: so when a man is
benumbed and frozen in sin, yea when he is even stark dead in sin, it is
the property of the Holy Ghost to warm and quicken his heart, and to revive
him. II. Fire does purge and eat out the dross from the good metal: now
there is no dross nor canker that has so deeply eaten into any metal as
sin into the nature of man, and therefore the Holy Ghost is as fire to purge
and eat out the hidden corruptions of sin out of the rebellious heart of
man. Again the holy Ghost is compared to clear water for two causes: I. man
by nature is as dry wood without sap, and the property of the holy Ghost is
as water to supple and to put sap of grace into the dead and rotten heart of
man. II. the property of water is to cleanse and purify the filth of the
body: even so the holy Ghost does spiritually wash away our sins, which are
the filth of our nature; and this is the second benefit of the Holy Ghost. By
this we are taught that he which would enter into the kingdom of God, and have
the Holy Ghost to dwell in him, must labor to feel the work of regeneration
by the same spirit: and if a man would know whether he have this work
wrought in him or no, let him mark what Saint Paul says, They that are of the
spirit, savor the things that are of the spirit: but they that live after the
flesh, savor the things of the flesh. Romans 8.5.
If therefore a man have his heart continually affected with that which is
truly good, either more or less; it is a certain token that his wicked
nature is changed, and he regenerate: but contrariwise if his heart be always
set on the pleasures of sin, and the things of this world, he may justly
suspect himself that he is not regenerated. As for example: if a man have all
his mind set upon drinking and gulling in of wine and strong drink, having
little delight nor pleasure in any thing else, it argues a carnal mind and
unregenerate, because it affects the things of the flesh; and so of the rest.
And on the contrary, he that has his mind affected with a desire to do the
will of God, in practicing the works of charity and religion, he I say, has
a spiritual and a renewed heart, and is regenerate by the holy Ghost.

The third work of the holy Ghost is, to govern the hearts of the elect: this
may be called spiritual regiment. A man that dwells in a house of his own,
orders and gouerns it according to his own will: even so the holy ghost gouerns
all them in whom he dwells, as Paul says, they that are the sons of God
are led by his spirit, Romans 8 ^4.
a most notable benefit: for look where the h. Ghost dwells, there he will
be Lord, governing both heart, mind, will, and affections; and that two ways:
I. by repressing all badde motions unto sin, arising either from the
corruption of man's nature, from the world, or from the devil. II. by stirring
up good affections and motions upon every occasion: so it is said, The flesh
(that is, the corruption of man's nature) lusts against the spirit: and the
spirit (that is, grace in the heart) lusts against the flesh; Gal. 5.17.
and that after a double sort: first by laboring to ouermaster and keep down
the motions thereof: secondly, by stirring up good motions and inclinations to
piety and religion. In Esaias the holy Ghost has most excellent titles: Esai.
11.2.
The spirit of the Lord: the spirit of wisdom and understanding: the spirit of
counsel, and of strength: the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the
Lord. Now he is so called, because he stirs up good motions in the godly, of
wisdom, of knowledge, of strength, of understanding, of counsel, and of the
fear of the Lord. And S. Paul says, that the fruits of the spirit are joy,
peace, love, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes,
temperance, etc. Gal 5 22.
all which are so termed, because where the holy Ghost rules, there he
ingendreth these good gifts and motions of grace: but among all the inward
motions of the spirit, the most principal are these: I. an utter disliking of
sin, because it is sin. And that is, when a man has an eye not so much to
another man's sins, as to his own, and seeing them, is truly sorrowful for
them, and disliketh them, and himself for them; not so much because there is a
place of torment, or a day of judgment to come, wherein he must answer to God
for them all: but as if there were no hell or judgment, because God is
displeased by them, who has been unto him a most loving and merciful father
in redeeming him by Christ. The second is an hungring desire above all things
in this world, to be at unity with God in Christ for the same sins. This is
a motion of the holy Ghost, which no man can have but he in whom the holy
Ghost does dwell. The third, the gift of hearty prayer. For this cause the Holy
Ghost is called the spirit of supplications, Zach. 12.10,
because it stirs up the heart, and makes it fit to pray: and therefore Paul
says, Rom 8.26.
that the spirit of God helps our infirmities: for we know not what to pray
as we ought, but the spirit it self makes request for us with sighs which
cannot be expressed. This is an ordinary work of the holy Ghost in all that
believe: and he that would know whether he have the spirit dwelling truly in
his heart, shall know it by this: A mother carries her child in her arms; if
it cry for the dugge, and suck the same, it is alive: being observed many
days together, if it neither cry nor stir, it is dead. In like manner it is
an infallible note of a true child of God to cry to his father in heaven by
prayer, but he that never cries nor feels himself stirred up to make his
moan to God, is in a miserable case, and he may well be thought to be but a
dead child; and therefore let us learn in prayer unfeignedly to pour out our
souls before God, considering it is a special gift of the Holy Ghost bestowed
on the children of God.

The fourth work of the holy Ghost in the heart of the elect is, comfort in
distress, Ioh. 15.26. ^sa^ 45.9.
and therefore our Savior Christ calls him the comforter whom he will send:
and in the Psalm he is called the oil of gladness, because he makes glad
the heart of man in trouble and distress. There be two things that fill the
heart full of endless grief: the first, outward calamities, as when a man is
in any danger of death, when he loses his goods, his good name his friends,
and such like. The second is, a troubled conscience, whereof Solomon says, A
troubled spirit, who can bear it? and of all other it is the most heavy and
grievous cross that can be. When as the hand of God was heavy upon Job, this
was the sorest of all his affliction, and therefore he cries out that the
arrows of the almighty did stick in his soul. Now what is the comfort in
this case? Ans. In the midst of all our distresses the holy Ghost is present
with us, to make us rejoice and to fill us with comforts that no tongue can
express out of the word of god and specially the promises thereof. And
hereupon, the ungodly man when afflictions befall him, is ready to make away
himself because he wants the comfort of the holy Ghost.

The last benefit wrought in the hearts of the elect is, the strengthening of
them to do the weightiest duties of their callings: and hence the holy Ghost
is called the spirit of strength. E^^i. 11.2.
There be diverse things to be done of a Christian man that are far beyond
the reach of his power; as first, when he sees his own sins and is truly
humbled for them, then to lift up the hand of faith to heaven, and thereby to
catch hold on the mercy of God in Christ, is the hardest thing in the whole
world: and this do all those know to be true in some part, which know what
it is to believe. Secondly it is as hard a thing in the time of temptation to
resist temptation, as for dry wood to resist the fire when it begins to burn.
Thirdly, when a man is put to his choice, either to loose his life, goods,
friends, and all that he has, or else to forsake religion; even then to forsake
all and to stick unto Christ, is a matter of as great diff^cultie as any of
the former. Fourthly, when a man wants the ordinary means of Gods
providence, as meat, drink, and clothing, then at the very same instant to
acknowledge Gods providence, to rejoice in it, and to rely thereon, is as much
as if a man should shake the whole earth. It is against our wicked nature to
trust God, unless he first lay down some pawn of his love and mercy to us.
How then, will some say, shall any one be able to do these things? Ans. The
holy Ghost is the spirit of strength, and by him we do all things; as Paul
says, Phi^. 4.12.
I am able to do all things through the help of Christ which strengthens me.

Concerning these gifts of the holy Ghost, two questions may be moved. First,
what is the measure of grace in this life. Answ. Small, in respect. In this
world, we receive, as Paul says, not the tenths, Romans 8.23.
but the first fruits of Gods spirit: and the earnest of the spirit. 2. Cor.
1.22.
Now the first fruits properly are but as an handful or twain of corn, to a
whole corn field, containing many acres and furlongs of ground. And the
earnest in a bargain it may be is but a penie laid down for the paying of
twenty thousand pound. The second question is, whether the graces of the holy
Ghost may be wholly lost or not. Ans. The common gifts of the spirit may be
lost and extinguished. But the gifts proper to the Elect can not. Indeed they
may be diminished and covered as coals under ashes, and as the sap in the
root of the tree in the winter season, not appearing at all in the branches;
and the feeling of them may be lost: but they can not either finally or totally
be abolished. It is true that God does forsake his children; but that is only
in part, 2. Chr. 32.3^.
as he left Ezechias to prove and try what was in his heart. A mother that
loves her child most tenderly, sets it down in the flore, lets it stand, and
fall, and break the face, and all this while she hides her self, not because
her purpose is to leave her child quite, or to make it hurt it self; but that
when she takes it up again, it may love her the better. So deals the holy
Ghost with men to make them see their own weakness and frailty: he hides
himself as it were in some corner of the heart for a season, that they may the
more earnestly hunger after grace, the want whereof they feel.

The use of this article whereby we confess that we believe in the holy Ghost
is manifold. First, considering that all the gifts which any man has, whether
they be gifts of knowledge in the word of God, or of humane learning, or again
gifts whereby men are enabled to practice their trades or handicrafts, do come
not from our selves but from the holy Ghost, we are taught this duty. Look
what gifts soever we for our parts have received of the spirit of God, we must
use them so, as they may ever serve for the glory of God and good of our
brethren, and not to the practicing and setting forth of any manner of sin,
and by consequent to the service of the devil. For that is as if a man
receiving riches and revenues of his prince, should straight way go to the
princes enemy and employ them for his benefit; which were a point of exceeding
treachery.

Furthermore, in every place the greater part of men are blind and ignorant
persons both young and old; and aged folks, as they are ignorant themselves, so
they nuzzle up their youth in ignorance. Confer with them, you s^all find
that they can say nothing but that which may be learned by common talk, as
that there is a God, and that this God must be worshipped: but ask them
further of the means of their salvation, and of their duties to God and man,
and they will answer you, that they are not booke-learned: tell them further
that the ordinary means to bring men to knowledge is the preaching of the
word, which if they will not use, they shall be inexcusable; they will say,
alas, we are dull of memory, and cannot learn. Well, for all this, thou say
thou beleeuest in the holy Ghost, and he is thy schoolmaster to teach thee:
though thy capacity be dull, yet he is able to open thine understanding: for
as there is outward teaching by the minister, so the work of the holy Ghost is
joined withal to enlighten the conceit of the mind, that they which hear the
word with reverence may profit thereby and get knowledge. But if for all this
men will not learn, but remain ignorant still, then let them mark the
example of the sons of Eli: he in some part did rebuke them for their
wickedness, but yet they would not obey; and the reason is there set down, 1.
S^m. ^.25.
because the Lord would destroy them. In the same manner howsoever we may not
judge of any man's person, yet this may be said, that if men refuse to hear the
word of God when they may, or if in hearing they will not obey, it is a
fearful sign that God will at length destroy them. When a trumpet is sounded
in a man's ear, and he lies still, not stirring at all; he is certainly dead.
And surely when the trumpet of the Gospel is sounded in the ears of our
hearts, if we awake not out of our sins to newnes of life, we are no better
then dead men before God. Wherefore the case being thus dangerous, and the
punishment so great, let us labor in time for the knowledge of Gods will, and
prevent Gods judgments before they light upon us.

Thirdly, as the Apostle says, Gal 5. 5.
If we live in the spirit, we must walk in the spirit, that is, if we be dead
unto sin by the power of the holy Ghost, and be raised up to newnes of life,
then we must walk in the spirit. Now to walk in the spirit, is to lead our
lives in showing forth the fruits of the spirit. ^sa. 44.3,^.
In Esai the holy Ghost is compared unto water powered forth on the dry land,
which makes the willowes to blossom and to bear fruit: wherefore those that
have the gifts of the spirit must be trees of righteousness bringing forth the
fruits of the spirit, which (as they are set down by Paul) are principally
nine.

The first fruit is love, which respects both God and man. Love unto God is an
inward and spiritual motion in the heart, whereby God is loved absolutely for
himself. This love shows it self in two things: I. when a man's heart is set
and disposed to seek the honor and glory of God in all things. II. when a
man by all means strives, and endeauours himself to please God in every
thing, counting it a most miserable estate to live in the displeasure of God:
and the heart that is thus affected, can have no greater torment then to fall
into sin, whereby God is offended and his displeasure provoked. By these two
signs a man may know whether he love God or no, and by them also must he
testify his love. Now our love to man, is a fruit of this love of God: for God
is to be loved for himself: man is loved for God. This love must not be in
show only, but in deed and action. 1. Ioh 3.18.
S. John bids us not to love in word and tongue only, but in deed and
truth. Brotherly love does not always lie hid, but when an occasion is
offered, it does break forth into action; it is like fire, which though for a
time it be smothered, yet at length it breaks forth into a flame. And so much
love a man shows to his neighbor, as he has; and where none is showed, none
is.

The second fruit is Joy, when a man is as glad at the good of his neighbor as
at his own good: and this is a special work of the holy Ghost. For the
nature of man is to pine away, and to grieve at the good of another; and
contrariwise it is a work of grace to rejoice thereat. Paul says, Romans 12. 1^.
Rejoice with them that rejoice. And this was the holy practice of the friends
and neighbors of Zacharias and Elizabeth, when John Baptist was borne, Luke
1.58.
they came and rejoiced with them.

The third fruit of the spirit, is peace. Of this Paul speaks most
excellently, saying, Romans 12.18.
If it be possible, as much as in you is have peace with all men. It is nothing
else but concord which must be kept in an holy manner, with all men, both good
and badde, so far forth as can be. Isai the Prophet speaking of the fruits of
the Gospel says, Esa. 11.6.
The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard with the kidde, etc.
Where note, that in the kingdom of Christ, when a man is called into the state
of grace, howsoever by nature he be as a wolf, as a leopard, as a lion, or as
a bear; yet he shall then lay away his cruel nature, and become gentle, and
live peaceably with all men. Now for the practicing of this peace, there are
three duties especially to be learned and performed: I. rather then peace
should be broken, a man must yield of his own right. When Publicans came to our
Savior Christ for tribute, he had a lawful excuse: for how soever he lived in
low estate among them, yet he was the right heir to the kingdom, and
therefore was free: nevertheless he stood not on his privilege, but calls
Peter, saying, Mat. 17.26,27.
Least we offend them, go to the sea and cast in an angle, and take the first
fish that comes up: and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a
piece of twenty pence: take it, and give it to them for thee and me. Here we
see that our Savior Christ, rather then he would break the common peace,
yields of his own right; and so we must do if we will be good followers of
him. Secondly, when any man shall sin either in word or indeed, specially if
it be upon infirmity, we must avoid bitter inuectiues and mildly tell him of
his fault, and in all meeknes and love labor for his amendment. So Paul
teaches us, saying, Gal. 6.1.
If any man be fallen into any fault by occasion, restore such an one with the
spirit of meeknes, considering thy self, least thou be also tempted. etc.
Bear ye one an others burden. Thirdly, every man within the compass of his
calling, must be a peacemaker between them that are at varia^ce. This is a
special duty of godliness and christianity, and therefore our Savior Christ
does highly commend such, and pronounces this blessing upon them, Math. 5.9.
that they shall be called the children of God.

The fourth fruit of the spirit, is long suffering: and it stands in two
points: I. when a man deferreth his anger and is hardly brought to it: II.
being angry does yet moderate the same, and stay the hotnesse of that
affection. For the first, to bridle anger, it is a special work of the holy
Ghost, and the means to attain unto it are these: I. not to take notice of
the injuries and wrongs done unto us, if they be not of great moment; but to
let them pass, as not knowing them. Solomon says, Pr^v. 19.11.
It is a man's discretion to defer his anger. Now how is that done? it is
added in the next words, It is the glory of a man to pass by infirmity: that
is, when a man shall ouershoote himself, either in word or in deed, to let it
pass either wholly, or till a time convenient, as though we knew not of it.
The second way to defer and bridle anger is, when a man has iniuried us
either in word or deed, to think with our selves that we have iniuried other
in the same manner: and for this cause Solomon says, Eccles. ^.23.
Give not thine heart to all the words that men speak, least thou hear thy
servant cursing thee: for oftentimes thine heart also knows that thou have
cursed others. A man must not listen to every man's words at all times: but he
is to think that he has spoken or done the same to other men, and that now
the Lord meets with him by the like, as it is said, With what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured to you again. Math. 7.2.
This is a thing which few consider. Evil men desire good report and would
have all men speak well of them, whereas they can speak well of none: but
indeed they must begin to speak well of others before others shall speak
well of them. Thirdly, a man must consider how God deals with him. For so
often as he sins he provoke God to cast him away and to confound him
eternally; yet the Lord is merciful and long suffering. Even so when men do
offend and injury us, we must do as God does: not be angry but fight against
our affections, endeavoring to become patient and long suffering as God is
with us. The second property of long suffering, is to keep the affection of
anger in moderation and compass. It is not always a sin to be angry, and
therefore it is said of Christ (in whom was no blemish of sin) that he was
angry: Mark. 3.5.
yet we must look that our anger be moderate not continuing ouerlong, as Paul
says, Let not the sun go down upon your wrath.

The fifth fruit of the spirit is gentleness, whereby a man behaueth and shows
himself friendly and courteous to every man, as Paul says to Titus, Tit. 3.2.
Put them in remembrance that they speak evil of no man, that they be no
fighters but soft, showing all meekenes unto all men, whether they be good or
bad. This gentleness stands in these points: I. to speak to every man
friendly and lovingly. II. to salute friendly and courteously. III. to be
ready upon every occasion to give reverence and honor to every man in his
place. It is made a question of some, whether a man is to salute and speak
unto them that are known to be lewd and wicked men: but here we see what our
duty is in that we are taught to be courteous to all men both good and bad,
yet so as we approve not of their sins: as for that which S. John says of
false prophets, 2. Job 10.
receive them not, neither bid them God speed, it is to be understood of
giving an outward approbation to false teachers.

The sixth fruit is goodness, which is, when a man is ready to do good and
become serviceable in his calling to all men at all times upon all occasions.
This was to be seen in that holy man Job: he says; that he was eyes to the
blind, Job. 36.^5.
and feet to the lame, a father unto the poor, and when he knew not the
cause, he sought it out. And S. Paul showed this fruit most notably after his
conversion, for he says, 1. Cor. 9.2^^
that he was made all things to all men that he might save some. He was content
to undergo any thing for the good of any man. And as we have heard, the godly
are trees of righteousness bearing fruit not for themselves but for others, and
therefore Paul in the epistle to the Galatians gives this rule, Do service
one to another in love. Gal. 5.13.
In these days it is hard to find these duties performed in any place. For
both practice and proverb is commonly this, Every man for himself, and God for
us all: but it is a graceles saying; and the contrary must be practiced of
all, that desire to be guided by the spirit.

The seventh fruit is faith. Faith or fidelity stands in these two duties.
One, to make conscience of a lie, and to speak every thing whereof we speak,
as we think it is, and not to speak one thing and think an other. A rare
thing it is, to find this virtue in the world now adays: who is he that
makes conscience of a lie? and is not truth banished out of our coasts;
considering that for gains and outward commodities men make no bones of
glosing and dissembling? but alas, the practice is damnable, and the contrary
is the fruit of the holy Ghost, Psalm. 15.
namely to speak the truth from the heart: and he that can do this, by the
testimony of God himself shall rest in the mountain of his holiness, even in
the kingdom of heaven. The second point, wherein fidelity consists is, when
a man has made a promise that is lawful and good, to keep and perform the
same. Some think it is a small matter to break promise, but indeed it is a
fruit of the flesh; and contrariwise a fruit of the spirit to perform a
lawful promise: and a man's word should be as sure as an obligation: and in
conscience a man is bound to keep promise so far forth as he will, to whom
the promise is made. Indeed if a man be released of his promise, he is then
free: otherwise if we promise and do not perform, we do not only crack our
credit before men, but also sin before God.

The eight fruit of the spirit is meekness, which is a notable grace of God,
when a man provoked by injuries does neither intend nor enterprise the
requital of the same. And it stands in three duties. The first is to interpret
the sayings and doings of other men in better part as much as possibly may be.
The second, when men mistake and misconsture our sayings and doings, if the
matter be of smaller moment, to be silent and patient as Christ was, when he
was accused before the high priests and Pharisees: this being withal remembered,
that if the matter be of weight and moment, we may defend our selves by soft
and mild answers. The third, is not to contend in word or deed with any man,
but when we are to deal with others, to speak our mind, and so an end.

The last fruit of the spirit is temperance, whereby a man bridleth his
appetite or lust in meat, drink, and apparel. In bridling the lust, these
rules must be observed. I. Eating and drinking must be joined with continual
fasting, after this manner. We must not glut our selves, but rather abstain
from that which nature desires, and as some use to speak, leave our stomachs
craving. II. A man must so eat and drink, as afterward he may the better be
enabled for Gods worship. Creatures are abused when they make us unfit to serve
God. The common fault is, on the Sabbath day men so pamper themselves, as that
they are made unfit both to hear and learn Gods word, and fit for nothing
but to slumber and sleep: but following this rule of temperance these faults
shall be amended. III. This must be a caveat in our apparel, that we be
attired according to our callings in holy comeliness. The Lord has threatened
to visit all those that are clothed in strange apparel. And holy comeliness
is this, when the apparel is both for fashion and matter so made and worn,
(...) 2.3.
that it may express and show forth the graces of God in the heart, as
sobriety, temperance, gravity, etc. and the beholder may take occasion by the
apparel, to acknowledge and commend these virtues. But lamentable is the time,
look on men and women in these days, and you may see and read their sins
written in great letters on their apparel, as intemperance, pride, and
wantonness. Every day new fashions please the world; but indeed that holy
comelines which the holy Ghost does commend to us, is the right fashion when
all is done. And these are the nine fruits of the spirit, which we must put in
practice in our lives and conuersations.

Fourthly, if we believe in the holy Ghost, and thereupon do persuade our
selves, that he will dwell in us: we must daily labor as we are commanded to
keep our vessels in holiness and honor unto the Lord: 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
and the reason is good. If a man be to entertain but an earthly prince or
some man of state, he would be sure to have his house in a readiness, and all
matters in order against his coming, so as every thing might be pleasing unto
so worthy a guest: well now, behold, we put our confidence and affiance in the
holy Ghost, and do believe that he will come unto us, and ^anctifie us, and
lodge in our hearts. He is higher then all states in the world whatsoever; and
therefore we must look that our bodies and souls be kept in an honorable and
holy manner, so as they may be fit temples for him to dwell in. S. Paul bids
vs^ not to grieve the holy spirit, Ephesians. 4.30.
where the holy Ghost is compared to a guest, and ou^ bodies and souls unto
Innes: and as men use their guests friendly and courteously, showing unto them
all service and duty: so must we do to Gods spirit which is come to dwell and
abide in us, doing nothing in any case, which may disquiet or molest him. Now
there is nothing so grievous unto him as our sins, and therefore we must make
conscience of all manner of sin, least by abusing of our selves, we do cause
the holy Ghost (as it were) with grief to depart from us. When the arc of the
covenant which was a sign of the presence of God, was in the house of Obed
Edom, the text says, that the Lord blessed him and all his house: but when the
holy Ghost dwells in a man's heart, 2. Sam. 6.17.
there is more then the ark of the Lord present, even God himself: and
therefore may we look for a greater blessing. Now then shall we grieve the holy
Ghost by sinning, seeing we reap such benefit by his abode? It is said that
our Savior Christ was angry when he came into the temple at Jerusalem, and
saw the abuses therein. Now shall he be angry for the abuses that are done in
a temple of stone, and seeing the temples of our bodies which are not made of
stone, but are spiritual, figured by that earthly temple, seeing them (I say)
abused by sin, will he not be much more angry? Yea we may assure our selves,
he can not abide that. And therefore if we believe in the holy Ghost, we must
hereupon be moved to keep our bodies and souls pure and clean. And further,
to persuade us hereunto, we must remember this, that when we pollute our souls
and bodies with any manner of sin, we make them even stables and styes for
our wretched enemy the devil to harbor in. For when Satan is once cast out,
if afterward we fall again to our old sins and loosenes of life, and so
defile our bodies, they are then most clean and neat for them to dwell in:
whereupon he will come and bring seven other devils worse then himself, and
so a man's last end shall be worse then his beginning. Now what a fearful
thing is this, that the body which should be a temple for the holy Ghost, by
our sins should be made a stable for the devil. 1 Thessalonians ^.1^.
Furthermore S. Paul bids us, not to quench the spirit. The graces of the
holy spirit in this life, are like sparks of fire, which may soon be quenched
with a little water. Now so often as we sin, we cast water upon the grace of
God, and as much as we can put out the same: therefore it stands us in hand to
make conscience of every thing wherein we may offend and displease God. And we
may assure our selves, that so long as we live and lie in our corruptions and
sins, the holy Ghost will never come and dwell with us. He is a spirit most
pure and chaste, and therefore must have an undefiled temple to dwell in.

Thus we have heard what is to be believed concerning the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost. Now, look as we believe in God distinguished into three persons:
so we must remember, that when we perform divine worship to him, we may
distinguish the persons, but we are not to sever them: when we pray to the
Father, we must not omit the Son or the holy Ghost, but make our prayers to
them all: for as in nature they are one, and in person not divided but
distinguished: so in all worship we must never confound or sever the persons,
but distinguish them, and worship the Trinity in unity and unity in
trinity: one God in three persons, and three persons in one God.

Hitherto we have entreated of the first part of the Creed concerning God: now
follows the second part thereof concerning the Church: and ^t was added to the
former upon special consideration. For August. in ^nchir. c. 59.
the right order of a confession did require, that after the Trinity the
Church should be mentioned, as the house after the owner, the temple after God,
and the city after the builder. Again, Aug. l. 4. c. 10. de ^ymb. ad Catech.
the Creed is concluded with points of doctrine concerning the Church, because
whosoever is out of it, is also forth of the number of gods children: and he
can not have God for his father, which has not the Church for his mother.

Question is made what the words are which are to be supplied in this article,
the holy Catholic Church, whether, I believe, or, I believe in: and ancient
expositours have sufficiently determined the matter. One Ruffin. in symb.
says, In these words, in which is set forth our faith of the godhead, it is
said, In God the father, in the Son, and in the holy Ghost; but in the rest
where the speech is not of the Godhead, but of creatures and mysteries, the
preposition In is not added that it should be, in the holy Church, but, that we
should believe there is an holy Church not as God, but as a company gathered
to God. And men should believe that there is remission of sins, not, in the
remission of sins: and they should believe the resurrection of the body not,
in the resurrection of the body: therefore by this preposition the Creator is
distinguished from the creatures, and things pertaining to God from things
pertaining to men. Another upon these words, This is the work of God that ye
believe in him; says, August tract. 2. 9.10 ^oh.
If ye believe in him, ye believe him; not if ye believe him, ye believe in
him, for the devils believed God, but did not believe in him. Again of the
Apostles, we may say, we believe Paul, but we do not believe in Paul: we
believe Peter, but we believe not in Peter. For his faith that believes in him
which justifies the ungodly, is imputed to him for righteousness. What is it
therefore to believe in him? by believing to love and like, and as it were to
pass into him, and to be incorporated into his members. Now the reasons which
some Papists bring to the contrary to prove that we may believe in the
creatures, and in the church, are of no moment. First they allege the phrase
of Scripture, Exodus 14.31. They believed in God, and in Moses. 1. Sam. 27. 12.
And Achis believed in David. 2. Chron. 20.20. Believe in the Prophets and
prosper. Ans. Epiph an. in Anchor.
The Hebrewe phrase in which the servile letter Beth is used, must not be
translated with a preposition that rules an accusative or ablative case, but
with a dative case on this manner, Believe Moses, David, the Prophets: and it
does not impart any affiance in the creature, but only a giving of credance by
one man to another. Secondly they allege, that ancient fathers read the
article on this manner, I believe in the holy Catholic Church. Answ. Indeed
some have done so: but by this kind of speech they signified no more but thus
much, that they believed that there was a Catholic Church.

Thus having found what words are to be supplied, let us come to the meaning of
the article. And that we may proceed in order, let us first of all see what
the Church is. The Church is a peculiar company of men, predestinate to life
everlasting and made one in Christ. First I say, it is a peculiar company of
men: for Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 2.^.
Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, and a
peculiar people. He speaks indeed of the Church of God on earth, but his
saying may be also extended to the whole Church of God, as well in heaven as in
earth. Now because there can be no company unless it have a beginning and a
cause whereby it is gathered: therefore I add further in the definition,
predestinate to life everlasting. Noting thereby the ground and cause of the
Catholic Church, namely Gods eternal predestination to life everlasting: and
to this purpose our Savior Christ says, Luke 12.31.
Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers will to give you the kingdom:
signifying thereby, that the first and principal cause of the Church, is the
good pleasure of God whereby he has before all works purposed to advance his
elect to eternal salvation. Therefore one says well, Bernard. in Cant.
only the elect are the Church of God. And further, because no company can
continue and abide for ever, unless the members thereof be joined and coupled
together by some bond, therefore I add in the last place, made one with
Christ. This union makes the Church to be the Church: and by it the members
thereof, whether they be in heaven or in earth, are distinguished from all
other companies whatsoever. Now this conjunction between Christ and the Church
is avouched by Saint Paul when he says, Col 1.18.
Christ is the head to his body, which is his Church: and when he ascribes the
name of Christ not only to the person of the Son but to the Church it self,
as in the Epistle to the Galatians. To Abraham and his seed were the promises
made: he says not, and to his seeds, as speaking of many, but, and unto his
seed, as speaking of one, which is Christ: that is not the redeemer alone, but
also the Church redeemed. For Christ as he is man is not the only seed of
Abraham. And this definition of the Church is almost in so many words set
down in the Scriptures in that it is called the Family of God, partly in
heaven, Ephesians. 3.15.
and partly in earth, named of Christ: and it is also called the heavenly
Jerusalem, the mother of us all: and, the celestial Jerusalem: and, Gal. 4.20.
Heb. 12.22.
the congregation of the first borne. Now for the better understanding of the
nature, estate, and parts of the Church, two points among the rest must be
considered; the efficient cause thereof, C^^s predestination; and the form, the
mystical Union.

In handling the doctrine of Predestination, my meaning is, only to stand on
such points as are revealed in the word and necessary, tending to
edification. And first I will show what is the truth, and secondly the
contrary falshoode. In the truth I consider four things; I. what
Predestination is: II. what is the order of it: III. what be the parts of it:
IV. what is the use.

Predestination may thus be de^ined: It is a part of the counsel of God,
whereby he has before all times purposed in himself to show mercy on some
men, and to pass by others, showing his justice on them for the manifestation
of the glory of his own name. First, I say, it is a part of his counsel,
because the counsel or decree of God, universally extends it self to all
things that are: and Predestination is Gods decree so far forth as it
concerns the reasonable creatures, especially man. Now in every purpose or
decree of God, three things must be considered; the beginning, the matter, the
end. The beginning is the will of God whereby he wills and appoints the
estate of his creatures: and it is the most absolute, supreme, and sovereign
cause of all things that are, so far forth as they have being: having
nothing either above it self or out of it self, to be an impulsive cause to
move or incline it; and to say otherwise, is to make the will of God to be no
will. Indeed men's wills are moved and disposed by external causes, out of
themselves borrowed from the things whereof deliberation is made, because they
are to be ruled by equity and reason: and a man's bare will without reason is
nothing. Now Gods will is not ruled by another rule of reason or justice, but
it self is an absolute rule both of justice and reason. A thing is not first
of all reasonable and just, and then afterward willed by God: but it is first
of all willed by God, and thereupon becomes reasonable and just. The matter of
his purpose is a decreed manifestation of two of the most ptincipall attributes
of the godhead, mercy and justice: and that with a limitation or restraint of
mercy to some of the creatures, and justice to some others, because it was his
good will and pleasure. And we are not to imagine that this is a point of
cruelty in God: for his very essence or nature is not justice alone or mercy
alone, but justice and mercy both together: and therefore to purpose the
declaration of them both upon his creatures over whom he is a sovereign
Lord; and that without other respects, upon his very will and pleasure, is no
point of injustice. The supreme end of the counsel of God is the
manifestation of his own glory partly in his mercy, and partly in his
justice. For in common equity the end which he propoundes unto himself of all
his doings, must be answerable to his nature; which is majesty and glory and
(as I have said) justice and mercy it self.

And because Paul's disputation in the 9. to the Romans gives light and
sufficient confirmation to this which I now teach, I will stand a little to
open and resolve the same. From the 1. verse to the 6. he sets down his grief
conceived for his brethren the Jews, and therewithal, that it might not be
thought that he spoke of malice, he does only in close and obscure manner
insinuate the R^iection of that nation. This done in the 6. v. he answers a
secret objection which might be made, on this manner: If the Jews be rejected,
the^ the word of God is of none effect: that is, then the covenant made with
the forefathers is void: but the covenant can not be void: therefore the Jews
are not rejected. The assumption he takes for granted, and denies the
consequence of the proposition. And the ground of his denial is, because there
is a distinction between man and man, even among the Jews, whereby some are
indeed in the covenant, some not. And this distinction is proved by three
examples: the first in this verse, that of the children of Jacob the common
parent of all the Jews, some are Israel, that is, truly in the covenant as
Jacob was: and some are not Israel. Now it might be further objected, that the
Jews are not only the posterity of Jacob, but the seed of Abraham in whom
all nations of the earth are blessed: and therefore not to be rejected. And to
this Paul answers verse. 7. alleging a second example of the distinction
between man and man out of the family of Abraham, in which some were indeed
sons, some were not. For the proof of this, first he sets down the words of
the text in Moses, In Isaac shall thy seed be called: and secondly makes an
exposition of them with a collection on this manner: Al they which are the
sons of the promise are the seed of Abraham or the sons of God: but Isaac
is a son of promise and not Ismael: therefore Isaac is the seed of Abraham
and heir of the blessing, and not Ismael. The proposition is in the 8. verse,
the assumption in the 9. verse. the conclusion in the 7. verse. Here mark, I.
how he makes a double seed, one according to the flesh, the other spiritual:
and two kind of sons, one of the flesh, the other son of the promise or
the son of God: for he puts the one for the other. II. that the distinction
between Isaac and Ismael, whereby one is in the covenant of grace, the other
not; stands not in their foreseen says and unbelief, and the fruits of
them: but in the purpose and will of God it self. For Isaac is called the
child of promise, because by the virtue of it he was borne, and believed, and
was adopted the child of God, and made heir of the covenant given to Abraham:
and therefore consequently the right of apoption befell him by the mere good
pleasure of God, which is the first cause of our salvation, without respect of
any thing in the person of Isaac. For what God by his promise brings to pass
in time, that he most freely decreed before all times. Now considering the
Jews might say that Ismael was rejected, because he was borne of the handmaid
Hagar, whereas they, for their parts descend of Abraham and Sarai; by Isaac the
lawefull son, Paul adds a third example of the distinction between man and
man out of the family of Isaac, in which Jacob was a true son and heir of
the promise, and Esau was not. Now the distinction of these two persons is
propounded in the 10. verse. and confirmed verse 11, 12, 13. in which are set
down three things: I. the time of this distinction, yer the children were
borne, and therefore when they had neither done good nor evil. And this
circumstance is noted, to show, that God was not moved by any preuision or
preconsideration of Jacobs godliness and Esaus profaneness to prefer the
one before the other. II. the end why the distinction was made at this time
and not afterward when they were borne is, that the purpose of God which is
according to his election might remain sure, not of works but by him that
calls: that is, that by this means it might appear, that when God receives
any man into the covenant of eternal life, it proceeds not of any dignity in
the man whom God calls, but from his mercy and alone good pleasure, that
his decree of saving the elect might remain firm and sure for ever. Hence it
is manifest that there is an unchangeable decree of election of some men (for
he that takes all and accepts none can not be said to choose) to salvation,
depending upon the alone will of God; and therefore necessarily by the law of
contraries, there is an opposite decree of reprobation: for in that God
ordains some to eternal salvation, he testifies thereby, that his purpose
is to pass by some without showing of mercy. III. The author of this
distinction, God himself by his purpose before al times, which purpose he made
manifest by testimony given to Rebecca, saying, the greater shall serve the
younger: that is, the first borne and more excellent according to the flesh,
shall loose his birthright and the blessing of his father, and in respect of
title to the covenant, be subject to the younger. And because this testimony
concerning the freedom and servitude of Jacob and Esau might seem sufficient
to prove the election of the first and the reiection of the second, therefore
Paul adds a second testimony out of Malachi, I have loved Jacob and hated
Esau: that is, I have purposed to love Jacob and to hate Esau. And these words
no doubt, are alleged to expound the former place out of Moses, and show that
the bondage of Esau was joined with the hatred of God, and the feedom of Jacob
with the love of God as tokens thereof.

Against this received exposition of the former words which I have now
propounded, sundry exceptions are made. First, that the prerogative of Isaac
above Ismael, and Jacob above Esau, was only in temporary blessings, in that
God vouchsafed unto them the right of the land of Canaan. Ans. If these places
are to be understood of temporal blessings and not spiritual, then the
Apostle has not fitly alleged the former examples, to prove the reiection
of the Jews from the Covenant. For though it be granted, there be a
difference between man and man, in respect of earthly blessings, yet does it
not follow that there shall be the same difference in things concerning the
kingdom of heaven. If a father for some cause disinherit one or two of his
children, it were absurd thereupon to conclude that he might therefore kill any
of the rest. Again, the land of Canaan was not only an earthly inheritance,
but also a pledge and figure unto our forefathers of a better inheritance in
heaven: and therefore the excluding of Ismael and Esau from the land of Canaan
was a sign that they were excluded from the covenant of grace, and the right
of eternal life. Some others say, that by Jacob and Esau are not meant two
persons, but the two nations of the Idumeans and the Israelites. Ans. It is a
manifest untruth. For it was not possible for two nations to strive in the
womb of Rebecca, unless we considered them as they were comprehended under
the two heads, to wit, the very persons of Jacob and Esau. And whereas they
say that Esau in person never served Jacob, but only in his posterity, the
answer is, that Jacobs freedom and prerogatives were spiritual, and not
temporal, which by faith he saw a far off, but inioyed not: and therefore
proportionally Esau was debased to the condition of a servant in respect of his
younger brother, not so much in respect of his outward estate and condition, as
in regard of the covenant made with his ancestors from which he was barred.
And though it be granted that by Jacob and Esau two nations and not two
persons are to be understood, yet all comes to one head, for the receiving of
the nation of the Israelites into the covenant, and the excluding of the nation
of the Edomites, both descending of Jacob and Esau, serve as well to prove Gods
eternal election and reprobation, as the receiving and rejecting of one man.
Others say that these words, I have hated Esau, are thus to be understood; I
have less loved Esau then Jacob. But how then shall we say that Paul has
fitly alleged this text to prove the reiection of the Jew from the favor
of God and the Covenant of grace, considering that of men, whereof one is loved
more of God, the other less; both may still remain in the Covenant. Lastly, it
is alleged that the former exposition makes Ismael and Esau damned persons.
Ans. We must leave unto God all secret judgment of particular persons, and yet
nevertheless Paul does very fitly in there two persons, both descending of
Abraham, and both circumcised; set forth examples of such, as for their outward
prerogatives, are indeed barred from the covenant of life everlasting before
god. And again the opposition made by Paul requires that the contrary to that
which is spoken of Isaac and Jacob, should be said of Ismael and Esau. And
there is nothing spoken of either of them in the Scriptures which argues the
disposition of men ordained to eternal life. Ismael is noted with the brand of
a mocker, and Esau of a profane man.

To proceed in the text, because the doctrine of Paul delivered in the former
verses might seem strange unto the Romans, therefore in the 14. verse, he
lays down an objection, and answers the same. The objection is this: If God
put distinction between man and man, without respect had to their persons,
upon his own will and pleasure, then is he unjust: but he is not unjust:
therefore he makes no such distinction. The answer is, God forbid. Whereby he
denies the consequence of the proposition, on this manner: Though God should
elect some to salvation, and reject some others and that upon his will, yet
were there no injustice with God. The reason of this answer follows in the 18.
verse. God has absolute power or freedom of will, whereby without being
bound to any creature, he may and can first of all have mercy on whom he
will, and secondly harden whom he will. For the proof of the first, that God
has mercy on whom he will, he lays down the testimony of Moses, verse. 15.
I will have mercy on him on whom I will show mercy, and I will have
compassion on him on whom I will have compassion. And in verse 16. makes his
collection thence, that it [namely the purpose of God according to election
verse 11.] is not in him that wills or in him that runne^h, but in God that
shows mercy. Whereby he teaches, that the free election of God in order
goes before all things that may in time befall man: and that therefore neither
the intentions and endeauours of the mind, nor the works of our life, which
are the effects of election, can be the impulsive causes to move God to choose
us to salvation. The second, that God hardens whom he will, is confirmed and
made plain by the testimony of Scripture concerning Pharao, verse 17.

In the 19. verse there follows an other objection, arising out of the answer
to the former, on this manner: If God will have some to be hardened and
rejected, and his will can not be resisted, then with no justice can he punish
the^ that are necessarily subject to his decree: but God will have some to be
hardened and rejected, and his will can not be resisted: therefore (says the
adversary) with no justice can he punish man that is necessarily subject to
his decree. Here mark, that if there had been an universal election of all
men, and if men had been elected or rejected according as God did foresee that
they would believe or not believe, the occasion of this objection had been
cut off. But let us come to Paul's answer. In the 20. verse he takes the
assumption for granted, that some are rejected because God will: and that the
will, that is, the decree of God can not be resisted: A child might answer his
objection, if men were elect and re^used for their foreseen faith and
^nbeleefe.
and only denies the coherence of the proposition, checking the malipert pride
of the adversary, and showing that the making of this wicked and blasphemous
collection against the will of God, is as if a man should sue God at the law,
and bring him as it were to the bar, and plead against him as his equal,
whereas indeed the creature is nothing to the creator, and is absolutely to
submit it self to his will in all things. In verse. 21. he proceeds to a
second answer, showing that Gods will is not to be blamed, because by his
absolute sovereignty and the right of creation, he has power to choose men,
or to reject and harden them. And where there is right and power to do a
thing, the will of the doer is not to be blamed. Now that God has this right
and power over his creature, it is proved by a comparison from the less to
the greater, on this manner. The potter has power over the clay to make of the
same lump one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor: therefore may God
much more make some vessels of mercy, and some vessels of wrath prepared to
destruction. The first part of the comparison is verse. 21. the second part
verse. 22, 23. And least any man should think that God makes vessels of honor
and dishonor without sufficient and just cause in himself, as the potter may
do: therefore he sets down ends of the will of God: he makes vessels of
dishonor to show his wrath, and to make manifest his power: and again he
condemns no man til he have suffered him with long patience. And he makes
vessels of honor that he might declare the riches of his glory upon them.
Hence it is manifest, first that the end of predestination is the glory of
God, which is to be made manifest partly in his justice and partly in his
mercy: secondly that men are not elected or refused of God, for their foreseen
corru^tions or virtues: for then Paul would not have said, the God made vessels
of dishonor, but that being so already, he left them in their dishonor.

Thus from the 6. verse of this chapter to the 24. Paul has described unto us
the doctrine of Gods eternal predestination, and that by the judgment of Aug
de ^raede^t. san^t. ad Paulinum. ep. 7^. E^c^ir. 98 99. ^^ ^^^rum. 105. epist.
^ierony. He^lib^^ q. 10 B^d. i^ Romans and Aquinas, etc.
Divines in all ages.

The order of Gods Predestination is this. It is the property of the
reasonable creature to conceive one thing after another, whereas God conceiues
all things at once with one act of understanding, and all things both past and
to come are present with him; and therefore in his eternal counsel he decrees
not one thing after another, but all things at once. Nevertheless for our
understanding sake, we may distinguish the counsel of God concerning man into
two acts or degrees: the first is, the purpose of God in himself, in which he
determines what he will do, and the end of al his doings: and that is to create
al things, specially man for his own glory, partly by showing on some men his
mercy, and upon others his justice. The second is, an other purpose whereby he
decrees the execution of the former, and lays down means of accomplishing
the end thereof. These two acts of the counsel of God, are not to be severed
in any wise, nor confounded, but distinctly considered with some difference.
For in the first, god decrees some men to honor by showing his mercy and love
on them, and some again to dishonor by showing his justice on them; and this
man more then that, upon his will and pleasure, and there is no other cause
hereof, known to us. In the second, known and manifest causes are set down of
the execution of the former decree. For no man is actually condemned; yea God
decrees to condemn no man but for his sins: and no man is actually saved but
for the merit of Christ. Furthermore this latter act of the counsel of God,
must be conceived of us in the second place and not in the first. For evermore
the first thing to be intended is the end it self, and then afterward the
subordinate means and causes whereby the end is accomplished. Again the second
act of Gods counsel contains two other; one which sets down the
preparation of the means whereby Gods Predestination begins to come in
execution; and they are two, the creation of man righteous after the image of
God, the voluntary fall of Adam and withal the shutting up of all men under
damnation: the other appoints the applying of the several means to the
persons of men; that Gods decree, which was set down before all times may in
time be fully accomplished; as shall afterward in particular appear.

Predestination has two parts, the Decree of Election, the Decree of
Reprobation or No-election. This division is plain by that which has been
said out of the 9. chapter to the Romans, and it may be further confirmed by
other testimonies. Of some it is said, 2. Tim. 2.19.
that the Lord knows who are his: and of some others. Christ shall say in the
day of judgment, Math. 7.21. Act. 13.48.
I never knew you. In the Acts it is said, that as many of the Gentiles as
were ordained to life everlasting believed. And Jude says of false prophets,
Iud. 4.
that they were ordained to condemnation.

In handling the decree of Election, I will consider three things: I. what
Election is: II. the execution thereof: III. the knowledge of particular
Election. For the first, Gods Election is a decree in which according to the
good pleasure of his will, he has certainly chosen some men to life eternal in
Christ for the prai^e of the glory of his grace. This is the same which Paul
says to the Ephesians, Ephesians. ^.4.5.
God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, that we
should be holy and without blame before him in love: who has predestinate us
to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will. Now that we may the better conceive this doctrine, let
us come to a consideration of the several points thereof. First of all I say,
Election is Gods decree. For there is nothing in the world that comes to pass
either universally or particularly without the eternal and unchangeable decree
of God. And therefore whereas men are actually chosen, and brought to life
everlasting it is because God did purpose with himself and decree the same
before all worlds. Now touching the decree it self, six things are to be
observed. The first, what was the motive or impulsive cause that moved God to
decree the salvation of any man. Ans. The good pleasure of God. For Paul says,
he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy: and, He has predestinate us
according to the good pleasure of God. Romans 8. 18. Ephesians. 1.5.
As for the opinion of them that say, that foreseen faith and good works are
the cause that moved god to choose men to salvation, it is frivolous. For
faith and good works are the fruits and effects of gods election. Paul says,
he has chosen us, not because he did foresee that we would beco^e holy, but
that we might be holy. Ephesians. 1.4. (...) 1. ^^.
And, he has predestinate us to adoption. Which is all one as if he had said,
he has predestinate us to believe, because adoption comes by believing. Now if
men are elected that they might believe, then are they not elected because they
would believe. For it can not be that one thing should be both the cause and
the effect of another.

The second point is, that Gods election is unchangeable; so as they which are
indeed chosen to salvation can not perish, but shall without fail attain to
life everlasting. Paul takes it for a conclusion^ that the purpose of God
according to election must remain firm and sure; Romans 9. ^^. an^ 1. 29.
and again, that the gifts and calling of god are without repentance. And
Samuel says, The strength of Israel will not lie or repent. For he is not a
man that he should repent. ^. Sam. 15 ^9.
Such as Gods nature is, such is his will and counsel: but his nature is
unchangeable, I am Jehovah, says he, M^l. 3 6.
and I change not: therefore his will likewife and his counsels be
unchangeable. And therefore whenever the spirit of God shall testify unto
our spirits, that we are iustif^ed in Christ, and chosen to salvation; it must
be a means to comfort us, and to stablish our hearts in the love of God. As for
the opinion of them that say, the elect may fall from grace and be damned, it
is full of hellish discomfort, and no doubt from the devil. And the reasons
commonly alleged for this purpose, are of no moment, as may appear by the
skanning of them. Ephesians. 1 ^. ^. ^he^s. ^.4. (...) ^.^.
First they object that the Churches of the Ephesians, Thessalonians, and the
dispersed Jews are all called Elect by the Apostles themselves, yet sundry of
them afterward fell away. Ans. I. There are two kinds of judgment to be given
of men, the judgment of certenty, and the judgment of charity. By the first
indeed, is given an infallible determination of any man's election; but it
belongs unto God principally and properly: and to men but in part, namely so
far forth as God shall reveal the estate of one man unto another. Now the
judgment of charity belongs unto all men; and by it, leaving all secret
judgments unto God, we are charitably to think, that all those, that live in
the Church of God, professing themselves to be members of Christ, are indeed
elect to salvation, till God make manifest otherwise. And on this manner, and
not otherwise do the Apostles call whole Churches elect. II. they are called
elect of the principal part, and not because every member thereof was indeed
elect; as it is called an heap of corn though the bigger part be chafe.
^^^l. 69. ^8. ^xod. ^2 32. ^^^ 9^3.
Secondly it is alleged, that David prays that his enemies may be blotted
out of the book of life, which is the election of God, and that Moses and Paul
did the like against themselves. Answer. David's enemies had not their names
written in the book of life but only in the judgment of men. Thus Judas so
long as he was one of the disciples of Christ, was accounted as one having his
name written in heaven. Now hence it follows, that men's names are blotted out
of Gods book, when it is made clear and manifest unto the world, that they
were never indeed written there. And where Moses says, Forgive them this
sin: if not, blotte me out of thy bo^ke: and Paul, I could wish to be
accursed, etc. there meaning was, not to signify that men elected to salvation
might become reprobates: only they testify their zealous affections, that
they could be content to be deprived of their own salvation, rather then the
whole body of the people should perish, and God loose his glory. As for that
which Christ says, Ioh. 6 70.
Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil, it is to be
understood not of election to salvation, but of election to office of an
Apostle; which is temporary and changeable.

The third point is, that there is an actual election made in time, being
indeed a fruit of Gods decree, and answerable unto it, and therefore I added
in the description these words, whereby he has chosen some men. All men by
nature are sinners, and children of wrath, shut up under one and the same
estate of condemnation. And actual election is, when it pleases God to sever
and single out some men above the rest, out of this wretched estate of the
wicked world, and to bring them to the kingdom of his own son. Thus Christ
says of his own disciples, Ioh. 15.19.
I have chosen you out of the world.

The fourth point is, the actual or real foundation of Gods election, and
that is Christ: and therefore we are said to be chosen to salvation in Christ.
Ephesians. 1.4.
He must be considered two ways: as he is God, we are predestinate of him,
even as we are predestinate of the father and the holy Ghost. As he is our
Mediator we are predestinate in him. For when God with himself had decreed to
manifest his glory in saving some men by his mercy, he ordained further the
creation of man in his own image, yet so as by his own fall he should infold
himself and all his posterity under damnation: this done, he also decreed
that the Word should be incarnate actually, to redeem those out of the former
misery, whom he had ordained to salvation. Christ therefore himself was
first of all predestinate as he was to be our head, and as Peter says, 1.
Pet. 1.20. Aug de praede^t. ^anct. c.15.
ordained before all worlds; and we secondly predestinate in him, because God
ordained that the execution of man's Election should be in him. Here if any
demand, how we may be assured that Christ in his passion stood in our room
and stead, the resolution will be easy, if we consider that he was ordained
in the eternal counsel of God, to be our surety and pledge, and to be a
public person to represent all the elect in his obedience and sufferings: and
therefore it is, that Peter says, Act. 2.23. ^. Tim. 1.^^.
that he was delivered by the foreknowledge and determinate counsel of God.
And Paul, that grace was given unto us through Christ Jesus before the world
was.

The fifth point is, concerning the number of the Elect. And that I expressed
in these words, has chosen some men to salvation. If God should decree to
communicate his glory and his mercy to all and every man, there could be no
election. For he that takes all, cannot be said to choose. Therefore Christ
says, Many are called, but few are chosen. Some make this question; how
great the number of the elect is, and the answer may be this, that the Elect
considered in themselves be innumerable, but considered in comparison to the
whole world, they are but few. Hence it follows necessarily, that saving
grace is not universal, but indefinite or parti^^lar, unless we will against
common reason make the streams more large and plentiful then the very
f^untain it self. And this must excite us above all things in the world to
labor to have fellowship with Christ, and to be partakers of the special
mercy of God in him, yea to have the same sealed up in our hearts. Benefits
common to all, as the light of the sun, etc. are not regarded of any. Things
common to few, though they be but temporal blessings, are sought for of all.
God gives not riches to all men, but to some more, to some less, to some none.
And herupon how do men like drudges toil in the world from day to day, and
from year to year, to enrich themselves. Therefore much more ought men to seek
for grace in Christ, considering it is not common to all. We must not content
our selves to say, God is merciful, but we must go further, and labor for a
certificate in the conscience, that we may be able to say that God is indeed
merciful to us. When the Disciples would have known how many should be saved,
he omitting the question, answers thus, Strive to enter in at the straight gate.

The last point is, the end of Gods election, and that is the manifesting of
the praise and excellency of the glorious grace of God. Ephesians ^^.


Thus having seen what Election is, let us come to the Execution thereof. Of
which remember this rule, Men predestinate to the end, that is, glory, or
eternal life, are also predestinate to the subordinate means, whereby they
come to eternal life: and these are vocation, justification, sanctification,
glorification. For the first, he that is predestinate to salvation, is also
predestinate to be called, as Paul says, Romans 8.3^.
Whom he has predestinate, them also he calls. Secondly, whom God calls,
they also were predestinate to believe; therefore saving faith is called the
faith of the elect. T^^. 1.1.
And in the Acts, Act. 13.48.
as many as were ordained to life everlasting, believed. Thirdly whom God has
predestinate to life, them he justifies, as Paul sait^, Romans ^.30.
whom he has predestinate, them he calls, and whom he calls, them he
justifies. Fourthly, whom he has predestinate to life, them he has
predestinate to sanctification and holiness of life, as Peter says, that the
Jews were elect according to the foreknowledge of God the father unto
sanctification of the spirit. ^. Pe^. ^.1.
Lastly, they that are predestinate to life, are also predestinate to
obedience, as Paul says to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2. 10.
Ye are the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has ordained that we should walk in them.

This rule being the truth of God, must be observed: for it has special use.
First of all it serves to stop the mouths of ungodly and profane men. They
use to bolster up themselves in their sins by reasoning on this manner: If I
be predestinate to eternal life, I shall be saved whatsoever come of it, how
wickedly and lewdly soever I live: I will therefore live as I list, and follow
the swinge of mine own will. But, alas, like blind bayards they think they
are in the way, when as they rush their heads against the wall, and far
deceive themselves. For the case stands thus: all men that are ordained to
salvation, are likewise ordained in the counsel of God to use all the good
means whereby they may come to salvation. And therefore all the elect that
live in this world shall be called, justified, sanctified, and lead their lives
in all good conscience before God and men: and they that live and continue in
their own wicked ways disputing on this manner, If I be ordained to salvation,
I shall not be damned; ouershoote themselves, and as much as they can, plunge
themselves headlong into the very pit of hell. And for a man to live and die in
his sins, let the world dispute as they will, it is an infallible sign of
one ordained to damnation. Secondly, there be others that think that the
preaching of the word, the administration of the Sacraments, admonitions,
exhortations, laws, good orders, and all such good means are needless,
because Gods counsels be unchangeable: if a man shall be condemned, nothing
shall help: if a man be saved, nothing shall hinder. But we must still for our
part remember, that God does not only ordain the end, but also the means
whereby the end is compassed: and therefore the very use of all prescribed
means is necessary. And for this cause we must be admonished with diligence
to labor and use all good means, that we may be called by the ministry of
the Gospel, and justified, and sanctified, and at length glorified. If a king
should give unto one of his subjects a princely palace, upon condition that he
shall go unto it in the way which he shall prescribe; oh what pains would the
man take to know the way, and afterward to keep and continue in it: but
behold, the kingdom of heaven is the most glorious and royal palace that
ever was; and God has bestowed the same on his elect: and he requires nothing
at their hands but that they would turn their faces from this world, and
walk unto it in the way which he has chalked forth unto them in his word.
Therefore if we would have life everlasting, we must come forth of the broad
way that leads to destruction, and enter into the straight way that leads to
eternal life. We must acquaint our selves with the guides which are the
Ministers of the word, that will cry unto us, Here is the way, walk ye in it,
when we go to the right hand or to the left. Vocation, justification,
sanctification, repentance, new-^bedience, are the marks of the way, and we
must pass by them all: and thus our weary souls weltring a while in this
wretched world, shall at length be received into eternal joy and happiness.

Touching the knowledge of particular election, two special points are to be
skanned: I. whether a man may know his election: II. how it may be known. For
the first, Papists are of mind that no man can certainly know his own election
unless he be certified thereof by some special revelation from God: but the
thing is false and erroneous which they say. When the disciples of our Savior
Christ returned from preaching, and showed what wonders they had done, and how
devils were subject unto them, the text says they rejoiced greatly. But
Christ answered them again, saying, Luke 10.10.
In this rejoice not, but rather rejoice that your names are written in heaven.
Whereby he signifies that men may attain to a certain knowledge of their own
election. For we can not, neither do we rejoice in things either unknown or
uncertain. Saint Peter says, 2. (...) 1.^^.
Give all diligence to make your election sure. Now in vain were it to use
diligence if the assurance of election could not be any ways compassed without
an extraordinary revelation. And Paul says to the Corinthians, Prove your
selves whether ye be in the faith or not. 2. Cor. 13.5.
Where he takes it for granted, that he which has faith may know that he has
faith, and therefore may also know his election: because saving faith is an
infallible mark of election.

The second point is, how any man may come to know his own election. And there
be two ways of knowing it. The one is by ascending up as it were into heaven,
there to search the counsel of God, and afterward to come down to our selves.
The second by descending into our own hearts to go up from our selves, as it
were by Jacobs ladder, to Gods eternal counsel. The first way is dangerous,
and not to be attempted. For the ways of God are unsearchable and past finding
out. The second way alone is to be followed, which teaches us by signs and
testimonies in our selves, to gather what was the eternal counsel of God
concerning our salvation. And these testimonies are two: the testimony of Gods
spirit, and the testimony of our spirits, as Paul says, Romans 8.16.
the spirit of God bears witness together with our spirits, that we are the
sons of God.

Touching the testimony of Gods spirit, two questions may be demanded. The
first is, by what means the spirit of God gives a particular testimony in a
man's conscience of his adoption. Ans. It is not done by any extraordinary
revelation, or enthusiasme, that is, an ordinary revelation without the word;
but by an application of the promises of the Gospel in the form of a
practical syllogism, on this manner: Whoso^uer believes in Christ, is chosen
to life everlasting. This proposition is set down in the word of God, and it
is further propounded, opened, and applied to all that be in the Church of God,
by the ministers of the Gospel set apart for this end. Now while the hearers
of Gods word give themselves to meditate and consider of the some promise,
comes the spirit of God and enlightens the eyes, and opens the heart, and gives
them power both to will to believe, and to believe indeed: so as a man shall
with freedom of spirit, make an assumption and say, but I believe in Christ, I
renounce my self, all my joy and comfort is in him: flesh and blood can not
say this, it is the operation of the holy Ghost. And hence arises the blessed
conclusion which is the testimony of the spirit, therefore I am the child of
God.

The second question is, how a man may discern between the illusion of the
devil, and the testimony of the spirit. For as there is a certain persuasion
of Gods fouour from Gods spirit; so there be sleights and frauds of the devil
whereby he flatters and soothes men in their sins: and there is in all men
natural presumption in show like faith, indeed no faith. And this counterfeit
mocke-faith is far more common in the world then true faith is. Take a view
hereof in our ignorant and careless people; ask any one of them, whether he be
certain of his salvation or no; he will without bones making, protest that he is
fully persuaded and assured of his salvation in Christ: that if there be but
one man in a cuntrie to be saved, it is he: that he has served God always,
and done no man hurt: that he has evermore believed, and that he would not for
all the world, so much as doubt of his salvation. These and such like
presumptious conceits in blind and ignorant persons, run for current faith in
the world. Now the true testimony of the spirit is discerned from natural
presumption, and all illusions of the devil by two effects and fruits thereof,
noted by Paul in that he says, that the spirit makes us cry Abba, that is,
father. The first is, to pray so earnestly with groans and sighs, as though a
man would even fill heaven and earth with the cry not of his lips, but of
his heart, touched with sense and feeling of his manifold sins and off^nces.
And this indeed is a special and principal note of the spirit of adoption.
Now look upon the loose and careless man, that thinks himself so filled
with the persuasion of the love and favor of God, ye shall find that he very
seldom or never prays: and when he does, it is nothing else but a mumbling
over the Lords prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments for fashions
sake. Which argues plainly that the persuasion which he has of Gods mercy,
is of the flesh and not of the spirit. The second fruit is, the affection of a
dutiful child to God a most loving father: and this affection makes a man
stand in fear of the majesty of God wheresoever he is, and to make conscience
of every evil way. Now those that are carried away with presumption, so soon
as any occasion is given, they fall straight into sin without mislike or
stay, as fire burns with speed when dry wood is laid unto it. In a word,
where the testimony of the spirit is truly wrought, there be many other graces
of the spirit joined therewith, as when one branch in a tree buddeth the rest
budde also.

The testimony of our spirit is the testimony of the heart and conscience,
purified and sanctified in the blood of Christ. And it testifies two ways, by
inward tokens in it self, by outward fruits. Inward tokens are certain
special graces of God imprinted in the spirit, whereby a man may certainly be
a^^ured of his adoption. These tokens are of two sorts, they either r^^pect o^^
sins, or Gods mercy in Christ. The first are in respect of sins p^st,
p^^sent, or to come. The sign in the spirit which concerns sins past, ^s
(...) sorrow, which I may term a beginning and mother grace of many other
gi^^^ and graces of God. It is a kind of grief conceived in heart in respect
of God. And the nature of it may the better be conceived, if we compare it with
the contrary. Worldly sorrow springs of sin, and it is nothing else but the
horror of conscience, and the apprehension of the wrath of God for the same:
now godly sorrow, it may indeed be occasioned by our sins, but it springs
properly from the apprehension of the grace and goodness of God. World^y sorrow
is a grief for sin only in respect of the punishment: godly sorrow is a
lively touch and grief of heart for sin because it is sin, though there
were no punishment for it. Now that no man may deceive himself in judging of
this sorrow, the holy Ghost has set down seven fruits or signs th^^^^^
whereby it may be discerned. The first is Care to leave all our sins: the
second is Apology whereby a man is moved and carried to accuse and condemn
himself for his sins past, both before God and men. The third is
indignation, whereby a man is exceedingly angry with himself for his
offenses. The fourth is fear, least he fall into his former sins again. The
fifth is desire, whereby he craves strength and assistance, that his sins
take not hold on him as before. The sixth is zeal, in the performance of all
good duties contrary to his special sins. The seventh is reueng^, whereby
he subdues his ^o^^^ least it should hereafter be an instrument of sin as it
has been in ^ormer time. Now when any man shall feel these fruits in
himself, he has no doubt the godly sorrow, which here we speak of.

The token which is in regard of sins present, is the combat between the
flesh and the spirit, Gal. 1.17.
proper to them that are regenerate, who are partly flesh and partly spirit. It
is not the check of conscience which all men find in themselves both good and
badde, so often as they offend God: but it is a fighting and striving of the
mind, will, and affections with themselves, whereby so far forth as they are
renewed, they carry the man one way, and as they still remain corrupt, they
carry him flat contrary. Men having the disease called Ephialtes, when they
are half asleep feel as it were some weighty thing lying upon their
breasts, and holding them down: now lying in this case, they strive with their
hands and feet and with all the might they have to raise up themselves, and to
remove the weight, and can not. Behold here a lively resemblance of this
combat. The flesh which is the inborne corruption of man's nature, lies upon
the hearts of the children of God, and presses them down as if it were the
very weight of a mountain: now they, according to the measure of grace
received, strive to raise up themselves from under this burden, and do such
things as are acceptable to God; but can not as they would.

The token that respects sin to come, is Care to prevent it. That this is the
mark of Gods children, appears by the saving of John, ^. Ioh. 5.18.
He that is borne of God sins not, but keeps himself that the wicked one
touch him not. And this care shows it self not only in ordering the outward
actions, but even in the very thoughts of the heart. For where the Gospel is of
force it brings every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ: 1.
Cor. 10.5.
and the Apostles rule is followed, P^^l. 4.8.
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, etc. think on these
things.

The tokens which concern Gods mercy are specially two. The first is, when a
man feels himself distressed with the burden of his sins, or when he
apprehends the heavy displeasure of God in his conscience for them: then
further to feel how he stands in need of Christ, and withal heartily to
desire, yea to hunger and thirst after reconciliation with God in the merit of
Christ, and that above all other things in the world. To all such Christ has
made most sweet and comfortable promises, which can appertain to none but to
the elect. Ioh. 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink: he
that believes in me, as says the Scripture, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of water of life. Rev. 21. 6. I will give unto him which is a thirst of
the well of the water of life freely. Now if he that thirsts, drink of these
waters, mark what follows, Ioh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I
shall give him, shall never be more a thirst: but the water that I shall give
him, shall be in him a well of water springing up unto everlasting life.

The second is a strange affection wrought in the heart by the spirit of God,
whereby a man does so esteem and value, and as it were, set so high a price on
Christ and his righteousness, that he accounts even the most precious things
that are, to be but as dung in regard thereof. Phil. 3.8. M^^h. ^3.44.
This affection was in Paul, and it is expressed in the parable in which after
a man has found a treasure, he first hides it, and then sells all he has and
makes a purchase of the field where it is. Now every man will say of himself,
that he is thus affected to Christ, and that he more highly esteems the least
drop of his blood, then all things in the world beside: whereas indeed most
men are of Esaus mind, rather desiring the red broth then Isaaks blessing; and
of the same affection with the Israelites, which liked better the onyons and
flesh pottes of Egypt, then the blessings of God in the land of promise.
Therefore that no man may deceive himself, this affection may be discerned by
two signs. The first is to love and like a Christian man because he is a
Christian. For he that does aright esteem of Christ, does in like manner
esteem of the members of Christ. And of this very point our Savior Christ
says, Math. 10.^^.
he that receives a Prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a Prophets
reward, and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man,
shall receive the reward of a righteous man. And Saint John says, Hereby we
know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren:
that is, such as are members, even because they are so. The second sign of
this affection is a love and desire to the coming of Christ, whether it be by
death unto any man particularly, or by the last judgment universally, and that
for this end that there may be a full participation of fellowshippe with
Christ. And that this very love is a note of adoption, it appears by that
which S. Paul says, 2. Tim. 4.8.
that the crown of righteousness is laid up for all them that love the
appearing of Christ.

The outward token of adoption is New-obedience, whereby a man endeauours to
obey Gods commandments in his life and conversation: as Saint John says, 1.
Ioh. 2.3.
Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we keep his commandments. Now this
obedience must not be judged by the rigor of the moral law, for then it
should be no token of grace, but rather a means of damnation: but it must be
esteemed and considered as it is in the acceptance of God, Mal. 3.17. Si quod
vis n^ po tes deus factum computat. August.
who spares them that fear him as a father spares an obedient son, esteeming
things done not by the effect and absolute doing of them, but by the affection
of the doer. And yet least any man should here be deceived, we must know that
the obedience, which is an infallible mark of the child of God, must be thus
qualified. First of all it must not be done unto some few of Gods
commandments, but unto them all without exception. Herod heard John Baptist
willingly, and did many things: and Judas had excellent things in him, as
appears by this, that he was content to leave all and to follow Christ, and he
preached the Gospel of the kingdom in Jury as well as the rest: yet alas, all
this was nothing: for the one could not abide to become obedient to the
seventh commandment in leaving his brother Philips wife; and the other would
not leave his covetousness, to die for it. Upright and sincere obedience does
enlarge it self to all the commandments, as David says, Psalm. 1^9.^.
I shall not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy commandments. And
Saint James says, Iam. 2.10^.
he which fails in one law is guilty of all: that is, the obedience to many
commandments is indeed before God no obedience, but a slatte sin if a man
wittingly and willingly carry a purpose to omit any one duty of the law. He
that repents of one sin truly, does repent of all: and he that lives but in
one known sin without repentance, though he pretend never ^o much
reformation of life, indeed repents of no sin. Secondly this obedience must
extend it self to the whole course of a man's life after his conversion and
repentance. We must not judge of a man by an action or two, but by the tenor
of his life. Such as the course of a man's life is, such is the man: though he,
through the corruption of his nature, fail in this or that particular action,
yet does it not prejudice his estate before God, so be it he renew his
repentance for his several slippes and falls, not lying in any sin; and
withal from year to year walk unblameable before God and men. S. Paul
says, 2. Tim. 2.19.
The foundation of God remains sure: the Lord knows who are his. Now some
might hereupon say, it is true indeed, God knows who are his; but how may I
be assured in my self that I am his? to this demand as I take it, Paul
answers in the next words, Let every one that calls on the name of the Lord
depart from iniquity: that is, let men invoke the name of God; praying
seriously for things whereof they stand in need, withal giving thanks, and
departing from all their former sins, and this shall be unto them an
infallible token that they are in the election of God. Thirdly in outward
obedience it is required that it proceed from the whole man: as the
regeneration which is the cause of it, is through the whole man in body,
soul, and spirit. ^. Thessalonians. 3.23.
Again, obedience is the fruit of love, and love is from the pure heart, the
good conscience, and faith unfeigned.

Thus we have heard the testimonies and tokens whereby a man may be certified
in his conscience that he was chosen to salvation before all worlds. If and
desire further resolution in this point, let them meditate upon the 15. psalm.
and first epistle of S. John, being parcels of Scripture penned by the holy
Ghost for this end.

Here some will demand how a man may be assured of his adoption, if he want the
testimony of the spirit to certify him thereof. Ans. Fire is known to be no
painted but a true fire, by two notes; by heat, and by the flame: now if the
case fall out that the fire want a flame, it is still known to be fire by the
heat. In like manner, as I have said, there be two witnesses of our adoption,
Gods spirit, and our spirit: now if it fall out that a man feel not the
principal, which is the spirit of adoption, he must then have recourse to the
second witness, and search out in himself the signs and tokens of the
sanctification of his own spirit, by which he may certainly assure himself of
his adoption, as we know fire to be fire by the heat though it want a flame.

Again it may be demanded on this manner: how if it come to pass that after
inquiry, we find but few signs of sanctification in our selves. Ans. In
this case we are to have recourse to the least measure of grace, less then
which, there is no saving grace; and it stands in two things: an hearty
disliking of our sins because they are sins, and a desire of reconciliation
with God in Christ for them all: and these are tokens of adoption, if they be
soundly wrought in the heart, though all other tokens for the present seem to
be wanting. If any shall say, that a wicked man may have this desire, as
Balaam, who desired to die the death of the righteous: the answer is, that
Balaam indeed desired to die as the righteous man does, but he could not abide
to live as the righteous: he desired the end, but not the proper subordinate
means which tend unto the end; as vocation, justification, sanctification,
repentance, etc. the first is the work of nature, the second is the work of
grace. Now I speak not this to make men secure and to content themselves with
these small beginnings of grace, but only to show how any may assure
themselves that they are at the least babes in Christ: adding this withal,
that they which have no more but these small beginnings must be careful to
increase them, because he which goes not forward goes backward.

Lastly, it may be demanded what a man should do if he want both the
testimony of Gods spirit and his own spirit, and have no means in the world
of assurance. Ans. He must not utterly despair, but be resolved of this, that
though he want assurance now, yet he may obtain the same hereafter. And such
must he advertised to hear the word of God preached: and being outwardly of
the Church, to receive the Sacraments. When we have care to come into the Lords
vine-yarde and to converse about the wine press, we shall find the sweet
juice of heavenly grace pressed forth unto us plentifully by the word and
sacraments, to the comfort of our consciences, concerning gods election. This
one mercy that God by these means in some part reueales his mercy, is
unspeakable. When sickness or the day of death comes, the dearest servants
of God, it may be, must encounter with the temptations of the devil, and
wrestle in conscience with the wrath and displeasure of God, as for life and
death: and no man knows how terrible these things are, but those which have
felt them. Now when men walk thus through the valley of the shadow of death,
unless God should, as it were open heaven, and stream down unto us in this
world some lightsome beams of his love in Christ by the operation of his
spirit, miserable were the case even of the righteous.

Thus much of Election, now follows Reprobation, in handling whereof we are
to observe three things. I. what it is. II. how God does execute this decree.
III. how a man may judge of the same.

For the first, Reprobation is Gods decree, in which because it so pleased him,
he has purposed to refuse some men by means of Adams fall and their own
corruptions, for the manifestation of his justice. First, I say, it is a
decree, and that is evident thus. If there be an eternal decree of God,
whereby he chooses some men, then there must needs be another decree whereby
he does pass by others and refuse them. For election always implies a
refusal. Again, what God does in time, that he decreed to do before time: as
the case falls out even with men of mean wisdom, who first of al intend with
themselves the things to be done and after do them. But god in time refuses
some men as the scripture testifies, and it appears to be true by the event:
Therefore God before all worlds decreed the rejecting of some men.

Now in this decree four points are to be considered. The first is the matter
or object thereof, which is the thing decreed, namely the reiection of some men
in respect of mercy, or, the manifestation of his justice upon them. This may
seem strange to man's reason^ but here we must with all submission strike our
top-sailes, for the word of God says as much in plain terms. The Apostle
Jude speaking of false Prophets says, Iud. 4.
that they were of old ordained to this damnation. And Paul says in
emphaticall terms, that God makes vessels of wrath prepared to destruction:
^om. ^ 22. 2. ^o^ 4.3. 2. (...). 2.9.13.
and that some are rejected, whom he opposes to them which are elected to
salvation.

The second point is the impulsive cause that moved God to set down this
decree concerning his creature, and that was nothing out of himself, but his
very will and pleasure. He hardened Pharaoh with final hardenesse of heart
because he would: and therefore he deceed to do so because he would. And our
Savior Christ says, Mat. 11.25.
I thank thee, O father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and men of understanding, and have opened them unto babes.
But upon what cause did God so? It follows in the next words, Verse. 25.
It is so, O father, because thy good pleasure is such. And if it be in the
power and liberty of a man to kill an ox or a sheep for his use, to hunt and
kill the hare and partridge for his pleasure: then much more without injustice
may it be in the will and liberty of the creator to refuse and forsake his
creature of his glory. Nay it stands more with equity a thousand fold that
all the creatures in heaven and earth should jointly serve to set forth the
glory and majesty of God the creator in their eternal destruction, then the
striking of a sly or the killing of a slay should serve for the dignity of
all men in the world. For all this, it is thought by very many to be very
hard to ascribe unto God who is full of bounty and mercy such a decree, and
that upon his very will: but let us see their reasons. First of all they say it
is a point of cruelty for God to purpose to create a great part of the world
to damnation in hell fire: the answer is, that by the virtue of this decree God
cannot be said to create any man to damnation, but to the manifestation of his
justice and glory in his due and deserved damnation: and the doing of this is
absolute justice. Secondly it is alleged that by this means God shall hate
his own creature, and that before it is: but it is an untruth. We must
distinguish between Gods purpose to hate and actual hating. Now indeed God
before all worlds did purpose to hate some creatures: and that justly so far
forth as his hating of them will serve for the manifestation of his justice:
but he neither hates them indeed nor loves them before they are: and therefore
actual hatred comes not in till after the creation. Whom God has decreed to
love, them, when they are once created, he begins to love in Christ with
actual love: and whom he has decreed to hate, them being once created, he
hates in Adam with actual hatred. Thirdly it is objected, that by this
doctrine God shall be the author of sin, for he which ordaines to the end
ordaines to the means of the end: but God ordaines men to the end, that is,
damnation: therefore he ordaines them to the means thereof, that is, sin.
Ans. The proposition being thus understood, he which ordaines a man to an
end, in the same order and manner ordaines him to the means, is false. For
one may be ordained to the end simply, the end being simply good; and yet not
be simply ordained to the means, because they may be evil in themselves, and
only good in part, namely so far forth as they have respect of goodness in
the mind of the ordainer. Secondly, the assumption is false: for the supreme
end of Gods counsel is not damnation, but the declaration of his justice in
the just destruction of the creature: neither does God decree man's damnation as
it is damnation, that is, the ruin of man and the putting of him forth to
perishment, but as it is a real execution of justice. Thirdly we must make
distinction between sin it self and the permission thereof, and between
the decree of reiection, and actual damnation: now the permission of sin,
and not sin it self properly is the subordinate means of the decree of
reiection. For when God had decreed to pass by some men, he withal decreed
the permission of sin, to which permission men were ordained: and sin it
self is no effect, but only the consequent of the decree: yet so, as it is
not only the antecedent, but also the efficient and meritorious cause of
actual damnation.

The third point is, the real foundation of the execution of this decree, in
just condemnation, and that is the voluntary fall of Adam and of all his
posterity in him with the fruit thereof, the general corruption of man's
nature. For howesoeuer God has purposed to refuse men because it so pleased
him, yet when his purpose comes to execution he condemns no man but for his
sins: and sin though it were not in the counsel of God an impulsive cause
that moved him to purpose a declaration of justice and judgment, yet was it a
subordinate means of damnation: God in wonderful wisdom ordering and
disposing the execution of this decree, so as the whole blame and fault of man's
destruction should be in himself. And therefore the Lord in the Prophet Ose
says, Hos. 13. 9.
One has destroyed thee, but I will help thee: that is, salvation is of God,
and the condemnation of men is from themselves. Now whereas many deprauing our
doctrine say, that we ascribe unto God an absolute decree in which he does
absolutely ordain men to damnation, they may here be answered. If by
absolute, they understand that, which is opposed to conditional, then we hold
and avouch, that all the eternal decrees of God are simple or absolute, and
not limited or restrained to this or that condition or respect. If by absolute,
they understand a bare and naked decree without reason or cause, then we deny
Gods decrees to be absolute. For though the causes thereof be not known to vs^
yet causes there be, known to him, and just they are: yea the very will of God
it self is cause sufficient, it being the absolute rule of justice. And
though men in reason can not discern the equity and justice of Gods will in
this point, yet may we not thereupon conclude that therefore it is unjust. The
sun may shine clearly though the blind man see it not. And it is a flat
mistaking to imagine that a thing must first of all be just in it self, and
then afterward be willed of God. Whereas contrarise, God must first will a
thing before it can be just. The will of God does not depend upon the quality
and nature of the thing, but the qualities of things in order of causes follow
the will of God. For every thing is as God wills it. Lastly, if it be called an
absolute decree, because it is done without al respect to man's sin, then we
still deny it to be absolute. For as God conde^nes man for sin: so he
decreed to condemn him for and by his sin: yet so, as if the question be
made what is the cause why he decrees rather in his justice to condemn this
man then that man, no other reason can be rendered, but his will.

The last point, is the end of Gods decree, namely the manifestation of his
justice, as Solomon says, Prove. 16.4.
The Lord has made all things for his own sake, and the wicked for the day of
evil. And Paul says, Romans 9.22.
that God made vessels of wrath, to show his wrath and to make his power known.

Thus we have seen what Reprobation is: now follows the execution thereof,
for that which God decrees before time, in time he executes. And here a
special rule to be remembered is this. Those which are ordained to just
damnation, are likewise ordained to be left to themselves in this world, in
blindness of mind and hardness of heart, so as they neither shall nor will
repent of their sins. The truth of this we may see in Gods word. For S.
Peter speaking of the priests and Doctors, and chief of the people among the
Jews says plainly, ^. Pet. 2.8.
They stumbled at the word, and are disobedient. Why so? the reason is there
set down, because they were ordained to it of old. And so Paul says to the
Corinthians, that he handled not the word of God deceitfully, but in the
declaration of the truth he approved himself to every man's conscience in the
sight of God. Now hereupon it might be said: how then comes it to pass that
all receive not the Gospel in Corinth; and to this he answers with a terrible
sentence, 2. Cor. 4.3.
If (says he) our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish: giving us to
understand, that God leaves them to themselves in this world, whom he
purposes to refuse. And the Lord by the Prophet Esai says of the Jews, Esai.
^.^.
By hearing they shall hear and not understand, and by seeing they shall see
and not perceive, least they should hear with their ears, and see with their
eyes, and understand with their hearts, and so turn and be saved.

The use of this is manifold: first it serves to overthrow the opinion of
carnal men which reason thus: If I be ordained to damnation, let me live never
so godly and well, I am sure to be damned, therefore I will live as I list: for
it is not possible for me to alter Gods decree. Blas^hemous mouths of men make
nothing of this and like speeches, and yet they speak flat contraries. For
whom God has purposed in his eternal counsel to refuse, them also he has
purposed for their sins, to leave to the blindness of their minds and
hardness of their hearts, so as they neither will nor can live a godly life.

Secondly, this rule does as it were, lead us by the hand, to the consideration
the fearful estate of many people among us. We have had for the space of
thirty years and more the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, and the more
plentifully by reason of the schools of learning. But what has bin the issue
of it? I doubt not but in many it has been the means of their conversion and
salvation: but to speak generally of the greater part there is little or no
fruit to be seen. The most after this long preaching remain as blind, as
impenitent, as heard hearted, and as unreformed in their lives as ever they
were, though they have heard the Lord calling them to repentance from day to
day, and from year to year. Well if this rule be the truth of God, as no
doubt it is, then I say plainly, that there is a most fearful judgment of
God among us. My meaning is not to determine or give sentence of any man's
person, of any town or people, nevertheless this may be avouched, that it is
a terrible and dangerous sign of the wrath of God, that after this long and
daily preaching, there is still remaining a general hardness of heart,
impenitencie, and want of reformation in the lives of men. The smithes stithie,
the more it is beaten the harder it is made: and commonly the hearts of men,
the more they are beaten with the hammer of Gods word, the more dull, secure,
and senseless they are. This being so, it stands every man in hand to look
to his own estate. We are careful to fly the infection of the bodily plague:
oh then! how careful should we be to fly the common blindness of mind and
hardness of heart, which is the very plague of all plagues, a thousand fold
worse then all the plagues of Egypt? And it is so much the more fearful,
because the more it takes place, the less it is perceived. When a malefactor
on the day of assise is brought forth of the iayle, with great bolts and
fetters to come before the judge, as he is going all men pity him and speak
comfortably unto him: but why so? because he is now to be arraigned at the
bar of an earthly judge. Now the case of all impenitent sinners is far more
miserable, then the case of this man: for they lie fettered in bondage under
sin and Satan; and this short life is the way, in which they are going every
hour to the bar of Gods justice, who is the King of kings and Lord of lords,
there to be arraigned and to have sentence of condemnation given against them.
Now can thou pity a man that is before an earthly judge, and will thou not
be touched with the misery of thine own estate who go every day forward to
the bar of Gods justice; whether thou be sleeping or waking, sitting or
standing, as a man on the sea in a ship goes continually toward the haven,
though he himself stir not his foot. Begin now at length to lay this point
to your hearts, that, so long as ye run on in your blind ways without
repentance, as much as ye can, ye make post have to hel-ward: and so long as
you continue in this miserable condition, as Peter says, Your judgment is not
far off, and your damnation sleeps not. Thirdly, seeing those whom God has
purposed to refuse shall be left unto themselves, and never come to repentance,
we are to love and embrace the word of God preached and taught unto us by the
ministers of the Gospel: withal submitting our selves unto it, and suffering
the Lord to humble us thereby, that we may come at length out of the broad way
of blindness of mind and hardness of heart leading to destruction, into the
strait way of true repentance and reformation of life, which leads to
salvation. For so long as a man lives in this world after the lusts of his own
heart, he goes on walking in the very same broad way to hell, in which all that
are ordained to condemnation walk: and what a fearful thing is it, but for a
little while to be a companion in the way of destruction with them that perish:
and therefore I say once again, let us all in the fear of God, lay his word
unto our hearts, and hear it with reverence, so as it may be in us the sword
of the spirit to cut down the sins and corruptions of our natures, and work
in us a reformation of life and true repentance.

The third point concerning the decree of Reprobation, is the Judgment to be
given of it. This judgment belongs to God principally and pro^erly, because
he knows best what he has determined concerning the estate of every man, and
none but he knows who they be which are ordained to due and deserved
damnation. And again, he only knows the hearts and wills of men, and what
grace he has given them, what they are, and what all their sins be, and so
does no angel nor creature in the world beside. As for men, it belongs not to
them to give judgment of reprobation in themselves or in others, unless God
reveal his will unto them and give them a gift of discerning. This gift was
bestowed on sundry of the Prophets in the old testament, and in the new
testament on the Apostles. Psalm. 69. and 109.
David in many psalms makes request for the confusion of his enemies, not
praying only against their sins, (which we may do) but even against their
persons, which we may not do. No doubt he was guided by Gods spirit, and
received thence an extraordinary gift to judge of the obstinate malice of his
adversaries. And Paul prays against the person of Demetrius, saying, The Lord
reward him according to his doings. 2. Tim. 4.14.
And such kind of prayers were lawful in them, because they were carried with
pure and upright zeal, and had no doubt a special gift whereby they were able
to discern of the final estate of their enemies. Again, God sometimes gives
this gift of discerning of some men's final impenitencie to the Church upon
earth, I say not, to this or that private person, but to the body of the
Church or greater part thereof. S. John writing unto the Churches says, ^.
Ioh. 5.16.
There is a sin unto death (that is, against the holy Ghost) I say not that
thou should pray for it: in which words he takes it for granted, that
this sin might be discerned by the Church in those days. And Paul says, If
any man believe not the Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 16.22.
let him be had in execration, Mara-natha, that is, pronounced accursed to
everlasting destruction. Whence it appears, that the Church has power to
pronounce men rejected to everlasting damnation, upon some special occasions,
though Sic Chrysostom.
I dare not say ordinarily and usually. The primitive Church with one consent
prayed against Julian the Apostata, and the prayers made were not in vain, as
appeared by the event of his fearful end. As for private and ordinary men,
for the tempering and rectifying of their judgments, in this case they must
follow two rules. The one is, that every member of the Church is bound to
believe his own election. It is the commandment of God binding the very
conscience, ^ Ioh. 3.
that we should believe in Christ. Now to believe in Christ, is not only to
put our affiance in him, and to be resolved that we are justified and
sanctified and shall be glorified by him, but also that we were elect to
salvation in him before the beginning of the world, which is the foundation of
the rest. Again, if of things that have necessary dependence one upon
another, we are to believe the one then we are to believe the other. Now
election and adoption are things conioined, and the one necessarily depends
upon the other. For all the elect (as Paul says) are predestinate to adoption:
and we are to believe our own adoption: and therefore also our election. The
second rule is, that concerning the persons of those that be of the Church, we
must put in practice the judgment of charity, and that is to esteem of them
as of the elect of God till God make manifest otherwise. By virtue of this rule
the ministers of Gods word are to publish and preach the gospel to all without
exception. It is true indeed there is both wheat and darnell in Gods field,
chafe and corn in Gods barn, fish and dross in Gods net, sheep and goats
in Christ's fold: but secret judgments belong unto god, and the rule of love,
which is to think and wish the best of others, is to be followed of us that
profess faith working by love.

It may be demanded, what we are to judge of them that as yet are enemies of
God. Ans. Our duty is, to suspend our judgment concerning their final
estate: for we know not whether God will call them or no: and therefore we
must rather pray for their conversion then for their confusion.

Again, it may be demanded, what is to be thought of all our ancetours and
forefathers that lived and died in the times when popery took place. Ans. We
may well hope the best and think that they were saved: for though the Papacy
be not the Church of God, and though the doctrine of Popery raze the
foundation, yet nevertheless in the very midst of the Roman Papacy, God
has always had a remnant which have in some measure truly served him. In the
old testament when open Idolatry took place in all Israel, God said to
Eliah, I have r^serued seven thousand to my self that never bowed knee to
Baal: See Illyr. Catal. test. ver^.
and the like is and has been in the general apostasy under Antichrist.
Saint John says, that when the woman fled into the wilderness for a time,
Rev. 12.17.
even then there was a remnant of her seed which kept the commandments of
God, and had the testimony of Jesus Christ. And again, when ordinary means
of salvation fail, then God can and does make a supply by means
extraordinary, and therefore there is no cause why we should say, that they
were condemned.

Thirdly it may be demanded, whethether the common judgment given of Francis
Spira that he is a reprobate be good or no? Ans. We may with better warrant say
no; then any man say, yea. For what gifts of discerning had they, which came
to visit him in his extremity; and what reasons induced the^ to give this
peremptory judgment. He said himself that he was a reprobate: that is
nothing; a sick man's judgment of himself is not to be regarded. Yea, but he
despaired; a senseless reason: for so does many a man year by year, and that
very often as deeply as ever Spira did; and yet by the good help of the
ministry of the word, both are and may be recovered. And they which will
avouch Spira to be a reprobate, must go further and prove two things, that he
despaired both wholly and finally: which if they cannot prove, we for our
parts must suspende our judgments, and they were much to blame that first
published the book.

Lastly it may be demanded, what is to be thought of them that make very
fearful ends in rauing and blaspheming. Ans. Such strange behauiours are
oftentimes the fruits of violent diseases which torment the body, and bereave
the mind of sense and reason: and therefore if the persons lived well, we must
think the best: for we are not by outward things to judge of the estate of any
man. Solomon says, that all things come alike to al, and the same condition to
the just and to the wicked.

Thus much of the parts of Predes^ination. Now follows the use thereof: and
it concerns partly our judgments, partly our affections, and partly our
lives. The uses which concern judgment are three. And first by the doctrine
of Predestination we learn that there cannot be any justification of a sinner
before God by his works. For Gods election is the cause of justification,
because whom God electeth to salvation after this life, them he electeth to be
justified in this life. Now election it self is of grace and of grace alone,
as Paul says, Romans 11^5.
Election is by grace, and if it be of grace, it is no more of works: or else
were grace no grace: therefore justification is of grace and of grace alone:
and I reason thus. The cause of a cause is the cause of all things caused: but
grace alone is the cause of predestination, which is the cause of our vocation,
justification sanctification, etc. Grace therefore is also the alone cause of
all these. Therefore the Scriptures ascribe not only the beginning, but also
the continuance and accomplishment of all our happiness to grace. For first,
as election, so vocation is of grace. Paul says, 1. Tim. 1.9.
God has called us not according to our works, but according to his purpose
and grace. Again, faith in Christ is of grace. So it is said, To you it is
given to believe in Christ. Phil. 1.29.
Also the justification of a sinner is of grace. So Paul says plainly to the
Romans: you are justified freely by his grace. Again, sanctification and the
doing of good works is of grace. So it is said, Rom 3.24.
We are his workemanshippe created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has ordained that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2.10.
Also p^rseuerance in good works and godliness is of grace. So the Lord says,
Ier. 32.40.
I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will never turn away
from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. Lastly, life everlasting is of grace. So Paul says,
Romans 6.23.
Life everlasting is the gift of God through Jesus Christ. Now they of the
Church of Rome teach the ^lat contrary: they make two iustifications; the
first whereby a man of an evil man is made a good man: the second, whereby of
a good man he is made better. The first they ascribe to grace; but so, as the
second is by works. Secondly hence we learn, that the art of judicial
astrology is vain and frivolous. They that practice it, do profess
themselves to tell of things to come almost whatsoever, and this they do by
casting of figures: and the special point of their art is to judge of men's
natiuities. For if they may know but the time of a man's birth, they take upon
them to tell the whole course of his life from year to year, from week to
week, and from day to day, from the day of his birth to the hour of his
death: yea that which is more, they profess themselves to tell all things that
shall befall men either in body, goods, or good name, and what kind of death
they shall die. But that this their practice is not of God, but indeed
unlawful, it may appear by this, because it stands not with the doctrine of
Gods predestination. Two twins begotten of the same parents, and borne both
at one and the same time, by the judgment of Astrologians must have both the
same life and the same death, and be every way alike both in goods and good
name: yet we see the contrary to be true in Jacob and Esau, who were borne
both of the same parents at one time. For Jacob took Esau by the heel, so as
there could not be much difference b^tweene them in time: yet for all this Esau
was a fierce man and wild, given to hunting; but Jacob was mild of nature,
and lived at home: the one had favor at Gods hand and was in the covenant, but
God kept back that mercy from the other. Again, in a pitched field are slain
a thousand men at one and the same time: now if we consider the time of their
births it may be, they were borne at a thousand sundry times, and therefore
under so many diverse positions of the heavens and so by the judgment of all
Astrologers should have all diverse and sundry lives and ends: but we see
according to the determination of the counsel of God, they have all one and
the same end: and therefore this must admonish all those that are brought up in
schools of learning, to have care to spend th^^r times in better studies: and
it teaches those that are fallen into any manne^ of distress, not to have
recourse unto these fond figure-casters. For their astrologicall judgments
are false and foolish, as we may see by the two former examples. Thirdly, the
knowledge of God is one of the most special points in Christian religion: and
therefore the Lord says, Ier 9.24.
Let him that rejoice, rejoice in this, that he understands and knows me.
For I am the Lord which show mercy and judgment in the earth. And our Savior
Christ says, Ioh. 17.3.
This is life eternal to know thee, the only very God, and whom thou have
sent Jesus Christ. Now Gods predestination is a glass wherein we may behold
his majesty. For first, by it we see the wonderful wisdom of God, who in his
eternal counsel did foresee and most wisely set down the state of every
man: secondly his omnipotency, in that he has power to save and power to
refuse whom he will: thirdly his justice and mercy both joined together in the
exequution of election: his mercy in that he saves those that were utterly
lost; his justice in that he ordained Christ to be a mediator to suffer the
curse of the law, and to satisfy his justice for the elect: fourthly his
justice in the exequution of the decree of Reprobation; for though he decreed
to hold back his mercy from some men, because it so pleased him, yet he
condemns no man but for his sins. Now the consideration of these and the
light points, bring us to the knowledge of the true God.

The uses which concern our affections are these. First the doctrine of
predestination ministers to all the people of God matter of endless
consolation. For considering Gods election is unchangeable, therefore they
which are predestinate to salvation can not perish: though the gates of hell
prevail against them so as they be hardly saved, yet shall they certainly be
saved; therefore our Savior Christ says, that in the latter days shall arise
false Christ's and false prophets, which shall show great signs and wonders,
Math. 24.24^
so that if it were possible they should deceive the very elect. In which
words he takes it for granted, that the elect of God can never finally fall
away. And hereupon he says to his disciples when they rejoiced that the devils
were subject to them, Luk 10.20.
rather r^ioice that your names are written in heaven. And S. Paul speaking of
Hymeneus and Alexander, which had fallen away from the faith, least the church
would be discouraged by their fall, because they were thought to be worthy men
and pillars of the Church; he does comfort them from the very gounde of
elect^on, saying, ^. Tim. 1.^9;
The foundation of God remains sure and has this seal: The Lo^d k^^^eth who
are his. Where Gods election is compared to the foundation of an house, the
building whereof may be shaken, but the groundworke stande^h fast: and
therefore Paul says further, Romans 8.^3.
Who shall lay any thing to the change of Gods elect? Now then that we may
have comfort in distress, and some thing to stay upon in all our troubles: we
in this world are as strangers in a far country: our passage homeward is
over the sea of this world: the ship wherein we sail is the Church: and
Satan stirs up many blasts of troubles and temptations^ and his purpose is to
sink the ship, or to drive it on the rock; but we must take the anchor of
hope and fas^en it in heaven upon the foundation of Gods election: which being
done, we shall pass in s^fetie and rejoice in the midst of all storms and
tempests. Secondly whereas God refuses some men and leaves them to themselves,
it serves to strike a fear into every one of us whatsoever: we lie, as S. Paul
says in the like ca^e, the Jews being the natural branches are broken off
through unbelief, and thou stand by faith: be not high m^nded, but fear.
Romans 11.20.
This indeed was spoken to the Romans, but we must also lay it unto our
hearts. For what is the best of us, but a lump of clay? and howsoever in Gods
counsel we are chosen to salvation, yet in our selves we are all shut up under
unbelief, and are fit to make vessels of wrath. Our Savior Christ calls
Judas a devil, and we know his lewd life and fearful end: now what are we
better then Judas by nature? If we had bin in his stead, without the special
bles^ing of God, we should have done as he did: he betrayed Christ; but if God
leave us to our selves, we shall not only betray him, but by our sins even
crucify him a thousand ways. Furthermore, let us bethink our selves of this,
whether there be not already condemned in hell, who in their lives were not
more grievous of^endours then we. Esai calls the people of his time a people
of Sodom and Gomorrha; giving the Jews then living to understand, Esa. 2.10.
that they were as bad as the Sodomites, and as the people of Gomorrha, on
whom the Lord had showed his judgments long before. If this be true, then let
us with fear and trembling be thankful to his majesty that he has preserved
us hitherto from deserved damnation.

The uses which respects our lives and conuersations are manifold. First,
seeing God has elected some to salvation, and has also laid down the means
in his holy word whereby we may come to the knowledge of our particular
election, we must therefore as Saint Peter counsels us, ^. Pet. ^.10.
give all diligence to make our election sure. In the world men are careful
and painful enough to make assurance of lands and goods to themselves and to
their posterity: what a shame is it then for us, that we should be slack in
making sure to our selves the election of God, which is more worth then all the
world beside? and if we shall continue to be slack herein, the leases of our
lands and houses and all other temporal assurances shall be bills of
accusation against us at the day of judgment to condemn us. Secondly, by this
doctrine we are taught to live godly and righteously in this present world;
because all those whom God has chosen to salvation, he has also appointed to
live in newness of life, as Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 1.4.
God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, that we
should be holy and without blame before him. And again, Ephesians. 2.10
We are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained that
we should walk in them. And, 2 These. 2.13.
God has chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the spirit and
faith of the truth. The Elect are vessels of honor: Romans 9. 2 Timothy 2.21.
and therefore all those that will be of the number of the Elect, must carry
themselves as vessels of honor. For so long as they lie in their sins they
be like vessels of dishonor, employing themselves to the most base service
that can be, even to the service of the devil. The sun was ordained to shine
in the day, and the moon in the night, and that order they keep; yea every
creature in his kind observes the course appointed unto it by creation, as
the grass to grow, and trees to bring forth fruit: now the elect were ordained
to this end to lead a godly life; and therefore if we would either persuade
our selves or the world, that we are indeed chosen to salvation, we must be
plentiful in all good works, and make conscience of every evil way: and to
do otherwise, is as much as to change the order of nature, and as if the
sun should cease to shine by day and the moon by night. Thirdly, when God
shall send upon any of us in this world crosses and afflictions, either in
body or in mind, or any way else (as this life is the veil of misery and
tears, and judgment must begin at Gods house) we must learn to bear them
with all submission and contentation of mind. For whom God knew before, Romans
8.29.
them he has predestinate to be made like unto his son. But wherein is this
likeness? Paul says, ^hil 3.10.
in the fellowship of his afflictions, and in a conformity to his death. And
the consideration of this, that afflictions were ordained for us in the
eternal predestination of God, must comfort our hearts, and restrain our
impatience so often as we shall go under the burden of them. Hence again we
learn, that they which persuade themselves that they are in the favor of God,
because they live at ease in wealth and prosperity, are far deceived. For
Saint Paul says, Romans 9 22.
God suffers with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to
destruction, to make known his power and to show forth his wrath on them. This
being so, no man then by outward blessings ought to plead that he has the
love of God. Sheep that go in fat pastures come sooner to the slaughterhouse
then those which are kept upon the bare common: and they which are pampered
with the wealth of this world, sooner forsake God, and therefore are sooner
forsaken of God, then others. Solomon says, No man knows love or hatred,
Eccles. 9.^^
that is, by outward things: for all things come alike to all: the same
condition is to the just and to the unjust, to the wicked and good, to the pure
and polluted. Lastly, it may be an offense unto us, when we consider that the
doctrine of the Gospel is either not known, or else despised and persecuted of
the whole world; but we must stay our selves with this consideration, that
nothing comes to pass by chance; that God knows who are his; and that there
must be some in the world, on whom God has in his eternal counsel purposed
to manifest his power and justice. Again, Ministers of the Gospel may be
discouraged, when after long preaching they see little or no fruit of their
labors: the people whom they teach remaining as blind, impenitent, and
unreformed as ever they were. But they must also consider, that it is the
purpose of God to choose some to salvation and to refuse others: and that of
the first, some are called sooner some later, and that the second being left
to themselves never come to repentance. To this Paul had regard when he said,
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish. And again, We are unto
God the sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved and in them that perish.

Hitherto I have delivered the truth of this weighty point of religion, which
also is the doctrine of the church of England: now it follows that we should
consider the falshoode. Sundry Divines have devised, and in their writings
published a new frame or platform of the doctrine of Predestination: the
effect whereof is this. The nature of God (say they) is infinite love,
goodness, and mercy it self: and therefore he propounds unto himself an
end answerable thereunto, and that is the communication of his love and
goodness unto all his creatures. Now for the accomplishing of this supreme
and absolute end, he did four things. First he decreed to create man
righteous in his own image: secondly, he foresaw the fall of man after his
creation, yet so, as he neither willed nor decreed it; thirdly, he decreed the
universal Redemption of all and every man effectually by Christ, so be it they
will believe in him: fourthly, he decreed to call all and every man
effectually, so as if they will, they may be saved. This being done, he in his
eternal counsel foreseeing who would believe in Christ, did thereupon elect
them to eternal salvation: and again foreseeing who would not believe but
contemn grace offered, did thereupon also decree to reject them to eternal
damnation.

This platform howsoever it may seem plausible to reason, yet indeed it is
nothing else but a Devise of man's brain: as will appear by sundry defects and
errors that be in it. For first whereas it is avouched that Adams fall came by
the bare prescience of God, Act. 2.23.
without any decree or will of his, it is a flat untruth. The putting of Christ
to death was as great a sin as the fall of Adam; nay in some respects
greater. Now that came to pass not only by the foreknowledge of God, but also
by his determinate counsel. And therefore as the Church of Jerusalem says,
Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and the people of Israel gathered
themselves together to do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel had
determined before to be done: Act. 4.28.
so may we say, that Adam in his fall did nothing but that which the hand of
God and his counsel had determined before to be done. And considering the will
of God extends it self to the least things that are, even to sparrowes;
whereof none do light upon the ground without our heavenly father, how can a
man in reason imagine that the fall of one of the most principal creatures
that are, shall fall out altogether without the will and decree of God. And
there can be nothing more absurd then to sever the foreknowledge of God from
his counsel or decree. For by this means, things shall come to pass God
Nolente, nesciente, non curante.
nilling, or not knowing, or not regarding them. Now if any thing come to pass
God nilling it, then that is done which God would not have done; and to say so,
is to bereave him of his omnipotency. And if we shall say that things fall
out, God not knowing of them; we make him to be imprudent, and deny his
omniscience: lastly, if we shall say that a thing is done, God not regarding
it; we bring in an idol of our own brains, and stablish the idle-god of the
Epicures. But it is objected to the contrary, that if God any way decreed and
willed the fall of Adam, then he was the author of sin: which once to say, is
blasphemy. Ans. The argument follows not. Volendo velle.
There be three actions in the will of God; one whereby he does absolutely will
any thing and delight in it: and of all such things God himself is the author.
The second is, Nolendo nolle, or, penitus nolle.
wholly or absolutely to Nill a thing: and all things thus nilled, can not
possibly come to pass, or have the least being in nature. There is also a
third action which comes as a mean between the two former, Remiss and velle
and nolle, or, nolendo velle.
which is remissely or in part both to nill and will a thing; whereby though God
approve not evil as it is evil, and therefore does it not: yet he wills
the permitting of it to be done by others, or the being of it; because in
respect of God that decrees the permitting of evil, it is good that there
should be evil. And on this manner and no otherwise God willed the fall of
Adam: and therefore in the reason of any indifferent man, though he decreed the
fall, yet shall he be free from the blame thereof, which lies wholly upon the
doer; these two caueats always remembered: first that God by his will did not
constrain or force the will of Adam to sin, or infuse into it any
corruption; and that therefore he sinned willingly and freely, only by the
Decretum Dei non tollit libertatem voluntatis sed ordinat.
necessity of immutabilitie, and not by the necessity of coaction: secondly
that God willed the fall for a most worthy end, which was, to lay down a way
tending to the manifestation both of justice and mercy. Again, it is
alleged that if God willed Adams fall, then his will is flat contrary to it
self, because he wills that which he had by express commandment forbidden.
Answ. Indeed if God should both will and forbid one and the same thing, in one
and the same respect, there should be a contradiction in Gods will: but that
God does not. He forbad Adams fall, as it was sin: for so in every
commandment sin as it is sin is condemned and punished: and yet because it
was in a new respect, a means of manifesting his glory, who is able to bring
light out of darkness; therefore he willingly decreed the permission of it.
Incest as it is sin, it is condemned in the seventh commandment, and
punished with death: yet as incest was a punishment of David's adultery, God is
said to take his wives and to give them to his son Absalom. 2. Sam. 12.1^.


Some again, as it appears by their writings, fear to ascribe unto God so
much as a permission of Adams fall: but no doubt they are deceived. For if
these rules be true; that God is omnipotent: that he works all things that are
by the counsel of his will, and gouernes them: that he has care and regard
over man: that nothing is hid from him: that he is unchangeable, there must
needs be permission of evil. If the devil could not enter so much as into an
heard of swine without Christ's permission, Mark. 5.1^.
shall we think that he could compass the fall and overthrow of man, without
a permission? Indeed to permit, is not to hinder evil when one may; and with
men it is a fault, but not with God, because he is not bound to hinder the
evil which he permits.

The second fault is, that they make the Prescience of man's faith and
unbelief, to be the or, as some speake^, a rule according to which he orders
his decree.
impulsive cause of Gods decree. For they say that God eternally decrees to
save or refuse men, because he did foresee that they would believe or not
believe. But indeed it is a manifest untruth. Among the causes of all things
that are, there is an order set down by God himself, in which order some
causes are highest some lowest, some in the midst. Now the highest cause of all
is that, which ouerrules all and is ouerruled of none: and that is Gods will,
beyond which there can be no higher cause: for God is placed above all, and
subject to none. And this very will of his is the cause of all things that have
being: for we must not imagine that a thing first of all existeth, and then
afterward is willed of God; but first of all God wills a thing, and then
afterward it comes to have a being. Now to say that foreseen faith or
unbelief are the moving causes whereby God was induced to ordain men either
to salvation or to just damnation, is to undo this divine order of causes, and
to displace the linkes; in that Gods will is made a secondarie or middle cause
subordinate to other causes placed above it: yea this is to make the will of
God to depend upon the quality and condition of the creature, whereas
contrariwise all things depend upon Gods will. Again, Ephesians. 1.^.
Paul says that God has opened the mystery of his will, according to his good
pleasure, which he had purposed to himself: whereby he makes a distinction
between the creature and the Creator. Men, when they purpose the doing of any
thing, borrow reasons of their purposes and wills out of themselves from the
things to be done; because man's bare will is no sufficient cause to warrant the
doing of this or that, in this or that manner, unless there be just reason.
But Gods will is a simple and absolute rule of righteousness, and a thing is
good, so far forth as God wills it. Therefore there is no cause, why he
should go forth of himself for external inducements and reasons of his
eternal counsel: his very will in himself is a sufficient reason of all his
purposes and decrees. And hereupon Paul says, that Gods purpose was in
himself, to show that there is no dependence of his will upon the creature,
and that in ordering and disposing of his decrees he had no reference or
respective consideration of the qualities and works of men. Thirdly by this
doctrine, there is fastened upon God want of wisdom, who is wisdom it self:
and that is very absurd. A simple man that has in him but a spark of the
wisdom of God, first of all intends with himself the end and event of the
business to be done, and then afterward the means whereby the end is
accomplished: but in this platform God is brought in, in the first place to
foresee and consider with himself the means which tend to the end, namely
faith and unbelief of men, and then afterward to determine with himself what
shall be the end and final condition of every man either in life or death: as
if a man should purpose with himself to build an house without any
consideration of the end why; and afterward conceive with himself the
particular uses to which he will apply it. Fourthly hence it follows, that
faith shall not only be an instrument, but also an efficient cause in the act
of justification of a sinner before God. For the cause of a cause is also the
cause of the thing caused; but foreseen faith is an impulsive cause whereby
God was moved to choose some men to salvation (as it is said:) and therefore
it is not only an instrument to apprehend Christ's righteousness, but also a
cause or means to move God to justify a sinner; because justification
proceeds of Election which comes of foreseen faith: now this is erroneous by
the doctrine of all Churches, unless they be Popish. Fifthly, this doctrine
takes it for granted, that all both young and old, even Infants that die in
their infancy, have knowledge of the Gospel, because both faith and unbelief
in Christ presuppose knowledge of our salvation by him: considering that
neither ordinarily, nor extraordinarily men believe or contemn the thing
unknown. But how false this is, even common experience does show. Lastly, this
platform quite overthrows it self. For whereas all men equally corrupt in
Adam, are effectually both redeemed and called, the difference between man and
man, stands not in believing or not believing, for all have power to believe:
but in this properly, that some are confirmed in faith, some are not. Now when
all without exception are endued with grace sufficient to salvation, I demand
why some men are confirmed in grace, and others not confirmed; as also of
Angels, some were confirmed and stand, and some not confirmed, fell? No other
reason can be rendered but the will of God. And to this must all come, strive
as long as they will, that of men being in one and the same estate some are
saved, some justly forsaken, because God would. Again, as the foreseeing of
^aith does presuppose Gods giui^g of faith, unless men will say it is
natural: so the foreseeing of faith in some men alone, does presuppose the
giving of faith to some men alone. But why does not God confer the grace of
constant faith to all? no other reason can be rendered, but because he will
not. Thus then those men whose faith was foreseen, are saved, not because
their faith was foreseen, but because God would.

The third fault is, that they ascribe unto God a conditional Purpose or
counsel, whereby he decrees that all men shall be saved, so be it they will
believe. For it is every way as much against common sense, as if it had bin
said, that God decreed nothing at all concerning man. A conditional sentence
determines nothing simply but conditionally, and therefore vncertenly: and when
we speak of God, to determine vncertenly, is as much as if he had determined
nothing at all, specially when the thing determined is in the power of man's
will, and in respect of God, the decree may come to pass or not come to pass.
Men, if they might always have their choice, desire to determine of all their
affairs simply without condition: and when they do otherwise it is either
because they know not the event of things, or because things to be don are not
in their power. No reason therefore that we should burden God with that,
whereof we would disburden our selves. Again, the majesty of God is disgraced
in this kind of decree. God for his part would have all men to be saved: why
then are they not? men will not keep the condition and believe. This is flat
to hang Gods will upon man's will, to make every man an Emperor, and God his
underling, and to change the order of nature by subordinating Gods will which
is the first cause to the will of man, which is the second cause: whereas by
the very law of nature, the first cause should order and dispose the second
cause. But for the justifying of a conditional decree it is alleged, that
there is no eternal and hidden decree of God beside the Gospel, which is Gods
predestination revealed. Ans. It is an untruth. There be two wills in God, quid
vult sie^i de nobis, r, in nobi^.
one whereby he determines what he will do unto us or in us: the other, quid
vult s^^ri a no^is.
whereby he determines what we shall do to him: Now Predestination is the
first: whereupon it is commonly defined to be the preparation of the blessing
of God, whereby they are delivered which are delivered, and the Gospel is the
second. Again, Predestination determines who they are, and how many which are
to be saved, and hereupon Christ says, Ioh. 13.18.
I know whom I have chosen: but the Gospel rather determines what kind of ones
and how they must be qualified which are to be saved. Lastly, Predestination is
Gods decree it self: and the Gospel is an outward means of the execution of
it: and therefore though the Gospel be propounded with a condition^ yet the
decree of God it self, may be simple and absolute.

The fourth defect, is the opinion of Universal saving grace, a^pertaining to
all and every man: which may be fitly termed the School of universal
Atheism. For it pulls down the pale of the Church, and lays it wast as every
common field: it breeds a carelesnes in the use of the means of grace, the word
and Sacraments; when as men shall be persuaded that grace shall be offered to
every one effectually, whether he be of the Church or not, at one time or
other, wheresoever or howsoever he live: as in the like case, if me^ should be
told that whether they live in the market town or no, there shall be
sufficient provision brought them, if they will but receive it and accept of
it, who would then come to the market?

Universal grace has three parts. Universal Election: universal Redemption:
universal Vocation. Universal Election of all and every man, is a witless
conceit: for if men universally be appointed to grace without exception, then
there is no electing or choosing of some out of mankind to grace: and if some
alone be appointed to grace, as it must needs be in election, then is not
grace universal. And it is flat against the word of God. For Christ avouches
plainly that fewer be chosen then called, Math. 2^.14.
and (as afterward we shall see) all are not called. Ioh. 17.2,11, 24.
And he further says, that all which are given unto him shall be one with him
and have life everlasting: but all men shall not be one with him and have life
everlasting: and therefore all men are not given to Christ of the father, that
is, ordained to salvation. And the Scripture says, that all men's names are not
written in the book of life: Apoc. 17.4. and 20.22. Math. 25.^4.
and that the kingdom of heaven was not prepared for all. And whereas men
build this their universal election upon the largeness of the promise of the
Gospel: upon the like ground they might as well make an universal decree of
Reprobation, whereby God decrees all men to be damned indefinitely upon this
condition, if they do not believe. Now if universal Reprobation be absurd, as
it is indeed; then universal Election of all and every man must take part
therewith.

As for the universal Redemption of all and every man, it is no better then a
forgerie of man's brain. There shall be many in the day of judgment of whom
Christ shall say, that he never knew them. Again he says, Math. 7.23. Job.
^.36.
He which believes not is already judged, and the wrath of God abides upon
him. But if all were effectually redeemed, and only condemned for not
believing in Christ, it should have been said that they are already judged,
and that the wrath of God not abides but returns upon them. Job. 17.9.
Christ makes no intercession for the world: and therefore his redemption is
not effectual to all men. For the intercession is the means of applying the
satisfaction. If it be said that by the world is meant only contemners of
grace, it appears to be otherwise in that Christ opposes the world to them
which are the fathers, and are given to Christ by him: thereby signifying that
by the world he means all such as are not the fathers, and were never given to
Christ. And he lays down his life for his sheep: Ioh. 10.27.
now the sheep have all these brands or marks; they hear his voice, they know
him, they follow him, they shall not perish, none shall pluck them out of
Christ's hands: and these are only such of whom Paul says; Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect: it is God that justifies who shall
condemn? And if this should be true, Romans 8.33.
that Christ was crucified and died no less to make satisfaction for the
sins of the damned, then for the sins of Peter and Paul and the rest of the
Saints, it follows necessarily that all their sins are forgiven: considering
that remission of sin depends inseparably upon satisfaction made to Gods
justice for sin: and satisfaction does necessarily abolish all fault. We
grant that Christ's death is sufficient to save many thousand worlds: we grant
again it is every way most effectual in it self: but that it is effectual
in, or unto the person of every man, that we deny. For if it were thus
effectual, then it should be applied to the person of every man, as to Cain,
Judas, Nero, Heliogabalus, etc. even as the plaster is laid to the sore:
being applied, Christ's righteousness should be imputed for the justification
and sanctification of all and every man: and thus some justified before God and
sanctified should after go to hell and be damned, whereas David, never so much
as dreaming of this divinity says, that they are blessed which have the
pardon of their sins: ^sal. 32.^. Romans 5.1.
and Paul, that they which are justified have peace with God. But let us hear
what reasons may be alleged to the Universality of redemption: I. Ezechiel
33. v. 11. As I live says the Lord, I will not the death of the wicked: but,
that the wicked return from his wicked way. Answ. The place is to be
understood not simply but in respect; of the twain God rather wills the
repentance of the sinner then his death. Again, he wills not death as it is
the destruction of his creature; and so this place may be understood: yet
nevertheless he wills the same as it is a means of manifestation of his justice:
and therefore the prophet Esai says, Isai 45.7.
that God creates evil. II. 1. Tim. 2. God would have all men to be saved and
come to the acknowledgement of the truth. Ans. The place is meant not of the
persons of all particular men, but of the orders and kinds of men. For in the
first verse Paul exhorted Timothy that prayer should be made for all men: and
in the second verse opening his own meaning, he adds these words, for kings
and all that be in authority: as though he should say, we must pray not only
for private men and for the common people, but also for public persons, though
they persecute the Gospel. But why? because in that very order God has his
elect which shall be saved. And on this manner Paul expounds himself
elsewhere. There is neither Jew nor Grecian: there is neither bond nor free:
there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ. Gal. 5.27.
III. Romans 11. v. 32. God has shut up all in unbelief that he might have
mercy on all. Ans. The word all, must be understood of all that are to be
saved, both of Jews and Gentiles, as the article added to all imports, (...)
and the meaning is, that God will save all whom he purposes to save of his
mercy, and not of their merit, because al are sinners as well Jews as
Gentiles: thus Paul expoundes himself, Galat. 3.22. The scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should
be given to them that believe. And if we should expound the word all, for
every particular man, as some would have it, Paul must contradict himself, who
said before that God would have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom
he will he hardens, and in this very chapter his drift is to prove the
reiection of the Jews, and the calling of the Gentiles. IV. Ioh. 3. 16. God so
loved the world that he has given his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him shall not perish but have everlasting life: and Ioh. 6.^1. I
will give my flesh for the life of the world. Answ. By world, we must not
understand every particular man in the world, but the Elect among the Jews
and Gentiles: for in both these places Christ does overthwart the conceit of
the Jews, which thought that they alone were loved of God, and not the
Gentiles. And how this word is to be understood in the new testament, Paul
does fully declare. Romans 11. v. 12. If (says he) the fall of them, that is,
the Jews, be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches
of the Gentiles, etc. and v. 15. If the casting away of them be the reconciling
of the world, what shall the receiving be but life from the dead. Where by the
world, he vndestandes the body of the Gentiles in the last age of the world.
And thus he fully declares his own meaning, when he says to the Corinthians,
2. Cor. 5.18.
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. V. Romans 14. v. 15.
Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ dyed. 2. Pet. 2.1. Denying the
Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation. Therefore
Christ died for them also which are condemned. Answ. The reason is not good.
For in these and such like places the scripture speaks of men, not as they are
indeed before God, but as they are in appearance and profession, and as they
are in the acceptance with men. For so long as a man holds and embraces the
Christian faith, so long in the judgment of charity we must esteem him to
be one that is redeemed by Christ, though indeed he be not. And this is the
meaning of Peter when he says, that false prophets deny the Lord that bought
them. IV. In the preaching of the gospel grace is freely offered not only to
the Elect, but to all men indifferently: and God in offering grace deludes no
man: and therefore Christ's death appertains and belongs to all men
indifferently. Answer. The preaching of the Gospel is an ordinance of God
appointed for the gathering together and the accomplishment of the number of
the elect: and therefore in the ministry of the word, grace and salvation is
offered principally and directly to the elect;, and only by consequent to them
which are ordained to just damnation: because they are mingled with the elect
in the same societies: and because the ministers of God, not knowing his secret
counsel, in charity think all to be elect. And though God in offering grace
do not confer it to all, yet is there no delusion. For the offering of grace
does not only serve for the conversion of a sinner, but also to be an occasion
by men's fault of blinding the mind and hardening the heart, and of taking away
excuse in the day of judgment.

To conclude this point; Universal redemption of all men, we grant: the
Scripture says so: and there is an universality among the elect and
believers: but universal Redemption of all and every man as well the damned as
the elect and that effectually, we renounce as having neither footing in the
scripture, nor in the writings of any ancient and orthodoxe divine, for many
hundred years after Christ, his words not depraved and mistaken.

As for Universal vocation, it is of the same kind with the former^ because
it is slatte against the word of God in which is fully set down a distinction
of the whole world from the creation to the days of Christ, into two parts:
one, the people of God being received into the covenant: the other, (being
the greatest part of the world) No-people, and forth of the covenant. From the
beginning of the world to the giving of the law, the Church was shut up in the
families of the Patriarchs: and the covenant in the very family of Abraham
was restrained to Isaak: Genesis 6.
and the members of these families, for this cause, were called the sons of
God: the rest of the world beside being termed as they were indeed, the
sons of men. From the giving of the law til Christ, the nation of the Jews
was the Church of God, and the rest of the world beside, no people of God. ^sa
4^.9. Ose. 2.23. and 1 10. ^a^h. ^.11. Act. 14.16. (...). 2.13.
And therefore Esai calls them prisoners and them that are in darkness: and
Ose, Such as are without mercy and no people: and Zachary, Such as are not
joined to the Lord: and Paul. Such as are set to walk in their own ways,
being without God and without Christ in the world. And this distinction
between Jew and Gentile stood till the very ascension of Christ. And hereupon
when he was to send his disciples to preach, Mat. 10.6.7.
he charged them not to go into the way of the Gentiles; and not to enter
into the cities of the Samaritanes, but rather to go to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel: and when the woman of Canaan made request for her daughter, he
gave a denial at the first upon this distinction, saying, Mat. 15.22.
It is not meet to take the childrens bread and give it unto dogs: and
again, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. It will
be said, that this distinction arose of this, that the Gentiles at the first
fell away from the covenant, and contemned the Messiah. It is true indeed of
the first heads of the Gentiles the sons of Noe: but of their posterity it
is false, which in times following did not so much as hear of the covenant,
and the Messiah. The Prophet Esai says of Christ, Esai 55.5.
A nation that knew not thee, shall run unto thee. And Paul speaking to the
Athenians says, Act. 17.30.
that the times of this their ignorance God regarded not: but now admonishes
all men every where to repent: and to the Romans he says, that the mystery
touching Christ and his benefits was kept secret since the world began, Rom
16.26. 1. Tim. 3.16.
and now opened and published among all nations. And if the Gentiles had but
known of the Messiah, why did not their Poets and Philosophers who in their
writings notoriously abuse the Jews with sundry Apella, Verpus, Recutitus,
Sabbatarius, Cultur(...).
nickenames, at the least signify the contempt of the Redeemer. Wherefore to
hold, and much more to avouch by writing, that all and every one of the
heathen were called, it is most absurd: and if it were so, the Caniballs and
the sauadge nations of America should have known Christ without preaching
which by the histories of the discovery of those countries, is known to be
false.

Again, if the: Vocation of every man be effectual, then faith must be
common to all men either by nature or by grace, or both: now to say the first,
namely that the power of believing is common to all by nature, is the heresy
of the Pelagians, and to say it is common to all grace, is false. 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
All men have not faith, says Paul: nay many to whom the Gospel is preached,
do not so much as understand it and give assent unto it; 2. Cor. 4.4.
Satan blinding their minds that the light of the glorious gospel of Christ
should not shine unto them: and to say that faith is partly by nature and
partly by grace, is the condemned heresy of the semi-Pelagian: 2. Cor. 3.5.
for we can not so much as think a good thought of our selves.

The last defect in the platform is, that they ascribe unto God a wrong end of
his counsels: namely the communication of mercy or goodness in eternal
happiness. For the absolute and sovereign end of all Gods doings must be
answerable to his nature, which is not mercy and love alone, but also justice
it self: and therefore the right end is the manifestation of his glory both
in justice and mercy by the express testimony of scripture. Again, if the
communication of his goodness were the highest end of all his counsels, all men
without exception should be saved, because God can not be frustrated of his end
and purposed: and if but one man be damned, he is damned; either because God
will not save him, or because he can not. If they say he will not, then is he
changeable; if he can not, then is he not omnipotent, considering his purpose
was to convey happiness to all creatures.

Thus much of the efficient cause of the Church, namely Gods predestination:
which doctrine could not here be omitted considering no man can believe
himself to be a member of the Church, unless withal he believe that he is
predestinate to life everlasting. Now we come to the second point, namely the
Mystical union, which is the very form of the Church, whereby all that
believe are made one with Christ. Ga^. ^.28.
To the causing of this union two things are required, a Donation or giving of
Christ unto that man, which is to be made one with him: and a Conjunction
between them both. Of the first, the Prophet Esai says, ^sa^. 9.16. Romans 8.31.
Unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is given: and Paul, Who spared
not his own son, but gave him for us all: how shall he not with him give us
all things also? And touching it sundry points must be considered. The first
is, what is meant by this giving? Ans. It is an action or work of God the
Father by the holy ghost, whereby Christ as redeemer in the appointed time is
really communicated to al ordained to salvation in such manner, that they may
truly say, that Christ himself withal his benefits is theirs, both in
respect of right thereto, and in respect of all fruit redounding thence, and
that as truly as any man may say that house and land given him of his
ancetours is his own both to possess and to use.

The second point is, what is the very thing given? Answ. Whole Christ God and
man is given, because his humanity without his godhead, or the godhead without
the humanity does not reconcile us to God. Yet in this giving there must be a
diverse consideration had of the two natures of Christ^ for the communication of
the godhead is merely energeticall, that is, only in respect of operation; in
that it does make the manhood personally united unto it to be propitiatory for
our sins and meritorious of life eternal. And to avouch any communication of
the godhead in respect of essence, were to bring in the heresy of the
Maniches, and to maintain a composition and a commixtion of our natures with
the nature of God. Again, in the manhood of Christ we must distinguish
between the subject it self, the substance of body and soul, and the
blessings in the subject which tend to our salvation. And the communication of
the aforsaid manhood is in respect of both, without separation: for no man can
receive saving virtue from Christ, unless first of all he receive Christ
himself, as no man can have the treasure hid in the field, unless first of
all he have the field: and no man can be nourished by meat and drink unless
first of all he receive the substance of both. Ioh 6.53 54.
And this is the cause why not only in the preaching of the word but also in
the institution of the Lords supper, express mention is made, not only of
Christ's merit, but also of his very body and blood, whereby the whole
humanity is signified, as appears by that place where it is said, Ioh. 1.14.
that the Word was made flesh. And though the flesh of it self profit nothing
as S. John says, yet as it is joined to the godhead of the son and does
subsist in his person, it receives thence quickening virtue, to revive and
renew all those to whom it shall be given. Lastly, among the blessings that
are stored up in the manhood of Christ for our salvation, some are given unto
us by imputation, as when we are justified by the righteousness indeed
inherent in his manhood, but imputed unto us: some by infusion, as when
holiness is wrought in our hearts by the spirit, as a fruit of that
holiness which is in the manhood of Christ, and derived from it, as the light
of one candle from another.

The third point is, in what manner Christ is given unto us. Ans. God the
father gives Christ unto his Church not in any earthly or bodily manner, as
when a king bestows a gift with his own hand, and puts it into the hand
of his subject: but the manner is altogether celestial and spiritual: partly
because it is brought to pass by the mere divine operation of the holy Ghost:
and partly because in respect of us, this gift is received by an instrument
which is supernatural, namely, faith, whereby we lay hold on, and apply unto
our selves the Evangelical promises. And this manner of giving may be
conceived thus. A man that never stirred foot out of England holds and enioyes
land in Turkey: but how comes it to be his? Thus: the Emperor was willing and
content to bestow it; and the man for his part as willing to accept and receive
it: and by this means that which at the first was the Emperors, by mutual
consent becomes the man's. In the same manner God the Father has made an
Evangelical covenant with his Church: in which of his mercy he has made a
grant of his own son unto us, with righteousness and life everlasting in
him: and we again by his grace accept of this grant and receive the same by
faith: and thus by mutual consent according to the tenor of the covenant, any
repentant sinner may truly say, though I now have mine abode upon earth, and
Christ in respect of his manhood be locally in heaven; yet is he truly mine to
have and to enjoy, his body is mine, his blood is mine. As for the giving and
receiving of the body and blood of Christ in bodily manner (which the Papists
maintain in auouching the real transubstantiation of bread and wine in the
sacrament into the body and blood of Christ, and the Lutherans also in
teaching that his body and blood is substantially either in, or with, or under
the bread and wine) is an erroneous conceit flat opposite to sundry points of
the Cbristian faith. For Christ to this very hour retains still the essence
and essential properties of a true body, and we believe that really and
visibly he ascended into heaven, and there abides till his second coming to
the last judgment: who then having but common reason would imagine a
communication of the body of Christ pent up in the element of bread, and
conveyed into our bodies by the mouth and stomach.

The third point is, whether we are not lords of Christ, he being thus given
unto us. Ans. No: for this donation is not single but mutual. As Christ is
given to us, so we again are given to Christ, as he himself says, Ioh. 17.2.
Those whom thou have given me, Father, I have kept. And we are given unto him
in that our bodies and souls are made his not only as he is God, but also as
he is our redeemer: and our sins with the guilt thereof are made his by
imputation, and the punishment thereof is wholly laid upon him. This is all the
dowry which the Church, being the spouse of Christ, has brought unto him.

The fifth point is, how any man in particular may know that Christ is given
unto him of the Father. Ans. When God gives Christ to man, he withal gives man
grace and power to receive Christ, and to apprehend him with all his benefits:
and this we do when we utterly renounce our selves, this world and all things
therein, bewail our sins past, resting on the death of Christ for the pardon
of them al, and as it were with both the arms of faith catching hold upon him
in all estates, both in life and death. When the heart of any man is truly
disposed and inclined to do these and the like things, we may truly say,
that God has given him grace to receive Christ.

The second thing required to make us one with Christ is, the Mystical union,
which is a Conjunction whereby Christ and his Church are actually coupled into
one whole Mystical body. Now that we may the better conceive the nature of it,
sundry questions are to be moved. The first, what kind of conjunction this
is. Ans. In the scripture we meet with three kind of conjunctions. The first
is, conjunction in nature, when sundry things are coupled by one and the same
nature. As the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, being three distinct
subsistances are all one, and therefore joined in one godhead or divine nature.
Now Christ and the believer are not joined in nature: for the^ they twain
should have one body and soul. The second conjunction is in person, when
things in nature different, so concur together, that they make but one
person; as the body and soul make one man: and the godhead of the son with
his manhood make but one Christ: in whom there is an union of distinct natures
with unity of person. Now Christ and a Christian are not joined in person: for
Christ is one person, Peter a second, and Paul a third distinct from the^ both:
and so many men as there be, so many several persons. The third conjunction
is in spirit; and this is the conjunction meant in this place: whereby Christ
and his Church are joined together: for the very same spirit of God that
dwells in the manhood of Christ and fills it with all graces above measure,
is derived thence and dwells in all the true members of the Church, and
fills them with the like graces in measure, and therefore S. John says,
Hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has given us of
his spirit. Hence it follows, that the bond of this conjunction is one and the
same spirit descending from Christ the head to all his members, creating also
in them the instrument of faith whereby they apprehend Christ and make him
their own.

The second is, what are the things united? Ans. Not the body of the believer,
to the body of Christ, or the soul to his soul, but the whole person of the
man to the whole person of Christ: yet in this order; we are first of al and
immediately joined to the manhood of Christ, and by the manhood to the godhead.

The third question is, what is the manner of this conjunction. Answ. We must
not think that Christ and his Church are joined by imagination, as the mind
of man and the thing whereof he thinks: or by consent of heart as one friend
is joined with another, and as the Jews converted were all of one heart and
soul: or by any abode in one place, or by touching, as sea and land are both
joined together and make one globe: (...) 2.48.
or by any composition or co^mixtion of substances, as when many ingredients
are put together, to make one medicine. But this conjunction is altogether
spiritual as the former Giving was; and incomprehensible to man's reason: and
therefore we must rather labor to feel it by experience in the heart, then
to conceive it in the brain. Yet nevertheless it shall not be amiss to
consider a resemblance of it in this comparison. Suppose a man having the parts
of his body disioyned far asunder, his head lying in Italy, one arm in
Germany, the other in Spain, and his legs with us in England: suppose
further all these parts or quarters have all one soul, extending it self unto
them all, and quickening each of them severally as though they were nearly
joined together: and though the parts be severed many hundred miles asunder,
yet the distance of place does not hinder the conjunction, considering one and
the same soul does enlarge it self and give life unto them all. In the same
manner the head of the Mystical body Christ our Savior is now in heaven,
and some of his members in heaven with him, and some in earth: and of these,
some in England, some in Germany, some in Italy, some in Spain, distant many
thousand miles asunder: and the spirit of God is as it were the soul of this
body which gives spiritual life to all the members: distance of place does
not hinder this conjunction, because the holy Ghost which linketh all the
parts together is infinite.

The benefits which we receive by this Mystical union are manifold. For it is
the ground of the conueiance of all grace. The first is, that by means hereof
every Christian as he is a Christian or a man regenerate has his beginning and
being in Christ, howesoeuer as he is a man he has his being and subsisting
in himself, as Paul says, 1. Cor. 1.30. Ephesians. 5.30,
Ye are of God in Christ. And, We are members of his body of his flesh and of
his bones. How will some say can this be? After this manner. The comparison is
taken from our first parents. Eve was made of a rib taken out of Adams side, he
being cast into a slumber: this being done, Adam awaked and said, This now
is bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh Christ was nailed on the cross and
his most precious blood was shed, and out of it arise and spring all true
Christians; that is, out of the merit of Christ's death and passion, whereby
they become new creatures. Secondly, every one that believes in Christ by
reason of this union has an unspeakable prerogative: for hereby he is first
united to Christ, and by reason thereof is also joined to the whole trinity,
the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, and shall have eternal fellowship
with them. Thirdly, sundry men specially Papists deride the doctrine of
justification by imputed righteousness: thinking it as absurd, that a man
should be just by that righteousness which is inherent in the person of
Christ; as if we should say, that one man may live by the soul of another: or
be learned by the learning of another. But here we may see that it has
sufficient foundation. For there is a most near and strait union between
Christ and all that believe in him: and in this union Christ with all his
benefits according to the tenor of the covenant of grace, is made ours really:
and therefore we may stand just before God by his righteousness; it being
indeed his, because it is in him as in a subject; yet so, as it is also ours;
because it is given unto us of God. Now there is no such union between man
and man, and for that cause one man can not live by the soul of another, or be
learned by the learning of another. Fourthly from this fountain springes our
sanctification, whereby we die to sin and are renewed in righteousness and
holiness. Worms and flies that have lien dead al winter, if they be laid in the
sun in the spring time begin to revive, by virtue thereof: even so, when we
are united to Christ, and are (as it were) laid in the beams of this blessed
son of righteousness, virtue is derived thence, which warmeth our benumbed
hearts dead in sin, and reuiueth us to newnes of life: whereby we begin to
affect and like good things, and put in practice all the duties of religion.
Fifthly, hence we have the protection of Gods angels; for they always wait
and attend on Christ, and because we are made one with him, they attend upon us
also. Lastly by reason of this union with Christ, every believer comes to
have interest and to recover his title in the creatures of God, and to have the
holy and lawful use of them all. For we must consider, that although Adam
created in the image of God, was made lord over all things in heaven and earth;
yet when he fell by eating the forbidden fruit; he, and in him all mankind
lost the title and use of them all. Now therefore that a man may recover his
interest, he must first of all be united and made one with Christ: and then by
Christ, who is Lord and King over all, shall he recover that title in the
creatures of God, which he had by creation; and be made lord over them again.
But some will say, if this be so, then a Christian man may have and enjoy all
creatures at his pleasure; and therefore the goods of other men. Ans. The
reason is not good, for in this life we have no more but Ius ad rem.
right unto the creature, and Ius in re.
right in it, that is, actual possession is reserved for the life to come.
Therefore we must content our selves with our allowed portions given unto us by
god, by his grace using them in holy manner, expecting by hope the full
fruition of all things till after this life. Again, if all title to the
creatures be rocouered by Christ, it may be demanded, whether infidels have
any interest to their goods or no? Ans. Infidels before men are right lords of
all their lands and possessions which they have obtained by lawefull means;
and in the courts of men they are not to be deprived of them: but before God
they are but usurpers, because they hold them not in capite, that is, in
Christ: neither have they any holy and right use of them, for to the unclean,
all things are unclean. And they must first of all become members of Christ
before they can hold and enioy^ them aright, and use them with good conscience.

The duties which are to be learned of the doctrine of this union are
manifold. And first of all we are taught to purge our hands and hearts of all
our sins, and especially to avoid all those sins whereby men's bodies are
defiled, as drunkenness, uncleanness, fornication: for they drive away the
spirit of God from his own house, and dissolve the bond of the conjunction
between Christ and us. Secondly we must every one of us, which profess our
selves to be members of Christ, labor to become conformable unto him in
holiness of life, and to become new creatures: for this union requires thus
much. Let a man take the grifts of a crabtree, and set them into good stocks:
yet will they not change their sap, but bring forth fruit according to their
own nature, even sour crabs: but it must not be so with us: we are indeed
wild olives, and the branches of wild vines; yet seeing we are persuaded that
we are grafted into Christ and made one with him, we must lay aside our wild
and sour nature, and take upon us the nature of the true vine, bear good
fruit, have good juice in us, and render sweet wine. Thirdly we are taught
hence to be plentiful in all good works, considering we are joined to him
that is the fountain of grace. And therefore Christ says, (...). 1^.1.
I am the true vine and my father is the husband man: every branch that
bears not fruit in me, he takes away: and every one that bears fruit he
purges it that it may bear more fruit. And the Prophet Esai compares the
Church of God to a vineyard with a tower and a wine press in it. Esai. 5.7.
And God himself comes often down unto it, Can^. 6.10.
to see the fruits of the valley, to see if the vine budde, and the Pomegranets
flourish. And further we must bring forth fruit with patience. Luke 8.15.
For the Lord of this vineyarde comes with crosses and afflictions, as with a
pruning knife in his hand, to pare and to dress us that we may be fit to bring
forth fruit plentiful in duties of piety to God, and in duties of love to
all men, yea to our enemies. Ezec. 4^.^^.
Christian men are trees of righteousness growing by the waters of the
sanctuary: but what trees? not like ours: for they are rooted upward in heaven
in Christ, and their grains and branches grow downward that they may bear
fruit among men.

Hitherto we have heard what the Church is, now to believe the Church is
nothing else but to believe that there is a company of the predestinate made
one in Christ, and that withal we are in the number of them.

Before we proceed any further, three rules must be observed touching the
Church in general. Ephesians. 2 22. Colo^^. 2.29.
The first, that Christ alone is the head of the Catholic Church, and that he
neither has nor can have any creature in heaven or earth to be his fellow
herein. For the Church is his body, and none but he can perform the duty of
an head unto it: which duty stands in two things: the first is, to govern
the Church by such power and authority whereby he can and does prescribe
laws properly binding the consciences of all his members; the second is, by
grace to quicken and to put spiritual life into the^, so as they shall be able
to say, that they live not, but Christ in them. As for the Supremacy of the
sea of Rome whereby the Pope will needs stand ministerial head to the
Catholic Church, it is a satanicall forgerie. For the headship (as I may
term it) of Christ is of that nature or quality, that it can admit no
deputy. Whether we respect the commanding or the quickening power of Christ
before named. Nay Christ needs no vicar or deputy; for he is al sufficient in
himself and always present with his Church, as he himself testifies,
saying, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst among them. And whereas all commissions cease in the presence of him
that gives the commission: it is as much pride and arrogancy for the Pope to
take unto himself the title of the head and universal Bishop of the Church;
as it is for a subject to keep himself in commission in the presence of his
King.

The second rule is, that there is no salvation out of the Church, and that
therefore every one which is to be saved must become a member and a citizen of
the Catholic and Apostolic Church: and such as remain for ever out of the
same perish eternally. Therefore S. John says, 1. Ioh. 2.10.
They went out of us, they were not of v^^ for if they had been of us, they
would have remained with us: but this comes to pass that it might appear,
that they are not all of us. And again, that such as be holy, are in the city
of God; but without, that is, forth of the Church are dogs, en^hanters,
whoremongers, adulterers, etc. ^ev. 22.1^^
And the Arc out of which all perished, figured the Church, out of which al
are condemned. And for this cause Saint Luke says, Ac^. 1.47.
that the Lord added to the Church from day to day such as should be saved. And
the reason hereof is plain: for without Christ there is no salvation, but out
of the militant church there is no Christ nor faith in Christ: and therefore no
salvation. Again, forth of the militant church there are no means of
salvation, no preaching of the word, no invocation of Gods name, no Sacraments,
and therefore no salvation. For this cause every man must be admonished
evermore to join himself to some particular church being a sound member of
the Catholic church.

The third rule is, that the church which here we believe is only one. As
Christ himself speaks, Cant. 6.8.
My dove is alone, and my undefiled is the only daughter of her mother. And as
there is only one God and one Redeemer, one faith, one baptism, and one way
of salvation by Christ only, so there is but one church alone.

The Catholic church has two parts: the church Triumphant in heaven, and the
church Militant on earth.

The Triumphant church may thus be described: It is a company of the spirits
of just men, triumphing over the flesh, the devil, and the world, praising
God. Heb. 12.23.
First I say it is a company of the spirits of men as the holy Ghost
expressly terms it, because the souls only of the godly departed, as of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, etc. are as yet ascended into heaven, and not
their bodies. Furthermore the properties of this company are two. The first
is, to make triumph over their spiritual enemies the flesh, the devil, the
world: for the righteous man so long as he lives in this world is in continual
combat without truce with all the enemies of his salvation: and by constant
faith obtaining victory in the end of his life, he is translated in glorious
and triumphant manner into the kingdom of glory. This was signified to John in
a vision in which he saw an innumerable company of all sorts of nations,
kinreds, people, and tongues stand before the Lamb clothed in long white robes
with palms in their hands, Rev. 7.10.
in token that they had been warriors, but now by Christ have gotten the
victory and are made conquerours. Their second property is to praise and
magnify the name of God, as it follows in the former place, saying Amen:
praise and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, honor, power, and might be unto
our God for evermore. Hence it may be demanded whether Angels be of this
Triumphant church or no? Ans. The blessed Angels be in heaven in the presence
of God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, but they are not of the
mystical body of Christ, because they are not under him as he is their
redeemer, considering they can not be redeemed, which never fell: and it can
not be proved that they now stand by the virtue of Christ's redemption: but
they are under him as he is their Lord and King, and by the power of Christ as
he is God, and their God, are they confirmed. And therefore as I take it, we can
not say, that Angels are members of the mystical body of Christ or of the
triumpha^t church; though indeed, they be of the company of the blessed.

The church Militant may be thus described: It is the company of the elect or
faithful, living under the cross, desiring to be removed and to be with
Christ. I say not that the Militant church is the whole body of the elect, but
only that part thereof which lives upon earth: and the infallible mark
thereof is that faith in Christ which is taught and delivered in the writings
of the Prophets and Apostles: and this faith again may be discerned by two
marks. The first is, that the members of this company live under the cross,
and profit by it in all spiritual grace. And therefore it is said, Act. 14.22.
that we must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of heaven. And
our Savior Christ says, Luke 9.23.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
every day and follow me. The second mark is a desire to depart hence and to be
with Christ, as Paul says, 2. Cor ^.8.
We love rather to be removed out of this body and to be with Christ. And
again, Phil 1.23.
I desire to be loosed and to be with Christ, which is best of all. Where yet
we must remember, that the members of Christ do not desire death simply and
absolutely, but in two respects: I. that they might leave off to sin, and by
sinning leave to displease God. II. That they might come to enjoy happiness in
heaven, and to be with Christ.

Touching the general estate of the Militant church, two questions are to be
considered. The first, how far forth God is present with it, assisting it by
his grace. Ans. God gives his spirit unto it in such a measure, that although
the gates of hell can not prevail against it, yet nevertheless it remains
still subject to error both in doctrine and manners. For that which is true in
every member of the church is also true in the whole: but every member of the
Militant church is subject to error both in doctrine and manners: because men
in this life are but in part enlightened and sanctified; and therefore still
remain subject to blindness of mind and ignorance, and to the rebellion of
their wills and affections: whereby it comes to pass that they may easily
fail either in judgment or in practice. Again, that which may befall one or
two particular churches may likewise befall all the particular churches upon
earth, all being in one and the same condition, but this may befall one or two
particular churches to fail either in doctrine or manners. Rev 1.4.
The church of Ephesus failed in leaving her first love, whereupon Christ
threatens to remove from her the candlestick. Gal. 1.6.
And the church of Galatia was removed to an other Gospel from him that had
called them in the grace of Christ: now why may not the same things befall
twenty yea an hundred churches which befell these twain. Lastly experience
shows this to be true, in that general Councels have erred. The Council of
Nice being to reform sundry behauiours among the Bishops and Elders, would
with common consent have forbidden marriage unto them, thinking it profitable
to be so; unless Paphnutius had better informed them out of the Scriptures. In
the third Council at Carthage certain books Apocrypha, as the book of
Syrach, Tobie, and the Macchabees are numbered in the Canon, and yet were
excluded by the Council of Laodicea. August. de bap. l. 2 c. 3.
And the saying of a Divine is received, that former Councels are to be
reformed and amended by the latter. But Papists maintaining that the Church can
not err, allege the promise of Christ: Ioh. 15.13.
Howbeit when he is come which is the spirit of truth, he will lead you into
all truth. Ans. The promise is directed to the Apostles, who with their
Apostolical authority had this privilege granted them, that in the teaching
and penning of the gospel they should not err: and therefore in the council
at Jerusalem they conclude thus, It seems good unto us and to the holy Ghost.
And if the promise be further extended to all the Church, it must be understood
with a limitation: Ioh. 3.34. Act. 20.20,27.
that God will give his spirit unto the members thereof to lead them into all
truth, so far forth as shall be needful for their salvation.

The second question is, wherein stands the dignity and excellency of the
Church. Ans. It stands in subjection and obedience unto the will and word of
his spouse and head, Christ Jesus. And hence it follows, that the Church is
not to challenge unto her self authority over the Scriptures, but only a
ministry or ministerial service whereby she is appointed of God to preserve
and keep, to publish and preach them, and to give testimony of them. And for
this cause, ^. Tim. 3.11.
it is called the pillar and ground of truth. The church of Rome not content
with this, says further that the authority of the Church in respect of us is
above the authority of the Scripture, because (say they) we can not know
Scripture to be Scripture but by the testimony of the Church. But indeed they
speak an untruth. For the testimony of men that are subject to error can not
be greater and of more force with us, then the testimony of God who can not
err. Again, the Church has her beginning from the word: (for there can not
be a Church without faith, and there is no faith without the word, and there is
no word out of the Scriptures) and therefore the Church in respect of us,
depends on the Scripture, and not the Scripture on the Church. And as the
lawyer which has no further power but to expound the law, is under the law: so
the Church which has authority only to publish and expound the Scriptures,
can not authorize them unto us, but must submit her self unto them. And
whereas it is alleged that faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.
and this hearing is in respect of the voice of the Church, and that therefore
faith comes by the voice of the Church: the answer is, that the place must be
understood not of that general faith whereby we are resolved that Scripture is
Scripture, but of justifying faith, whereby we attain unto salvation. And
faith comes by hearing the voice of the Church; not, as it is the Churches
voice, but as it is a ministry or means to publish the word of God, which is
both the cause and object of our believing. Now on the contrary we must hold,
that as the carpenter knows his rule to be straight, not by any other rule
applied unto it, but by it self: for casting his eye upon it, he presently
discernes whether it be straight or no: so we know and are resolved that
Scripture is Scripture, even by the Scripture it self, though the Church say
nothing, so be it we have the spirit of discerning when we read, hear, and
consider the Scripture. And yet the testimony of the Church is not to be
despised, for though it breed not a a persuasion in us of the certenty of the
Scripture, yet is it a very good inducement thereto.

The militant Church has many parts. For as the Ocean sea which is but one, is
divided into parts according to the regions and countries against which it
lies, as into the English, Spanish, Italian sea, etc. so the Church dispersed
over the face of the whole earth, is divided into other particular churches
according as the countries are several in which it is seated, as into the
Church of England and Ireland, the Church of France, the Church of Germany,
etc.

Again^, particula^ Churches are in a twofold estate: sometime lie hid in
persecution, wanting the public preaching of the word, and the administration
of the Sacraments: and sometimes again they are visible, carrying before the
eyes of the world an open profession of the name of Christ: as the moon is
sometime eclipsed and sometime shines in the full. In the first estate was the
Church of Israel in the days of Eliah, when he wished to die: 1. King 19.
14,^8.
because the people had forsaken the covenant of the Lord, broken down his
altars, slain his Prophets with the sword, and he was left alone and they
sought to take his life also. Behold a lamentable estate, when so worthy a
Prophet could not find an other beside himself that feared God: yet mark
what the Lord says unto him, I have left seven thousand in Israel, even all
the knees that have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth that has not kissed
him. Again it is said, 2. Chr. 15.^^
That Israel had been a long season without the true God, without priest to
teach, and without the law. Neither must this trouble any that God should so
far forth forsake his Church: for when ordinary means of salvation fail,
he then gathers his Elect by extraordinary means; as when the children of
Israel wandered in the wilderness wanting both circumcision and the Passover,
he made a supply by Manna and by the pillar of a cloud. Hence we have
direction to answer the Papists, who demand of us where our Church was
threescore years ago before the days of Luther: we say, that then for the
space of many hundred years, an universal Apostasy ouerspread the whole face
of the earth; and that our Church then was not visible to the world, but lay
hid under the chafe of Popery. And the truth of this, the Records of all ages
manifest.

The second estate of the Church is, when it flourishes and is visible, not
that the faith and secret election of men can be seen (for no man can discern
these things but by outward signs) but because it is apparent in respect of
the outward assemblies gathered to the preaching of the word and the
administration of the Sacraments, for the praise and glory of God and their
mutual edification. And the visible Church may be thus described: It is a mixed
company of men professing the faith, assembled together by the preaching of
the word. First of all I call it a mixed company, Math. ^3.25, 47.
because in it there be true believers and hypocrites, Elect and Reprobate,
good and badde. The Church is the Lords field, in which the enemy sows his
tares: it is the corn flore, in which lies wheat and chafe: it is a band of
men, in which beside those that be of valor and courage, there be white
liuered soldiers. And it is called a Church of the better part, namely the
Elect whereof it consists, though they be in number few. As for the ungodly,
though they be in the Church, yet they are no more parts of it indeed, then
the superfluous humors in the veins, are parts of the body. But to proceed;
how are the members of the visible Church qualified and discerned? the answer
follows in the definition, professing the faith. Whereby I mean the
profession of that religion which has bin taught from the beginning, and is
now recorded in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. And this profession
is a sign and mark whereby a man is declared and made manifest to be a member
of the Church.

Again, because the profession of the faith is otherwhiles true and sincere,
and otherwhiles only in show: therefore there be also two sorts of members of
the visible church, members before God and members before men. A member of the
church before God is he, that beside the outward profession of the faith, has
inwardly a pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned, whereby he is
indeed a true member of the church. Members before men, whom we may call
reputed members, are such as have nothing else but the outward profession,
wanting the good conscience and the faith unfeigned. The reason why they are to
be esteemed members of us, is; because we are bound by the rule of charity to
think of men as they appear unto us; leaving secret judgments unto God.

I added in the last place, that the Church is gathered by the word preached,
to show that the cause whereby it is begun and continued, is the word: which,
for that cause is called the immortal seed whereby we are borne anew, 1. Pet.
1.23. Heb 5.13. ^. Co^. 3.2.
and milk, whereby we are fed and cherished to life everlasting. And hence
it follows necessarily, that the preaching of the doctrine of the Prophets
and Apostles, joined with any measure of faith and obedience, is an infallible
mark of a true church. Indeed it is true, there be three things required to
the good estate of a church, the preaching of the Gospel, the administration
of the Sacraments, and due execution of Discipline according to the word: yet
if the two latter be wanting, so be it there be preaching of the word with
obedience in the people, there is for substance a true church of God. For it is
the banner of Christ displaied, under which all that war against the flesh,
the devil, the world, must range themselves. As the Lord says by the Prophet
Esai, Esa. 49.22.
I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard unto the
people, and they shall bring their sons in their arms, and their daughters
shall be carried upon their shoulders. Hence it follows, that men which want
the preaching of the Gospel, must either procure the same unto themselves; or
if that can not be, because they live in the midst of idolatrous nations, as
in Spain and Italy, it is requisite that they should join themselves to
those places where with liberty of conscience they may enjoy this happy
blessing. Men are not to have their hearts glued to the honors and riches of
this world; but they should be of David's mind, and rather desire to be
dorekeepers in the house of God, then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness. In
the Canticles, the spouse of Christ says, Can^. 1.6.
Show me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou lie at
noone: for why should I be as she that turns aside to the flocks of thy
companions. To whom he answers thus: ve^s. 7.
If thou know not, O thou the fairest among women, get thee forth by the
steps of the flock, and feed thy kids by the tents of the shepherds: that
is, in those places where the doctrine of righteousness and life everlasting by
the Messiah, is published. When the Shunamites child was dead, she told her
husband that she would go to the man of God, to whom he answered thus; ^.
King. 4.23.
Why will thou go to him to day, it is neither new moon nor sabbath day:
whereby it is signified that when teaching was skarse in Israel, the people did
resort to the Prophets for instruction and consolation. And David says, (...)
that the people wheresoever there abode was, went from strength to strength
till they appeared before God in Sion. And oftentimes, they being Proselytes,
there aboade must needs be out of the precincts of Iewrie.

Thus we see what the visible Church is: now further concerning it, three
questions are to be skanned. The first is, how we may discern whether
particular men and particular Churches holding errors, be found members of the
Catholic church or no. For the answering of this, we must make a double
distinction, one of errors, the other of persons that err. Of errors, some
are destroiers of the faith, 2. Tim. 2.^^^
some only weakners of it. A destroier is that, which ouerturneth any
fundamental point of religion; which is of that nature, that if it be denied,
religion it self is ouerturned; as the denial of the death of Christ, and the
immortality of the soul, justification by works, and such like: and the
sum of these fundamental points is comprised in the Creed of the Apostles
and the Decalogue. A weakening error is that, the holding whereof does not
ouerturue any point in the foundation of salvation; as the error of freewill,
and sundry such like. This distinction is made by the holy Ghost, who says
expressly that the doctrines of repentance, and faith, and baptismes, and
laying on of hands, and the resurrection, and the last judgment, Gal. 5.^.3.
Heb. 6.1. 1. Cor. 3.10,
are the foundation, namely of religion: and again, that Christ is the
foundation, and that other doctrines consonant to the word, are as gold and
silver laid thereupon. Secondly, persons erring, are of two sorts: some err of
w^aknes, being carried away by others; or of simple ignorance, not yet being
convicted and informed concerning the truth. Some again err of obstinacy, or
affected ignorance, which having bin admonished and convicted, still persevere
in their forged opinions. This being said, w^e now come to the point. If any
man or Church, shall hold an error of the lighter kind, he still remains a
member of the Church of God, and so must be reputed of us. As when a Lutherane
shall hold, that images are still to be retained in the church; that there is
an Universal Election of all men, etc. for these and such like opinions may be
maintained, the foundation of salvation vnrased. This which I say is slatly
avouched by Paul. If any man (says he) build on this foundation gold, silver,
precious stones; 1. Cor. 3.35.
timber, hay, or stubble, his work shall be made manifest by the fire, etc.
and if any man's work burn, he shall loose, but yet he shall be safe himself.
And therefore the hay and stubble of men's errors that are beside the
foundation, on which they are laid, do not debar them from being Christians
or members of the church. A man breaks down the windows of his house; the
house stands: he breaks down the roof or the walls; the house yet stands,
though deformed: he pulls up the foundation; the house it self falls and
cease to be an house. Now religion which we profess is like an house or
building: and some points thereof are like windows, doors, walls, roofes, and
some are the very foundation: and the former may be battered, the foundation
standing. Again, if the error be directly or by necessary consequent, even in
common sense against the foundation, consideration must be had whether the
Church or party erreth of weakness or malice: if of weakness, the party is to be
esteemed as a member of the Catholic church. And thus Paul writes unto the
church of Galatia, as to a church of God, though by false teachers it had bin
turned away to another Gospel, and embraced the fundamental error of
justification by works. But when any man or church shall hold fund^mental
errors in obstinacy or affected ignorance, we are not then bound to repute
them any longer as churches or Christians, but as such to whom condemnation
belongs, as Paul shows by the example of Iannes and Iambres. 2. Tim. 3.8.
And as Iannes and Iambres, says he, withstood Moses, so do these also resist
the truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. Yet withal,
this caveat must ever be remembered, that we rather condemn the error then the
person that erreth, because Gods mercy is like a bottomless sea, whereby he
works what he will and when he will in the hearts of miserable sinners.

The second question is, where at this day we may find such visible Churches
as are indeed so and members of the Catholic church. And for the resolving of
it, we are t^ go through all countries and religions in the world. And first
to begin with Turks and Jews, we are not in any wise to acknowledge their
Assemblies for churches, because they worship not God in Christ who is the head
of the church.

As for the Assemblies of Papists which have bin a great part of the world, if
thereby we understand companies of men holding the Pope for their head, and
believing the doctrine established in the council of Trent; in name they are
called churches, but indeed they are no true or sound members of the Catholic
church. For both in their doctrine and in the worship of God, they raze the
v^ry foundation of religion, which will appear by these three points. First of
all they hold justification by works of grace: auouching that they are not
only justified before God by the merit of Christ, but also by their own
doings. Which opinion flatly ouerturneth justification by Christ. For as Paul
says to the Galatians, If ye be circumcised Christ profits you nothing, that
is, if ye look to be justified by the works of the ceremonial law, ye are
fallen from Christ: join circumcision and Christ together in the matter of
justification, and ye do quite overthrow justification by Christ. Now if this
be true, which is the word of God that can not lie, then we say to the Papists;
If ye will needs be justified by works of grace, ye are fallen from grace.
The second point is, that they maintain daily real sacrifice of the body of
Christ in the Mass for the sins of the quick and dead. And this is also a
fundamental heresy. For Christ's sacrifice on the cross must either be a
perfect sacrifice or no sacrifice: and if it be often iterated and repeated by
the Mass Priest, it is not perfect but imperfect. The third point is, that
they worship the Images of the Trinity and of Saints departed, and their
Breaden-god, which is as vile an abomination as ever was among the Gentiles:
all being directly against the true meaning of the second commandment, and
defacing the worship of God in the very substance thereof. Thus then it
appears that the old church of Rome is changed, and is now at this day, of a
spouse of Christ become an harlot: and therefore no more a church of Christ
indeed, then the carcass of a dead man that wears a living man's garment is
a living man, though he look never so like him. And whereas they plead for
themselves that they have succession from the Apostles, the answer is, that
succession of person is nothing without succession of doctrine, which they
want: and we see that Heretics have succeeded lawful Ministers. Secondly,
whereas it is alleged that in the Popish assemblies the sacrament of Baptism
is rightly for substance administered; and that also it is a note of a Church,
three things may be answered. First, that baptism severed from the preaching
of the gospel, is no more a sign of a Church, then the seal severed from the
indenture is of force; and that is nothing. Circumcision was used in Colchis,
yet no church, and among the Samaritanes^ and yet no people. Herodo^, Hos. 1.9.
Secondly, Baptism in the assemblies of the Church of Rome, is as the purse of
the true man in the hand of the thief: and indeed it does no more argue them
to be Churches, then the true man's purse argues the thief to be a true man.
For baptism though it be in their assemblies, yet does it not appertain unto
them, but unto another hidden Church of God, which he has in all ages gathered
forth of the midst of them. Thirdly, though they have the outward baptism,
yet they by necessary consequent of doctrine, ouerturne the inward baptism
that stands in justification and sanctification. Moreover, whereas it is
alleged, that they maintain the books of the old and new testament penned
by the Prophets and Apostles; the answer is, that they do it with adding to
the Canon, and by corrupting the native sense of the Scriptures in the very
foundation: and therefore they are but as a lantern that shows light to
others and none to it self. Fourthly, it is further said that they hold the
Creed of the Apostles, and make the same confession of faith that we do. I
answer that in show of words they do so indeed: but by necessary
consequents in the rest of their doctrine they ouerturne one of the natures and
all the offices of Christ, and therewithal most of the articles of the Creed.
And herein they deal as a father, that in outward show tenders the body of
his child, and will not abide the least blemish vopn it: and yet by secret
conueiances inwardly annoyes the heart, the brain, or the liver, and so in
truth destroies the same. Fifthly it is alleged, that Antichrist must sit
in the temple of God, that is, the Church: therefore say some that desire an
union between us and the Papists, popish assemblies are true churches: but the
argument is not good. For it is one thing to be in the Church, and another
thing to be of it. And Antichrist is said to sit in the Church, not as a member
thereof, but as an usurper, or as the pyrate in the ship of the merchant: and
hence it can not be proved, that the assemblies of Papists are Churches, but
that in them and with them there is mingled an other hidden Church in the
midst whereof Antichrist the Pope rules, though himself has no part
therein. Lastly, whereas some, being no Papists, think their churches to be
like a body diseased and full of sores and wounds from the head to the foot,
and the throat also cut, yet so as life is still remaining; we may better
think, (their foul errors considered and their worship of God, which is
nothing else but a mixture of Iudaisme and Paganism) that it is a rotten and
dead corpse void of spiritual life. And therefore we have severed our selves
from the Church of Rome upon just cause: neither are we schismatics in so
doing, but they rather; because the ground and the proper cause of the schism
is in them.

As for the ass^mbli^s of Anabaptists, Libertines, Antinomies, Tritheits,
Arrians, Samosate^^^ns, they are no churches of God, but conspiracies of
monstrous heretics iud^^^lly condemned in the primitive Church, and again by
the malice of Satan ^^^ued and revived in this age. The same we are to think
and say of the Famili^ of love.

As for the Churches of Germany commonly called the Churches of the
Lutheranes, they are to be reputed of us as the true churches of God. Though
their Angustane Confession have not satisfied the expectation of other Reformed
Churches: yet have they all the same enemies in matter of religion, and do
alike confess the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: and of the office of
the Mediator, of faith and good works, of the Word, the Church and the
Magistrate, are all of one judgment. They differ indeed from us in the
question of the sacrament, but it is no sufficient cause to induce us to hold
them as no Church: for that there is a true or real receiving of the body and
blood of Christ in the Lords supper, we al agree; and we jointly confess that
Christ is there present so far forth that he does truly feed us with his
very body and blood to eternal life: and all the controversy lies in the
manner of receiving; we contenting our selves with that spiritual receiving
which is by the hand of faith, they adding thereto the corporal, whereby they
imagine themselves to receive Christ with the hand and mouth of the body. And
though to maintain this their opinion, they be constrained to turn the
ascension of Christ into a disparition, whereby his body being visible
becomes invisible, yet in the maine points we agree: that Christ ascended into
heaven: that he entered into his kingdom in our name and for us: that we are
governed and preserved by his power and might: and that whatsoever good thing
we have or do, proceeds wholly from the grace of his spirit. Indeed the
opinion of the Vbiquitie of the body of Christ reuiueth the condemned heresies
of Eutiches and Nestorius, and it ouerturneth by necessary consequent most of
the articles of faith: but that was private to some men, as Brentius and
others, and was not received of whole churches: and whereas the men were godly
and learned, and we are uncertain with what affection, and how long they held
this error, we rest our selves in condemning it, leaving the persons to God.
Again Popish Transustantiation, and Lutherian Consubstantiation, are both
against the truth of the manhood of Christ; yet with great difference.
Transubstantiation is slatte against an article of faith: for if Christ's body
be made of bread, and his blood of wine (which must needs be if there be a
conversion of the one into the other) then was not he conceived and borne of
the virgin Marie: for it cannot both be made of bakers bread and of the
substance of the virgin. Again it abolisheth the outward sign in the Lords
supper, as also the analogy between the sign and the thing signified, and so
ouerturnes the sacrament: but Consubstantiation does not so, neither does it
ouerturne the substance of any article of Religion, but only a maine point of
Philosophy; which is, that A body does occupy only one place at once.

Furthermore, the Churches of Helvetia, and Savoie, and the free cities of
France, and the low Countries, and Scotland, are to be reverenced as the
true Churches of God, as their confession make manifest. And no less must we
think of our own Churches in England and Ireland. For we hold, believe, and
maintain, and preach the true faith, that is, the ancient doctrine of
salvation by Christ, taught and published by the Prophets and Apostles, as the
book of the articles of faith agreed upon in open Parliament do fully show:
and withal now we are, and have been ready to testify this our faith, by
venturing our lives even in the cause of religion against foreign power, and
especially the Spaniard: and hereupon all the Churches in Europe give unto us
the hand of fellowship. And whereas sundry among us that separate and indeed
excommunicate themselves, give out that there is no Church in England, no
Ministers, no Sacraments: their peremptory asseuerations wanting sufficient
ground, are but as paper-shot. They allege that our assemblies are full of
grievous blottes and enormities. Ans. The defects and corruptions of Churches
must be distinguished: and they be either in doctrine, or manners. Again
corruptions in doctrine must further be distinguished: some of them are errors
indeed, but beside the foundation; and some errors directly against the
foundation: and these ouerturne all religion, whereas the former do not. Now
it can not be showed that in our Churches is taught any one error that raseth
the foundation, and consequently annihillateth the truth of Gods Church. Indeed
there is controversy among us touching the point of Ecclesiastical regiment:
but mark in what manner. We all jointly agree in the substance of the
regiment, confessing freely that there must be preaching of the word,
administration of the Sacraments according to the institution, and the use of
the Power of the Keys in admonitions, suspensions, excommunications: the
difference between us is only touching the persons, and the manner of putting
this government in exequution: and therefore men on both parts, though both hold
not the truth in this point; yet because both hold Christ the foundation,
they still remain brethren and true members of Christ. As for corruptions in
manners, they make not a Church to be no church, Mat. 23.2.
but a badde church. When as the wicked Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses
chair, taught the things which he had written, the people are commanded to
hear them, and to do the things which they say, not doing the things which
they do. And whereas it is said, that we hold Christ in word, and deny him
indeed; that is answered thus: denial of Christ is double, either in
judgment, or in fact: denial in judgment joined with obstinacy, makes a
Christian to be no christian; denial in fact, the judgment still remaining
sound, makes not a man to be no christian, but a badde christian. When the
Jews had crucified the Lord of life, Romans 9.4. Act. 2.39.
they still remained a Church, if any upon earth: and notwithstanding this
their fact, the Apostles acknowledged that the covenant and the promises still
belonged unto the^: and they never made any separation from their Synagogues,
till such time as they had bin sufficiently co^uicted by the Apostolical
ministry that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah.

Thus we see where at this day we may find the true Church of God. Now I
come to the third question; and that is, at what time a man may with good
conscience make separation from a Church. Ans. So long as a Church makes no
separation from Christ, we must make no separation from it: and when it
separates from Christ, we may also separate from it: and therefore in two cases
there is warrant of separation. The one is, when the worship of God is corrupt
in substance. And for this we have a commandment, Be not, says Paul, 2. Cor
6.14.
unequally yoked with infidels: for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness, or what communion has light with darkness, or what concord
has Christ with Belial? or what part has the believer with the infidel? or
what agreement has the temple of God with idols? wherefore come out from
among them and separate ^our selves, says the Lord. And we have a practice of
this in the old testament. 2. Chro. 11.14.
When Jeroboam had set up idols in Israel, then the priests and Levites came to
Judah and Jerusalem to serve the Lord. The second is, when the doctrine of
religion is corrupt in substance: as Paul says, ^. Tim. 6.3.
If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, he is
puffed up: from such separate your selves. A practice of this we have in the
Apostle Paul, who being in Ephesus in a Synagogue of the Jews, spoke boldly
for the space of three months, disputing and exhorting to the things which
concern the kingdom of God: A^^. 19 9. ^^ 18.28.
but when certain men were hardened and disobeyed, speaking evil of the way
God, he departed from them, and separated the disciples of Ephesus: and the
like he did at Rome also. As for the corruptions that be in the manners of men
that be of the Church, they are no sufficient warrant of separation, unless it
be from private company, 1. Cor. 5.11.
as we are admonished by the Apostle Paul; and by the examples of David and
Lot. By this which has been said, Psalm 17.4. 2. Pet. 2.6.
it appears that the practice of such as make separation from us, is very
badde and schismatic, considering our Churches fail not either in the
substance of doctrine, or in the substance of the true worship of God.

Now to proceed in the Creed. The Church is further set forth by certain
properties and prerogatives. The properties or qualities are two, holiness and
largenes. 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 11 2. and 2^.29. Rev. ^.9. and 3.9. Psalm. 26.5.
That the Church is holy, it appears by Peter, which calls it an holy nation,
and a chosen people: and by S. John, who calls it the holy city. And it is so
called^ that it may be distinguished from the false Church, which is termed in
Scriptures the synagogue of Satan, and the malignant Church.

Now this holiness of the Church is nothing else but a created quality in
every true member thereof, whereby the image of God, which was lost by the fall
of Adam is again renewed and restored. The author of it is God by his word and
spirit, by little and little abolishing the corruption of sin, and sanctifying
us throughout, as Christ says, Ioh. 17.17.
Father, sanctify them in thy truth, thy word is truth. And holiness must be
conceived to be in the Church on this manner: it is perfect in the Church
Triumphant, and it is only begun in the Church militant in this life: 1. Tim
1.17. Rom 11 20. Phil. 2 1^. Mat. 9.24.
and that for special cause, that we might give all glory to God; that we
might not be high minded, that we might work our salvation with fear and
trembling; that we might deny our selves and wholly depend upon God. Hence we
learn three things: first that the Church of Rome erreth in teaching that a
wicked man, yea such an one as shall never be saved, may be a true member of
the Catholic Church: for in reason, every man should be answerable to the
quality and condition of the Church whereof he is a member: if it be holy, as
it is; he must be holy also. Secondly we are every one of us, as Paul says to
Timothy, ^. Tim. 4.7.
to exercise our selves unto godliness, making conscience of all our former
unholy ways, endeavoring our selves to please god in the obedience of all his
commandments. It is a disgrace to the holy Church of God that men professing
themselves to be members of it, should be unholy. Thirdly our duty is, to
eschew the society of Atheists, drunkards, fornicatours, blasphemers, and all
wicked and ungodly persons, as Paul says, Ephesians 3.7.
Be no companions of them and have no fellowship with unprofitable works of
darkness. And he charge the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
that if any man among them walk inordinately they have no company with him
that he may be ashamed.

The largenes of the Church is noted in the word Catholic, that is, general
or universal. And it is so called for three causes. For first of all it is
general in respect of time; because the Church has had a being in all times
and ages ever since the giving of the promise to our first parents in Paradise.
Secondly it is general, in respect of the persons of men: for it stands of all
sorts and degrees of men, high and low, rich and poor, learned and unlearned,
etc. Thirdly it is Catholic or universal in respect of place; because it
has been gathered from all parts of the earth, specially now in the time of
the new Testament; when our Savior Christ says, Math. 26.23.
that the Gospel shall be preached in the whole world. To this purpose John
says in the Revelation, Rev. 7.9. Catholica. i. per totum orbem diffusa.

Aug. epi^t. 170.


I beheld and lo a great multitude which no man could number of all nations
and kinreds, and peoples, and tongues, stood before the throne and before the
lamb, clothed with long white robes and palms in their hands.

And the Church which we here profess to believe, is called Catholic, that
we may distinguish it from particular Churches, which are not believed, but
seen with eye, whereof mention is made often in the Scriptures. Romans 16.5.1.
Cor. 16.19. the Church in their house: and, the Churches of Asia. Coloss. 4.15.
Salute Nymphas and the Church in his house. Act. 11.22. the Church of
Jerusalem. Act. 13.1. the Church at Antioche, etc.

That the Church is Catholic in respect of time, place, person, it ministers
matter of endless comfort unto us. For hereby we see that no order, degree, or
state of men are excluded from grace in Christ, unless they will exclude
themselves. Saint John says, Ioh. 2.1,2.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. Now it might be answered, it is true indeed Christ is an advocate
to some men, but he is no advocate to me. Saint John therefore says further,
and he is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but
for the whole world, that is, for all believers of what condition or degree
soever.

Thus much of the properties of the Church: now follow the prerogatives or
benefits which God bestows on it, which are in number four. The first is
expressed in these words, The communion of Saints. Where communion signifies
that fellowship or society that one has with an other: and by Saints we
understand not dead men enrolled in the Popes calender, but all that are
sanctified by the blood of Christ, whether they be living or dead: as Paul
says, 1. Cor 1.2.
Unto the Church of God which is at Corinthus, to them that are sanctified in
Jesus Christ Saints by calling. And, and 14.33.
God is the God of peace in all the Churches of the Saints. Now if we add the
clause I believe, unto these words, the meaning is this; I confess and
acknowledge that there is a spiritual fellowship and society among all the
members of Christ, being the faithful servants and children of God: and
withal I believe that I am partaker of the same with the rest.

This communion has two parts, fellowshippe of the members with the head, and
of the members with themselves. The communion of the members with their head is
not outward, but altogether spiritual in the conscience: and for the opening
of it, we must consider what the Church receives of Christ, and what he
receives of it. The Church receives of Christ four most worthy benefits. The
first, that Christ our Mediator, God and man, has truly given himself unto
us, and is become our lot and portion, and withal God the father, and the holy
spirit, in him, as David says, Psalm. 16.5.
Iehoua is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou shall maintain
my lot: the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places: yea I have a fair
heritage. And, Psalm. 73.26.
My flesh fails: and my heart also: but God is the strength of my heart, and
my portion for ever. The second is, the Right of adoption, whereby all the
faithful whether in heaven or earth are actually made the children of God. The
benefit is wonderful, howsoever carnal men esteem not of it. If a man should
either by election or birth, or any way else be made the son and heir of an
earthly prince, he would think himself highly advanced: how highly then are
they extolled which are made the sons of God himself? The third benefit is a
title and right to the righteousness of Christ in his sufferings, and his
fulfilling of the law. The excellency of it is unspeakable, because it serves
to award the greatest temptations of the devil. When the devil replieth thus,
thou art a transgressour of the law of God, therefore thou shall be damned: by
means of that communion which we have with Christ we answer again: that
Christ suffered the curse of the law to free us from due and deserved
damnation: and when he further replies, that seeing we never fulfilled the
law, we can not therefore enter into heaven: we answer again, that Christ's
obedience is a fulfilling of the law for us, and his whole righteousness is
ours to make us stand righteous before God. The fourth benefit is a right to
the kingdom of heaven, as Christ comforting his disciples says, Fear not
little flock, it is your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom: and hence it
is sundry times called Act. 26.18. Coloss. 1.12. Ephesians. 1.18.
the inheritance and the lot of the Saints.

Furthermore, for the conueiance of these benefits unto us, God has ordained
the preaching of the word and the administration of the Sacraments, specially
the Lords supper: and has commanded the solemn and ordinary use of them in
the Church. And hereupon the Lords supper is called the Communion. 1. Cor.
10.16.
The cup of blessing (says Paul) which we bless, is it not the communion
of the blood of Christ: and the bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the body of Christ: that is, a sign and seal of the communion.

Again, the things which Christ receives of us are two: our sins with the
punishment thereof made his by application or imputation: and our afflictions
with all the miseries of this life which he accounts his own, and therefore
does as it were put under his shoulders to bear the burden of them. And this
communion between Christ and us is expressed in the scriptures by that blessed
and heavenly bargain in which there is mutual exchange between Christ and
us: he imparts unto us, Isa. 55.^.
milk and wine without silver or money to refresh us, and gold tried by the
fire that we may become rich, Rev. 3 18.
and white raiment that we may be clothed, and eye-salue to anoint our eyes
that we may see: and we for our parts return unto him nothing but blindenes
and nakedness, and poverty, and the loathsome burden of our filthy sins.

The second part of the communion is that which the Saints have one with an
other. And it is either of the living with the living, or of the living with
the dead. Now the communion of the living stands in three things: I. the like
affection: II. in the gifts of the spirit: III. in the use of temporal riches.
For the first; communion in affection is, whereby all the servants of God are
like affected to God, to Christ, to their own sins, and each to other. They
are all of one nature and heart alike disposed, though they be not acquainted
nor have any external fellowship in the flesh. As in a family children are
for the most part one like another and brought up alike: even so it is in Gods
family which is his Church: the members thereof are all alike in heart and
affection: and the reason is, because they have one spirit to guide them all:
and therefore Saint Peter says, Act. 4.32.
The multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul,
neither any of them said that any thing of that which he possessed was his own,
but they had al things common. And the Prophet Esaias foretelling the unity which
should be in the kingdom of Christ, says, Isa. 11.6,7.
The woolfe shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie with the
kidde, and the calfe and the lion, and the fat beast together, and a little
child shall lead them. The cow and the bear shall feed, and their young
ones shall lie together: and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock. The
sucking child shall play upon the hole of the aspe, and the weaned child shall
put his hand into the cockatrice hole. By these beasts are signified, men that
be of a wicked and brutish nature: which, when they shall be brought into the
kingdom of Christ, shall lay aside the same and become loving, gentle,
courteous, and all of one mind. 2. Pet. 1.7.
And S. Peter requires of the Church the practice of brothely love, and that is
to carry a tender affection to men, not becanse they are of the same flesh,
but because they are joined in the bond of one spirit with us. Furthermore by
reason of this that all the children of God are of one heart, Gal 6.2.
there follows another duty of this communion, whereby they bear one the
burdens of another, and when one member is grieved all are grieved; when one
rejoices all rejoice, as in the body when one member suffers all suffer.

The second branch of their communion, is in the gifts of Gods spirit, as love,
hope, fear, etc. And this is showed, when one man does employ the graces of
God bestowed on him, for the good and salvation of another. As a candle
spends it self to give light to others: so must Gods people spend those
gifts which God has given them for the benefit of their brethren. A Christian
man howesoeuer he be the freest man upon earth, yet is he servant to all men,
Gal. 5.13.
especially to the Church of God to do service unto the members of it by love
for the good of all. And this good is procured, when we convey the graces of
God bestowed on us to our brethren: and that is done five ways. I. by example:
II. by admonition: III. by exhortation: IV. by consolation: V. by prayer. The
first, which is good example, we are enjoined by Christ, saying, Mat. 5^
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and
glorify your father which in heaven. And that our hearts might be touched with
special care of this duty, the Lord sets before us his own blessed example,
saying, Leuit. 11.44. Mat. 11.28. 1. Cor. 11.1.
Be ye holy as I am holy: and, Learn of me that I am meek and lowely. And
Paul says, Be ye followers of me as I follow Christ: and the higher men
are exalted, the more careful ought they to be in giving good example. For let
a man of note or estimation do evil, and he shall presently have many
followers. Evil example runs from one to an other l^ke a leprosy or
infection: and this Christ signified when he said that the figtree planted in
the vineyard, Luke 13.18.
If it bears no fruit makes all the ground barren. The second means of
communication of the gifts of god unto others, is admonition, which is an
ordinance of God whereby christian men are to recover their brethren from their
sins. A man by occasion fallen into the water is in danger of his life; and
the reaching of the hand by another is the means to save him. Now every man
when he sins does, as much as in him lies, cast his soul into the very
pit of hell: and wholesome admonitions are as the reaching out of the hand to
recover him again. But it will peradventure be said, how must we proceed
in admonishing of others? Ans. We are to observe three things. The first is,
to search whether we that are to reprove, be faulty our selves in the same
thing or no. Mat. 7.5.
First we must take out the beam that is in our own eye, and so shall we see
clearly to pull out the mote in our brothers eye. Secondly, before we reprove,
we must be sure that the fault is committed: we must not go upon heare-saie or
likelihoods: and therefore the holy Ghost says, Heb. 10.14.
Let us consider or observe one another to provoke unto love or good works.
Thirdly, before we reprove, we must in Christian wisdom make choice of time
and place: for all times and places ^erue not to this purpose. And therefore
Solomon says, It is the glory of a man to pass by an offense. Furthermore in
the act of admonishing, two things are to be observed: I. a man must deliver
the words of his admonition (so far forth as he can) out of the word of
God, so as the party which is admonished, may in the person of man see God
himself to reprove him. II. his reproof must be made with as much
compassion and fellow feeling of other men's wants as may be. As Paul says,
Gal. 6.1.
If any man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual As
Chirurgians ^^^der^y see arms and legs in joint.
restore such an one with the spirit of meekness. The third way of
communicating good things to others is exhortation: and it is a means to
excite and stir them on forward, which do already walk in the way of
godliness. Therefore the holy Ghost says, Exhort one another daily, least any
of you be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. But alas^ the practice of
this duty, as also of the former is hard to be found among men; for it is
usual in families that masters and fathers in stead of admonishing their
servants and children, teach them the practice of sin in swearing,
blaspheming, slaundering, etc. and as for exhortation, it is not used. Let a
man that has the fear of God offend never so little, in stead of brotherly
exhortation he shall hear his profession cast in his teeth, and his hearing
of sermons: this practice is so general, that many beginning newely to tread
in the steps of godliness, are hereby daunted, and quite driven back. The
fourth way is consolation, which is a means appointed by God whereby one man
should with words of heavenly comfort refresh the souls of others afflicted
with sickness or any other way feeling the hand of God either in body or in
mind. And this duty is as little regarded as any of the former. In time of
men's sickness neighbors come in, but what say they? I am sorry to see you
in this case, I hope to see you well again. I would be sorry else, etc. Not
one of an hundred can speak a word of comfort to the weary: but we are
faulty herein. For with what affection do we believe the communion of
Saints, when we our selves are as dry fountains, that do scarce convey a
drop of refreshing to others. The last means is prayer, whereby gods Church
procures blessings for the several members thereof and they again for the
whole. And herein lies a principal point of the Communion of saints; which
ministers notable comfort to every Christian heart. For hence we may reason
thus: I am indeed a member of the Catholic Church of God, and therefore
though my own prayers be weak, yet my comfort is this, I know that I am
partaker of all the good prayers of all the people of God dispersed over the
face of the whole earth my f^llowe members, and of all the blessings which God
bestows on them. This will make us in all our troubles to say with Elisha, 2.
King 6.16.
Fear not, for they that be with us are more then they that be with them. When
the people of Israel had sinned in worshipping the golden calfe the wrath of
the Lord was kindled and made a breach into them, as canon shot against a wall:
Psalm 10^.23.
but Moses the servant of God stood in the breach before the Lord to turn away
his wrath, least he should destroy them. And the prayer of Moses was so
effectual that the Lord said, ^^od. 32.10.
Let me alone, as though Moses by prayer had held the hand of God that he could
not punish the people. And some think that Steuens prayer for his enemies when
he was stoned was a means of Paul's conversion. And surely though there were no
other reason, yet this were sufficient to move a man to embrace Christian
religion, considering that being a member of the Church he has part in all the
prayers of the Saints through the world, and of the blessings of god that come
thereby.

The third part of this communion is in temporal things, as goods, and riches:
whereby I mean no Spiritual (...) or temporal goods Act ^.21. 2. ^or. 8.1.
anabaptisticall communion, but that which was used in the primitive Church,
when they had all things common in respect of use: and some sold their goods
and possessions and parted them to all men, as every one had need. And by
their example we are taught to be content to employ those goods which God has
bestowed on us, for the good of our fellow members within the compass of our
callings, and to our ability, and beyond our ability if need require. Paul
says, Gal 6.10.
Do good to all but specially to them which are of the household of faith.

The communion of the living with the dead stands in two things: the one is,
that the Saints departed in the Church Triumphant do in general pray for the
Church militant upon earth, desiring the final deliverance of all their
fellow members from all their miseries. And therefore in the Apocalypse they
cry on this manner, ^ev. 6.10.
How long Lord holy and true! do not thou judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth. I say in general, because they pray not for the
particular conditions and persons of men upon earth considering they neither
know, nor see, nor hear us: neither can they tell what things are done upon
earth. The second is, that the godly on earth do in heart and affection
converse with them in heaven, desiring continually to be dissolved and to be
with Christ. Now whereas the Papists do further enlarge this communion,
auouching that the Saints in heaven make intercession to Christ for us, and
impart their merits unto us; and that we again for that cause are to invoke
them, and to do unto them religious worship, we dissent from the^, being
resolved that these things are but inventions of man's brain, wanting warrant
of the word.

Lastly, to conclude, a question may be demanded, how any one of us may
particularly know and be assured in our selves, that we have part in this
communion of Saints. Ans. Saint John opens this point to the full when he
says, ^. Ioh. 1.6.
If we say that we have fellowship with him, and yet walk in darkness, we lie:
but if we walk in the light, as he is light, then we have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Christ purges us from all our sins. In which
words he makes knowledge of Gods will joined with obedience, to be an
infallible mark of one that is in the communion: as on the contrary,
ignorance of Gods will, or disobedience, or both to be tokens of one that has
neither fellowshippe with Christ, or with the true members of Christ. And
therefore to end this point, if we would have fellowship with Christ, let us
learn to know what sin is, and to ^he from the same as from the bane of our
souls, and to make conscience of every evil way.

The duties to be learned by the communion of the Saints are manifold. And
first of all if we do believe the fellowship which all the faithful have with
Christ and with themselves; and be resolved that we have part therein, then
must we separate and withdraw our selves from all ungodly and unlawful
societies of men in the world whatsoever they be. Unlawful societies are
manifold, but I will only touch one, which every where annoyeth religion, and
hinders greatly this communion of Saints, and that is, when men join
themselves in company to pass away the time in drinking, gaming, etc. Behold
a large fellowship which bears sway in all places; there is almost no town
but there is at the least one knot of such companions: and he that will not be
combined with such loose mates, he is thought to be a man of no good nature: he
is foisted forth of every company; he is no body: and if a man will yield to
run riot with them in the mispending of his time and goods, he is thought to
be the best fellow in the world. But what is done in this society? and how do
these cup-companions spend their time? surely the greatest part of day and
night is usually spent in swearing, gaming, drinking, surfeiting, reuelling,
and railing on the ministers of the word, and such as profess religion; to
omit the enormities which they procure to themselves hereby: and this behavior
spreads it self like a canker over every place, and it defiles both town and
country. But we that look for comfort by the communion of Saints, must not
cast in our lot with such a wicked generation, but separate our selves from
them. For undoubtedly their society is not of God but of the devil: and they
that are of this society, can not be of the holy communion of Saints: and
surely except the Magistrate by the sword, or the Church by the power of the
keys do pull down such fellowship, the holy society of Gods Church and
people must decay. Excommunication is a censure ordained of God for this end,
to banish them from this heavenly communion of the members of Christ, that live
inordinately and have communion with men in the works of darkness.

Secondly by this we are taught, that men professing the same religion, must be
linked in ^ocietie and converse together in Christian love, meeknes,
gentleness, and patience: as Saint Paul taught the Philippians, Phil 2.1.
If there be any fellowship of the spirit, if there be any compassion and
mercy, fulfill my joy, that we may be like minded, having the same love,
being of one accord and of like judgment. And again, Keep (says he) the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Why? mark how his reason is fetched
from this communion: ^ph. 4 3.
Because there is one body, one spirit, even as you are called into the hope
of your vocation, one Lord, one ^aith, one hope, one baptism, one God and
father of all, which is above all and in all. And no doubt the same reason made
David say, ^sal 16.3.
All my delight is in the Saints which be upon earth.

Thirdly every Christian man that acknowledges this communion, must carry
about with him a fellow-feeling, that is, an heart touched with compassion in
regard of all the miseries that befall either the whole Church or any member
thereof, as Christ our head teaches us by his own example, when he called to
Saul, and said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? giving him to understand,
that he is touched with the abuses done to his Church, as if they had directly
been done to his own person. The Prophet Amos reprooueth the people, because
they drank wine in bowls, and anointed themselves with the chief ointments:
but why? was it not lawful for them to do so? yes: but the cause for which
they are reproved follows: Amos 6.6.
No man (says he) is sorry for the affliction of Joseph. In the midst of
their delights and pleasures they had no regard or compassion of the miseries
of the poor Church and servants of God elsewhere in affliction, which every
man ought to show forth in the practice of all duties of love: and therefore
Paul says, ^ph. 6.18.
Pray always with all manner of prayers and supplications in the spirit, and
watch thereunto with all perseverance and supplications for the saints. And he
highly commends the Philippians for communicating to his afflictions. Phil.
4.14.
And further he bids Philemon to comfort Onesimus his bowels in the Lord.
And S. John says, 1. Ioh. 3 16.
If a man's life would save his neighbors soul, he must lay it down, if need
require. We have all of us daily occasion to practice this duty toward the
afflicted members of Gods Church in other countries. For howsoever we enjoy the
Gospel with peace, yet they are under persecution for the same: and so often as
we hear report of this, we should suffer our hearts to be grieved with them,
and pray to God for them.

We must here be admonished not to seek our own things, but to refer the
labors of our callings to the common good especially of the Church whereof we
are members. As for them that seek for nothing but to maintain their own
estate and wealth; and therefore in their trades use false weights and measures,
the engrossing, corrupting, mingling of wares, glozing, lying, smoothing,
swearing, forswearing, dissembling, griping, oppressing of the poor, etc. they
may plead for themselves what they will, but in truth they never yet knew what
the communion of Saints meant.

Lastly, considering we are all knit into one mystical body, and have mutual
fellowship in the same, our duty is both to redress the faults of our
brethren and to cover them, as the hand in the body lays plaster upon the
sore in the foot or in the leg, and withal couers it. Love couers the
multitude of sins. And when men disgrace their brethren for their wants, and
blase them to the world, they do not the duty of fellow members.

Thus much for the first benefit bestowed on the Church: the second is,
Forgiveness of sins: which may be thus described, Forgiveness of sins is
a blessing of God upon his Church procured by the death and passion of Christ,
whereby God esteems of sin as no sin, or, as not committed. In this
description I have couched five points, which we are severally to consider. The
first, who is the author of forgiveness of sins? Ans. God, whose blessing it
is: for sin is only committed against God, and the violating of his laws and
commandments are properly sins. And the offense done to any man or creature
is no more in it self but an offense or injury: yea the breach of man's
commandment is no sin, unless it do imply withal the breach of Gods
commandment. Therefore it is a prerogative belonging to God alone to pardon
sin: and when we are taught to say, Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive
them that trespass against us, the meaning is not, that we forgive sins as
they are sins, but only as trespasses, that is, losses, hurts, and damages
done unto us by men. It may be further said, God has given this power and
commandment to his ministers to forgive sins, saying, Ioh. 20.23.
Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted. Ans. Gods ministers do not
properly forgive sins, but only in the name of God according to his word
pronounce to a penitent sinner that his sins are pardoned and forgiven of
God: and therefore it is a most certain truth that none can forgive sins but
God only: it was avouched by the Pharisees and not denied by Christ. Mark. 2.7.
Hence it follows that remission of sin, being once granted remains for
ever, because Gods love unto the elect is unchangeable, and his decree
concerning their salvation can not be altered. The second point is, to whom
remission of sins is given? Ans. To the Catholic church, that is, to the
whole company of men predestinate to salvation: as Esai says, Esa. 31.^4
The people that dwell therein (that is, the Church) shall have their sins
forgiven. And, Esa. 62.1^.
they shall call them the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord: and thou shall
be named, a city sought out and not forsaken. And if there had been an
universal remission of sins to all men as some do dream, it should not
here have been made a peculiar prerogative of the Church. The third point is,
what is the means whereby pardon of sin is procured at Gods hand? Ans. The
death and passion of Christ: so Paul says, ^om. 4 25.
Christ died for our sins: that is, Christ died to be a payment and
satisfaction to Gods justice for our sins. And S. John says, 1. Ioh 1.7.
The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. And Peter
says, 1. Pet. 1.18.
Knowing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and g^ld
from your vain conversation, etc. but with the precious blood of Christ as of
a ^^mbe undefiled and without spot. The fourth point is, after what manner
sin is forgiven? Ans. By an action of God, whereby for the merit of Christ,
he esteems and accounts sin as no sin, or, as if it had never been
committed. Therefore David says, Psalm. 32. 1.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. And in Esai the Lord
says, Es^. ^4.22.
I have put away thy transgressions like a cloud, and thy sins as a mist. Now
we know that clouds and mystes which appear for a time, are afterward by the
sun utterly dispersed. And King Hezekias when he would show that the Lord had
forgiven him his sins, says, Es^ ^^.17.
God has cast them behind his back, alluding to the manner of men, who when
they will not remember or regard a thing, do turn their backs upon it. And
Micheas says, Mi^h. 7.19.
that God does cast all the sins of his people into the bottom of the sea,
alluding to Pharao, whom the Lord drowned in the bottom of the red sea. And
Christ has taught us to pray thus: Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
debtors: in which words is an alluding to creditours, who then forgive debts,
when they account that which is debt as no debt, and cross the book. Hence it
appears, that damnable and vile is the opinion of the church of Rome, which
holds that there is a remission of the fault without a remission of the
punishment: and here withal fall to the ground, the doctrines of humane
satisfactions, and indulgences, and purgatory, and prayer for the dead, built
upon this foundation, are of the same kind.

Moreover, we must remember to add too this clause, I believe, and then the
meaning is this. I do not only believe that God does give pardon of sin to
his Church and people (for that the very devils believe) but withal I believe
the forgiveness of mine own particular sins. Hence it appears, that it was
the judgment of the Primitive Church that men should believe the forgiveness
of their own sins.

By this prerogative we reap endless comfort: for the pardon of sin is a
most wonderful blessing, and without it every man is more miserable and
wretched then the most vile creature that ever was. We lo^th the serpent or the
toad; but if a man have not the pardon of his sins procured by the death and
passion of Christ, he is a thousand fold worse then they. For when they die,
there is the end of their woe and misery: but when man dies without this
benefit, there is the beginning of his. For first in soul till the day of
judgment, and then both in body and soul for evermore, he shall enter into
the endless pains and torments of hell; in which if one should continue so
many thousand years as there are drops in the Ocean sea, and then be
delivered, it were some ease: but having continued so long (which is an
unspeakable length of time) he must remain there as long again, and after
that for ever and ever without release: and therefore among all the benefits
that ever were or can be thought of, this is the greatest and most precious.
Among all the burdens that can befall a man, what is the greatest? Some will
say, sickness, some ignominy, some poverty, some contempt: but indeed among
all, the heauiest and the greatest, is the burden of a man's own sins, lying
upon the conscience and pressing it down, without any assurance of pardon.
David being a king had no doubt all that heart could wish; and yet he, laying
aside all the royalties and pleasures of his kingdom, says this one thing
above all, that he is a blessed man that is eased of the burden of his sins.
Psalm. 32.^^.
A lazar man full of sores is ugly to the sight, and we can not abide to look
upon him: but no lazar is so loathsome to us, as all sinners are in the sight of
God: and therefore David counted him blessed, whose sins were covered. It may
be some will say, there is no cause why a man should thus magnify the pardon of
sin, considering it is but a common benefit. Thus indeed men may imagine,
which never knew what sin meant: but let a man only as it were, but with the
tip of his finger have a little feeling of the smart of his sins, he shall
find his estate so fearful, that if the whole world were set before him on
the one side, and the pardon of sins on the other, he would choose the pardon
of his sin before ten thousand worlds. Though many drousie Protestants
esteem nothing of it, yet to the touched conscience it is a treasure, which
when a man finds, he hides it, and goes home and sells all that he has and
buies it. Therefore this bene^it is most excellent, and for it the members of
Gods Church have great cause to give God thanks without ceasing.

The duties to be learned hence are these. And first of all here comes a common
fault of men to be rebuked. Every one will say, that he believes the remission
of sins, yet no man almost labors for a true and certain persuasion hereof
in his own conscience: and for proof hereof, propound this question to the
common Christian; Do thou persuade thy self, that God gives remission of
sins unto his Church? The answer will be, I know and believe it. But ask him
further: Do thou believe the pardon of thine own sins? and then comes in
a blind answer, I have a good hope to Godward, but I can not tell, I think no
man can say so much: for God says to no man, thy sins are pardoned. But this
is to speak flat contraries, to say they believe, and they can not tell: and
it bewraies exceeding negligence in matter of salvation. But let them that
fear God, or love their own souls health, give all diligence to make sure
the remission of their own sins: withal, avoiding hardness of heart, and
drowsines of spirit, the most fearful judgments of God which every where
take place. The foolish virgins went forth to meet the bridegroom with lamps
in their hands as well as the wise, but they never so much as dreamed of the
horn of oil, till the coming of the bridegroom. So many men live in the
Church of God as members thereof, holding up the lamp of glorious profession:
but in the mean season they seek only for the things of this life; never
casting, how they may assure themselves in conscience touching their
reconciliation with God, till the day of death come.

Secondly, if we be here bound to believe the pardon of all our sins, then we
must every day humble our selves before God, and seek pardon for our daily
offenses: for he gives grace to the humble or contrite; he fills the hungry
with good things, when the rich are sent empty away. When Benhadad the King of
Syria was discomfited and overcome by the king of Israel, by the counsel of
his servants, who told him that the kings of Israel were merciful men, ^.
^ing. 2^.^2.
he sent them clothed in sackcloath with ropes about their necks to entreat
for peace and favor. Now when the king saw their submission, he made covenant
of peace with him. We by our sins most justly deserve hell, death, and
condemnation every day, and therefore it stands us in hand to come into the
presence of God and to humble our selves before him in sackcloath and ashes,
craving and entreating for nothing in the world so much as for pardon of our
sins, and that day by day without ceasing till the Lord give this blessed
answer to our consciences, that all our sins are put out of his remembrance.
We must not think that God puts grace into men's hearts when they lie
snurting upon their elbowes, and either not use or despise the means: but we
must first use the means partly by making confession of our sins to God, and
partly by crying to heaven for pardon: and then when by his grace we begin to
desire grace, he gives further grace.

Lastly, if we believe the pardon of our sins, then we must change the tenor
and course of our lives, and take heed of breaking Gods commandments by doing
any of those things, whereof our consciences may accuse us, and tell us, that
by them we have displeased God heretofore. A man that for some misdemeanour
has been cast into prison and lien there many years winter and summer in
cold irons, when he obtaines liberty, he will often bethink himself of his
old misery, and take heed for ever least he fall into the same offense
again: and he which has seen his own sins and ^elt the smart of them, and
withal by Gods goodness obtained assurance touching the pardon of them, will
never wittingly and willingly commit the like sinne^ any more, but in all
things change the course of his life. As for such as say, that they have the
pardon of their sins, and yet live in them still; they deceive themselves and
have no faith at all.

Thus much for the second benefit which God bestows on his Church, namely
remission of sins: now follows the third in these words: The resurrection
of the body. In the handling whereof sundry points must be considered. The
first, whether there be a resurrection or no? This question must needs be
handled, because Epicures and Atheists in all ages, and at this day some do
call this article in question. Now that there is a resurrection of the body
after death, it may be proved by many arguments, whereof I will only touch
the principal. The first is taken from the work of redemption. Saint John
writes, 1. Ioh. 3.8.
that Christ came to dissolve the works of the devil: which are sin, and by
sin death: and hence I reason thus: If sin and death are to be dissolved
utterly, then the bodies of the faithful which are dead in the grave, must
needs be made alive: otherwise death is not abolished: but sin and death
must be utterly abolished, therefore there shall be a resurrection. Secondly,
God had made a covenant with his Church, the tenor whereof is this, I will be
thy God, and thou shall be my people. This covenant is not for a day or an age,
or for a thousand years or ages, but it is everlasting and without end, so as
Gods people may say of God for ever, God is our God: and likewise God will say
of his church for evermore, this people is my people. Now if Gods covenant be
everlasting, then all the faithful departed from the beginning of the world
must be raised again to life. And if God should leave his people in the gra^e
under death for ever, how could they be called the people of God? for he is a
God of mercy and of life it self: and therefore though they abide long in the
earth, yet they must at length be revived again. This argument Christ uses
against the Sadduces, which denied the resurrection: Math. ^2.^^.
God is not the God of the dead but of the living, but God is the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, which are dead, and therefore they must rise again.
The third argument must be taken from the tenor and order of Gods justice. It
is a special part of gods glory, to show forth his mercy on the godly, and his
justice upon the wicked in rewarding them according to their works, as the
Apostle says, Romans 2.^.
God will reward every man according to his works: to them that by continuance
in well doing, seek glory, and ho^our, ^n^ immortality, life eternal: but
unto them that disobey the truth, that be co^tent^^^^ and obey unrighteousness,
shall be indignation and wrath. But in this life God rewards not men
according to their doings: and therefore Sa^^mon speaking of the estate of all
men in this world, says, Eccles. 9.2.
All things come alike to all, and the same ^ondition is to the just and
unjust, to the good and badde, to the pure and polluted, to h^^ that offers
sacrifice, and to him that offers none. Nay, which is more, here the wicked
flourish, and the godly are aff^^cted. The ungodly have hearts ease and all
things at will, whereas the godly are oppressed and overwhelmed with all kind
of miseries, and are as s^ee^e appointed for the slaughter. It remains
therefore that their (...) needs be a general resurrection of all men after
this life, that the righteous may obtain a reward of Gods free mercy, and the
wicked utter shame and c^n^usion. But some will say, It is sufficient that God
do this to the soul of every man, the body needs not to rise again. I
answer, that the ungodly man does not work wickedness only in his soul, but
his body also is an instrument thereof: and the godly do not only practice
righteousness in their souls, but in their bodies also. The bodies of the
wicked are the instruments of sin, and the bodies of the righteous are the
weapons of righteousness: and therefore their bodies must rise again, that both
in body and soul they may receive a reward, according to that which they have
wrought in them. The fourth argument, which is also used by Paul is this: 1.
Cor. 15.
Christ himself is risen, and therefore all the faithful shall rise again;
for he rose not for himself as a private man, but in our room and stead and
for us. If the head be risen, then the members also shall rise again: for by
the same power whereby Christ raised himself, he both can and will raise all
those that be of his mystical body, he being the first fruits of them that
sleep. The fifth argument is taken from express testimony of Scripture. Job
has an excellent place for this purpose, Job. 19.25.
I am sure (says he) that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on
the earth, and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet I shall see
God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see and mine eyes shall behold, and
none other for me. And Saint Paul to the Corinthians avouches and proves
this point at large, by sundry arguments which I will not stand to repeat;
^^es. 14. and 18.
this one remembered: If (says he) the dead rise not again, then your faith is
vain, our preaching is in vain, and the godly departed are perished. The
sixth argument may be taken from the order of nature, which ministers certain
resemblances of the resurrection; which though they be no sufficient proofs,
yet may they be inducements to the truth. Both Philosophers and also Divines
have written of the Phoenix, that first she is consumed to ashes by the heat
of the sun, and that afterward of her ashes rises a young one: and on this
manner is her kind preserved. Again swallows, worms, and flies, which have
lien dead in the winter season, in the spring, by virtue of the suns heat,
revive again: so likewise men fall in sownes and trances, being for a time
without breath or show of life, and yet afterward come again. And (to use
Paul's example) before the corn can grow and bear fruit, it must first be cast
into the ground and there rotte. And if this were not seen by experience, men
would not believe it. Again every present day is as it were dead and buried in
the night following, and yet afterward it returns again the next morning.
Lastly we read how the old Prophets raised some from death: and our Savior
Christ raised Lazarus among the rest, that had lien four days in the grave
and stanke: why then should any think it impossible for God to raise all men
to life?

But let us see what reasons may be alleged to the contrary. First it is
alleged that the resurrection of bodies resolved to dust and ashes, is
against common sense and reason. Ans. It is above reason but not against
reason. For if impotent and miserable men, as experience shows, can by art
even of ashes make the most curious workmanship of glass, why may we not in
reason think, that the omnipotent and everliving God is able to raise men's
bodies out of the dust. Secondly it is said, that men's bodies being dead are
turned into dust, and so are mingled with the bodies of beasts and other
creatures, and one man's body with another, and that by reason of this
confusion, men can not possibly rise with their own bodies. Ans. Howesoeuer
this is impossible with men; yet it is possible with God. For he that in the
beginning was able to create all things of nothing, is much more able to make
every man's body at the resurrection of his own matter, and to distinguish the
dust of men's bodies from the dust of beasts, and the dust of one man's body
from another. The goldsmith by his art can sunder diverse metals one from
another: and some men out of one metal can draw another, why then should we
think it impossible for the almighty God to do the like? It may be further
objected thus: A man is eaten by a woolfe, the woolfe is eaten by a Lion, the
Lion by the fowls of the air, and the fowls of the air eaten again by men:
again one man is eaten of another, as it is usual among the Cannibals. Now
the body of that man which is turned into so many substances, especially into
the body of another man, cannot rise again: and if the one does the other
does not. Ans. This reason is but a cavil of man's brain: for we must not
think, that whatsoever enters into the body, and is turned into the
substance thereof, must rise again and become a part of the body at the day
of judgment; but every man shall then have so much substance of his own as
shall make his body to be entire and perfect: though another man's flesh once
eaten be no part thereof. Again it is urged, that because flesh and blood
cannot enter into the kingdom of God: therefore the bodies of men shall not
rise again. Ans. By flesh and blood, is not meant the bodies of men simply, 1.
Cor. 15.50.
but the bodies of men as they are in weakness, without glory, subject to
corruption. For flesh and blood in Scripture, signifies sometime the original
sin and corruption of nature, and sometime man's nature subject to miseries
and infirmities, or the body in corruption before it be glorified, and so it
must be understood in this place. Lastly it is objected, that Solomon says,
Eccles 3.19.
The condition of the children of men, and the condition of beasts are even as
one condition. Now beasts rise not again after this life: and therefore there
is no resurrection of men. Ans. In that place Solomon expounds himself. They
are like in dying: for so he says, as the one dies, so dies the other: he
speaks not of their estate after death.

The second point to be considered, is the cause of the resurrection. In
mankind we must consider two parts, the Elect and the Reprobate; and they both
shall rise again at the day of judgment, but by diverse causes. The godly have
one cause of their resurrection, and the ungodly another. The cause why the
godly rise again, is the resurrection of Christ, yea it is the proper cause
which procures and effects their resurrection. In the scripture Adam and
Christ are compared together, and Christ is called the second Adam: these were
two roots. The first Adam was the root of al mankind, and he conueieth
sin, and by sin death to all that sprang of him, Christ only excepted: the
second Adam which is the root of all the Elect, conueieth life both in body
and soul to all that are united to him: and by the virtue of his resurrection
they shall rise again after this life. For look as the power of the godhead of
Christ when he was dead in the grave, raised his body the third day: so shall
the same power of Christ his godhead, convey it self unto all the faithful,
which even in death remain united unto him, and raise them up at the last
day. And for this cause Christ is called a quickening spirit. Now the cause
why the wicked rise again, is not the virtue of Christ's resurrection, but the
virtue of Gods curse, set down in his word: In the day that thou shall eat
of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die the death, that
is, a double death both of body and soul. And therefore they arise only by
the power of Christ as he is a judge, that this sentence may be verified on
them; and that they may suffer both in body and soul eternal punishment in
hell fire.

Furthermore S. John sets down the outward means whereby the dead shall be
raised, namely the voice of Christ: Ioh. 5.28.
The hour shall come (says he) in which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice, and they shall come forth. For as he created all things by
his word, so at the day of judgment by the same voice all shall be raised
again. This may be a good reason to move us to hear the ministers of God
reverently: for that which they teach, is the very word of God: and therefore
we are to pray that it may be as effectual in raising us up from the grave of
sin in this life, as it shall be after this life in raising us up from the
grave of death unto judgment.

Thirdly, we are to consider what manner of bodies shall rise at the last day.
Ans. The same bodies for substance: this Job knew well, when he said: Job.
19.27.
I shall see him at the last day in my flesh, whom I my self shall see and
none other for me, with these same eyes. Nevertheless the bodies of the elect
shall be altered in quality, ^. Cor. 15.43.
being made incorruptible and filled with glory.

The last point to be considered, is the end why these bodies shall rise
again. The principal end which God intends is his own glory, in the
manifestation of his justice and mercy. Now at the last day, when all men
shall be raised to judgment by the voice of Christ, the godly to life, and the
wicked to condemnation; there shall be a full manifestation both of his mercy
and justice: and therefore by consequent a full manifestation of his glory.

Thus much for the doctrines touching the Resurrection: now follow the uses.
First it serves wonderfully for the comfort of all Christian hearts. David
speaking not only of Christ, but also of himself, says most notably: ^sal.
16.9.
Mine heart is glad, my tongue reioiceth, and my flesh also does rest in hope.
Why so? For (says he) thou shall not leave my soul in grave, neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Though the days of this life be
days of woe and misery, yet the day of the resurrection shall be unto all
the children of God a time of reioicing and felicity, and as Peter says, it
is the time of refreshing. Whosoever is now an hungered, Act. 3.1^.
shall then eat and be filled with the fruit of the tree of life: and
whosoever is now naked, shall be then clothed with the white garments dipped
in the blood of the Lamb: and Aug. in F^ chir. cap. 91.
whosoever is now lame, shall have all his members restored perfectly. And as
this day is joyful to the godly, so on the contrary it is a day of woe and
misery to the ungodly: as S. John says, Ioh. 5.2^.
they that have done evil shall come forth to the resurrection of
condemnation. If they might cease to live after this life, and die as the beast
does, O the^ it would be well with them; for then they might have an end of
their misery: but the wicked must after this life rise again to condemnation,
which is the accomplishment of their eternal woe and wretchedness; a rufull and
doleful case to consider, and yet is it the state of all unbelieving and
unrepentant sinners. If a man were bidden to go to bed, that after he had
slept and was risen again he might go to execution, it would make his heart to
ache within him: yet this, yea a thousand fold worse is the state of all
impenitent sinners: they must sleep in the grave for a while, and the^ rise
again, that a second death may be inflicted upon the^ in body and soul,
which is the suffering of the full wrath of God both in body and soul
eternally. Act. 3.19.
This being so, let us embrace the good counsel of S. Peter, who says, Amend
your lives and turn, that your sins may be done away when the time of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. If a man die repe^tant for
his sins, it is a day of refreshing; but if he die in his sins, impetent,
and hard hearted, it is a day of eternal horror, desperation, and confusion.

Again, if we believe that our bodies shall rise again after this life, and
stand before God at the last day of judgment, we must daily enter into a
serious consideration of this time, and have in mind that one dai^ we must
meet the Lord face to face. A traveler comes into an Inn having but a penny
in his purse, he sits down and calls for all store of provision and dainties:
now what is to be thought of him? surely in the judgment of all men his
behavior betokens folly, or rather madness. But why? because he spendes freely
and has no regard to the reckening which must follow: how foolish then and
mad is the practice of every man that lives in his sins, bathing himself in
his pleasures in this world, never bethinking how he shall meet god at the last
day of judgment, and th^re make reckening for all his doings. An ancient
divine w^ites of himself that this saying ran in his mind, and sounded
always in his ears: Hierome.
Arise ye dead and come unto judgment. And this ought always to be sounding
in our ears, that while we have time we should prepare our selves to meet
God at the last day.

Thirdly, if we believe the resurrection of the body, we are not to weep and
mourn immoderatly for our friends deceased. Our Savior Christ did weep for
Lazarus, and when Steven was stoned to death, certain men that feared God
buried him, and made great lamentation for him: and therefore mourning is not
condemned: and we must not be as stocks, that are bereft of all compassion:
yet remember we must, what Saint Paul says to the Thessalonians: 1. These.
4.^^.
I would not, brethren, have you ignorant concerning those which are asleep,
that ye sorrow not, as others which have no hope. For the godly man properly
dies not, but lays himself down to take a sleep after his manifold
labors in this life; which being ended he must rise again to joys
everlasting: and therefore we must needs moderate and mingle our mourning for
the deceased, with this and such like comforts.

Fourthly, we are taught hence to labor and strive against the natural fear
of death: for if there be a resurrection of our bodies after this life, then
death is but a passage or middle way from this life to eternal life. If a
beggar should be commanded to put off his old rags, that he might be clothed
with rich and costly garments, would he be sorry because he should stand naked
a while til he were wholly bestripped of his rags? No surely; well, thus does
God when he calls a man to death: he bids him put off his old rags of sin and
corruption, and be clothed with the glorious robe of Christ's righteousness: and
our abode in the grave is but for a space, while corruption be put off. This is
Paul's argument, saying, We know that when our earthly house of this
tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have a building given of God, which is an
house not made with hands but eternal in the heavens.

Fifthly, whereas the godly are subject to manifold afflictions and miseries,
both in body and mind in this life, here they shall find a sufficient stay
to quiet and calm their minds, if they consider that after this short life is
ended, there will ensue a joyful resurrection. Job in the extremity of all
his temptations, Job. 19.25.
made this the comfort to his soul, that one day he should rise again, in
which he should enjoy the glorious presence of his Creator. And the Holy Ghost
says, that the servants of God in the days of Antiochus were racked and
tormented, and would not be delivered: why so? Heb. 11.35.
because they looked for a better resurrection.

Lastly, the consideration of this point serves to be a bridle to restrain a
man from sin, and a spur to make him go forward in all godliness of life
and conversation. Saint Paul had hope toward God, that the resurrection of the
dead should be both of the just and unjust. Act. ^4.16.
Now what did this move him unto? Mark: Herein (says Or in the mean season.
he, that is, in this respect) I endeavor my self always to have a clear
conscience toward God and toward man. And let us for our parts likewise
remember the last judgment, that it may be a means to move us so to behave
our selves in all our actions, that we may keep a good conscience before God
and before men: and let it also be a bridle unto us to keep us back from all
manner of sin. For what is the cause why men daily defile their bodies and
souls with so many damnable practices, without any remorse of conscience?
Surely they never seriously remember the day of the resurrection after this
life, wherein they must stand before Christ to give an account of that which
they have done in this life, whether it be good or bad.

Thus much of the duties: now mark it is further said, The resurrection of
the body. If the body rise, it must first fall. Here then this point is
wrapped up as a confessed truth, that all men must die the first death. And
yet considering that the members of the Church have the pardon of their sins
which are the cause of death, it may be demanded, why they must die? Ans. We
are to know that when they die, death does not seize upon them, as it is in his
own nature, a curse: for in that respect it was borne of Christ upon the
cross, and that for us: but for two other causes, which we must think upon,
as being special means to make a man willing to die. I. They must die that
original corruption may be utterly abolished: for no man living on earth is
perfectly sanctified; and original sin is remaining for special causes to
the last moment of this life, and then it is abolished and not before. II. The
godly die that by death as by a straight gate they may pass from this vale of
misery to eternal life. And thus Christ by his death makes death to be no
death, and turns a curse into a blessing.

And to proceed: It is not here said, the resurrection of the soul, but of
the body only; what then (will some say) becomes of the soul? Diverse have
thought, that the souls then, though they do not die, yet are still kept
within the body (being as it were asleep) till the last day. But Gods word
says to the contrary. For the souls of the godly lie under the altar, and
cry, Rev. 6.9.
How long Lord Jesus? Dives in soul did suffer the woe and torments of hell:
Luke 16.23.
and Lazarus had joy in Abraham's bosom. Again some others think, that men's
souls after this life do pass from one man's body to an other: and Herod may
seem to have been of this opinion: Math. 14.^,
for when news was brought him of Christ, he said, that John Baptist being
beheaded was risen again, thinking that the soul of John Baptist was put into
the body of some other man. And for proof hereof, some allege the example of
Nebuchadnezzar, who forsaking the society of men, lived as beasts, and did
eat grass like a beast: and they imagine that his own soul went out of him,
and that the soul of a beast entered in the room thereof. But this indeed is
a fond conceit: for even then he had the soul of a man when he lived as a
beast, being only stricken by the hand of God with an exceeding madness,
whereby he was bereft of common reason; as does appear by that clause in the
text, where it is said, that his understanding or knowledge returned to him
again. Dan 4.33.
Again, some other think, that the soul neither dies nor sleeps, nor
passes out of one body into an other, but wandereth here on earth among men,
and oftentimes appears to this or that man: and this is the opinion of some
heretics, and of the common people, which think that dead men walk: and for
proof hereof some allege the practice of the witch of Endor, who is said to
make Samuel to appear before Saul: but the truth is, it was not Samuel in
deed, but only a counterfeit of him. For not all the witches in the world, nor
all the devils in hell are able to disquiet the souls of the faithful
departed, which are in the keeping of the Lord without wandering from place to
place. For when men die in the faith, their souls are immediately translated
into heaven, and there abide till the last judgment: and contrariwise if men
die in their sins; their souls go straight to the place of eternal
condemnation, and there abide as in a prison, as Peter says. In a word, when
the breath goes out of the body, the soul of every man goes straight either
to heaven or hell; and there is no third place of abode mentioned in Scripture.

To conclude, the resurrection of the body is expressly mentioned in the
Creed, to show that there is no resurrection of the soul, which neither
dies, nor sleeps, but is a spiritual and invisible substance, living and
abiding for ever as well forth of the body as in the same.

Thus much of the third prerogative or benefit: now follows the fourth and
last, in these words, And life everlasting. To handle this point to the full,
and to open the nature of it, as it deserves, is not in the power of man. For
both the prophet Esai and Saint Paul say, Isa. 64.1. 1. Co^. ^.9.
that the eye has not seen, and the ear has not heard, neither came it into
man's heart to think of those things which God has prepared for those that
love him. Again Paul when he was rapt into the third heaven says, 2. Co^.
1^.4.
that he saw things not to be uttered. Nevertheless we may in some part
describe the same, so far forth as God in this case has revealed his will
unto us. Wherefore in this last prerogative, I consider two things; the first
is, Life it self, the second is the Continuance of life, noted in the word
everlasting. Life it self is that whereby any thing acts, lives, and
moves it self: and it is twofolde, uncreated or created. Uncreated life is
the very godhead it self, whereby God lives absolutely in himself, from
himself, and by himself, giving life and being to all things that live and
have being: and this life is not meant here; because it is not communicable to
any creature. Created life is a quality in the creature; and its again
twofold: natural, spiritual. Natural life is that whereby men in this world
live by meat and drink, and all such means as are ministered by Gods
providence. Spiritual life is that most blessed and happy estate, in which
all the Elect shall reign with Christ their head in the heavens after this
life, and after the day of judgment for ever and ever. And this alone is the
life which in the Creed we confess and believe: and it consists in an
immediate conjunction and communion or fellowship with God himself: as Christ
in his solemn prayer to his father a little before his death, signifies: Ioh.
17.21.
I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in me
through thy word, that they all may be one as thou, O father art in me and I in
thee, eue^ that they may be one also in us. And when S. John in the Revelatio^
says, ^ev. ^^.3.
Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, he will dwell with them, and they
shall be his people, and God himself shall be their God with them: he shows
that the very foundation of that happiness which god has prepared for his
servants stands in a society between God and them, whereby God shall dwell
with them in heaven, and they again shall there enjoy his glorious presence.

Touching this Communion, three points must be considered. The first is, in
what order men shall have fellowship with God? Ans. This communion shall be
first of all with Christ as he is man; and by reason that the manhood of
Christ is personally united to the godhead of the son, it shall also be with
Christ as he is God; and consequently with the father and the holy Ghost. The
reason of this order is, because Christ, though he be the author and the
fountain of eternal life as he is God, yet he conueies the same unto us only
in and by his flesh or manhood. Yet must we not here think that life
proceeds from the ma^hood it self, as from a cause efficient: for the flesh
quickens not by any virtue from it self, but by the Word to which it is
personally united; it being as it were a pipe eternally to convey life from
the godhead unto us.

The second point is, in what thing this communion consists? Ans. Saint Paul
opens this point to the very full, when he says, that after Christ has
subdued all things unto him, ^. Cor. 15.28.
then God shall be all in all, that is, God himself immediately shall be all
good things that heart can wish to all the elect. But some men may say, What?
is not God all in all unto us even in this life? for whatsouer good things we
have, they are all from him. Ans. It is true indeed God is all in all even in
this life: but how? not immediately but by outward^ means; and that also in
small measure. For he conueies his goodness and mercy unto us so long as we
live on earth, partly by his creatures and partly by his word and Sacraments:
but after this life is ended, all helps and outward means shall cease:
Christ shall give up his kingdom, and as he is Mediator shall cease to put in
execution the office of a priest, a prophet, or a king: all authority and
power shall be abolished: and therefore all callings in the three maine estates
of the Church, the Commonwealth, the family shall have an end; there shall
be no more magistrate and subject, Pastor and people, master and servant,
father and son, husband and wife: there shall be no more use of meat,
drink, clothing, respiration, physic, sleep: and yet for all this, the
condition of men shall be many thousand fold more blessed then ever it was.
For the Godhead in the Trinity immediately without all means shall be all
things to all the chosen people of God in the kingdom of heaven, world
without end. This may seem strange to man's reason, but it is the very ^lat
truth of the word of God. S. John in the description of the heavenly
Jerusalem, says that there shall be no temple in it. Why, how then shall God
be worshipped? mark what follows, Rev. ^^.22.
the Lord God almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. Whereby is
signified, that although now we use the preaching of the word, and the
administration of the Sacraments, as means of our fellowship with God: yet
when this life is ended, they must all cease, God and Christ being in stead of
al these means unto us. And he adds further, The city has no need of the
sun, neither of the moon to shine in it. What then will some say, verse. 23.
must there be nothing but darkness? Not so. For the glory of God does lighten
it, and the Lamb is the light of it. Again he says, that in the Paradise of
God, Cap. 22.^^
there is the river of water of life, and the tree of life bearing fruit every
month, and that is Christ. And therefore we shall have no need of meat,
drink, apparel, sleep, etc. but Christ himself our head and redeemer shall
be in stead of them all unto us: on whom, all the elect shall feed, and by
whom both in body and soul they shall be preserved evermore. If a man would
have glory; the father, son, and holy ghost shall be his glory: if a man
desire wealth and pleasure, God himself shall be wealth and pleasure unto him,
and whatsoever else the heart of man can wish. Hence it appears, that this
communion is most admirable; and that no tongue can tell, nor heart conceive the
least part of it.

The third point is, touching the benefits or prerogatives that proceed of
this communion, and they are in number six. The first is, an absolute freedom
from all wants. In the mind there shall be no ignorance, no unbelief, no
distrust in God, no ambition, no envy, anger, nor carnal lust, nor terror in
conscience, or corrupt affection. In the body there shall be no soar, no
sickness, nor pain: Rev. 21.4.
for God shall wipe away al tears from their eyes: nay the^ all defects or
wants in body or soul or in both shall be supplied, and the whole man made
perfect every way.

The second is perfect knowledge of God. In this life the Church and all the
servants of god know him but in part. Moses would have seen gods face, but he
was permitted to see only his hinder parts; and as Paul says, 1. Cor. 13.12^
now we know in part, and darkely as through a glass. In this life we can no
otherwise discern but as an old man through spectacles: and the creatures, but
specially the word of God and the Sacraments are the spectacles of our mind,
wherein we behold his justice, mercy, love, etc. and without them we can
discern little or nothing: yet after this life, when that which is perfect is
come, and that which is imperfect is abolished; we shall see God as he is to be
seen, not as through a glass, but face to face, and we shall know him as we
are known of his majesty, so far forth as possibly a creature may. God
indeed is infinite, and therefore the full knowledge of his majesty can no
more be comprehended by the understanding of a creature, which is finite, then
the sea by a spoone: yet nevertheless God shall be known every way of man, so
far forth as a creature may know the Creator. Now upon this that the elect
have such fullness of knowledge, it may be demanded, whether men shall know
one another after this life or no. Ans. This question is oftener moved by such
as are ignorant, then by them that have knowledge: and oftentimes it is tossed
in the mouths of them that have little religion in their hearts: and therefore
I answer first, men should rather have care to seek how they may come to
heaven, then to dispute what they shall do when they are there: the common
proverb is true, it is not good counting of chickins before they be hatched.
Secondly, I say that men in heaven shall know each other: yea they shall know
them which were never known or seen of them before in this life: which may be
gathered by proportion, out of Gods word. Adam in his innocence knew Eve,
Genesis 2.23.
whom he had never seen before, and gave her a fit name so soon as she was
created. And when our Savior Christ was transfigured in the mount, Mat. 17.4.
Peter knew Moses and Elias, whom before he had never seen: and therefore it
is like that the elect shall know each other in heaven, where their knowledge
and their whole estate shall be fully perfited. But whether they shall know
one another after an earthly manner, as to say, this man was my father^ this
was mine uncle, this my teacher, etc. the word of god says nothing: and
therefore I will be silent, and we must be content a while to be ignorant in
this point.

The third prerogative of everlasting blessedness is, that the Elect shall love
God with as perfect love as a creature possibly can. The manner of loving God,
is to love him for himself, and the measure is to love him without measure:
and both shall be found in heaven. For the Saints of God shall have an actual
fruition of God himself, and be as it were swallowed up with a sea of his
love, and wholly ravished therewith: for which cause, as far as creatures can
they shall love him again. Again, the love of a thing is according to the
knowledge thereof, but in this life God is known of man only in part, and
therefore is loved only but in part: but after this life, when the Elect shall
know God fully, they shall love him without measure: and in this respect love
has a prerogative above faith or hope, howesoeuer in some respects again they
go beyond love.

The fourth prerogative is, that the Saints of God keep a perpetual Sabbath
in heaven. In this life it is kept but every seventh day, and when it is best
of all sanctified, it is done but in part; but in heaven every day is a
Sabbath: as the Lord says by the Prophet Esaias, (...) 66.2^. (...). ^.9.
From month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh shall come and
worship before me: and therefore the life to come shall be spent in the
perpetual service of God.

Fifthly, the bodies of the elect after this life in the kingdom of heaven
shall be like the glorious body of Christ: so Paul says, ^hil. 3.21.
Christ Jesus our Lord shall change our vile bodies that they may be like his
glorious body. Now the resembla^ce between Christ's body and ours, stands
in these things: as Christ's body is incorruptible, so shall our bodies be void
of all corruption: as Christ's body is immortal, so ours in the kingdom of
heaven shall never die: as Christ's body is spiritual, so shall ours be made
spiritual, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 25.^^.
It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body; not because the
body shall be changed into a spirit, for it shall remain the same in
substance, and that for ever: but because it shall be preserved by a spiritual
and divine manner. For in this life it is preserved by meat, drink,
clothing, sleep, physic, rest, and diet, but afterward without all these
means the life of the body shall be continued, and body and soul keep
together by the immediate power of Gods spirit for ever and ever. Thus the
body of Christ is now preserved in heaven, and so shall the bodies of all the
elect be after the day of judgment. Furthermore as Christ's body is now a
shining body, as does appear by his transfiguration in the mount, so in all
likelihood after the resurrection the bodies of the elect shall be shining and
bright, always remaining the same for substance. Lastly, as Christ's body
after it rose again from the grave, had this property of agilitie beside
swiftnes, to pass from the earth to the third heaven, being in distance many
thousand miles from us, and that without violence: so shall the bodies of the
Saints. For being glorified, they shall be able as well to ascend upward, as
to go downewarde, and to move without violence, and that very swiftly.

The sixth and last prerogative, is an unspeakable and eternal joy ^^ David
says: ^sal. 16.11.
In thy presence is fullness of joy: at thy right hand there are p^^^ares for
evermore. It is said that when Solomon was crowned king, 1 King. 1.40.
the people reioiced exceedingly. If there were such great joy at his
coronation, which was but an earthly prince, what joy then shall there be when
the Elect shall see the true Solomon crowned with glory in the kingdom of
heaven? It is said that the wise men which came from the East to worship
Christ, when they saw the star standing over the place where the babe was,
were exceedingly glad: how much more shall the elect rejoice, when they shall
see Christ not lying in a manger, but crowned with immortal glory in the
kingdom of heaven? Wherefore this joy of the elect after this life is most
wonderful, and cannot be uttered.

The property of life eternal, Mat. ^5.34. Romans ^.^^^
is to be an inheritance which God bestows on them which are made his sons
in Christ, who is the only begotten son of the father. Hence it follows
necessarily, that in the Scriptures it is called a reward, not because it is
deserved by our works, as the Church of Rome erroniously teaches: but for two
other causes. First because life eternal is due to all that believe by virtue
of Christ's merit. For his righteousness is made ours by imputation, so
con^equently the merit thereof is also ours: and by it, (all personal merits
in our selves utterly excluded,) we deserve or merit eternal happiness as a
reward; which nevertheless in respect of our selves is the free and mere gift
of God. Romans 5.13.
The second is, because there is a resemblance between eternal life and a
reward. For as a reward is given to a workman after his work is done; so
everlasting life is given unto men after the travails and miseries of this
life are ended.

The degrees of life are three. The first is in this life, when men being
justified and sanctified, have peace with God. Many imagine, that there is no
eternal life till after death: but they are deceived, for it begins in this
world: as our Savior Christ testifies, saying, Verily, verily I say unto you,
he that hears my words, and believes him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life.
Ioh. 5.24.
This being so, we are hence to learn a good lesson. Considering we look for
life everlasting after this life, we must not deceive our selves, lingering and
deferring the time till the last gasp; but we must lay the foundation of life
eternal in our selves in this world, and have the earnest thereof laid up in
our hearts against the day of death. But how is that done? we must repent us
heartily of all our sins, and seek to be assured in conscience that God the
father of Christ is our father, God the son our redeemer, and God the holy
Ghost our comforter. For as Christ says, this is life eternal to know thee
the only God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Ioh. 17.3.
And we must go further yet, endeavoring to say with Paul, Gal. 2.20.
that we live not, but that Christ lives in us: which when we can say, we have
in us the very seed of eternal life. The second degree is in the end of this
life, when the body freed from all diseases, pains, and miseries, is laid to
rest in the earth, and the soul is received into heaven. The third is after
the day of judgment, when body and soul reunited shall both be advanced to
eternal glory.

Again in this third degree of life, there be in all likelihood sundry
degrees of glory. Daniel speaking of the estate of the elect after this life,
says, They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and
they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for evermore.
Dan. 11.3.
Now we know there is difference between the brightness of the firmament and
the brightness of the stars. Again there be degrees of torments in hell, as
appears by the saying of Christ, Math. ^1.22.
It shall be easier for Tyrus and Sydon in that day then for this generation:
and therefore there be proportional degrees of glory. And Paul says, ^ Cor
15.41.
There is one glory of the sun, an other glory of the moon, an other
glory of the stars: for one star differs from another in glory: so is
the resurrection of the dead. In which words he applies the differences of
excellency that be in the creatures, to set forth the differences of glory
that shall be in men's bodies after the resurrection. Furthermore, (if we may
conjecture) it may be, the degrees of glory shall be answerable to the diverse
measures of gifts and graces bestowed on men in this life, and according to the
imployance of them to the glory of God and edification of the Church. And
therefore the twelve Apostles who were exceedingly enriched with the gifts of
the spirit, and were master builders of the Church of the new Testament, shall
sit on 12. thrones and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. But it may be
objected, that if there be degrees of glory in heaven, some shall want glory.
Ans. Not so: though some have more, and some less, yet all shall have
sufficient. Take sundry vessels whereof some are bigger, and some less, and
cast them all into the sea: some will receive more water and some less, and
yet all shall be full and no want in any: and so likewise among the Saints of
God in heaven, some shall have more glory some less, and yet all without
exception full of glory. And whereas it is alleged that all the laborers in
the vineyard receive each of them a penny equally for their hire; the answer
is, Math 10.9.
that our Savior Christ in that parable intends not to set forth the equality
of celestial glory, and what shall be the state of the godly after this life:
but the very drift of the parable is to show, that they which are called first,
have no cause to brag or insult over others which as yet are uncalled,
considering they may be made equal or be preferred before them.

Thus much of life it self: now follows the continuance thereof, which the
Scriptures have noted in calling it eternal or everlasting. And to this end
Paul says, that Christ has abolished death, and brought not only life, but
also immortality to light by the Gospel. 2. Tim. 1.1^.
And this very circumstance serves greatly to commend the happiness of the
godly: in that, after they have made an entrance into it, they shall never see
term of time or end. Suppose the whole world were a sea, and that every
thousand years expired, a bird must carry away, or drink up one only drop
of it: in process of time it will come to pass that this sea though very
huge, shall be dried up: but yet many thousand millions of years must be
passed before this can be done. Now if a man should enjoy happiness in heaven
only for the space of time in which the sea is in drying up, he would think
his case most happy and blessed: but behold the Elect shall enjoy the kingdom
of heaven not only for that time, but when it is ended, they shall enjoy it as
long again: and when all is done, they shall be as far from the ending of
this their joy, as they were at the beginning.

Having thus seen what life everlasting is, let us now come to the use of the
article. And first of all, if we believe that there is an eternal happiness,
and that the same belongs unto us, then we must use this present world and all
the things therein as though we used them not: and whatsoever we do in this
world, yet the eyes of our minds must be always cast toward the blessed estate
prepared for us in heaven. As a pilgrim in a strange land has always his
eyes toward his iournies end, and is then grieved when by any means he is out
of the way: so must we always have our minds and hearts set on everlasting
life, and be grieved when we are by any way hindered in the straight way, that
leads thereunto: we have a notable pattern of this duty set out unto us in
the Patriarch Abraham, who being called of God, obeyed to go out into a
place, which he should afterward receive for inheritance, and he went out, not
knowing whither he went: and by faith abode in the land of Canaan, as in a
strange country and as one that dwelt in tents. Now the cause that moved him
was life everlasting: for the text says, Heb. ^^.^^.
He looked for a city having a foundation, whose builder and maker is God. And
we ought every one of us for our parts to be little affected to the things of
this life, never setting our hearts upon them, but using them as a pilgrim
does use his staff in the way: so long as it is an help and stay for him in
his journey, he is content to carry it in his hand; but so soon as ^t
begins to trouble him, he casts it away.

Secondly all that ^rofesse the Gospel of Christ, may hence learn to bear the
crosses and afflic^ions which God shall lay on them in this world. It is Gods
usual manne^ to begin corrections in his own family upon his own children;
and as P^ter says, Judgment begins at Gods house. Look at a mother that
weanes her child, lays wormwood or some other bitter thing upon her breast,
to make the child loath the milk: so likewise God makes us often feel the
mis^ries and crosses of this life, that our love and liking might be turned
from this world and fixed in heaven. As raw flesh is loathsome to the
stomach; so is every sinner and unmortified man loathsome unto God: till the
Lord by afflictions mortify in him the corruptions of his nature, and
specially the love of this world. But when a man is afflicted, how shall he be
able to endure the cross? Surely by resolving himself that the Lord has
prepared life everlasting for him. Heb. 11.^4.
Thus we read that Moses by faith when he was come to age, refused to be called
the son of Pharaohs daughter, and choosed rather to suffer adversity with
the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming
the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. But I pray
you: what moved Moses to be of this mind? The reason is added: Because he had
respect to the recompense of reward, that is, he had always a special regard
to life everlasting, and that was it that made him content and willing to
suffer affliction with the people of god. Here then behold a notable president
for us to follow. In which we are taught that the best way to endure
afflictions with patience, is to have an eye to the recompense of reward: this
is it that makes the yoke of Christ easy and lightsome. When it shall please
God to bring unto us a cup of afflictions and bid us drink a draught thereof
to the very bottom, the meditation of life eternal must be as sugar in our
pockets to sweeten the cup withal.

Lastly, if this be true, that God of his goodness and endless mercy toward
mankind, has prepared life everlasting, yet not for all men, but for the elect
whose names are written in the book of life, we must above all things in this
world seek to be partakers of the same. Let us receive this as from the Lord,
and lay it to our hearts, whatsoever we do evening or morning, day or night,
whether we be young or old, rich or poor; first we must seek for the kingdom
of heaven and his righteousness. If this benefit were common to all and not
proper to the Church, less care might be had: but seeing it is proper to some
alone, for this very cause let all our studies be to obtain the beginnings of
li^e everlasting given in this life. For if we have it not, whosoever we be, it
had been better for us that we had never been borne, or that we had been
borne dogs and toades then men: for when they die, there is an end of their
misery; but man, if he loose everlasting happiness, has ten thousand
millions of years to live in misery and in the torments of hell: and when
that time is ended, he is as far from the end of his misery as he was at the
beginning. Wherefore, I pray you, let not the devil steal this meditation out
of your hearts, but be careful to repent of all your sins, and to believe in
Christ for the pardon of them all; that by this means ye may come to have the
pawn and earnest of the spirit concerning life everlasting, even in this
world. What a miserable thing is it, that men should live long in this world,
and not so much as dream of another till the last gasp. Let us not suffer
Satan thus to abuse and bewitch us: for if we have not eternal life in this
world, we shall never have it.

Hitherto by Gods goodness I have showed the meaning of the Creed: now to draw
to a conclusion, the general uses which are to be made of it, follow. And
first of all we learn by it, that the Church of Rome has no cause to condemn
us for heretics: for we do truly hold and believe the whole Apostolical
Symbol or Creed, which is an epitome of the Scriptures and the very key of
faith. It will be said, that we deny the Popes supremacy, justification by
works, purgatory, the sacrifice of the Mass for the sins of the quick and
the dead, the invocation and intercession of Saints, etc. which ar^ the
greatest points of religion. It is true indeed, we deny and renounce them as
doctrines of devils: persuading our selves that if they indeed had been
Apostolical, and the very grounds and pillars of religion, as they are now
avouched to be; they should in no wise have been left forth of the Creed. For
it is an oversight in making a confession of faith, to omit the principal
points and rules of faith. It will be further said, that in the Creed we
believe the Church, and so consequently are to believe all these former points
which are taught and avouched by the Church: but this defense is foolish. For
it takes this for granted, that the Church of Rome is the Church here meant
which we deny, unless they can prove a particular Church to be universal or
Catholic. Nay, I add further, that the principal grounds of popish faith,
for which they contend with us as for life and death; are not mentioned in any
other Creedes which were made by the Churches and Counsels for many hundred
years after Christ.

Secondly the Creed serves as a storehouse of remedies against all troubles
and temptations whatsoever. I. If a man be grieved for the loss of earthly
riches, let him consider that he believes God to be his Creator, who will
therefore guide and preserve his own workmanship, and by his providence
minister all things needful unto it. And that he has not lost the principal
blessing of all, in that he has God to be his father, Christ to be his
redeemer, and the holy Ghost to be his comforter: and that considering he
looks for life eternal, he is not to be over much careful for this life: and
that Christ being our Lord will not forsake us being the servants in his own
house, but will provide things needful for us. II. If any man be grieved in
respect of outward disgrace and contempt, let him remember that he believes in
Christ crucified, and that therefore he is to rejoice in contempt for
righteousness sake. III. They which are troubled for the decease of friends^ are
to comfort themselves in the communion of Saints, and that they have God the
Father and Christ and the holy Ghost for their friends. IV. Against bodily
captivity, let men consider that they believe in Christ their Lord, whose
service is perfect liberty. V. Against the fear of bodily diseases^ we must
remember the resurrection of the body, in which all diseases and infirmities
shall be abolished. VI. If a man fear death of the body, let him consider
that he believes in Christ, which died upon the cross, who by death has
vanquished death. VII. The fear of persecution is restrained, if we call to
remembrance that God is a Father Almighty, not only able but also willing to
repress the power of the adversary, so far forth as shall be for the good
of his children. VIII. Terrors arising of the consideration of the last
judgment are delaied by remembrance of this, that Christ shall be our judge
who is our redeemer. IX. Fear of damnation is remedied by consideration that
Christ died to make satisfaction for us, and now sitts at the right hand of his
father to make intercession for us: and by the resurrection of the body to
life everlasting. X. Terrors of conscience for sin are repressed, if we
consider that God is a Father, and therefore much in sparing, and that it is a
prerogative of the Church to have remission of sins.

Trin-vni Deo gloria.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER:

In the way of Catechizing, serving for ignorant people.

Corrected and amended.

Hereunto are adjoined the prayers of Paul, taken out of his Epistles.

By W. Perkins.

Printed for John Porter, and Ralph Iackson. 1600.

To the right Honorable Edward, Lord Russell Earl of Bedford: Grace and peace
be multiplied.
RIght Honorable, if you consider what is one of the chiefest ornaments of
this Noble state, unto which God has advanced you: it will appear, that there
is none more excellent then Zach. 12.12.
the spirit of grace and prayer. For what does your heart affect? would you
speak the languages? Behold, by prayer you may speak the most heavenly tongue
that ever was, Esa. 9.12 Romans 15.6
even the language of Canaan. Would you have the valor of knighthood? By prayer
you may stand in place where Gods hand has (...) 23. psalm. 59.16
made a breach, and do as much as 2. king. 2.
all the chariots and horsemen in a kingdom. Would you enjoy Gods blessings
which you want? By prayer you may (as it were) put your hand into the cofers of
Gods treasures Matthew. 7.7.
and enrich your self. Do you desire the favor of Monarks and Princes? By
prayer you may come in presence and have speech with Iehova the king of heaven
and earth. Lastly, would you know, whether now living you be dead, that being
dead you may live for ever? By prayer a man may know, whether he be dead to
sin, dead to the world, live to God, live to Christ and live eternally.

Prayer then, being so excellent a point of Religion: I am imboldened to
commend this small treatise to your Honor: not so much for it self, as
because it does set out the matter and true manner of invocation of Gods holy
name. And I hope for your favor in accepting of it, the rather, because I
doubt not but your desire is to be answerable to your most honorable, and for
religion most worthy ancestors, in the care of maintaining and countenancing
any good thing that may any way serve for the furtheri^g of the gospel of
Christ.

Now Jesus Christ our Lord, and God even the Father which has loved us, and
given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, stablish your
Honor in every good word and work to the end.

Your H. to command, William Perkins.

An advertisement to the Reader.
GOod reader, there was a book of late published in London under this title,
PERKINS, upon the Lords prayer. In it I have double injury. First it was
printed without my knowledge or consent. And secondly the book is faulty both
in the matter and manner of writing. In the matter, these things are not well
set down.

First the commandment of prayer, very easily to be kept. page 3.b.

2. Prayer is the restoration of the Gospel. 7.b.

3. The three first petitions concern Gods glory; the three latter, the
means of Gods glory. 1.b.

4. Gods name taken for his deity, and not for his attributes or titles. 15.b.

5. A man must pray for the day of his death. 26.a.

6. Repentance is sufficient not only to bring a true faith, but also to renew
it. 34.^.

7. A lesson in the Lords prayer taken out of Popery. 45.a.

8. The doctrine of satisfaction for sin is a most vile doctrine. 52.b.

9. God and the devil agree in the manner of temptation. 61.b.

10. God offers men the occasion to sin. 62.a.

Likewise the manner of writing has other faults.

First, in the middle of the Lords prayer, there is placed a discourse of the
Lords supper.

2. The end of the Lords prayer is not expounded at all but friuolously.

3. There are very many places, which have no common reason in them, as First,
Gods angels do his will in countenance. 39.b.

2. Our daily bread is communicating bread. 45.b.

3. To walk before God in the truth of the satisfaction of Gods justice. 51.a.

4. To purge a clear conscience. 51.b.

5. The pages 65.66.67. are so penned, as the reader cannot know what was my
meaning.

Now, considering by this vngoaly practice, Christian and well disposed people
are much abused, to omit the injury done to my self: I thought it my duty to
make a redress by publishing this treatise according as the points therein
were delivered: otherwise I was not willing to have set down any thing in the
way of Exposition of the Lords prayer: because it is already sufficiently
performed by others.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE Lords prayer, in the way of Catechism. Serving for
ignorant people, by M. Perkins. Matthew. 6. verse. 9. After this manner therefore
pray ye: Our Father, etc.
THe occasion, and so also the coherence of these words with the former is
this. The Evangelist Matthew setting down the sermons and sayings of our
Savior Christ keeps not this course to propound every thing as it was done or
spoken: but sometime he sets down that first, which was done last; and that
last which was done before: according as the spirit of God directed him. Which
thing is verified in these words, where the prayer is mentioned; yet the
occasion wherefore our Savior Christ taught his Disciples to pray, is not here
specified. But in S. Luke 11. 1. the occasion of these words is evident. For
there it is said that the disciples of our Savior knowing that John taught his
disciples to pray, made request to their master that he would do the same to
them likewise.

These few words set before the pr^ier are a commandment, and it prescribes
unto us two duties: the first, to pray: the second, to pray after the manner
following. Touching the first point, considering very few among the people
know how to pray aright, we must learn what it is to pray.

To make prayer is to put up our request to God according to his word from a
contrite heart in the name of Christ, with assurance to be heard.

For the better opening of these words, we are to consider six questions. The
first is, to whom we are to pray. The answer is, to God alone: Romans 10.14.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed, etc. Mark how
invocation and faith are linked together. And Paul's reason may be framed thus.
In whom we put our affiance or belief, to him alone must we pray: but we
believe only in God: therefore we must only pray to him. As for Saints or
angels, they are in no wise to be called upon: because not the least title of
gods word prescribes us so to do: because they cannot hear our prayers, and
discern what are the thoughts and desires of our hearts: and because
invocation is a part of divine worship, and therefore peculiar to God alone.

Objection. What need any man pray unto God, considering he knows what we
want before we ask, and is ready and willing to give that which we crave.
Ans. We pray not for this end to manifest our case to God as though he knew
it not, or to win and procure his favor and good will, but for other
weighty ends. First, that we might show our submission and obedience to God,
because he has given us a direct commandment to pray, and it must be obeyed.
Secondly, that we may by invocation show forth that we do indeed believe
and repent: because God has made the promise of remission of sins and of all
good blessings to such as do indeed repent and humble themselves under the
hand of God, and by true faith apprehend and apply the promises of God unto
themselves. Thirdly, we pray to God that we may (as our duty is) acknowledge
him to be the fountain, author, and giver of every good thing. Lastly, that we
might ease our minds by pouring out our hearts before the Lord: for to this
end has he made most sweet and comfortable promises. Pro. 16.3. Psalm. 37.5.

Objection. What need men use prayer, considering God in his eternal counsel
has certainly determined what shall come to pass? Ans. As God determines what
things shall come to pass: so he does with all determine the means whereby
the same things are effected. Before all worlds God decreed that men should
live upon earth, and he decreed likewise, that meat, drink and clothing
should be used that life might be preserved. Now prayer is one of the most
excellent means whereby sundry things are brought to pass: therefore Gods
eternal counsel touching things to come, does not exclude prayer and like
means, but rather include and implie the same.

The second question is, what kind of actio^ prayer is? Ans. It is no
lip-labor, it is the putting up of a suite unto God, and this action is
peculiar to the very heart of a man. Romans 8.26. The spirit makes request for
us. But how? with groans in the heart. Exodus ^4.15. The Lord says to Moses,
Why criest thou? yet there is no mention made that Moses spoke any word at all:
the Lord no doubt, accepted the inward mourning and desire of his heart for a
cry, Psalm. 38.10. and 11.4.

The third question is, what is the form or rule according to which we are to
pray? Ans. It is the revealed will and word of God. A man in humbling his soul
before God, is not to pray as his affections carry him, and for what he list:
but all is to be done according to the express word. So as those things which
God has commanded us to ask, we are to ask, and those things which he has
not commanded us to ask, we are in no wise to pray for, 1. John 5.14. This is
the assurance which we have of him, that if we ask any thing according to his
will, he hears us. This then is a special clause to be marked, that men must
pray in knowledge, not in ignorance. Here weigh the case of poor ignorant
people: they talk much of praying for themselves and others, they imagine that
they pray very devoutly to God: but alas they do nothing less, because they
know not what to ask according to gods will. They therefore must learn Gods
word, and pray according to the same, else it will prove in the end that all
their praying was nothing but as mocking, and flat dishonouring of God.

The fourth question is, with what affection a man must pray? Ans. Prayer must
proceed from a broken and contrite heart. This is the sacrifice which God
accepts. Psalm. 51. 17. When Ahab abased himself, though he did ^^ in
hypocrisy, yet God had some respect unto it. 1. King. 21.29. says the Lord to
Eliah, see thou how Ahab is humbled before me? This contrition of heart
stands in two things. The first of them is a lively feeling of our own sin,
misery, and wretched estate, how that we are compassed about with innumerable
enemies, even with the devil and his angels, and within abound even with huge
seas of wants and rebellious corruptions, whereby we most grievously displease
God, and are vile in our own eyes. Being therefore thus beset on every side,
we are to be touched with the sense of this our great misery. And he that will
pray aright, must put on the person and the very affection of a poor wretched
beggar, and certainly not being grieved with the rufull condition in which we
are in our selves, it is not possible for us to pray effectually, Psalm. 130.1.
Out of the deepest called upon thee, O Lord: that is, when I was in my greatest
misery, and as it were not far from the gulfes of hell, then I cried to God,
Esaias 26.16. Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they powered out a prayer
when thy chastening was upon them. 1. Sam. 1.15. I am a woman (says Anna) of
an hard spirit: that is, a trouble soul, and have powered my soul before the
Lord. Hence it appears, that the ordinary prayers of most men grievously
displease God, seeing they are made for fashion only, without any sense and
feeling of their miseries, commonly men come with the Pharise in ostentation of
their integrity, and they take great pains with their lips, but their
hearts wander from the Lord. The second thing required in a contrite heart, is
a longing desire and hungring after Gods graces and benefits whereof we stand
in need. It is not sufficient for a man to buckle as it were, and to go
crooked under his sins and miseries: but also he must have a desire to be
eased of them, and to be enriched with graces needful.

Thus Hezekias the King, and the Prophet Isaiah the son of Amos prayed
against Senacharib, and cried unto heaven. 2. Chr. 32.10. Where we may see what
a marvelous desire they had to obtain their request. So also Romans 8.16. The
spirit makes request with groans so great that they can not be uttered, as
they are felt. David Psalm. ^43.6. says, that he desires after the Lord, as
the thirsty land. Now we know that the ground parched with heat, opens it
self in ri^ts and cranies, and gapes toward heaven as though it would devour
the clouds for want of moisture, and thus must the heart be disposed to Gods
grace, till it obtain it. The people of Israel being in grievous a^fliction,
how do they pray? They power out their souls like water before the face of
the Lord. Lament. 2. 1^.

The fifth question is, in whose name prayer must be made. Ans. It must not be
made in the name of any creature, but only in the name and mediation of
Christ. Ioh. 14.14. If ye ask any thing in my name I will do it. A man is
not to present his prayers to God in any worthiness of his own merits. For what
is he to make the best of himself, what can he make of himself? by nature he
is no better then the very firebrand of hell, and of all Gods creatures on
earth the most outrageous rebel to God, and therefore can not be heard for his
own sake. As for Saints, they can be no mediators, seeing even they
themselves in heaven are accepted of God not for themselves, but only for the
blessed merits of Christ. If any man sin (says Saint John 1. epist. chap.
2.1.) we h^^e an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ. But how proves he
this? It follows then, And he is the reconciliation for our sins. His reason
stands thus, he which must be an advocate, must first of al be a
reconciliation for us; no saints can be a reconciliation for us, therefore no
Saints can be advocates. Therefore in this place is manifest an other fault of
ignorant people. They cry often, Lord help me, Lord have mercy upon me. But
in whose name pray they? poor souls like blind bayards they rush upon the
Lord, they know no mediator in whose name they should present their prayers
to him. Little do they consider with themselves, that God is as well a most
terrible Judge, as a merciful father.

The sixth question is; Whether faith be requisite to prayer or not. Ans. Prayer
is to be made with faith, whereby a man must have certain assurance to be heard.
For he that prays must steadfastly believe, that God in Christ will grant his
petition. This affiance being wanting, it makes prayer to be no prayer. For
how can he pray for any thing effectually, who doubts whether he shall
obtain it or no.

Wherefore it is an especial point of prayer, to be persuaded, that God to
whom prayer is made, not only can, but also will grant his request. Mar. 11.
24. Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it
shall be done unto you. Here we see two things required in prayer: the first,
a desire of the good things which we want: the second is faith, whereby we
believe that God will grant the things desired. The ground of this faith is
reconciliation with God, and the assurance thereof. For unless a man be in
conscience in some measure persuaded that all his sins are pardoned, and that
he stands reconciled to God in Christ, he cannot believe any other promises
revealed in the word, nor that any of his prayers shall be heard.

Thus much of the definition of prayer: now let us see what use may be^ made
of ^his commandment, Pray ye thus. Seeing our Savior commands his di^^iples^
and so even us also to pray to God, it is our duty not only to present our
prayers to God, but also to do it cheerfully and earnestly. Romans 15. 30. Also
brethren I beseech you that ye would strive with me by prayers to God for me.
What is the cause why the Lord does often defer his blessings after our
prayers? No cause, but that he might stir us up to be more earnest to cry
unto the Lord. Exodus 32. 10. When Moses prayed to God in the behalf of the
Israelites, the Lord answers, Let me alone: as though his prayers did bind the
Lord, and hinder him from executing his judgments. Wherefore this is good
advise, for all Christian men to continue and to be zealous in prayer. If thou
be an ignorant man, for shame learn to pray, seeing it is Gods commandment,
make conscience of it. We see that there is no man, unless he be desperately
wicked, but will make some conscience of killing and stealing^ and why is this?
Because it is Gods commandment, Thou shall not kill, thou shall not ^teale.

Well then, this also is Gods commandment, to pray. Let this consideration
breed in thee a conscience of this duty: and although thy corrupt nature shall
draw thee away from it, yet strive to the contrary, and know it certainly,
that ^he breach of this commandment makes thee as well guilty of damnation
before God as any other. Furthermore, this must be a motive to prick thee
forward to this duty, that as God commands us to pray, so also he gives the
spirit of prayer, whereby the commandment is made easy unto us. If the Lord
had commanded a thing impossible, then there had been some cause of
discouragement, but commanding a thing through the grace of his spirit very
easy and profitable: how much more are we bound to obedience of the same?
Again, prayer is the key whereby we open the treasures of GOD, and pull down
his mercies upon us. For as the preaching of the word serves to declare and to
convey unto us Gods graces: so in prayer we come to have a lively feeling of
the same in our hearts. And further, this must move us to prayer, seeing in
that, we have familiarity with Gods majesty. It is an high favor for a man
to be familiar with a prince; how much more then to be familiar with the king
of kings the mighty Iehoua? This then can be no burden or trouble unto us,
being one of the many prerogatives that god bestows on his church. For in the
preaching of the word, it pleased God to talk to us, and in prayer, God does
vouchsafe us this honor, to speak, and as it were familiarly to talk with
him, not as to a fearful Judge, but as to a loving and merciful God.

Consider also that prayer is a worthy means of defense, not only to us, but
also to the Church and the^ that are absent. By it Moses stood in the breach,
which Gods wrath had made into the people of Israel, and stayed the same, Psalm.
106. 23. By this, Christian men fight as valiant champions against their own
corruptions, and all other spiritual enemies, Ephesians. 6. 18. Infinite were it to
show how many blessings the Lord had bestowed on his servants by prayer. In a
word, Luther, whom it pleased God to use as a worthy instrument for the
restoring of the gospel, testifies of himself, that having this grace given
him to call upon the name of the Lord, he had more revealed unto him of gods
truth by prayer, then by reading and study.

The second point of the commandment, is to pray after the manner propounded
in the Lords prayer. Where it is to be noted, that the Lords prayer is a
direction, and as it were a samplar to teach us how and in what manner we
ought to pray. None is to imagine that we are bound to use these words only,
and none other. For the meaning of Christ is not to bind us to the word, but to
the matter and to the manner, and to the like affections in praying. If this
were not so, the prayers of Gods servants set down in the books of the old
and new Testament, should all be faulty, because they are not set down in the
very same words with the Lords prayer, nay this prayer is not set down in the
same words altogether by Matthew and Luke.

And whereas sundry men in our Church hold it unlawful to use this very form
of words as they are set down by our Savior Christ for a prayer; they are
far deceived, as will appear by their reasons. First (say they) it is
scripture, and therefore not to be used as a prayer. I answer, that the same
thing may be the scripture of God, and also the prayer of man, else the prayers
of Moses, David, and Paul, being set down in the scriptures, cease to be
prayers. Again (say they) that in prayer we are to express our wants in
particular, and the graces which we desire: now in these words all things to be
prayed for, are only in general propounded. I answer, that the maine wantes
that are in any m^n, and the principal graces of God to be desired, are set
down in the petitions of this prayer in particular. Thirdly, they plead that
the pattern to make all prayers by, should not be used as a prayer. I answer,
that therefore the rather it may be used as a prayer, and sure it is that
ancient and worthy Divines have reverenced it as a prayer; choosing rather to
use these words then any other, as Cyprianus Sermon de orat. Dominic. And
Tertullian lib. de fuga in persequntione. And August. Sermon 126. de tempore.
Wherefore the opinion is full of ignorance and error.

Well, whereas our Savior first gives a commandment to pray, and then after
gives a direction for the keeping of it, this he does to stir up our dulnes,
and to allure us by all means to this heavenly exercise of prayer: wherefore
still I say, employ your selves in prayer fervently and continually, and if you
cannot do it, learn to pray. Thus much of the commandment of our Savior
Christ: now follow the words of the prayer.

Our Father which art, etc.]
THese words contain three parts, 1. A preface. 2. The prayer it self,
containing six petitions. 3. The testification of faith in the last word,
Amen.

Which although it be short, yet it does not contain the smallest point in the
prayer: It is (I say) a testification of our faith, whereas the petitions that
go before are only testifications of our desires. Now of these three parts
in order.

We must consider how our Savior Christ does not set down the petitions
abruptly, but he first begins with a solemn preface. Whereby we are taught
this lesson; that he which is to pray unto God, is first to prepare himself,
and not boldly without consideration as it were to rush into the presence of
God.

If a man be to come before an earthly prince, he will order himself in
apparel, gesture and words, that he may do all things in seemelinesse and
dutiful reverence: how much more are men to order themselves, when they are to
appear before the living God? Eccl. 5.1. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let
not thy heart be hasty to utter a thing before the Lord. And David, Psalm.
26.6. Washed his hands in innocence, before he came to the altar of the Lord to
offer sacrifice.

The means whereby men may stir up their dull and heavy hearts, and so
prepare themselves to prayer, are three. The first is to read diligently the
word of God, concerning those matters about which they are to pray: and what
then? this will be a means not only to direct him, but also to quicken the
heart more fervently to deliver his prayer. This is evident by a comparison.
The beams of the sun descending, heat not before they come to the earth, or
some solid body where they may reflect, and then by that means the earth and
air adjoining is made hot: even so the Lord sends down unto us his blessed
word, even as beams and the goodly sunshine, and thereby he speaks to our
hearts: now when we make our prayers of that which we have read, Gods word is
as it were re^^ected, and our hearts are thereby warmed with the comfortable
heat of Gods holy spirit, to pour out our p^aiers to God more fervently. The
second means is to pray to God that he would strengthen us with his spirit,
that we might be able to pray as it is practiced, Psalm. 143.1. The third
means is, the consideration of Gods most glorious majesty, wherein we are to
remember first his fatherly goodness and kindness, whereby he is willing; and
secondly his omnipotency, whereby he is able to g^ant our requests. One of
these imboldened the leaper to pray, Lord, if thou will thou can make me
^leane. Mat. 8.2. Therefore both together are more effectual.

Now let us come to the preface it self, Our father which art in heaven. It
co^taines a description of the true Iehoua to whom we pray, and that by two
arguments: the first is drawn from a relation, Our Father: the second is taken
from the subject or place, Which art in heaven.

Father.]
1. The meaning.
IN the opening of this word, or title of God, two questions are to be opened.

1. Quest. Whether by thit title, Father, is signified the whole Trinity or
some one person thereof. Ans. Otherwhiles this name is attributed to all the
persons in Trinity, or any of them. Mal. 2. 10. Have we not all one father.
etc. Luke 3.38. Which was the son of Adam, which was the s^nne of God. And in
Esai 36. Christ is called the Father of eternity, because all that are truly
knit to him, and borne anew by him, they are eternally made the sons of God.
Again, oftentimes it is given to the first person in Trinity, as in those
places where one person is conferred with another. And so in this place
principally for some special respects, this title agrees to the first person.
For first he is the father of Christ as he is the eternal word of the father,
and that by nature, because he is of the same essence with him. Secondly, he is
the father to Christ in respect of his manhood, not by nature or adoption, but
by personal union, because the humane nature does subsist in the person of the
word. Thirdly, he is a father to all the faithful by adoption in Christ.

2. Quest. Whether are we to pray to the son and the holy Ghost as to the
Father? Ans. Invocation belongs to all the three persons in Trinity, and not
only to the Father, Act. 7.59. Steven prays, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. 1.
Th^s. 3.2. Now God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ guide our journey unto
you. 2. Cor. 13.13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and
the communion of the holy ghost be with you. And men are baptized in the name
of the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, that is, by calling on the name
of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Some may say, this prayer is a perfect platform of all prayers, and yet we
are taught to direct our prayers to the Father, not to the Son, or holy
spirit. I answer, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, are three distinct
persons, yet they are not to be severed or divided, because they all subsist in
one and the same godhead or divine nature. And further in all outward actions,
as in the creation and preservation of the world, and the salvation of the
elect, they are not severed or divided: for they all work together, only they
are distinguished in the manner of working. Now if they be not divided in
nature or operation, then they are not to be severed in worship.

And in this place we principally direct our prayers to the father, because he
is the first in order: yet so, as then we implie the Son and holy Ghost. For
we pray to the Father in the name of the Son by the assistance of the holy
Ghost. And to what person soever the prayer is directed, we must always
remember in mind and heart to include the rest.

2. The use.
TThe uses of this point are manifold.

1. First, whereas we are taught to come to God as to a father, and therefore
in the name of his Son our Savior Christ, we learn to lay the first ground
of all our prayers, which is to hold and maintain the union and the
distinction of the three persons in Trinity. This being the lowest and the
first foundation of prayer, it is requisite that all which would pray aright,
should have this knowledge, rightly to believe the Trinity, and to know how
the three persons agree, and how they are distinguished, and the order of them,
how the Father is the first, the Son the second, the holy ghost the third:
and therefore how the father is to be called upon in the name of the son by
the holy Ghost. By this, the prayers of Gods Church, and the prayers of heathen
men are distinguished, who invoke God as creator out of the father, Son,
and holy Ghost. And hence it is manifest, that ignorant and silly people which
do not so much as dream of the union, distinction, and order of the persons
in Trinity, make but a cold and slender kind of praying. 2. Secondly, we may
learn hereby that we are not in any wise to invoke Saints and Angels, but
only the true Iehoua. The reason stands thus: This prayer is either a perfect
platform for all prayers, or not: to say it were not, were an injury to our
Savior Christ: to say it is so, is also to grant that it does fully set down
to whom all prayers are to be made. Now, in these words there is set down no
invocation but of God alone. For in prayer to be termed, Our father is proper
to God, Esai 64.16. Thou art our father: though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel know us not: yet thou, O Lord, art our father and redeemer. Papists
therefore that are the great patrons of invocation of Saints, in their reformed
breuiaries and missals, deal very fondly: for first they pray to Marie, that
she would pray to Christ for them, and when they have so done, like iuglers
they come to Christ and pray unto him that he would accept Mary's prayer for
them. 3. Thirdly, we learn that there can be no intercessour between God and
us, but only Christ. For here we are taught to come to God not as to a judge,
but as to a kind and loving father. Now he is a father to us only by Christ:
as for Angels and Saints and all creatures, they are not able to procure by any
means, that God should become a father, no not so much as to one man. 4.
Again, if the God to whom we pray be a father, we must learn to acquaint our
selves with the promises which he has made in his word, to quicken our hearts
in all our prayers unto him, and thereby to gather affiance to our selves and
persuasion that he will grant our requests. For this word [Father] implies a
readiness and willingness in God to hear and be merciful to our prayers. And a
father can not but must needs make promise of favor to those that be his
children, and therefore it can not be that he should call God his father truly,
which has not in his heart this assurance, that God will fulfill all his
promises made unto him. Promises made to prayer, as these and such like, are to
be marked, as follow, 2. Chron. 7.14. If my people among whom my name is
called upon, do humble themselves, and pray, and seek my presence, and turn
from their wicked ways, then I will hear in heaven, and be merciful unto
their sins. 2. Chron. 15.2. The Lord is with you while ye be with him, and if
ye seek him, he will be found of you. Esai 65. 34. Before they call I will
answer, and whiles they speak I will hear. Matthew. 7.7. Ask and it shall be
given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened. Luke 11.13.
If ye which are evil can give good gifts unto your children, how much more
shall your heavenly father give the holy Ghost to them that desire him. Romans
10. 12. He that is Lord over all, is rich unto all that call on him. Iam. 4.8.
Draw near unto God, and he will draw near unto you. 5. If God be a father who
is called upon, then prayer is the note of Gods child. Saint Luke and S. Paul
set out the faithful servants of God by this note, Act. 9.14. He has
authority to bind all that call on thy name. 1. Cor. 1.2. To them that are
sanctified by Jesus Christ, Saints by calling, with all that call on the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And contrariwise, Psalm. 14.4. it is made one of the
properties of an Atheist, Never to call on the name of God. And such persons as
neither will nor can, or use not heartily to pray to God, they may say that
they are persuaded there is a God, but in their doings they bear themselves as
if there were no God. 6. He which would pray aright, must be like the prodigal
child, that is, he must not only confess his sin, saying, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and against thee, etc. but also have a full purpose
never after to offend his father. For how can a child call him father, whom he
cares not continually to displease through his lewd conditions? He can not do
it, neither can any father delight in such a child: therefore in prayer we must
call to mind our lewdnes and rebellions against our heavenly father, and with
the Publicane in heaviness of soul say, Lord be merciful to be a sinner. He
which can truly do this, is a kind child. If we consider our selves as we
are by nature, we are the children of the devil: no child so like his father
as we are like him, and in this estate we continually rebel against God: for
the devil has all the heart, our whole joy is to serve and please him. A man
that is to pray must think on this, and be grieved thereat. And happy, yea a
thousand times happy are they, who have grace given them to see this their
state and to bewail it. And further, it is not sufficient to confess our
sins against our merciful Father, but we must set down with our selves
never in such sort to offend him again, and to lead a new life. This point is
very profitable for these times. For many there be when any cross or sickness
comes on them, will pray and promise repentance and all obedience to Gods word,
if it shall please God to deliver them: but this usually is but in hypocrisy,
they dissemble with God and men. For when their sickness is past, like a dog
that has bin in the water, they shake their ears and run straight with all
greedines to their former sins. Is this to call God Father? No, he that does
this shall not have God to be his father: but the man that is wounded in his
soul for his offenses past, and carries a purpose in his heart never
wittingly and willingly to offend God again. 7. Lastly, here we are to
observe, that he which would pray, must be endued wi^h the spirit of adoption:
the actions whereof in the matter of prayer are twofold. The first to move the
heart to cry and call on God as a father. It is no easy thing to pray: for to
a man of himself it is as easy to move the whole earth with his hand: how
then comes it that we pray? It is a blessed work of the spirit. Romans 8.15. We
have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Ab^a, that is^ father.
And Romans 8.26. Likewise the spirit helps our infirmities: for we know not
what to pray as we ought: but the spirit it self makes request. And Zach.
12.10. the holy Ghost is called the spirit of grace, and deprecatio^s or
prayers. Well then, the man that would pray, must have Gods spirit to be his
schoolmasters, to teach him to pray with groans and sighs of the heart: for
the words make not the prayer, but the groans and desires of his heart: and a
man prays for no more then he desires with the heart, and he which desires
nothing prays not at all, but spends lip-labor. The second work of the
spirit, is to assure us in our consciences that we are in the state of grace
reconciled to God. Romans 8.16. The spirit of adoption bears witness with our
spirits that we are the children of God. And this inward certificate of the
spirit in all exercises of invocation is very necessary: for he which wants
this assurance, if he be secure and benumbed in his sins, will not, and if he
be touched in conscience for them, for his life dare not call God father. Also
this confutes the opinion of the Church of Rome, which teaches, that man is to
doubt whether he be adopted or no. For how can a man truly call God father,
when he doubts whether he be the child of God, or no? It is a miserable kind of
praying to call God father, and withal to doubt whether he be a father. Indeed
it is true that doubts will often arise, but it is our duty to strive against
them, and not to yield to them. Yea but (say they) to be certain of Gods mercy
is presumption. I answer, if it be presumption, it is an holy presumption,
because God has bidden us to call him father.
Our Father.]
1. The meaning.
THus much of the argument of relation: now let us proceede^ It is further
said, Our father. And he is so termed, because he is the father of Christ by
nature; and in him the father of every believer: yea of the whole body of the
Church.

Quest. Whether may it be lawful for us in prayer to say, not our father, but
my father? Ans. A Christian may in private prayer say, My father. This is
warranted by the example of our Savior, Matthew. 26.^9. O my father if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me. And Math. 27.46. My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? And Thomas prayed, My Lord, and my God. And Paul, I give
thanks to my God, etc. And Gods promise is, Ier. 3.19. Thou shall call me my
father. The meaning of Christ is not to bind us to these words, but to teach
us that in our prayers we must not have regard to our selves only, but also to
our brethren, and therefore when we pray for them in our private prayers as for
our selves, we put in practice the true meaning of these words.

2. The uses.
When we pray, we must not make request only for our selves and our own
good, but for others also, as the church and people of God, persuading our
selves that we also are partakers of their prayers: and for the better clearing
of this point, let us search who they are for whom we are to pray.

Of men there be two sorts, some liuing^ some dead. Of these two kinds, the
living are to be prayed for, and there is no praying for the dead.

A man that is dead, knows what shall be his estate eternally: if he died a
wicked person, that is, an unrepentant sinner, his state shall be according in
eternal torment: if he died having repented of his sins, then he shall rest
with God in his kingdom. Apoc. 14.13. Blessed are they which die in the Lord,
for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Gal. 6.10.
While we have time let us do good to all men. Where we may note that there
is a time, namely after death, when we cannot do good to others.

Again, of the living, some are our enemies, and some our friends: Our friends
are they which are of the same religion, affection, and disposition. Foes are
either private or public: Public foes, are either enemies to our country, as
tyrants, traitors, etc. or enemies to our religion, as Jews, Turks, Papists,
Infidels, Atheists. Now toward all these, how ought a man to behave himself
in prayer? Ans. He is to pray for them all. Matthew. 5.44. Pray for them which
hurt you, and persecute you. 1. Tim. 2.1. I exhort that prayers, intercessions,
etc. be made for all men, for kings, etc. Yet when Paul gave this commandment,
we read not that there were any Christian kings, but all Infidels. And the
Jews are commanded to pray for Babylon, where they were captive, Ierem. 29.7.
And seek the prosperity of the city, whither I have caused you to be
carried captive, and pray unto the Lord for it.

Question. How and in what manner are we to pray for our enemies? Ans. We are
to pray against their ^innes, counsels, enterprises, but not against their
persons. Thus prayed David against Achitophel. 2. Sam. 15.31. Lord I pray thee
bring the counsel of Achitophel to foolishness. And thus did the Apostles
pray against their persecutors, Act. 4.29. O Lord behold their threatenings, and
grant unto thy servants with all boldness to speak thy word.

Question. David uses imprecations against his enemies, in which he prays
for their utter confusion, as Psalm. 59. and 109. etc. The like is done by Paul,
Gal. 5.1. 2. Tim. 4.14. and Peter, Act. 8. 20. though afterward he mitigates
his execration. But how could they do it? Ans. 1. They were endued with an
extraordinary measure of Gods spirit, and hereby they were enabled to discern
of their enemies and certainly to judge that their wickedness and malice was
incurable, and that they should never repent. And the like prayers did the
Primitive church conceive against Julian the Apostata because they perceived
him to be a malicious and desperate enemy. 2. Secondly, they were endued with
a pure zeal, and not carried with desire of revenge against their enemies,
intending nothing else but the glory of God. Now for us it is good that we
should suspect our zeal, because sinister affections, as hatred, envy,
emulation, desire of revenge, will easily mingle themselves therewith.

Question. How far forth may we use those Psalms in which David uses
imprecations against his enemies? Ans. They are to be read and song with these
caueats. I. We are to use those imprecations indefinitely against the enemies
of God and his Church: for we may persuade our selves that always there be
some such obstinate enemies: but we must not apply them particularly. 2.
Secondly, we must use them (as Augustine says) as certain prophetical
sentences of the holy Ghost, pronouncing the last sentence of destruction upon
final and impenitent sinners, which oppose themselves against Gods kingdom. 3.
They may be used against our spiritual enemies, the flesh, the devil, and his
angels, and the world.

2. Furthermore, whereas we are taught to say, Our father, this serves to put
us in mind, that in praying to God, we must bring love to men with us. We must
all be the children of one father, lovingly disposed one to another. For how
should he call God his father, who will not take the child of God for his
brother? Math. 5.2^. When thou art to offer thy gift unto God, if thou have
ought against thy brother: first be reconciled, and then come and offer thy
gift. So also Esa. ^.15. the Lord says, that when they pray unto him he will
not hear. Why? because their han^s are full of blood. In these times many men
can be content form^lly to pray, but yet they will not leave b^ibing,
oppression, deceit, usury, etc. The common song of the world is, Every man for
himself, and God for us all: this is the common love and care that men have
each to other. The prayers of such are abominable, even as the sacrifice of a
dog, as Esaias says. For how can they call God their father, that have no love
to their brethren?

3. Thirdly, hence we may learn that God is no accepter of persons. For this
prayer is given to all men of what state or degree soever. All then, as well
poor as rich, unlearned as learned, subjects as rulers, may say, Our father.
It is not with the Lord as it is with the world, but all are his children that
do believe. The poor man has as good interest in Gods kingdom, and may call
God father as well as the king. Therefore the weaker sort are to comfort
themselves hereby, knowing that God is a father to them as well as to Abraham,
David, Peter. And such as are endued with more grace, must not therefore swell
in pride, because they have not God to be their father more then their
inferiors have.

Which art in heauen]
1. The meaning.
Quest. HOw may God be said to be in heaven, seeing he is infinite, and
therefore must needs be every where. 1. King. 8.27. The heavens of heavens are
not able to contain him. Ans. God is said to be in heaven: first, because his
majesty, that is, his power, wisdom, justice, mercy, is made manifest from
thence unto us. Psalm. 115.3. Our God is in heaven and does whatsoever he will.
Psalm. 2.4. He that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, and the Lord
shall have the^ in derision. Esai says, 66.2. Thus says the Lord, Heaven is
my throne, and the earth is my footstool. Secondly, after this life he will
manifest and exhibit the fulness of his glory to his Angels and Saints in the
highest heavens, and that immediately and visibly.

2. The use.
1. HEreby first we learn that Romish pilgrimages, whereby men went from place
to place to worship God, are vain, and foolish. The God to whom we must pray
is in heaven. Now let men travel to what place^ or country they will, they
shall not come the nearer to heaven, or nearer to God by traveling, seeing the
earth is in every part alike distant from heaven. 2. Secondly; this overthrows
popish idolatry, as worshipping of crosses, cruci^ixes, roodes, etc. used to
put men in mind of God and Christ. We are taught to lift up our eyes to
heaven; seeing God is there: and how can we do this, as long as our minds and
eyes are poaring upon an image made by man's art? 3. Again, we are here
admonished to use the action of prayer with as great reverence as possible may
be, and not to think of God in any earthly manner. Well reasons Solomon,
Eccles. 5.1. Be not rash with thy mouth to speak a word before God. Why? He is
in heaven, thou art in earth: therefore let thy words be few. This reverence
must appear in holiness of all our thoughts and affections, and in all
comelines of gesture. And for this cause all wandering by-thoughts, and all
vain babbling is to be avoided, but how goes the case with us, that on the
times appointed come to the assemblies to pray? Many, by reason of their
blindness pray without understanding. Many, when they are present at prayer, yet
have their hearts occupied about other matters, about their goods and worldly
business: such men have no joy or gladness in praying; it is a burden to them.
Many come to the assembly for custom only, or for fear of punishment, if
they might be left free they could find in their hearts not to pray at all. But
let all such men know, that this manner of praying is a very grievous sin, nay
greater then mocking of father or mother, killing or stealing, for it is
directly against God, the other against men. This sin because it is against
the first table, and therefore more hard to be discerned, it is lightly
esteemed, and it less troubles the consciences of ignorant men: yea as it is
in deed, so it is to be esteemed as a disgrace and plain mockery of Gods
majesty. Wherefore seeing God is in heaven, away with all drowsy and dead
praying, let us come with reverence in our hearts before the Lord. 4. Again,
we are here to consider that our hearts in prayer must mount up into heaven,
and there be present with the Lord. Psalm. 25.1.^ Unto thee O Lord, lift I up my
soul. The little child is never well but when it is in the fathers lap, or
under the mothers wing: and the children of God are never in better case, then
when in affection and spirit they can come into the presence of their heavenly
Father, and by prayer, as it were to creep into his bosom. 5. And here we
must further learn, specially to seek for heavenly things, and to ask
earthly things, so far forth as they serve to bring us to an everlasting and
immortal inheritance in heaven to which we are called. 1. Pet. 1.3. 6. Lastly,
whereas our father is in heaven, we are to learn that our life on earth is but
a pilgrimage, and that our desire must be to attain to a better country,
namely, heaven it self, and that we must use all means continually to come
unto it. In a word, to make an end of the preface: in it is contained a double
stay or prop of all our prayers. The one is to believe that God can grant our
requests, because he is almighty, and thus much is signified when he is said
to be in heaven. The second is to believe that God is ready and willing to
grant the same, and this we are t^ught in the title Father, which serves to put
us in ^ind that God accepts our prayers, Ioh. 16.32. and has a care of us in
all our miseries and necessities, Matthew. 6.32. and pitieth us as much as any
earthly father can pity his child. Psalm. 103.13.
Yet must we not imagine that God will indeed give unto us whatsoever we do
upon our own heads, fancy, and desire: but we must in our prayers have
recourse to the promise of God, and according to the tenor thereof must we
frame and square our petitions. Things promised absolutely, as all graces
necessary to salvation, may be asked absolutely: and things promised with
condition, as graces less necessary, and temporal blessings are to be asked
with condition, namely, so farforth as they shall be for Gods glory in us, and
for our good: except it be so that God promise any temporal blessing
absolutely, as he promised issue to Abraham in his old age. The kingdom to
David after Saul. A deliverance from captivity in Babylon after 70. years to
the Israelites.

Again, the preface serves to stir up love and fear in the hearts of them
that are about to pray. Love, because they pray to a father: fear, because he
is full of majesty in heaven.

Hallowed be thy Name.]
1. The Coherence.
THus much of the preface: now follow the petitions. They be six in number,
the three first concern God, the three last our selves. The three former
petitions are again divided into two parts: the first concerns Gods glory it
self; the other two, the means whereby Gods glory is manifested and enlarged
among men. For Gods name is glorified among men when his kingdom does come,
and his will is done.

Quest. Why is this petition, Hallowed be thy name, set in the first place?
Ans. Because Gods glory must be preferred before all things, because it is the
end of all creatures and of all the counsels of God. Prove. 16.4. The Lord has
made all things for his own sake: yea even the wicked for the day of evil.
And from the order of the petitions here arises a worthy instruction, namely,
that every one in all things they take in hand, are to propound to themselves
and to intend the glory of God. The reason is this: The end which God has
appointed to all our doings, we are to propound to our selves: but God has
appointed that the highest end of all his doings should be his glory:
therefore our hearts must be set to seek it first of all. That God will have
his name glorified by us, appears in this; that he punishes those which of
obstinacy set themselves to dishonor him, or by negligence did not sanctify
him, when they should have done so. Herod sitting in his royalty, made such an
oration, that the people cried, The voice of a god, and not of a man: and
immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not glory to God,
Act. 12. 12. And Moses because he did not sanctify the Lord in the presence of
the children of Israel, therefore he came not into the land of promise; yet he
did not altogether fail in doing of it. Thus we may see by these punishments,
and also by the order of the petitions, that it is our duties to prefer the
glory of God before all thing else.

Quest. Whether are we to prefer the glory of God before the salvation of
our souls? Ans. If the cause stand thus that Gods name must be dishono^red, or
our souls condemned, we must account the glory of God more precious then the
salvation of our souls. This is manifest in the order of the petitions. The
petitions that concern Gods glory is first, and the petitions that concern
directly our salvation are the fifth and sixth. Whereby we are taught, that
before God should want any part of his glory, we must let body and soul and
all go, that God may have all his glory. This affection had Moses, Exodus
32.32. when he said, Either forgive them, or if thou will not, blot my name out
of thy book.

In this petition as also in the rest, we must observe three things: the first
is the meaning of the words: the second, the wants which men must learn to
bewail: the third, the graces of God which are to be desired.

2. The meaning.
VEry few among the people can give the right meaning of the words of this
prayer. They pretend, that seeing God knows their good meaning, it is
sufficient for them to say the words and to mean well. But faith being one
of the grounds of prayer, and there being no faith without knowledge, neither
can there be prayer without knowledge, and therefore ignorant men are to learn
the right meaning of the words.

Name]
Name in this place signifies, 1 God himself, 1. King. 5.5. He shall build an
house to my Name. 2 His attributes, as his justice, mercy, etc. 3 His works,
creatures, and judgments. 4 His word. 5 His honor and praise arising from all
these.


For God is known to us by all these, as men are known by their names; and as
all a man's praise and glory lies in his name, so all the glory of God is in
these.

Hallowed]
TO hallow is to sever or set apart any thing from the common use, to some
proper and peculiar end: as the Temple was hallowed, that is, set apart to an
holy use; and the Priests were sanctified, that is, set apart to the service of
God. And all that believe in Christ are sanctified, that is, set apart from
sin to serve God. In like manner Gods name is hallowed, when it is put apart
from oblivion, contempt, profanation, pollution, blasphemy, and all abuses to
an holy, reverent, and honorable use, whether we think, speak of it, or use
it any manner of way. Leuit. 10.3. Ezech. 38.23.

Quest. How can a sinful man hallow Gods name which is pure and holy in it
self? Ans. We do not here pray that we might make Gods name holy, as though
we could add something unto it to make it holy: but that we might be means to
declare and make manifest to the world by the right usage of it, that it is
holy, pure and honorable. The like phrase is used, Luke 7. 9. Wisdom is
justified by her children: that is, acknowledged and declared to be just.
Ezech. 38.23.

The scope therefore of the first petition, is an earnest desire that we might
set forth Gods glory, whatsoever become of us: and it may be expressed thus. O
Lord open our eyes that we may aright know thee, and acknowledge the greatness
of thy power, wisdom, justice, and mercy, which appears, in thy titles,
words, creatures, and judgments: and grant that when we use any of these, we
may therein honor thee, and use them reverently to thy glory.

3. The wants which are to be bewailed.
1. THE wants, which we in this place are taught to bewail, are specially
four. The first is an inward and spiritual pride of our hearts; a sin that
none or very few can see in themselves, unless the Lord open their eyes. When
our first parents were tempted in paradise, the devil told them they should be
as Gods: which lesson not only they, but we have learned: and we conceive of
our selves, as little gods, though to the world we show it not. This hidden
pride, when other sins die, it begins to get strength, and to show it self:
and appears in vain thoughts, continually on every occasion ascending in the
mind. As may appear in the Pharisie, whose thoughts were these when he prayed
thus within himself, O God I thank thee that I am not as other men,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican, etc. And as this
was in him, so it is in us till God give grace: for so that men may have praise
and glory in the world, they care not for Gods glory though it be defaced. We
must therefore learn to discern this hidden corruption, and to mourn for it:
for it does poison and hinder al good desires of glorifying god, so long, as it
does or shall prevail in the heart.

2. Secondly, we are taught here to bewail the hardness of our hearts:
whereby we are hindered from knowing God aright, and from discerning the glory
and majesty of God in his creatures. Mark. 6.52. The disciples, through the
hardness of their hearts, could not see Gods power in the miracle of feeding
many thousands with a few loaves, though themselves were instruments of it, and
the food did increase in their hands. Our redemption, what a wonderful work
is it, but how few consider of it, or regard it? If we see a man have more wit,
wealth, or honor, then we have, we straight wonder at him: but beholding Gods
creatures, we see nothing in them, because we do not go higher to acknowledge
the love, power, wisdom, and justice of the Creator. And this is the cause why
Gods name is so slenderly honored among men.

3. The third corruption is our great ingratitude, for the Lord has made
heaven and earth, and all other creatures to serve man: yet he is the most
unthankful of all creatures. Bestow many jewels, or a kings ransom on a dead
man; he will never return any kindness: so men being dead in sin, deal with
God. Commonly men are like the swine that run with their groines and eat up
the mast, but never look up to the tree from whence it falls. But the godly
are with David, to feel this want in themselves, and to beseech God to open
and as it were to unlock their lips, that they may endeavor to be thanfull to
God. Psalm. 51.15.

4. The fourth is the ungodliness and the innumerable wa^ts that be in our
lives, and the sins committed in the world. Psalm. 119.136. Mine eyes (says
David) gush out with rivers of water, because men keep not thy laws. The
reason is, because he which lives in sin, reproaches Gods name; even as an
evil child dishonours his father. Now some will say that this cannot be:
because our sins cannot hurt God. True indeed: yet are they a cause of
sla^dering Gods name among men: for as we honor him by our good works, so we
dishonor him by our offenses. Matthew. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.

4. Graces to be desired.
1. THe graces to be desired, and to be prayed for at Gods hand, are three.
The first is the knowledge of God, that is, that we might know him as he has
revealed himself in his word, works and creatures. For how shall any glorify
God before he know him? Our knowledge in this life is imperfect. Exodus 23.
Moses may not see Gods face, but his hinder parts. 1. Corin. 13.12. We may see
God as men do, through spectacles in his word, sacraments, and creatures. And
therefore as Paul prayed for the Colossians. Col. 1.10. That they might
increase in the knowledge of God: so are we taught to pray for our selves in
this petition.

2. We desire that a zeal of Gods glory may be kindled in our hearts, and
that we may be kept from profaning and abusing of his name. Psalm. 69.9. The
zeal of thine house has eaten me up. Psalm. 45.1. My heart shall utter, or
cast up a good matter. I will speak in my works of the king. Here the spirit
of God borrowes a comparison from men, thus. As he which has somewhat lying
heavy in his stomach, is never quiet till he have cast it up: even so the
care and desire to glorify Gods name must lie upon a man's heart as an heavy
burden: and he is not to be at ease and quiet with himself till he be
disburdened, in sounding forth Gods praise. Luther says well, that this is
Sancta crapula: that is, an holy surfeit: and it is no hurt continually to have
our hearts ouercharged thus.

3. A desire to lead a godly and upright life before God and men. We see men
that in some great calling under honorable personages, will so order and
behave themselves, as they may please and honor their masters: even so must
our lives be well ordered, and we are to labor to walk worthy of the Lord
(as Paul speaks) that we may honor our heavenly father.

Thy kingdom come.]
1. The Coherence.
THis petition dependes on the former most excellently. For in it is laid
down the means to procure the first. Gods name must be hallowed among men:
but how is it done? by the erecting of Gods kingdom in the hearts of men. We
cannot glorify God until he rule in our hearts by his word and spirit.

2. The meaning.
Thy] This word does put us in mind that there is two kingdoms: one Gods, and
that is the kingdom of heaven: the other the devils, called the kingdom of
darkness, Coloss. 1.13. For when all had sinned in Adam, God laid this
punishment on all, that seeing they could not be content to obey their Creator,
they should be in bondage under satan: so that by nature we are all the
children of wrath, and the devil holds up the scepter of his kingdom in the
hearts of men. This kingdom is spiritual, and the pillars of it are
ignorance, error, impiety, and all disobedience to God, in which the devil
wholly delights; which also are as it were the laws of his kingdom. Blind
ignorant people can not abide this doctrine that the devil should rule in
their hearts: they spit at the naming of him, and say that they defy him with
all their hearts: but whereas they live in sin, and practice it as occasion
is offered, though they cannot discern of themselves, yet they make plain
proof, that they live in the kingdom of sin and darkness, and are flat
vassels of Satan, and shall so continue till Christ the strong man come and
bind him, and cast him out. And this is the estate of all the children of Adam
in themselves. Wherefore our Savior in this petition teaches us to consider
our natural estate, and to pray that he would give us his spirit to set us at
liberty in the kingdom of his own son.

Kingdome] Gods kingdom in Scripture is taken two ways. First generally, and
so it signifies that administration by which the Lord governs all things,
yea, even the devils themselves. Of which kingdom mention is made in the end
of this prayer. And in the Psalm 97. verse. 1. The Lord reigns, let the earth
rejoice. Again, it is taken more specially, and then it signifies the
administration of Christ the head of the church, in which he frames men by his
word and spirit to the subjection of the same word. And so it is taken in this
petition.

In a kingdom there are four things to be noted. 1. There must be a king. 2.
There must be subjects. 3. There are laws. 4. Authority.

In this kingdom Christ is the king: it is he to whom the father has given
all authority, in heaven and earth.

In this kingdom all are not subjects, but such as are willing to give free
and frank obedience to Gods word; or at the least though their hearts be not
sound, make an outward profession of it.

The laws of this kingdom is the word of God in the books of the old and
new Testament. Therefore it is called the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 13. The
Gospel of the kingdom, Mark. 1.13. The rod of his mouth, Esaias 11.4. The
arm of God, Esaias 53.1. As a king by his laws brings his people in order, and
keeps them in subjection; so Christ by his word, and the preaching of it, as
it were by a mighty arm, draws his elect into his kingdom, and fashions
the^ to all holy obedience.

The power and authority is that whereby Christ conuerts effectually those
which are to be converted by the inward operation of his spirit, and glorifies
himself in the confusion of the rest.

Kingdom being taken thus specially, is also twofold. The first is the
kingdom of grace, of which mention is made, Romans 14. 17. The kingdom of God
stands not in meat and drink, but in righteousness: that is, the assurance
of our justification before God in the righteousness of Christ; Peace of
conscience, which proceeds from this assurance; and joy in the holy Ghost,
which comes from them both. In this kingdom all men live not, but only those
that are subject to Christ, obedient to the laws of his kingdom, and ruled by
his authority, and are continually taught in his word by his spirit. But those
that refuse to live according to the laws of this king, and choose to live at
their own liberty, are in the kingdom of darkness, that is sin and Satan.

The second is the kingdom of glory in heaven, which is the blessed estate of
all Gods people, which God himself shall be all in all unto them. And the
former kingdom of grace is an entrance and preparation to this kingdom of
glory.

Come] Gods kingdom comes, when it takes place and is established and
confirmed in men's hearts, and made manifest to all people, the impediments
being removed.

Quest. This coming implies a stopping: but how should Gods kingdom be
hindered? Ans. Kingdom in this place is not taken for that absolute and
sovereign power of God whereby he rules all things, for that can not be
hindered; but for the kingdom of grace, which in the using of the outward
means, as ministers, word and Sacraments, may be hindered by the devil, the
world, and man's corruption.

3. The wants which are to be bewailed.
The wants which we in this petition are to mourn for, are of two sorts: some
concern our own selves, some others. That which concerns our own persons is
a bondage and slavery under sin and Satan. This bondage indeed is weakened
in Gods servants, but none is wholly freed from it in this life. Paul
complains that he is sold under sin, and cries pitifully, O miserable man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?

Question. What difference is then between the godly and the wicked? Ans. The
evil and ungodly man in the very midst of his bondage has a merry heart:
sin is no trouble to him, nay it is meat and drink to him. But the godly man
is otherwise minded: who considering the power of the devil, and hi^ craft in
manifold fearful temptations; and seeing the pronenesse of his rebellious
nature ever and anon to start away from God, is grieved and confounded in
himself, and his heart bleedes within him that he does offend so merciful a
father.

Many men live in this world and that many years, and yet never feel this
bondage under Satan and sin. Such undoubtedly cannot tell what this prayer
means: but he that would have the right use of this petition, must be
acquainted with his own estate, and be touched in his conscience, that the
flesh and the devil bear such sway in him. As the poor captive is always
creeping to the prison door, always laboring to get off his bolts and
fetters, and to escape out of prison: so must we always cry to the Lord for
his spirit to free us out of this bondage and prison of sin and corruption:
and every day come nearer the prison door, looking when our blessed Savior
will unbind us of all the fetters of sin and Satan, and fully erect his
kingdom in us.

2. The wants which concern others are twofold. The former is the want of the
good means which serve for the furthering of the kingdom of Christ, as
preaching, sacraments, and discipline. When we shall see a people without
knowledge, and without good guides and teachers, or when we see one stand up in
the congregation not able to teach, here is matter for mourning. This petition
puts us in mind to bewail these wants. Our Savior, when he saw the Jews as
sheep without a shepherd, he had compassion on them: and he wept over
Jerusalem, because they knew not the things which belong to their peace. Luke
9.11. Therefore when preachers want, to hold up the scepter of GOD before the
people, and to hold out the word, which is as it were the arm of God to pull
men from the bondage of the devil to the kingdom of Christ. Then it is time
to say, Lord let thy kingdom come.

3. The third want which we are to bewail is, that there be so many
impediments and hindrances of the kingdom of grace, as the devil and all his
angels, their instruments, the Pope, the Turk, and all the rest of the
professed wicked of the world, which by subtle intisements and tyranny, keep
back and repel the means whereby Christ rules as a king in his Church. When
the devil sees one that was sometime of his kingdom but to cast a look
toward the heavenly Jerusalem, he straightway rages against him and labors
quite to overthrow him. Wherefore in regard of all these impedi^ents, we^ must
pray, Thy kingdom come.

4. Graces to be desired.
1. IN this petition we are taught first that we are to have a fervent desire^
and to hunger, that god would give us his spirit to reign and rule in our
hearts, and to bow them to all obedience and subjection of his will: and further,
whereas our hearts have been as it were filthy sties and stables of the
devil, that he would renew them, and make of them fit temples to entertain
his holy spirit. Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a
right spirit in me, etc. Stablish me with thy free spirit. If we shall consider
the conversation of the wicked and the godly, and their corrupt hearts
together, we shall see little difference but in this, that the wicked is
delighted and glad to sin: but the godly do wrestle, as for life and death
with their temptations, and do resist the devil, and do desire the grace of
Gods spirit, and cry to heaven to be freed from this bondage, howesoeuer
their hearts are always ready to rebel against God.

2. Forasmuch as the kingdom of grace is erected in Gods Church here upon
earth, in this petition we are commanded to pray for the Chruch of God, and the
parts thereof. Psalm. 122.6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall
prosper that love thee. Esaias. 62.7. Ye which are the Lords remembrance^s, give
him no rest, until he set up Jerusalem the praise of the world.

And that Gods Church may flourish and be in good estate, we are to pray for
Christian Kings and Princes; that God would bless them, and increase the
number of them. For they are as nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to the
Church. And we especially are bound to pray for the Queens most excellent
majesty, as also for the French king, that they may be blessed and Gods
kingdom by them advanced.

And again because ministers are the Lords watchmen in the Church, we are here
also put in mind to seek their good; and to pray that their hearts may be
set for the building of Gods kingdom, for the beating down of the kingdom of
sin and Satan, and for the saving of the souls of his people. And the
rather, because the devil labors night and day to overthrow the^ in this
glorious work, and to resist them in their ministry: as appears in
Zacha^ie 3.1. When Joshua the high priest stood before the Angel of the Lord,
Satan stood at his right hand, namely to resist him. Therefore, also we are to
pray for them, that the Lord would keep them, and furnish them with gifts,
and with all make them faithful. For where vision fails the people are left
naked, says Solomon, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. Brethren, pray for us that the word of
the Lord may have a free passage and be glorified.

Thirdly, we must pray for all Christian Schools of learning. Howsoever some
think but basely of them; yet they are the ordinary means to maintain the
ministry, and so the Church of God. A man that has diverse orchards, will also
have a seminary full of young plants to maintain it. Schools, they are as
Seminaries to Gods church, without which the Church falls to decay: because
they serve to make supply of ministers.

3. Thirdly, we are to desire, that the Lord would hasten the second coming of
Christ, as the Saints in heaven pray, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: and
therefore the godly are said to love the coming of Christ. 2. Tim. 4.8. A
penitent sinner so abhors his own corruptions, and the irksome temptations of
Satan, that in this respect he desires that Christ would hasten his particular
coming to him by death, for no other cause but that he might make an end of
sinning and displeasing of God.

Thy will be done.]
1. The Coherence.
IN the second petition, we desired that God would let his kingdom come, vz.
That he would rule in our hearts. If he then must reign, we must be his
subjects: and therefore here we crave, that being his subjects we may obey
him, and do his will. Mal. 1.6. If I be a father where is my honor? If I be a
master, where is my fear?

2. The meaning.
VVIll] Here it signfieth Gods word written in the old and new Testament: For
in his word his will is reauealed. Of the whole will of God there be three
special points, which are in this place meant. 1. To believe in Christ, Ioh.
6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the
Son, and believes in him, should have everlasting life. 2. Sanctification of
body and soul. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, etc. 3. The bearing of affliction in this life. Romans verse. 29.
Those which he knew before, he did predestinate to be made like to the image of
his own son. Phil. 3.10. That I might know him and the virtue of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his afflictions, and be made conformable to
his death.

Thy will] Not mine: for man's own will is wicked and corrupt, yea it is flat
enmity to God. Romans 8. v. 5.

Done] That is, obeyed and accomplished of men. Then the effect of the prayer
is this: O Lord, seeing thou art our King, give us grace to show our selves
good subjects in obeying thy will.

3. The wants to be prayed against.
1. HEre first we are to bewail this, that our hearts are so prone to
rebellion and disobedience of Gods commandments. Put a match to a heap of
gunpowder, on a sudden it will be all on a flame; and as long as we add
matter to the fire, it burns: so by nature we are most ready to sin, so
soon as the least occasion is given. David had experience of this when he
prayed, Knit my heart to thee, O Lord, etc. Psalm. 86. 11. and incline my heart
to thy commandments. Psalm. 119.37. Those which find not this want in
themselves, and the like affection to bewail it, are in a miserable and
dangerous case: even as a man that has a great disease upon him, and knows
not of it.

2. Again, we must here bewail the sin of the world, as ignorance,
schisms, hypocrisy, pride, ambition, contempt of Gods word covetousness,
oppression, want of love of God and his word, etc. 2. Peter 2.7. Lot was vexed,
and his righteous heart was vexed with the unclean conversation of the
Sodomites from day to day: so ought our souls to be vexed and grieved
continually at the wickedness of our time: and we are to send up our prayers
to God for unbelieving and unrepentant sinners, that they may be brought to the
obedience of Gods will. Ezech. 9.4. In a common judgment upon Jerusalem, They
are marked in the forhead, that mourn and cry for all the abominations that
be done in the midst of it.

3. Here also we must humble our selves for our unquietness of mind, and
impatience, when god lays any cross on us. It is Gods will that we should
suffer affliction, and withal humble our selves under his mighty hand. Our
Savior prayed that the cup might be taken away, but with submission to his
Fathers will Luke 22.42. And this David had learned when he said, But if he
thus say, behold I have no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do to me
as seems good in his eyes. 2. Sam. 15.26.

4. Graces to be desired.
1. THe first thing which we are here to desire is, that we may have grace to
deny our selves, wills, and affections: because herein we are unlike to God,
and like the devil. This is the first lesson that our Savior does give his
disciples, that they must deny themselves and follow him.

2. The second thing is the knowledge of Gods will: for otherwise how shall we
do it? How can that servant please his master, which cannot tell what he would
have done of him? Most men will have books of statutes in their houses, and if
they be to deal in any great matter, they will do nothing before they have
looked on the statute. In like manner men should have the bible, that is, the
book of Gods statutes in their houses: the laws of God must be the men of our
counsel: before every action we are to search what is the will of God, and
then to do it. Here then we are taught to use the means, and to pray for
knowledge.

3. Again, we are here taught to have a desire in our hearts, and an
endeavor in our lives, in all things to perform obedience to Gods word in
our lives and conuersations, and in our particular callings.

4. Lastly, we desire patience and strength, when it shall please God at any
time to exercise us with the cross, as Paul prays for the Colossians, That
God would strengthen them by the power of his might, unto all patience and long
suffering with ioyfulnesse. Coloss. 1.12.

5. Error confuted:
THE Church of Rome teaches, that men by nature have free will to do good:
and that men being stirred up by the holy ghost, can of themselves will that
which is good. But if this were so, why might we not pray, Let my will be
done? So far forth as the will of man shall agree with Gods will: but this
cannot be, as we see in the tenor of this petition.

In earth as it is in heaven.
1. The meaning.
Having showed the meaning of this petition, Thy will be done: now we are to
speak of the condition, which shows in what manner we should do it. For the
question might be how we would do Gods will: and the answer is, that his will
must be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Heauen] By heaven here is meant the souls of faithful men departed, and the
elect Angels, Psalm. 103.20. Praise the Lord ye his angels, that excel in
strength, that do his commandments in obeying the voice of his word.

Earth] By earth is understood nothing but men on earth, because all other
creatures in their kind obey God: only man he is rebellious and disobedient.
Then the meaning is, Let thy will be done by us men on earth, as the Angels and
Saints departed do thy will in heaven.

Question. Do we here desire to do the will of God in that perfection it is
done by Angels? must we be as perfect as they? Ans. The words here used in
earth as it, etc. do not signify an equality (as though our obedience could
in this life be in the same degree of perfection with Angels) but a similitude
standing in the like manner of obedience. Now it may be asked in what manner do
the angels obey God? Ans. They do the will of God willingly, speedily, and
faithfully: and this is signified in that they are said in the scriptures to be
winged, and to stand continually beholding the face of our heavenly father. And
this is the manner in which we desire to perform Gods will.

2. The wants to be bewailed.
WE are here admonished to be displeased with our selves, for our slack and
imperfect obedience to God, and for our hypocrisy, privy pride, presumption,
deadnes of spirit, and many other wants which break out when we are in doing
Gods will. There is no servant of God, but has wants in his best works, so we
must understand Paul, when he says, To will is present with me, but I find no
means to perform that which is good. Romans 7.18. Where he signifies thus much
in effect, that he could begin good things, but not perfect them, and go
through-stitch, as we say. When the godly do good works, as hear, speak
gods word, pray, praise God, etc. they perform things acceptable to God: but in
these actions they find matter of mourning: namely, the imperfection of the
work: therefore David prays, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy
servant. And here we may see how far wide the Church of Rome is, that holds
good works to be any way meritorious, that be every way imperfect. If the men
of that church had grace, they might see that the corruptions of the flesh were
as gyues and fetters about their legs, that when they would feign run the
ways of Gods commandments, they are constrained to halt down right, and to
traile their loins after them.

3. Grace to be desired.
THe grace here to be desired, is sincerity of heart, or a ready and constant
purpose and endeavor not to sin in any thing, but to do Gods will, so as we
may keep a good conscience before God and men. Act. 24. 16. And for this cause
I endeavor always to have a clear conscience toward God, and toward men.
This must we hunger after, and pray for: seeing it is not sufficient to
abstain from evil, but also to do good, and in doing good, strive to come to
perfection. A conformity with Angels in this duty is to be sought for and to
be begun in this life, that in the life to come we may be like them in glory.

Give us this day our daily bread.]
1. The Goberence.
THus much of the three first petitions which concern God: now follow the
other three, which concern our selves. In which order we learn to pray for
those things which concern God absolutely: and for those things which concern
our selves not absolutely, but so far forth as they shall make for Gods
glory, the building of his kingdom, and the doing of his will.

But how depends this petition on the former? In the first we were taught to
pray, that Gods name might be hallowed: which is done when God reigns in our
hearts, and his will is done. Now further, his will is obeyed in three things:
first, by depending on his providence for the things of this life: secondly, by
depending on his mercy for the pardon of sinne^ thirdly, by depending on his
power and might, in resisting temptations. And thus Gods will is obeyed,

2. The meaning.
BR^ad] By bread in this place many of the ancient fathers, as also the Papists
at this day understand the element of bread in the Sacrament, and the body of
Christ which is the bread of life. But that cannot be: for S. Luke calls it
bread for the day, that is, bread sufficient to preserve us for the present
day; and by this he makes it manifest, that the words of this petition must be
understood not of spiritual, but of bodily food: and the bread of life is
more directly asked in the second or fourth petition. As for the opinion of
Erasmus, who thinks that in this so heavenly a prayer made to God the Father,
there should be no mention made of bread, that is, of earthly things, which
even the Gentiles bestow on their children; it is vain and frivolous. For it
is Gods will, that we should not cast the care of heavenly things only, but
all our care upon him. 1. Pet. 5. 7. And he has elsewhere commanded that
earthly things should be asked at his hand, 1. King 8.35. and the same has
been asked in prayer of Jacob, Genesis 28.10. and Solomon, Prou^ 20.7. And whereas
the Lords prayer is a perfect platform of prayer, temporal blessing must have
some place there, unless we will ascribe the having and inioying of them to
our own industry, as though they were no gifts of God: which to think were
great impiety.

By bread then we must understand properly a kind of food made of the flower
of grain that is baked and eaten: and thus it must be taken in those places of
scripture where bread is opposed to water or wine: and by a figure more
generally it signifies all things whereby temporal life is preserved: in this
sense goats milk is called bread, Prou. 27.27. and the fruit of trees, Ier.
11.19. and all things that pass to and fro in traffic. Prou. 31. 14. And so
likewise in this place by this one means of sustaining our bodies and
temporal lives, all other means whatsoever must be understood, as meat,
drink, clothing, health, liberty, peace, etc.

And whereas our Savior Christ under the name of bread, and not under the name
of any other plentiful or dainty food, teaches us to ask temporal
blessings; he does it for two causes. The first is, that we might hereby learn
frugalitie and moderation in our ^^et, apparel, houses; and be content if we
have no more but bread, that is, things necessary to preserve life, which Paul
comprehends under food and clothing. For we are taught in this petition to ask
no more. We must not with the I^raelites murmr because they had nothing but
Manna.

Question. Must we then use Gods creatures only for necessity? Ans. We may
use them not only for necessity, but also for honest delight and pleasure,
Psalm. 104. 15. God gives wine to make glad the heart of man: and oil to make
his face shine. And John 12.3. our Savior Christ allowed of the fact of Marie,
which took a pound of ointment of Spikenard very costly, and anointed his
very feet, so that all the house was filled with the smell; though Judas did
esteem it wast. Yet if it so fall out that the Lord do grant us but bread,
that is, so much as shall hold body and soul together, we must thankfully
content our selves therewith. 1. Tim. 6. 8. Therefore when we have food and
raiment, let us be therewith content. This contentation was practiced of Jacobs
Genesis 28.20.

A second cause is to teach us that there is a particular providence. All men
willingly confess the general providence of GOD over all things: but beside
that we must acknowledge another more special providence, even in the least
things that be: because every morsel of bread which we eat, would no more
nourish us then a piece of earth, or a stone, unless God give his blessing
unto it.

Daily] The word in the original is thus much in effect, Bread unto our
essence or substances: then the meaning is, give us such bread from day to day,
as may nourish our substances. Thus prays Agur, Prou. 30. 8. Feed me with
food convenient for me. Some there are which put an Angelical perfection in
fasting: but we are taught in Scriptures; that as above all things we are to
seek for life eternal; so we must in this life have care to sustain and
maintain our natural life, that we may have convenient space and time to
repent, and prepare our selves to the kingdom of heaven. Fasting in it self
as it is an abstinence from meat, is no part of Gods worship, but in it own
nature, a thing indifferent: and therefore it is to be used so far forth as
it shall further us in Gods service, and no further. And seeing we are taught
to pray for such food as shall preserve nature, and maintain the vital
blood, we ought not to use fasting to the hindrance or destruction of nature.

Our bread] 1. Quest. How is bread ours? Ans. Paul shows how, 1. Corinthians.
^.22. Ye are Christ's, and all things are yours: So then by means of Christ,
bread is called our. For GOD having given Christ to us, does in him and by him
give all things else to us. 2. Quest. How may I know that the things I enjoy
are mine by Christ, and that I do not usurp them? Ans. 1. Tim. 4. 4. Paul
says that the creatures of God are good, and that the use of them is
sanctified to us by the word and prayer. Then if we have the word of God to
tell us that we may enjoy and use them: and also if we pray to God for the
right and pure use of them, we are no usurpers, but indeed right owners of
them, not only before men, but also before God. 3. Question. If the creatures
must be made ours by Christ, how comes it to pass that the ungodly have such
abundance of them? Ans. We lost the title and interest of the creatures in
Adam: yet God of his mercy bestows temporary blessings upon the unjust as
well as upon the just: but for all that, unless they be in Christ, and hold
the title of them by him, they shall in the end turn to their greater
condemnation.

And whereas we call it our bread, we learn that every man must live of his
own calling, and his own goods. Here also is condemned all oppression,
stealing, lying, cogging, and other such deceitful means which men use to get
wealth and goods. Many think it no sin to provide for their families in such
order, but in saying this petition they pray against themselves. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
10. He which labors not, let him not eat. Ephesians. 4.28. He which stole, let
him steale^ no more, but rather labor with his hands the thing that good is.

This day] We say not here this week, this month, this age, but this day;
what means this? may we not provide for the time to come? Ans. It is lawful,
yea a man is bound in good manner to provide for time to come. Act. 11.28. The
Apostles provided for the Church in Judea against the time of dearth foretold
by Agabus. And Joseph in Egypt in the years of plenty stored up against the
years of famine. Wherefore in these words our Savior his meaning is only to
condemn all distrustful care that distracts the minds of men, and to teach us
to rest on his fatherly goodness from day to day in every season: this is noted
unto us, Numb. 11. where the Israelites were commanded to gather no more Manna
then would serve for one day, and if they did, it putrified. Whereby God taught
them to rest on his providence every particular day, and not on the means.

Give v^] Not me. This serves to teach us that a man must not only regard
himself, but also be mindful of others. For a man that has wealth is made a
steward to distribute his goods to the poor and the good of Gods Church. True
love seeks not her own things; the branches of the vine are laden with
clusters of grapes, not for themselves, but for others: the candle spends it
self to give others light.

Giue] If bread be ours, wherefore are we to ask it? it may seem needless.
Answ. Not so: for hereby we are taught to wait on God, who is the fountain
and the giver of all blessings. Men usually driven to any distress, use evil
means, as robbing, deceiving, consulting with wizzards, etc. 2. Again here we
learn, that though a man had all the wealth in the world, all is nothing
without Gods blessing. Question. The rich need not say, Give us, etc. for they
have abundance already, and what need they ask that which they have? Answer.
Let a man be never so rich, and want nothing that can be desired, yet if he
want Gods blessing, in effect he wants all. Wherefore even Kings, and the
greatest personages that be, are as much bound to use this petition as the
poorest. Gods blessing is riches, says Solomon, Prou. 10.22. Thou may eat
and not have enough, be clothed and not warm, earne wages and put it in a
broken bag, Hag. 1. 6. if God do not bless thee. This blessing of God is
called the staff of bread, Esaias. 3. 1. In bread there be two things, the
substance and the virtue thereof proceeding from gods blessing: this second,
that is, the power of nourishing is the staff of bread. For take away from an
aged man his staff, and he falls: and so take away Gods blessing from bread
and the strength thereof, it becomes unprofitable, and cease to nourish.
Lastly, here we see that all labor and toil taken in any kind of calling is
nothing and auailes not, unless God still give his blessing. Psalm. 127.1.

3. The wants which are to be bewailed.
Sins which we are taught in this petition to bewail are two especially. I.
Covetousness, a vice which is naturally engrafted in every man's heart; it is
when a man is not content with his present estate. This desire is insatiable,
and men that have enough would still have more. Wherefore he which shall use
this petition must be grieved for this sin, and pray with David, Psalm. 119.
36. Incline my heart to thy commandments, and not to covetousness. And he must
sorrow, not so much for the act of this sin, as for the corruption of nature
in this behalf. Covetous people will plead that they are free from this vice,
but mark men's lives, and we shall see it is a common disease, as David noted,
Psalm. 4.6. where he brings in the people, saying: who shall show us any good?
This then is a common sin that we are taught to mourn for.

2. The second want is diffidence and distrustfulnes in Gods providence
touching the things of this life. Men also will shift this off and say, they
would be sorry to distrust God. But if we do but a little look into the
corruption of our nature, we shall see that we are deceived. For being in
prosperity, we are not troubled: but if once we be pressed with adversity,
then we howl and weep, and as Paul says, 1. Tim. 6.10. Men pierce themselves
through with many sorrows. If a man shall loose a part of his goods, what then
does he? straight he goes out to the wise man: is this to believe in God? No:
it is to distrust God and believe the devil.

4. Graces to be desired.
THe grace to be desired is a readiness in all estates of life to rest on Gods
providence, whatsoever fall out. Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way to the Lord, and
trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass. Prou. 16. 3. Commit or role thy
works upon the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed. Whereby we are
admonished to take pains in our callings to get meat and drink, etc. If the
Lord bless not our labor we must be content: if he do, we must give him
thanks. Now for this cause we are further to pray to God that he would open
our eyes, and by his spirit teach us in all his good creatures to see his
providence, and when means fail and are contrary, then also to believe in
the same, and to follow Paul's example. Phil. 4.12.

5. Errors confuted.
PApists teach that men by works of grace may merit life eternal, and
increase of justification in this life. But how can this be? for here we see
that every bit of bread which we eat, is the free gift of God without any
merit of ours. Now, if we can not merit a piece of bread, what madness is it to
think that we can merit life everlasting.

2. They also are deceived who think; that any thing comes by mere chance or
fortune, without Gods providence. Indeed in respect of men who know not the
causes of things, many chances there are: but so, as that they are ordered and
come to pass by Gods providence. Luke 10.31. By chance there came down a
certain priest that way.

Forgive us our debts.]
1. The Coherence.
THis is the fifth petition and the second of those which concern our selves:
in the former we craved temporal blessings, in this and the next which
follows, we crave spiritual blessings. Where we may note, that seeing there
is two petitions, which concern spiritual things, and but one for temporal;
that the care for our souls must be double, to the care of our bodies. In the
world men care for their bodies, their hearts are set for wealth and promotion:
they can be content to hear the word on the Sabbath, yet neither then, nor in
the week day do they lay it up in their hearts, and practice it, which argues
that they have little or no care for their souls.

Question. What is the cause that first we crave things for the body, and in
the second place those which concern the soul? Ans. The order of the holy
Ghost in these petitions is wonderful: for the Lord considers the dulnes and
backwardnes of men's natures: and therefore he trains them up, and draws them
on by little, even as a schoolmaster does his young scholars: propounding unto
them some small elements and principles, and so carrying them to higher points.
For the former petition is a step or degree to these two following. The ruler
by the healing of the body of his child is brought to believe in Christ. Ioh.
4.53. He then that will rest on Gods mercy for the pardon of his sins, must
first of all rest on Gods providence for this life: and he that can not put his
affiance in God for the provision of meat and drink, how shall he trust Gods
mercy for the salvation of his soul? Here we may see the faith of worldlings:
they say that God is merciful, and that they believe in Christ: which can not
be true: seeing in lesser matters, as meat and drink, they distrust God, as
appears by their covetousness. Again, by this order we are taught as earnestly
to seek for the pardon of our sins, as we seek for temporal blessings.

2. The meaning.
DEbt] By debts sins are meant, as it is in Luke 11.4. and they are so
called, because of the resemblance between them. For even as a debt does bind
a man, either to make satisfaction, or else to go to prison: so our sins
binds us either to satisfy Gods justice, or else to suffer eternal damnation.

Forgiue] To forgive sin, is to cover it, or not to impute it. Psalm. 32.1.
And this is done when God is content of his mercy to accept the death and
passion of Christ as a sufficient payment and ransom for man's sins, and so
to esteem them as no sins. And here under this one benefit of remission of
sins, all the rest of the same kind are understood, as justification,
sanctification, redemption, glorification, etc.

3. The uses of the words.
HEnce we may learn many lessons: the first is, that seeing we must pray thus,
Lord forgive, etc. we are to hold, that there is no satisfaction to gods
justice for sin by our works, no not in temporary punishments: but that the
doing away of our sins is of Gods mere favor: for to forgive and to
satisfy be contrary: wherefore the doctrine of humane satisfactions, taught
in the Church of Rome, is vile and deuilish.

2. Secondly, whereas we are taught thus to pray continually from day to day,
we note the great patience and long suffering of God, that suffers and
forbeares still, and does not pour out his confusion upon us, though we offend
his majesty day by day. This teaches us like patience toward our brethren:
we our selves can not put up the least injury and forbear but one day, and
yet we desire that God would forgive us daily to the end of our lives.

3. Again we may observe, that there is no perfect sanctification in this life,
seeing we must every day to the end crave the pardon of our sins. Therefore
wicked is the opinion of the Catharists or Puritans, which hold that men may be
without sin in this life.

4. And when we say, forgive, not me but us: we are put in mind to pray, not
only for the pardon of our own sins, but likewise for our brethren and
enemies, Iam 5.17. Confess one an other, and pray one for an other: for the
prayer of the righteous avails much, if it be fervent. And as some think,
the prayer of Steven was a means of the conversion of Saul.

5. Also we note that before prayer for pardon of sin, must go a confession
of sin: for whereas we say, forgive our debts, we confess before God that we
are flat bankrupts and not able to discharge the least of our sins: this
appears 1. Ioh. 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful to forgive us.
And it was practiced by David, Psalm. 51. and 32.5. The manner of making
confession is this: known sins, and those which trouble the conscience, are
to be confessed particularly; but unknown sins generally, Psalm. 19.12.

6. Lastly, hence it is manifest, that there is no justification by works. Our
sins are debts, and so also are all works of the law: and it were a fond
thing to imagine that a man might discharge one debt by another.

4. Wants to be bewailed.
THe wants to be bewailed are the burden of our sins and the corruptions of
our natures, and the wickedness of our lives, and the sins of our youth, and
of our old age, Psalm. 40. 12. My sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am
not able to look up: they are more in number then the hairs of my head:
therefore mine heart has failed me. Thus with David we are to travel and groan
under this burden: but this grief for sin, is a rare thing in the world.
Men can mourn bitterly for the things of this life, but their sins never
trouble them. Again, this sorrow must be for sin, because it is sin,
though there were neither hell to torment, nor devil or conscience to accuse,
nor judge to revenge.

5. Graces to be desired.
THe grace which we must desire, is the spirit of grace and deprecations.
Zachar. 12.10. which is that gift of the holy Ghost, whereby we are enabled to
call to God for the pardon of our sins. A man having offended the laws of a
prince, and being in danger of death, will never be at quiet till he have
gotten a pardon: even so they which feel and see them sins having this
spirit, are so moved, that they can never be at rest, till in prayer they be
eased of the burden of their sins. A man may, I grant, babble and speak
many words, but he shall never pray effectually, before he have this spirit of
prayer to make him cry, Abba, father. For worldly commodities all can pray:
but learn to pray for the want of Christ.

As we forgive our debts.
1. The Coherence.
THese words be a part of the fifth petition, which is propounded with a
condition. Forgive us as we forgive others: and these words depend on the
former as the reason thereof, which seems to be taken from the comparison of
the less to the greater, thus: if we who have but a spark of mercy, do
forgive others: then do thou, who art the fountain of mercy, forgive us: but
we forgive others: therefore do thou forgive us. Thus Luke, 11.4. has it,
Forgive us our sins, for even we forgive. Rhem. Test. on Luke 7. 47. the
Papists take it otherwise, who say, Forgive us as we forgive, making our
forgiving a cause, for which God is moved to forgive us in temporal
punishments: whereas our forgiving of men is only a sign or effect that God
does forgive us.

2. The meaning.
1. Quest. Whether is a man bound to forgive all debts? Ans. The word debt, in
this place is not understood of debt that is civil, and comes by lawful
bargaining, but of hurts and damages which are done unto us in our bodies,
goods, or good name. As for the former civil debts, a man may exact them, so
he do it with showing of mercy.

2. Quest. How may any man forgive trespasses, seeing God only forgiues sin?
Ans. In every trespass which any do to their neighbors, there be two
offenses, one to God, another to man. In the first respect, as it is against
God and his commandment, it is called a sin; and that God only forgiues:
in the other respect it is called an injury or damage, and so man may forgive
it. When a man is robbed, the law is broken by stealing, and the injury that
is done is against a man that has his goods stolen. This injury, as it is an
injury a man may forgive; but as it is a sin, he can not, but God only.

3. Quest. Whether may a man lawfully pray this petition, and yet sue him at
the law, who has done him wrong? Ans. A man may in an holy manner sue another
for an injury: and as a soldier in lawful war may kill his enemy, and yet
love him: so may a man forgive an injury, and yet seek in a Christian manner
the remedy: but in doing of this we must observe five things. 1. We are to
take heed of all private revenge, and inward hatred; which if we conceive, we
do not forgive. 2. We must take heed of offense, and have care that our
doings be not scandalous to the Church. 3. Our suites must be taken in hand to
maintain godly peace: for if all injuries were put up, there would be no
civil state or government. 4. This must be, that the party offending may be
chastised, and he brought to repentance for his fault: for if many men were not
repressed, they would grow worse. 5. Law must be the last remedy. As
Physicians use desperate remedies, when weaker will not serve: even so must we
use law, as the last means when all other ^aile. The dealing of the world in
this case is no example for us to follow. For through rage and stomach men
will abide no private agreement, and therefore they use the law in the first
place, as the Corinthians did: but what says Paul. 1. Cor. 6.7. It is utterly
a fault among you. But if the law be used aright, a Christian man may sue his
neighbor at law, and love the party sued: for there is difference between
dealing against a man before a magistrate, and the dealing of one private man
with another. For private dealing is commonly revenge, and therefore unlawful.

3. The use.
THe use of this clause is very profitable, for it shows us a lively sign,
whereby our consciences may be assured of the pardon of our sins, namely a
readiness and willing desire to forgive men. Many use these words long and
often, yet find no assurance of pardon: and the cause is, because they have no
desire of Gods mercy, nor willingness to forgive others, which if indeed
they had, then no doubt the forgiveness of their sins should by this means be
sealed unto them. Wherefore if any would be persuaded of Gods mercy in this
point, let them descend into their own souls, and search narrowely, if they
can find their hearts as ready to forgive, as they are ready to desire
forgiveness at gods hand, then they may assure themselves of gods mercy in
Christ, as we are taught by our Savior Christ^ Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the
merciful for they shall obtain mercy. Consider these comparisons. A man
walking under a wall in a cold sunny day, is heated of the wall which first
received heat from the Sun: so he that shows mercy to others, has first
received mercy from God. Also take a piece of wax, and put to a seal; it
leaves an impression or mark like it self in the wax: which when a man
looks on, he does certainly know that there has been a seal, the print
whereof is left behind. Even so it is in every one that has a readiness to
forgive others: by which a Christian may easily know that God has sealed to
him the forgiveness of his sins in his very heart: therefore let men look
into their hearts, whether they have any affection to forgive others, for that
is as it were the print in their hearts of Gods mercy toward them in
forgiving them.

Many there are which pray for pardon at Gods hand, but they cannot brook it,
that they should forgive their neighbors. Hereupon come these sayings: I may
forgive him, but I will not forget him: he may come in my Pater noster, but he
shall not come in my creed. Behold the devils logic, which makes malice to be
charity. Blind people play with the Lords prayer, as the fly does with the
candle til she be burnt: for the more they pray these words, the more they
call for vengeance against themselves. Iam. 2.13. Neither will it help to omit
this clause, as some have done in Chrysostomes days: for this is even to mock
God: and if we do not forgive, we shall not be forgiven.

Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
1. The Coherence.
IT might seem to some, that this petition is superfluous, for what need he
care for temptations, that has the pardon of his sins? but our Savior did
not teach us thus to pray without special reason. 1. Because forgiveness of
sins, and grievous temptations be inseparable companions in this life: which
thing we find to be true, both in Gods word and in Christian experience: for
there is no man in this world so beaten, and buffeted with temptations, as the
penitent sinner that cries most bitterly for the pardon of his sins. This is
the estate that few men in the world are acquainted with. For many are never
troubled with temptation, but live in all peace and quietness both in body and
soul. Luke 11.21. When the strong man armed keeps his hold, the things that
he possesses are in peace. Whereby is signified, that the wicked of the world
being possessed of Satan, are not a whit molested by him with any temptations:
neither need he trouble them, seeing he has them at commandment to do what
he will. But when a man once begins to make conscience of sin, and to sue unto
the Lord for pardon of his offenses, and still continues in dislike of sin
and Satan: then the enemy bestirres him, and uses all means to bring that
man to confusion: he offers all manner of temptations to molest him, and never
affoards this poor sinner any rest. Hereupon, for fear of being overcome,
he must pray continually unto the Lord, that he may not be lead into
temptation.

Here some Christian conscience may reason thus. No man is so troubled with
sin and Satan, as I: therefore I am not in Gods favor, but am a plain
castaway. Ans. If pardon of sin and temptations go together, all is
contrary. If thou had no grief for sin, no buffettings of thine enemies,
the flesh, the world, and the devil, thou could not be in Gods favor, but
under the power of Satan: now this great measure of the spiritual temptations,
is a sign rather of Gods love. For whom God loves, the devil hates; and
where God works in love, the devil works in malice.

2. Secondly, this petition is joined with the former to teach us, that as we
must be careful to pray for pardon of sins past: so also we must endeavor
to prevent sins to come: we must not fall again into our old sins, neither
must we be overtaken with new sins.

2. The meaning.
THese words be but all one petition: which has two parts, the latter being a
declaration of the former. Lead us not into temptation: how is that done? by
delivering us from evil.

Temptation] Temptation is nothing else, but the enticement of the soul or
heart, either by the corruption of man's nature, or the allureme^ts of the
world, or the devil, to any sin. Iam. 1.15. God tempts no man: that is, God
mooues no man to sin.

Lead us not] Or carry us not into temptation. To be led, is to be overcome of
the temptation when it preu^iles and wholly gets the victory: so as men
tempted are brought to perdition. Then the meaning is this^ When we are moved
or entised to sin, Lord keep us that we be not overcome; and give thou an
issue with the temptation.

Quest. God is just and cannot sin: but if he lead men into temptation shall
he not be the author of sin? Ans. Indeed many fearing to charge God with
sin, read the words thus, Suffer us not to be led. But the text is very
plain, Lead, or carry us not. And the scriptures elsewhere, use the like
phrases of god. Exodus 7.3. God is said to harden Pharaohs heart. 2. Sam. 24. 1.
The Lord moved David to number the people. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. God sent strong
delusions that men might believe lies. These and such like places have a
special meaning, thus to be gathered. There is no action of man, or of the
devil, absolutely evil: but although in some respects it be evil, yet in
some other it is good: for we are not to think that as there is a maine or
absolute good, so also there is a maine or absolute evil. Thus then,
temptation being an action, it is not in every respect evil: but in some good,
in some evil. And so far forth as it is good, the Lord works it: but as it
is evil, he does not work it, but willingly permits it to be done by man and
Satan.

1. And there be four respects in which God may be a worker in temptations and
yet be free from sin. I. First, he tempts by offering occasions and objects
to try whether a man will sin or not. A master suspecting his servant, which
in word professes fidelity, lays a purse of money in his way, to try if he
will steal it: which if he steal, he has found by watching him, a secret
thief; and so has laid him open for deceiving any more. Now, this trying of
him is no sin, though he sin in stealing. In the same manner tempts God
his own servants, to prove and try them. Deuteronomy. ^3.3. Thou shall not harken
unto the words of the prophet or dreamer of dreams: for the Lord thy God
proves you to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart. 2.
Secondly, God leads into temptation by withdrawing his grace. Neither can this
be a sin in God: because he is bound to no man to give him grace. And here is
a difference between the tempting of God and Satan. God holds back grace when
he tempts, the devil suggests evil motions. 3. Every action so far forth as
it is an action is good, and of God. Act. 17. 28. In him we live, move, and
have our being. Therefore god is a worker in temptations, so far forth as they
are actions. One man kills another: the very moving of the body in the doing
of this villainy is of God: but the wickedness of the actio^ is from man, and
the devil. A man rides upon a lame horse, and stirs him: the rider is the cause
of the motion, but the horse himself of the halting in the motion. So God is
author of the action, but not of the evil of the action. 4. The fourth way is
in regard of the end. God tempts his servants only to correct and humble them
for their sins, and to try how they will abide the cross, and to move
them the more to love him. Deuteronomy. 8.2. God afflictes the children of Israel, to
try them whether they would keep his commandments. 2. Chr. 31.31. He tries
Ezechias to see what was in his heart. The devils end in tempting, is only to
bring the party to destruction. Thus we need not fear to say, that God in
some respects does tempt his own servants.
Deliver us from euill] That is, free us from the power of the flesh, the
devil, and the world. Some take evil in this place only for the devil, but
we may take it more largely for all spiritual enemies. 1. Ioh. 5.19. The
whole world lies in evil. vz. Under the power of sin and Satan. These words
(as I have said) are a proof and explanation of the former: for when a man is
delivered from evil, he is not led into temptation: the cause being taken
away, the effect cease.

3. The uses.
1. HEnce we learn what a righteous God, Iehoua is, that can work in evil
actions, and yet be void of sin.

2. Whereas we say, lead us not, etc. We note that the devil in temptation^
can go no further then God permits him.

3. We are not to pray that temptations be quite taken from us, or that we be
wholly freed from them: but that they do not overcome us. For it is the Lords
will that his Church should be tempted. Nay, David desired some kind of
temptations. Psalm. 26.1. Prove me, O Lord. And James says, Account it for
exceeding joy, when ye shall fall into diverse temptations. Iam. 1.2.

4. Note also that every man by nature is the bondslaue of sin and Satan. For
where is deliverance, there was a bondage first. This confutes the Papists who
maintain free will: for we are dead in sin by nature, as a man in a grave; and
we must still pray thus till we be fully delivered.

4. Wants to be bewailed.
THe corruption, which in this petition we ought to mourn for, is the
continual rebellion of our wicked natures; and our pronenesse to yield up our
selves in every temptation to sin and Satan. And the remnants of the old
bondage under Satan must be grievous and irksome unto us, and we must bewail
them bitterly. The Jews in a bodily captivity, wept when they remembered Sion.
Psalm. 1.27. How much more should we weep, when we feel the law of our
members rebelling against the law of our minds, and leading v^ captive to
sin.

5. Graces to be desired.
THe contrary blessing to be desired, is that God would stablish us by his
free spirit. Psalm. 51.12. Which is so called, because it sets us every day more
and more at liberty out of the reach of sin and Satan.

For thine is the kingdom, the power and glory, for ever.
1. The meaning.
THese words contain a reason of all the former petitions: whereby we are
moved to crave things needful at Gods hand.

Thine is] Earthly kings have kingdom, power, and glory, Dan. 2.37. Yet not
from themselves, but from God, whose vicegerents they are on earth. Therefore
to make a difference between Gods kingdom, power, and glory, and those of
earthly kings, it is said, Thine is the kingdom, etc. that is, that God has
all these in himself, and from himself, and men from him.

The kingdome] These words, 1. Chro. 26.11. are fully expounded, Thine, O Lord,
is greatness, power, and victory, and praise: and all that is in heaven and
earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, and thou excellest as head over all,
etc. The kingdom is said to be Gods, because he is absolute professor and
owner of all things that are; and also has sovereign rule over all things at
his will. Now out of this first property of God we may gather a strong motive
to induce us to pray unto him alone. For seeing all things are his, both in
heaven and earth whatsoever; therefore we must come to him for the graces and
blessings which we desire.

The power] Oftentimes earthly princes have kingdoms, yet want power: but God
has kingdom and power also: yea his power is infinite, and he can do all
that he will, and more then he will: as for those things which come of
impotencie, he can not do them; and if he could, he should not be omnipotent.
And as he is omnipotent in himself, so all the power which any creature has,
is from him alone.

Question. How can this be, seeing the devil has power to sin; which is not
from God? Ans. To sin is no power, but rather a want of power: otherwise all
the strength and power Satan has, is of God.

And from this second property is taken another motive to move us to pray
unto God. Because all power being his, we can never do any of the things
which we ask, but by power received from him.

Thine is the glorie] This third property of God, arises from the two former,
for seeing the title and interest in all things, and the power whereby they are
disposed and governed, is of God: therefore it follows that all glory is his:
yea in him is fullness of glory, and the glory of the creature is all of him.
To sinful men belongs nothing but shame and confusion. Dan. 9.7.

This third property ministers a third motive to induce men to pray unto God
alone. For seeing all glory by right is his, therefore we must invoke hi^
holy name, that in so doing, we may give him the glory due unto him.

For euer] The words in the original are, for ages. Now an age signifies the
space of an hundred years: but here it is taken for eternity: because
eternity is nothing but multiplication of ages. And as eternity is here noted
by ages, so on the contrary we read, that eternity is taken for a certain
and distinct time. Genesis 17.8. God promises Abraham to give him the land of
Canaan for an everlasting possession: that is, for a long season. For else
Abraham's seed should inherit the land until this time, which it does not.
Wherefore, as often the whole is put for the part, vz. eternity for a certain
time: so here the part is put for the whole, ages for eternity. This also
makes a difference between earthly princes and the mighty Jehovah. They have
kingdom, power, and glory for a short time, but he absolutely and for ever.

2. The uses.
1. HEre we learn in prayer to abase our selves before God, and utterly to
deny all that is in us. Kingdom, power, and glory is all his, not ours: we
are no better then rebels and traitors to him: if we have any good thing, it
is from him, even the grace whereby we pray. And he that in prayer will not
confess this, shall no more be heard, then the insolent beggar that will not
acknowledge his want.

2. Secondly, in prayer we learn, that we must be persuaded of two things, and
build upon them; Gods power, and will: his power, in that he is able; his will,
in that he is careful to perform our requests, as it was noted in the
preface: the first of these is signified by kingdom and power, the second is
noted in that glory is his. 2. Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of God in him,
are yea, and Amen, unto the glory of God.

3. Again, we gather that prayer and thanksgiving must go together: for as in
the six petitions we made request unto God; so in these words we praise him,
and thereby give him thanks. Phil. 4.6. But in all things let your requests be
showed to god in prayer and supplication with thanksgiving. There is none but
in want will be ready to pray: but when we have received, we are slack in
giving of thanks: but he which will pray aright, must join them both
together. And the sum of all gods praise stands in these three points. 1.
That he is an absolute King. 2. That he has absolute power to rule all things.
3. That having power and a kingdom, he has glory also, which appears in the
holding of his kingdo^^, and the showing of his power in governing of it.

4. Whatsoever we ask, we must refer it to Gods glory: this is the first
thing which we are taught to crave, and the last we are to perform, because
it is noted both in the beginning, and in the end of the prayer.

Thus much of the use of these words altogether: now let us make use of them
particularly. 1. Whereas we say, Thine is the kingdom. Magistrates and rulers
must know, that all the authority and rule which they have is from the Lord,
and therefore they must remember to order themselves as Gods vicegerents, using
their power to bring men in subjection to Gods laws; and referring all their
callings to his glory.

2. Where we say, Thine is the power, we are admonished, when we are to
perform any work, as to do service to God, to keep our selves in the
compass of our callings, and that we have no power of our selves: and for this
cause we must ask power at gods hands, that we may be enabled to walk
uprightly before him, and do our duties. 3. In saying, Thine is the glory, we
learn, that if we would have a good report and praise among men, we must
above all things seek Gods glory, not regarding so much our own. If he give
thee praise among men, give him thanks: if not, be content, because al glory
is his.

Amen.
1. The meaning.
We have heard the preface, and the petitions what they are: now follows
the third part, which is the assent or testification of faith required in
prayer in this word Amen. And it contains more then men at the first would
imagine: It signifies, certainly, so be it, or it shall be so. 2. Cor. 1.20. It
is often taken for a bare assent of the people, saying Amen to the minister:
but in this place it contains more; for every point in this prayer is not
only a direction for public prayer, but for private also, and must be said as
well of the minister as of the people. Now then, there being two principal
things in prayer: the first a desire of grace: the second faith, whereby we
believe that God will grant things desired. The first is expressed in the six
petitions: the latter is set forth in this word Amen, carrying this sense in
effect. As we have craved these things at thy hands, O Lord: so we do believe
that for Christ's ^ake, in thy good time thou will grant them to us. Therefore
this part is more excellent then the former, by how much our faith is more
excellent the^ our desire. For in this word is contained the testification of
our faith, whereas the petitions are only testifications of our desires. And as
it is in the end, so also it is the seal of our prayers to make them
authentical, and it is to be used (as men commonly take it) not only for this
end to answer the minister, praying in the congregation, but also to testify
our faith for the thing desired.

2. Graces to be desired.
HEreby we are taught, what grace we are to show in prayer. We must labor to
give assent to Gods promises when we pray, and strive against doubting and
unbelief. Mat 9.11. Lord, I believe, Lord help mine unbelief. Psalm. 42.11.
Why art thou cast down my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? wait on
God.

Many there are that will stand upon the strength of their faith, and plead for
themselves that they never doubted, but they are far wide; for true faith
being imperfect, is always accompanied with doubting more or less. Wherefore
the heart that never felt doubting, is not filled with faith, but with
presu^ption. As for them which are molested with doubtings, and complain of
the^, they have less cause to fear: for as fire and water does never strive
till they meet; no more does doubting and faith, till faith be wrought in the
heart.

To conclude, we see what an excellent work prayer is: in which two most
excellent graces of a Christian man be showed forth, hungring after mercy, and
faith, whereby we believe the obtaining of it. This might move men to learn to
pray, prayer being the exercise of grace.

Of the use of the Lords prayer.
THe principal use of the Lords prayer, is to direct gods Church in making
their prayers in all places, at all times, and upon all occasions, though their
prayers should be innumerable: and unless they be framed after this prayer,
they cannot be acceptable unto God. In the using of it for direction there be
three things required. 1. The first is the knowledge of the Lords prayer, and
all the parts thereof. He that would pray by it, must understand the meaning
thereof, the wants therein to be bewailed, and the graces to be desired, for
which end it has been expounded. 2. Knowing this, there is in the second
place required thus much skill, that he be able to refer every want and
grace to one of the six petitions: for example, feeling in himself pride of
heart, he must be able to say, this is a want in the first petition: and
feeling a rebellion and slownes in doing Gods commandments, he must be able to
say, this is a sin to be prayed against in the third petition. Thus every
want he must refer to his proper head: again, he must refer every grace to
be desired to one of the six petitions: as strength in temptation to the sixth:
affiance in Gods providence to the fourth: knowledge of God to the first, etc.
and so in the rest. 3. In the third place, he must before he pray, consider
what be his wants and imperfections which most trouble him, as also the graces
which he would obtain: then for the helping of his memory, he must go to the
petitions, and he must set those things first in his mind, which concern the
first petition: and those which concern the second petition, must have the
second place in his mind, and so he must proceed in order as he shall have
occasion. Thus a man keeping in mind the order of the petitions as they stand,
shall be able by referring every grace and want to his proper head, to make
distinct prayer: and to vary it as time, place, and other occasions shall
move him.

Quest. Must we of necessity follow all the petitions in conceiving a prayer?
Ans. No, but only those which do principally belong to the time, place, and
occasion, as Paul makes a prayer, Coloss. 1.9,10. And all the points of it may
be referred to the third and last petitions.

Again, a Christian man may make an excellent confession of his sins by this
prayer: if he shall, keeping the order of the petitions, confess and bewail
the sins which every petition requires us to pray against. And it serves to
make a thanksgiving to God, thus: let a man remember all the graces which he
has received from God, let him then refer them to the petitions, and give
thanks to God after the order of them, turning every petition into a
thanksgiving.

Of the circumstances of prayer.
Quest. 1. Whether a man is to use a voice in prayer? Answ. In public prayer
it is requisite that there be a voice: for the minister i^ the mouth of the
people, and to the prayer which he conceiues, they give assent. For private
prayer, using of a voice is convenient; yet so as it may be done in silence. I.
The Lord gave us the voice, as well as the heart to bless him withal. Iam.
3.9. II. God created the tongue as well as the heart; and so will be praised
by both. III. The voice often stirs up the heart: and again, the vehemency
of affection does often draw out a voice: the voice then in private prayer is
requisite, yet in some cases may be omitted, for it is not absolutely
necessary. Moses and Anna prayed in silence.

Quest. 2. What gesture is to be used in prayer? Ans. The word does not
affoard any particular direction. Our Savior and his disciples prayed in
diverse gestures: kneeling, standing, groueling, looking to heaven, looking down
to the earth, sitting, lying, etc. Luke 11.41. Act. 7. god respects not the
gesture, but the affection of the heart: yet two things must always be in
gesture: first, that it be comely: secondly, that it do fitly express the
affection of the heart: as when we ask mercy, to look to heaven: when we
bewail our sins to look downward, and to humble our bodies etc.

Question. 3. What place must we pray in? Ans. The place is set down, 1. Tim.
2.8. We may pray in all places: of which there is no difference. Some will say,
that in the time of the law, the tabernacle and temple were places of divine
prayer. Ans. The temple and tabernacle were types of Christ and his Church, and
the unity of it: but now, we having the thing it self signified thereby,
may pray in all places. Our Savior prayed in the wilderness, on the Mount,
Peter on the house top, Paul by the sea shore: yet so, that public prayer
must be used in public places, as Churches, Chapels, etc. not because in them
is more holiness, but for order sake.

Quest. 4. What is the time appointed for prayer? Ans. Pray continually, 1,5,7.
that is, upon all occasions: or when a man begins any business, whether it
be in word or deed, Coloss. 3. 17. or as Daniel, who prayed thrice every day,
Dan. 6.11. or as David, who prayed at evening and morning, and noone-tyde.
Psalm. 55. 18. and seven times a ^aie: that is, many. Psalm. 119.140. Thus we
shall pray continually. Every day affoards three special occasions. 1. The
entrance to our callings in the morning. 2. The receiving of Gods creatures at
noone-tyde. 3. The going to rest at night. Again, beside set and solemn
prayers, there be certain kinds of short prayers which the fathers call
Eiaculationes, that is, the liftings up of the heart into heaven secretly and
suddenly: and this kind of praying may be used as occasion is offered enery
hour in the day.

Quest. 5. Whether may we pray for all men or no? Ans. We may and we may not.
We may, if all men, or mankind be taken distributiuely, or severally. For there
is no particular country, kingdom, town, person, but we may make prayers
for it. And though men be Atheists, Infidels, Heretics, yea devils incarnate,
yet for any thing we know, they may belong to the election of God: except they
sin against the holy ghost, which sin is very seldom and hardly discerned
of men. And in this sense must the commandment of Paul be understood: I exhort
therefore that first of all supplications, prayers, etc. be made for all men. 1.
Tim. 2.1. We may not pray for all men, if all men or mankind be taken
collectiuely, that is, if all men be considered wholly together as they make
one body or company, and be taken as we say, in gross. For in this body or
mass of mankind there be some, though they be unknown to us, yet I say, there
be some whom God in his just judgment has refused, whose salvation by prayer
shall never be obtained.

Quest. 6. Whether is it possible for a man to pray in reading of a prayer?
Answer. It pleases some to move this question; but there is no doubt of it.
For prayer is a part of Gods worship, and therefore a spiritual action of the
heart of man standing specially in a desire of that which we want, and faith
whereby we believe, that our desire shall be granted. Now the voice or
utterance, whether it be in reading or otherwise, is no part of the prayer, but
an outward means whereby prayer is uttered and expressed. Therefore there is
no reason why a form of prayer being read, should cease to be a prayer,
because it is read; so be it the spirit of grace and prayer be not wanting in
the party reading and the hearers. Object. To read a sermon is not to preach:
and therefore to read a prayer is not to pray. Ans. The reason is not like in
both. For the gift of preaching or prophecy can not be showed or practiced in
the reading of a sermon: and for this cause the reading of a sermon is not
preaching or prophecy: but the grace and gift of prayer may be showed in
reading of a prayer: otherwise it would go very hard with them that want
convenient utterance, by reason of some defect in the tongue, or by reason of
bashfulnesse in the presence of others.

Of Gods hearing our prayers.
HItherto we have spoken of the making of prayer to god, a word or twain of
Gods hearing our prayers.

Quest. How many ways does God hear men's prayers? Ans. Two ways. The first
in his mercy, when he graunts the requests of such as call upon him in the
fear of his name. Secondly, he hears men's prayers in his wrath. Thus he gave
the Israelites Quails according to their desire. Psalm. 78.29.30.31. Thus often
men curse themselves, and wish that they were hanged or dead: and accordingly
they have their wish.

Quest. 2. Why does God defer to hear the prayers of his servants? Ans.
First, to prove them by delay. Secondly, to exercise their faith. Thirdly, to
make them acknowledge that the things which they receive are Gods gifts, and
not from themselves. Fourthly, that graces quickly given might not be lightly
esteemed. Fifthly, that an hungring after grace might be sharpened and increased.

Question. 3. After what manner does God hear his servants prayers? Answer.
Two ways. First, by granting the thing which was asked according to his will.
Secondly, by denying the thing desired, and by giving something proportional
to it. Thus God denies temporary blessings, and in the room thereof gives
eternal in heaven. Thus he refuses to remove the cross from his servants,
and gives in stead thereof strength and patience. Christ prayed that the cup
might be removed. It was not removed, yet he in his ma^hood was enabled to
bear the wrath of God. When Paul prayed three times that the prick in the
flesh might be removed, it was answered, My strength is sufficient for thee.

Quest. 4. Why does not God always hear men's prayers? Ans. There be many
causes of this. The first, because oftentimes we know not to ask as we ought,
Math. 20.22. The second, because we ask amiss, Iam. 4.3. The third, because
otherwhiles the things which we ask, though they be good in themselves, yet
they are not good unto us, and for that cause are withheld. 2. Cor. 12.7. The
last, because God will for some long time defer the granting of that which we
ask, that he may stir up our faith and hope, and our diligence in prayer:
and that we might the better esteem of the gifts of God when we have them, and
show our selves more thankful.

To the Reader.
PAul in his Epistles, has set down the sum of many of his prayers: they
are very gracious and heavenly, and I have here set them down, that thou
might know them, and in thy prayers follow them.

16. I cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers,

17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory, might give
unto you the spirit of wisdom, and of revelation, in the acknowledgement of
him.

18. The eyes of your mind being enlightened, that ye may know what the hope
is of his calling, and what the riches are of his glorious inheritance in the
Saints.

19. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power in us that believe;
according to the working of his mighty power.

20. Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him
at his right hand in heavenly places.

The Exposition.
IN this excellent prayer we are to mark two things: the first, to whom it is
made: the second, is the matter.

For the first, it is made to God the Father, who is described by two titles.
The first, The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, namely as Christ is man: for as
Christ is God, he is equal with the father. The second, The father of glory,
that is, a glorious father, and he is so called to distinguish him from earthly
fathers.

The matter of the prayer stands on two principal points. First, he asks of
God, the spirit of wisdom, whereby the servants of God are enabled to discern
out of the word, in every business which they take in hand, whether it be in
word or deed, what ought to be done, and what ought to be left undone: as also
the circumstances, the time, place, manner of doing any thing.

Secondly, he prays for the spirit of revelation, whereby the faithful have
their whole estate before God, revealed unto them according to the word: the
thing it self being otherwise secret and hidden. 1. Cor. 2,9,10,12. Further
the work of this spirit in the godly is twofold, the one concerns God
himself, the other the things of God.

The work of the spirit of revelation: which respects God himself is, an
acknowledgement of the Father, or of Christ. Now to acknowledge God the Father,
is not only to know, and confess that he is a father of the faithful: but
also to be resolved in conscience that he is a father to me in particular.
Secondly, that Christ is not only in general a Savior of the elect, but that
he is in special my Savior and redeemer.

The second work of this spirit, is an illumination of the eyes of the mind
to see and know the things of God which he has prepared for them that do
believe: and they are two. The first is life eternal, which is described by
five arguments. 1. It is the Ephesian hope, that is, the thing hoped for in
this life. 2. It is the hope of the calling of God: because in preaching of the
Gospel it is offered, and men are called to wait for the same. 3. An
inheritance, properly to Christ, because he is the natural son of God: and
by him to all that shall believe. 4. The excellency, because it is a rich and
glorious inheritance. 5. Lastly, it is made proper to the Saints.

The second thing is the greatness of the power of God, whereby sin is
mortified, the corrupt nature renewed, and mightily strengthened in temptations.
This power is set forth by two arguments. The first is the subject or persons
in whom this power is made manifest. In them that believe. Because none can
feel this, but they which apprehend Christ by faith. The second is the manner
of manifesting this power in them, which is according to the working of his
mighty power, which he showed in Christ. And that was in three things. First,
in putting all his enemies under his feet, v. 2. Secondly, in raising him from
death. Thirdly, in placing him at his right hand. Now therefore Paul prays
that this wonderful power of God, which did show forth it self in the head
Christ, might likewise show it self in the members of Christ. First, in
treading Satan and sin under their feet. Romans 16.10. Secondly, in raising
them from sin, as out of a grave to holiness of life. Thirdly, in advancing
them in the time appointed to the kingdom of glory in heaven.

Ephesians. 3.
14. FOr this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

15. Of whom is named the whole family in heaven and earth.

16. That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, that ye^
may be strengthened by his spirit in the inner man.

17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith:

18. That ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with
all Saints, what is the breadth and length, and depth and height:

19. And know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that ye may be
filled with all fullness of God.

20. Unto him therefore that is able to do^ exceeding abundantly, above all
that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us,

21. Be praise in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all generations for
ever, Amen.

The Exposition.
THese words contain two parts, a prayer, and a thanksgiving. In the prayer
these points are to be marked. First, the gesture: I bow my knees, whereby Paul
signifies his humble submission to God in prayer. Secondly, to whom he prays.
To the Father, who is described by two titles: the first, the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and that by nature as he is God, and as he is man by
personal union. The other title. Of whom the whole family, which is in
heaven and earth, is named: In which words is set down a description of the
Church: first it is a Family, because it is the company of Gods elect
children under the government of one father. 1. Tim. 3.15. It is called the
house of God, Ephesians. 2.19. They that believe are said to be of the household of
God: secondly, the parts of the Catholic Church are noted, namely, the Saints
in heaven departed, and Saints living on earth: thirdly, it is said to be named
of the father of Christ, because as the father of Christ is the father of this
family, so also this family is called by him. Genesis 6.2. Dan. 9.80. Thirdly,
the matter of the prayer stands of four most worthy points.

The first is strength to bear the cross and to resist spiritual
temptations, v. 16. where the strength is set out by diverse arguments: First,
that it is the mere gift of God, that he would grant you: Secondly, the cause
of strength, by his Spirit: Thirdly, the subject or place where this strength
must be, in the inner man, that is, in the whole man, so far forth as he is
renewed by grace, Ephesians. 6.14. The second is, the dwelling of Christ in their
hearts by faith: Faith is when a man being seriously humbled for his sins,
is further in conscience persuaded, and resolved of the pardon of them, and of
reconciliation to God. Now where this persuasion is in deed, there follows
necessarily Christ's dwelling in the heart, which stands in two things: the
first is, the ruling and ordering of the thoughts, affections, and desires of
the heart, according to his will; as a master rules in his house: the second is
the continuance of his rule. For he cannot be said to dwell in a place, who
rules in it but for a day.

The third, is the knowledge and the acknowledgement of the infinite greatness of
Gods love in Christ, an effect of the former. v. 18, 19. the words are thus
explaned: Rooted and grounded. Here the love of God wherewith he loves the
elect, is as a root and foundation of all Gods benefits, election, vocation,
justification, and glorification. Men are rooted and grounded in love, when
Gods spirit assures their hearts of Gods love, and does give them some inward
sense and feeling of it. For then they are as it were sensibly put into the
root, and laid on the foundation. With all Saints: Paul desires this benefit,
not only to the Ephesians, but also to all the faithful with them. What is
the length, the breadth. Here is a speech borrowed from the Geometricians, and
it signifies the absolute greatness or infinitnes of Gods love, and that it is
like a world, which for length, breadth, height, and depth, is endless. Here
note the order or receiving grace. First, Christ dwells in the heart by faith.
Secondly, then comes a sense and feeling of Gods love, as it were by certain
drops thereof. Thirdly, after this arises a plentiful knowledge, and
apprehension of Gods love, and as it were the pouring out of a sea into a man's
heart, that for greatness has neither bottom nor bank. And know the love of
Christ: these words (as I take it) are an exposition of the former: for to
comprehend the love of God, is nothing else but to know the love of Christ:
considering that all whom the father loves, he loves them in Christ: which
passes knowledge, that is, which for the greatness of it no man can fully know.

The fourth thing is the fullness of Gods graces, v. 19. Here the fullness of
God, does not signify fullness of the God^ead or divine nature, but the
perfection of the inner man which shall not be till after this life.

Now follows the thanksgiving, or the praise of God, v. 20, 21. containing
these points. The matter of praise, his power and bountifulnes, whereby he can
work exceeding abundantly above all we ask or think: and both these are not
only to be conceived in mind, but also may be felt in the heart, according to
the power that works in us. 2. The form of praise, glory unto God by
Christ, as all benefits are received from the father by Christ. 3. The proper
place of true praise of God, the Church. 4. The continuance of his praise,
through all generations for ever.

Philip. 1.
9. ANd this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more, in knowledge
and all sense.

10. That ye may discern things that differ: to the end, ye may be pure and
without offense, to the day of Christ.

11. Filled with fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the
praise and glory of God.

The Exposition.
THis prayer contains three parts. In the first, Paul prays for increase of
love in the Philippians, whether it be to God or men, v. 9. and he shows the
means of increase, which are two: knowledge and sense, or feeling. For (to go
backward) the more a godly man feels Gods love, and has experience of Gods
word in himself; the more he knows of Gods word, and perceiues his love unto
him: the more he loves God again, and his neighbor for his sake.

The second thing prayed for, is the gift of discerning, whereby men know, what
is true, what false: what is to be done, what to be left undone: the ends of
this gift are two. The first, that by means of it, they may be pure and
sincere: that is, keep a good conscience before God and men in their lives and
calings. The second is, to be without offense: that is, innocent, giving no
occasion of evil to any, and not taking them offered by others: and the
continuance of those is noted to the day of Christ; which is the time in which
he comes to us, either by our death, or by the last judgment.

Thirdly, he prays that they might abound in good works, which are described
by a similitude, fruits of righteousness: Christians being fruitful trees.
Ezech. 47. 12. Esaias 61.3. 2. By the cause efficient, which are by Christ. 3. By
the end, unto the glory and praise of God.

Coloss. 1.
9. I Cease not to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with
knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.

10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things,
fructifying in all good works, and increasing in the acknowledgement of God.

11. Strengthened with all might through his glorious power, unto all patience
and long suffering with ioyfulnesse.

12. Giving thanks to the father which has made us ^it to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light.

13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us
into the kingdom of his own son.

The Exposition.
THese words contain a prayer, and a thanksgiving. In the prayer, three
things are asked. The first is the increase of the knowledge of Gods revealed
will in his word, and he deuides it into two parts: wisdom, which is not only
to know Gods word, but also to apply it to every action for the right and holy
performing thereof^ and spiritual understanding, which is, when men by the
assistance of Gods spirit, do conceive the will of God in general without
applying.

Secondly, Paul prays for the fruits of this knowledge, which are four. 1. To
wal^ worthy of God, as good servants do, who in their apparel, gesture, and
all their doings, so behave themselves that they may credit their masters. 2.
To please God in all things, by approouing their hearts unto him. 3. To be
plentiful in all good works. 4. To increase in the acknowledgement of God.
For the more any increase in knowledge and experience in Gods word, the more
shall they acknowledge God the father to be their father, Christ to be their
redeemer, and the holy Ghost their sanctifier.

Thirdly, he prays that the Colossians may be strengthened, v. 11. where he
notes the cause, Gods glorious power; and the effects, which are three. 1.
Patience, because it is necessary that the godly suffer many afflictions. 2.
Long suffering, because oftentimes the same afflictions continue long. 3.
Ioyfulnesse, because the cross is bitter.

The thanksgiving is for a benefit, that God had made the Colossians fit for
the kingdom of glory: and the reason is, because he had made them members of
the kingdom of grace.

1 Thessalonians. 3.
12. THe Lord increase you, and make you abound in love one toward an other,
and toward all men: even as we do toward you.

13. To make your hearts stable and unblameable in holiness before God, even
our father at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints.

2 Thessalonians. 2.
16. Jesus Christ our Lord, and our God, even the father which has loved us,
and has given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace,

17. Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every word and good work.

1 Thessalonians. 5.
23. NOw the very God of peace, sanctify you throughout: and I pray God that
you The mind or understanding.
whole spirit and The will and affection.
soul and body may be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

A Song gathered out of the Psalms, containing the sobbes and sighs of all
repentant sinners.
A preface to preparation of prayer.
LOrd hear my prayer, hark the plaint that I do make to thee:
Lord in thy native truth, and in thy justice answer me.
Psalm. 143.1. Psalm. 61.1.
Regard, O Lord, for I complain, and make my suit to thee:
Let not my words return in vain, but give an ear to me.
Behold, in wickedness my kind, and shape I did receive: A confession of sin
with sorrow of heart.

And lo, my sinful mother eke, in sin did me conceive:
And I with evils many one, am sore beset about: Psalm. 51.5. Psalm. 40.14.

My sins increase, and so come on, I cannot spy them out.
For why, in number they exceed the hairs upon my head: verse. 16.

My heart does faint for very fear, that I am almost dead.
Thus in me in perplexity, is mine accombred spright: Psalm. 143.4.

And in me in my troubled heart, amazed and afflight.
The wicked works that I have wrought, thou setst before thine eye: Psalm. 90.
8.

My secret faults, yea eke my thoughts, thy countenance does epsy.
O Lord my God, if thou shall weigh my sins, and them peruse: Psalm. 130.3.

What one shall then escape and say, I can my self excuse?
In judgment with thy servant, Lord, oh enter not at all: Psalm. 143.2.

For justified in thy sight, not one that lives shall. Prayer for pardon of
sins known and unknown.

And for thy pity plentiful, O Lord, I thee entreat:
To grant me pardon for my sin, for it is wondrous great. Psalm. 25.10.

O Lord, what earthly man does know, the errors of this life?
Then cleanse me from my secret sins, which are in me most rife. Psalm. 19. 12.

And keep me, that presumptuous sins prevail not over me: verse. 13.

And then I shall be innocent, and great offenses flee.
To thee, O Lord my God, lo I do stretch my craving hands: Psalm. 143.6.

My soul desires after thee, as does the thirsty lands. Faith sh^wing it
self in desire of reconciliation with God.

As handmaids watch their mistress hands, some grace for to atchiue: Psalm. 125.2.

So I behold thee, Lord my God, till thou do me forgive.
Lord turn thee to thy wonted grace, my silly soul vptake: Psalm. 6.

O save me not for my deserts, but for thy mercy sake.
My soul why do thou faint and quail? so sore with pain oppressed: Psalm. 42.

With thoughts why do thy self assail? so sore within my breast. Faith
fights with di^^rust, and I labors to overcome it.

Trust in the Lord thy God always, and thou the time shall see: verse. 12.

To give him thanks with laud and praise, for health restorde to thee.
For why? his anger but a space does last, and slack again: Psalm. 30.6.

But in his favor and his grace, always does life remain.
verse. 7.
Though gripes of grief and pangs full sore, do lodge with thee all night:
The Lord to joy shall thee restore, before the day be light.
The Lord is kind and merciful, when sinners do him grieve:
Psalm. 103.8.
The slowest to conceive a wrath, and readiest to forgive.
And look what pity parents dear, unto their children bear:
verse. 13.
Like pity bears the Lord to such, as worship him in fear.
The Lord that made me knows my shape, my mould and fashion just:
verse. 14.
How weak and frail my nature is, and how I am but dust.
^rayer for regeneration and Gods holy spirit.
O God create in me an heart, unspotted in thy sight:
And eke within my bowels, Lord, renew a stable spright.
With thy free spirit confirm thou me, and I will teach therefore
Psalm. 51.10. verse. 12.
Sinners thy ways, and wicked shall be turned to thy lore.
Prayer for obedi^nce to God in our lives and calling.
My soul is ravished with desire, and never is at rest:
But seeks to know thy judgments hie, and what may please thee best.
Ps. 119.20. verse. 5.
O would to God it might thee please, my ways so to address:
That I might both in heart and voice, thy laws keep and confess.
Psalm. 20.11.
In righteousness I do intend, my time and days to serve:
Have mercy Lord and me defend, so that I do not swerue.
Prayer for life ^uerlasting.
And with thy saving health, O Lord, vouchsafe to visit me:
Psalm. 106.5.
That I the great felicity, of thine elect may see.
verse. 6.
And with thy peoples joy I may, a joyful mind possess:
And may with thine inheritance, a glorying heart express.
A conclusion with praising of God.
The Lord the God of Israel, be blessed for evermore:
verse. 46.
Let all the people say Amen, praise ye the Lord therefore.
FINIS.
A TREATISE TENDING UNTO A DECLARATION; WHETHER A MAN BE IN THE ESTATE OF
DAMNATION, OR IN THE ESTATE OF GRACE. and if he be in the first, how he may in
time come out of it: if in the second, how he may discern it, and persevere in
the same to the end.

Reuiewed and corrected by the Author.

The points that are handled be set down in the page following.

2. Pet. 1. verse. 10. Give all diligence to make your calling and election
sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall. Printed for I. P. and I.
L. 1600.

The Contents of the book.
How far a Reprobate may go in Christian Religion. The estate of a true
Christian in this life: which also shows how far the elect being called,
go beyond all reprobates in Christianity. A Dialogue to the same purpose,
gathered out of the sauorie writings of Master Tindall and Bradford. How a
reprobate may perform all the religion of the Church of Rome. The conflicts
between Satan and a Christian. How the word of God is to be applied aright
unto the conscience. Consolations for the troubled consciences of weak
Christians. A Declaration of certain spiritual Desertions.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND MY CHISTIAN FRIEND MASTER Valentine Knightly,
Esquire, one of her Majesty's Justices of peace in Northampton shiere.
SIr, I pray you consider with me an especial point of Gods word, carefully to
be waied: it is this, Mat. 25. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12.

Luke 13. 24.


Many professors of Christ, in the day of grace, persuade themselves that they
are in the estate of grace; and so the true Church esteems of them too: yet
when the day of grace is past, they contrariwise shall find themselves to be
in the estate of damnation remediless. A caveat to all protestants, of what
estate or condition soever.
A doleful case, yet a most resolute truth, and the reason is plain. Men
that live in the Church are greatly annoyed with a fearful securite and
deadnes of heart; by which it comes to pass that they think it enough to make
a common protestation of the faith, not once in all their life times, examining
themselves whether they be in the estate of grace before the eternal God or
not. 2. Cor. 13. 5. Psalm. 119.59
And indeed it is a grace peculiar to the man Elect to try himself whether
he be in the estate of grace or not.

The further opening of the truth of this point, as also the danger of it, I
have enterprised in this treatise; which I am willing to bestow on you, both
for the profession of the faith, which you make, as also for that Christian
friendship, you have showed to me. Accept of it I pray you and use it for your
edification. Act. 20. 32.
Thus I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, that is able to
build you up further and give you an inheritance among them which are
sanctified.

From Cambridge this 24. of November. 1589. Your Worships to command, William
Perkins.

To the Christian Reader.
GOod Reader it is a thing to be considered, that a man may seem both unto
himself and to the Church of God to be a true professor of the Gospel, and
yet indeed be none. All professors that be of this sort, are excellently
described, Luke 8. verse. 13. in these words. And they which are upon the stony
ground are they, which when they shall hear, receive the word with joy: but
having no root, believe for a time, and in the time of temptation go away.
Where are to be noted three things. First, their faith, in that they are said
to believe for a season. Secondly the fruits of that faith, in that they are
said to receive the word preached with joy. Thirdly, their unsoundness in that
they are compared to stony ground, and in the time of temptation go away.

Concerning their faith, whereas the spirit of God says, that they do believe
these things are to be considered. First, that they have the knowledge of the
word of God. Secondly, that they both can and do g^ue assent unto the word of
God, that it is most true. Thirdly, in more special manner they give assent
unto the covenant of grace made in Christ, that it is most certain and sure:
and they are persuaded in a general and confused manner, that God will verify
the same covenant in the members of his Church. This is all their faith: which
indeed proceeds from the holy Ghost, but yet it is not sufficient to make
them sound Professors. For albeit they do generally believe Gods promises, yet
herein they deceive themselves, that they never apply and appropriate the same
promises to their own souls. An example of this faith we have, Ioh. 2.24.
where it is said, that when our Savior Christ came to Jerusalem at the feast
of Easter, many believed in his name, and yet he would not commit himself
unto them, because he knew them all, and what was in them.

To come to the second thing: those professors which are endued with thus much
grace, as to believe in Christ in a confused manner, go yet further: for this
their faith, though it be not sufficient to salvation yet it shows it self
by certain fruits which it brings forth: for as a tree or a branch of a
tree that has no deep rooting, but either is covered with a few moules, or
else lies in the water, at the season of the year brings forth leaves and
blossoms, and some fruit too, and that for one or two, or more years: so one
that is an hearer of the word, may receive the word: and the word as seed, by
this general faith may be somewhat rooted in his heart and settled for a
season, and may bring forth some fruits in his life peradventure very fair
in his own and other men's eyes: yet indeed neither sound, nor lasting, nor
substantial. What these fruits are, it may be gathered forth of these words,
where it is said, that they receive the word with joy, when they hear it: for
here may be gathered.

Now, of these and such like fru^ts, this may be added: though they are not
sound, yet they are void of that gross kind of hypocrisy. For the minds of
those Professors are in part enlightened, and their hearts are endued with such
a faith, Mark, that there is a true faith, wrought by the holy Ghost, very
like saving faith, yet not saving faith.
as may bring forth these fruits for a time: and therefore herein they
^issemble not that faith which they have not: but rather show that which they
have. Add hereunto, that a man being in this estate, may deceive himself;
and the most godly in the world, which have the greatest gifts of discerning,
how they and their brethren stand before the Lord: like as the figtree with
green leaves deceived our Savior Christ as he was man: for when in his hunger
he came unto it to have had some fruit he found none.

If this be so, it may be then required, how these unsound professors differ
from true professors. I answer, in this they differ, that they have not sound
hearts to cleave unto Christ Jesus for ever. Which appears in that they are
compared to stony ground. Now, stony grounds mingled with some earth are
commonly hot, and therefore have as it were some alacrity and hastiness in
them, and the corn as soon as it is cast into this ground, it sprouteth out
very speedily, but yet the stones will not suffer the corn to be rooted
deeply beneath, and therefore when summer comes the blade of the corn
withers with roots and all. So it is with these professors: they have in
their hearts some good motions of the holy Ghost, to that which is good: they
have a kind of zeal to Gods word, they have a liking to good things, and they
are as forwards as any other for a time, and they do believe. But these good
motions and graces are not lasting, but like the flame and flashing of straw
and stubble: neither are they sufficient to salvation.

With the true professors it is far otherwise: for they have upright and
honest hearts before the Lord, Luke 8. 15. And they have faith which works by
love. Gal. 5.6. And that Christian man which loves God, whatsoever shall
befall, yea though it were a thousand deaths, yet his heart can never be
severed from the Lord and from his Savior Christ: as the spouse speaks unto
Christ of her own love, Cant. 8.6. Set me as a seal on thy heart, as a signet
upon thy arm: for love is as strong as death: jealousy is as cruel as the
grave; the coals thereof are fiery coals and a vehement flame. Much water
cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if a man should give all
the substance of his house for love, they would greatly contemn it.

Wherefore (good Reader) seeing there is such a similitude and affinity
between the temporary professor of the Gospel, and the true professor of the
same: it is the duty of every Christian to try and examine himself whether
he be in the faith or not. 2. Cor. 13.5. And whereas it is an hard thing for a
man to search out his own heart, we are to pray unto God that he would give us
his spirit to discern between that which is good and evil in us. Now when a
man has found out the estate of his heart by searching it, he is further to
observe and keep it with all diligence. Prou. 4. 23. that when the hour of
death, or the day of trial shall come, he may stand sure and not be deceived
of his hope.

And for this purpose I have described the most of these small treatises which
follow, to minister unto thee some help in this examining and observing of
thine own heart. Read them and accept of them, and by the blessing of God they
shall not be unprofitable unto thee. And if they shall any whit help thee,
help me also with thy prayer. 1595.

FINIS.
CERTAIN PROPOSITIONS DECLARING HOW FAR A MAN MAY go in the profession of
the Gospel, and yet be a wicked man or a Reprobate.
I.
A Reprobate has in his mind a certain To. 1. 21. Psalm. 19. 1.3
knowledge of God, of common equity among men, of the difference of good from
bad: and this is partly from nature, partly from the contemplation of Gods
creatures, in which the wisdom, the power, the love, the mercy, the majesty
of God is perceived.

II.
This knowledge is only general and imperfect, much like the ruins of a
Princes palace: it is not sufficient to direct him in doing of a good work.
For example, he knows that there is a God, and that this God must be
worshipped: come to particulars, who God is? what a one he is? how he must be
worshipped? Here his knowledge fails him, and he is altogether uncertain what
to do to please God.

III.
By reason of this knowledge, the Reprobate does give consent, and in his
heart subscribeth to the equity of Gods law; as may appear by the saying of
Medea: Video meliora proboque; deteriora sequor. That is, I know what is best
to be done, and like it; yet I do the worst. This approbation in the Reprobate
comes from constraint; and is joined with a disliking of the law: in the
elect being called, the To. 7. 15.
approbation of the law, proceeds from a willing and ready mind, and is
joined with love and liking.

IV.
And by reason of this light of nature, a mere natural man, and a reprobate
may be subject to some temptations: for example, he may be tempted of the
devil, and of his own corrupt flesh, to believe that there is no God at all.
As Ovid says of himself, Eleg. 3. Solicitor nullos esse putare deos: I am
often tempted to think there is no God.

V.
The reprobate for all this knowledge, in his heart may be an Atheist, as
David says: Psalm. 14.1. Romans 3.10. 11.
The fool has said in his heart there is no God. And a man may now a days
find houses and towns full of such fools: Nay, this glimmering light of
nature, except it be preserved with good bringing up, with diligent
instruction, and with good company, it will be so darkened, that a man shall
know very little, and lead a life like a very beast: as experience tells, and
David knew very well: who says, Psalm. 49. 20.
Man is in honor, and understands not; he is like to beasts that perish.

VI.
Wherefore, this knowledge which the reprobate receives from nature, and from
the creatures, albeit it is not sufficient to make him do that which shall
please God: yet before Gods judgment seat, Act. 14.17. Romans 1. 21.
it cutteth off all excuse, which he might allege, why he should not be
condemned.

VII.
Heb. 6.4. 2. Pet. 2. 23.
Beside this natural knowledge, the reprobate may be made partaker of the
preaching of the word, and be illuminated by the holy ghost, and so may come to
the knowledge of the revealed will of God in his word.

VIII.
Thus when they hear the preaching of the word, god profereth salvation to
them, and calls them, Mat. 22. 14. Luke 13. 14. Prou. 1.24. Ioh. 9.41. Luke
14.6.
yet this calling is not so effectual in them as it is in the elect children
of God. For the reprobate when he is called, he likes himself in his own
blindness, and therefore neither will he; and if he would, yet could he not
answer, and be obedient to the calling of God. The elect being called, with
speed he answers, and comes to the Lord, and his heart being ready,
gives a strong and loud echo to the voice of the Lord. This echo we see in
David's heart: Psalm. 27.8.
When (says he) thou said, Seek ye my face: mine heart answered unto thee; O
Lord, I will seek thy face. And god himself speaks the same of his children.
Zach. 13.9, They shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I will say, it is
my people (now mark the echo) and they shall say, the Lord is my God.

IX.
After that he has an understanding of Gods word, Heb. 10.26 Act. 1.16.17.
he may acknowledge the truth of it, and confess it: and if need require, be
a defender of it: As Judas was, and Julian the Apostata.

X.
The reprobate may have a feeling of his sins, and so acknowledge them, and
the punishment due unto them: 1. Sam. 29. 21.
as Saul did; who said, I have sinned: come again my son David: for I will
do thee no harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day: Behold
I have done foolishly, and have erred exceedingly. Thus did Caine, Genesis 4.13.
when he said; My punishment is greater then I can bear. Eus. lib. 8. cap.
17.18.
Galerius Maximinus, a vile persecutor of Christians, had his bowels rotting
within him: so that an infinite number of worms continually crawled forth of
his body, and such a poisoning stink came from him, that no man could abide
him: being thus plagued with the hand of God, he began to perceive his
wickedness in persecuting Christians, and he confessed his sins to the true
God: and assembling the chief rulers about him, he commanded that all within
his dominions should cease to trouble Christians, and in all haste he made a
law for the peace and liberty, and the public meetings of Christians.

XI.
The reprobate has oftentimes fear and terror of conscience: but this is
only, because he considers the wrath and vengeance of God, which is most
terrible. When Paul preached before Foelix, and by the majesty of Gods spirit,
did (as it were) thunder from heaven against his sinnes^ doubtless he made his
heart to ache, and every joint of him to tremble. Socrat. l. ^. c. 11.
Ecebolius a Philosopher of Constantinople, in the days of Constantius,
professed Christian religion, and went beyond all other in zeal for the same
religion: yet afterward under Julian, he fell from that religion unto
Gentilisme. But after Iulians death making means to be received into the
Church again, overwhelmed with the horror of his own conscience for his wicked
reuolting, he cast himself down on the ground before the doors of the church
crying aloud, Calcate me sale^ insipidum: Trample on me unsavory salt. And the
devil believes the word of God and at his own damnation he trembles. These
servile fears, though they harden the heart of the reprobate, as heat does
the iron, after it has bin in the furnace: yet these fears in the children of
God Act. 2. 37. Romans 8. 15.
are very good preparations, to make them fit to receive grace: like as we
see the needle which sows not the cloth, yet it makes a passage and
entrance for the thread, which serves for this use, to sow cloth together.

XII.
A reprobate before he commit a sin, is often vexed within himself, and
fears to commit it: not because he hates and disliketh the sin for it self,
but because he cannot abide the punishment due unto the sin. Mar. 6.20 26.
When the daughter of Herodias danced before Herod, and pleased him: that he
might do her a pleasure, he bad her ask what she would: she asked John
Baptists head in a platter: Herod did grant her request, but yet he had a
grudging in heart, and he was sore grieved at it. Mat. 27. 19.24.
In like manner, Pilate was very much troubled inwardly before he condemned our
Savior Christ.

XIII.
After he has committed a sin, he Mar. 27.3. Heb. 12.17.
sorroweth and repents: yet this repentance has two wants in it. First, he
does not detest his sin, and his former conversation when he repents: he does
bewail the loss of many things which he once enjoyed: he cries out through
very anguish, and through the perplexities which God in his judgment lays on
him: yet for his life, he is not able to leave his filthy sin: and if he
might be delivered, he would sin as before: Genesis 27.38 and 27.41. and 28.9.
Esau wept before his father with great yelling and crying, but after he was
gone from his fathers presence he hated his brother, who had got his blessing,
and in contempt of his father, chose him a wife against his liking. Pharao, as
often as the Lord laid any calamity on him, Exodus 8.8.
he evermore desired to be delivered from it, yet afterward always he returned
to his old by as again. Foelix trembled before Paul: for all that, he could
not leave his covetousness, but even then he sought for a bribe. Secondly, the
reprobate^ when he repents, he cannot come unto God, and seek unto him: he
has no power, no not so much as once to desire to give one little sob for the
remission of his sins: if he would give all the world he cannot so much as
give one rap at gods mercy gate, that he may open to him. Mat. 7.7.
He is very like a man upon a rack, who cries and roreth out for very pain,
yet cannot desire his tormentor to ease him of his pain. Genesis 3.4. 1. Sam.
31.4. Mat. 27.5.
Caine would have bin void of his trembling, but he could not ask pardon of
his sin from his heart: neither could Saul, or Judas, or now can the devil.

XIV.
The reprobate may humble himself for some sins which he has committed, and
may declare this by fasting and tears. When Eliah reproved Ahab for his
Idolatry, and threatened him from the Lord, it is said, that when he had heard
these words, 1. Reg. 21. 27.29.
he rent his clothes, and put sackcloath upon him, and fasted, and went softly
in token of mourning: and this humiliation stayed Gods wrath for a time.

XV.
He may confess his sins, even his particular sins before men: but this is
only then, when his soul is tormented for them, and can find no ease. For
then he sticks not to utter his secret filthiness to the hearing of all men;
and to the open shaming of himself. When God smote all that was in the fields
of Egypt with hail, then Pharao sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said
unto them, Exodus 9.27 Number. 22.44
I have now sinned, the Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked: pray
ye unto the Lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty thunders,
etc. So Judas, when he saw that Christ was condemned, and felt an hell in his
conscience, brake out, and said, I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood.
And the experience of these days gives fearful examples for the proof of
this point.

XVI.
He has often a desire to be like the children of God in happiness, and to be
saved: not because he has any love to the kingdom of God, but because he is
afraid of hell. As Balaam ouerpressed with the fear of Gods judgment, prayed
thus: Number. 2^^ 10.
Oh that my soul might die the death of the righteous, and that my last end
might be like his.

XVII.
The wicked in their distress may pray to God, and God may hear their
prayers, and grant them their request, Number. 18. 18.
as the Israelites wickedly murmuring against God, desired flesh in the
wilderness: God heard their cry, and rained Quails among them. But god hears
the wicked after one sort, and them that fear him after another: them that
fear him, he grants their requests of love and mercy: to the other of
indignation and anger. Numb. 11. 33. Psalm. 78. 31.
As may appear in the Israelites, who when they were in eating of their
Quails, and the meat was within their teeth, God in his anger stroke the^
with a sore plague. And (which is more strange then this) God has performed
that which he has promised to the unbelievers, though they refused to ask it
at his hands, even then when they were particularly commanded: Esa. 7.^1.
of this thing we have a worthy example in King Achas, who utterly refused to
have a sign of his deliverance, and the confusion of his enemies, when God
offered it to him, and yet the Lord delivered him.

XVIII.
The reprobate may go further in the profession of religion^ and may seem for
a time to be planted in the Church: for he does believe the promises of God
made in Christ Jesus, yet so that he cannot apply them to himself. In Luke 8.
13^
generally in a confused manner believes that Christ is a Savior of some men:
and he neither can nor desires to come to the particular applying of Christ.
The elect believes, that Christ is a Savior of him particularly. The
reprobates faith may perish in this life, but the faith of the elect cannot.
The reprobate may be persuaded Job. 3. 15.
if God would confound him, and he saw nothing but present death, and hell
fire: yet such is his nature that still he would believe; for faith and hope
are not grounded upon sense and feeling; but are the evidence of those things
which were never yet seen or felt. The life of the faithful is hid in Christ,
as the sap in the root of the tree: their life is not in sense and feeling, but
in hoping and believing: which oftentimes are contrary to man's sense and
feeling.

XIX.
After that he has received a general, and a temporary faith in Gods
heavenly word, and his most merciful promises of everlasting life contained
therein, by the power of the spirit of God, Heb. 6.4. Mat. 13.20.
he comes to have a taste in his heart of the sweetness of Gods mercies, and a
rejoicing in consideration of the election, adoption, justification, and
sanctification of Gods children. But what is this taste? I express it thus,
after the meaning of Gods word. Suppose a banquet prepared, in which are many
sweet, and pleasant, and dainty meats. At this banquet, such as are the bidden
guests, they must be set down, they see the meats, they taste them, they chaw
them in their mouths, they digest them, they are nourished, fed, and
strengthened by them: they which are not bidden to this feast, may see the
meats, handle them, and taste of them, to feel how good they are^ but they
must not eat and feed of them. The first resemble the elect, which truly
eat, digest, and are nourished by Christ unto everlasting life, because they
have great abundance of the vital heat of Gods holy spirit in them, and do
feel sensibly his grace and virtue in them, to strengthen them and guide them.
The second sort truly resemble the reprobates; which never in truth enjoy
Christ, or any of his benefits appertaining to salvation: but only see them,
and have in their hearts a vanishing, but no certain or sound feeling of them;
so that they may be changed, and strengthened, and guided thereby. To use
another similitude. The reprobates have no more feeling, and enjoying of Christ
and his benefits, then those men have of the sun, which see only a
glimmering of his light at the dawning of the day, before it rises. 2. Pet.
1.14 1. Ioh. 2.8. Luke 1.27. Esa. 60. 1,2.
Contrariwise, the elect, they have the day star, even the Sun of
righteousness, Jesus Christ, rising in their hearts; the day spring from an high
does visit them, the glory of God does rise upon them: they have their eyes
anointed with the ointment of the Spirit, which is the true eye salve, and do
plainly behold the son of righteousness; they enjoy his presence, they
effectually feel his comfortable heat to quicken and revive them.

XX.
From this sense and taste of Gods grace proceed many fruits: as first,
generally, he may do outwardly all things which true Christians do, and he
may lead such a life here in this world, that although he cannot attain to
salvation, yet his pains in hell shall be less: which appears, in that our
Savior Christ says, Matthew.11. 20,21,22, 23.
it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sydon, for Sodom and Gomor^ha, then for
Capernaum, and other cities unto which he came, in the day of judgment.

XXI.
Also the reprobate may have a love of God: but this love can be no sincere
love, for it is only because God bestows benefits and prosperity upon him:
as appears in Saul, 1. Sam. 10. ^.
who loved God for his advancement to the kingdom: and here is a difference
between the Elect and reprobate: the Elect love God, as children their
fathers: but reprobates, as hirelings their masters, whom they affect not so
much for themselves, as for their wages.

XXII.
Also a reprobate has often a rejoicing in doing those things which appertain
to the service of God, as preaching and prayer. Mar. 6.20
Herod heard John Baptist preach gladly: mat. 13.20.
and the second kind of naughty ground receives the word preached with joy.

XXIII.
A Reprobate often desires them, whom he thinks to be the children of God,
to pray for him. Exo. 9.27.
As Pharao desired Aaron and Moses to pray to God for him. Act. 8. 24.
So did Simon Magus desire Peter to pray that none of the things which he had
spoken against him, should come to pass. But yet they cannot pray themselves,
Romans 8. 16,26.
because they want the spirit of Christ.

XXIIII.
He may show liking to Gods Ministers, he may reverence them, and fear to
displease them. Act. 8.13.
Thus did Simon Magus, who at Philips preaching believed, wondered at his
miracles, and kept company with him. And Herod is said to fear John, knowing
that he was a just man and holy: also he gave reverence to him. Antonius the
Emperor, called Pius, though he was no Christian, Eus. lib. 4.
yet in a general parliament held at Ephesus, he made an act in the behalf of
Christians: that if any man should trouble or accuse a Christian, for being a
Christian; the party accused should go free though he were found to be a
Christian, and the accuser should be punished. Plin. lib. 10. ^pist. 97.
And Plinius secundus, governor of Spain under Trajanus the Emperor, when he
saw an innumerable company of Christians to be executed; being moved with
compassion, he wrote in their behalf, being no Christian, unto Trajanus to
spare them that could be charged with no crime: and his letter is yet extant.

XXV.
He may be zealous in the religion which he professes, and fall from that
profession, as the Galatians did, Gal. 4. 16.
who, after that they had received Paul as an Angel, and would have plucked out
their eyes to have done him good: yet they fell from the doctrine which he had
taught them to justification by the works of the Law, which flat overthrows
justification by faith alone. 2. King. 10. 16.
The same appears in Iehu, who was very zealous for Gods cause, and for the
defacing of idolatry, and thereupon God blessed him in his children: yet
nevertheless he was a wicked man, and 30. 31.
and followed the vile sins of Jeroboam his father.

XXVI.
2. Pet. 2. ^0. Hos. 6.4. 1. Sam. 9.21
After that he has sinned, he does in many things in which he is faulty, amend
and reform his life, and does profess great holiness outwardly. Herod, he did
many things which John Baptist in preaching moved him unto: Saul, when he was
to be chosen king, professed great humility. They may repress their vices and
corruptions, and so moderate themselves that they break not out Hest. 5.9^ 10.
as did Haman; of whom it is written: that when he was full of indignation
against Mordecai, yet he refrain himself. And herein the Elect and the
Reprobate differ: for 1 Thessalonians. 5. 32.
the elect are somewhat reformed in every one of their sins. But the
reprobate, though he be amend in many faults: yet someone fault or other, he
cannot abide to have it reformed; and by that, in a vile manner the devil
wholly possesses him. As Herod, who did many things, yet would not leave his
brothers wife. And no doubt, in Judas most of his sins in appearance were
mortified: and yet by covetousness the devil possessed him, and held him fast
chained in bondage under him. For one sin is sufficient to him, that by it he
may bring a man to damnation. Secondly, in infidels living honestly, the spirit
of God bridleth the force of sin, and the corrupt nature that it break not
out, as it does in many other. But in Christians that are indeed godly, the
same spirit not only represseth the corruption of nature outwardly; but also
mortifieth it within at the root, and regenerateth the whole man into a new
creature. Thus then neither the faithful nor infidels do effect any thing
that is laudable but by the spirit of god: the faithful by the spirit of
regeneration: infidels by the same spirit, only suppressing the outward act of
sin.

XXVII.
Beside this, he may have the gift of working miracles, of casting forth
devils, of healing, and such like: Mat. 7.22 Mar. 9. 38.
and this power of doing strange miracles, shall be used as an excuse of some
of the reprobates in the day of judgment.

XXVIII.
Oftentimes, unto him is given the gifts of the holy Ghost, to discharge the
most weighty calling that can be in any common wealth. And this is meant, when
God is said, 1. Sam. 10. 9.
to give Saul an other heart; that is, such virtues as were meet for a King.

XXIX.
A reprobate may have the word of God much in his mouth, and also may be a
preacher of the word: Mat. 7.22.
for so prophesying in Christ's name, shall be used as an excuse of reprobates:
and we know that among the twelve Apostles, Act. 1. 16. 17. Collos. 4. 2. Tim.
4.10
Judas was a reprobate. And this may be well perceived in the resemblance of
tasting which the author to the Hebrews uses. We know, that cooks commonly
which are occupied in preparing of bankets, have as much feeling and seeing of
the meat, as any other: and yet there is none that eats less of it then
they: for their stomachs are cloyed with the smell and taste of it: so, in
like manner it may come to pass, that the minister which dresseth and provides
the spiritual food, may eat the least of it himself; and so, laboring to
save others, he may be a reprobate. And it is thought, that some of them which
built the Arc, were not saved in the Arc, but perished in the flood.

XXX.
When as a reprobate professes thus much of the Gospel, though in deed he be
a goat, yet he is taken for one of Gods sheep: he is kept in the same
pastures, and is folded in the same fold with them. Ioh. ^.23. 24.25.
He is counted a Christian of the children of God, and so he takes himself to
be; no doubt because through the dullness of his heart, he cannot try and
examine himself, and therefore truly cannnot discern of his estate, whether he
be in Christ or not: and it may be thought, that Satan is ready with some
false persuasion to deceive him. For this is his property, that upon whom God
threatens death, there Satan is bold to pronounce life and salvation: as on
the contrary, to those, to whom God pronounces love and mercy, to those (I
say) he threatens displeasure and damnation: such malice has he against Gods
children.

XXXI.
And hereby it comes to pass, that an The elect may be of the Catholic
Church and not of the visible, and the reprobate may ^e of the visi^le and not
of the Catholic.
hypocrite may be in the visible Church, and obey it in the word and discipline,
and so be taken for a true member of Christ: when as a man indeed regenerate
may be excommunicate, and end his life before he be received again: for this
is the end of excommunication, 1. Cor. 5.5.
that the flesh, that is, the part unregenerate, may be destroyed: and the
spirit, that is, the part regenerate, may be kept alive in the day of the Lord.
Now the man in whom is spirit and flesh, Romans 8.9, 11.
must needs be the child of God, because this argues that he has the
sanctifying spirit of Christ. Again, Paul when he bids the Corinthians to
comfort the incestious man, 2. Cor. 2.7, 11.
least through the sleight of Satan he should be overwhelmed of over much
heaviness, gives men to understand, that he might have ended his life in great
extremity of sorrow, before he had been visibly received into the Church
again.

XXXII.
Though God will never adopt any reprobate: yet by the adoption of the elect
they may receive profit. For they find the blessing of God to be on them by
reason that they dwell together, and have society with the children of Genesis
7.1. Genesis 19.21. and 18.32 and 39. 3.
God. For Noah's sake every one in his family is saved in the flood. For lots
cause the men of Zoar are preserved from the fire. And God would have spared
Sodom, if there had bin but ten good men in it. For Rahabs cause, her family
and kindred are at liberty in Jericho. When Joseph was in Putiphars house, al
things prospered well. Sam. 7. 13
For Samuels cause the Israelites were delivered from the Philistims: Act.
27,24.
And for Paul's cause they which were with him in the ship were preserved. And
again, a reprobate by means of the faith of either of his parents may be
within Gods covenant, and so may be made partaker of Baptism, one of the
seals of the covenant. For so God made his covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7.
10.
that he would be not only his God, but also the God of his seed after him:
Gal. 3.8.
which Paul expounds not of a few, but of all nations. Also he says
manifestly that those children, either of whose parents are believers, 1. Cor.
7.14. Romans 11.16.
are holy: which holiness is not inherent in their persons, but only outward:
and it is a spiritual prerogative granted them of God, in that he vouchsafes
them to be in his covenant: whereby they are distinguished from the wicked and
profane men of the world.

XXXIII.
Besides this, reprobates have some prerogatives of God: Romans 9.22. and 2.4,5.
Genesis 6.3.
as that lie is patient toward them: that before he will destroy them, he uses
many means to win them, that they commonly spend all the days of their lives
in prosperity: insomuch, that it is said of them in the Psalm: Ps. 13. 12.
that they go in continual prosperity unto their death, and pine not away as
the children of God do. 2. Pet. 2. 22. 1. Tim. 1.4. 2. These. 2. 6. Esa. 6.10.
But after a certain time God in his just judgment hardneth their hearts,
blinds the eyes of their minds, he makes their heads giddy with a spiritual
drunkenness, and by the strength of their inward lusts, as also by the
effectual op^ration of Satan, they fall to open infidelity, and contempt of
Gods word, and so run headlong to their own damnation, and perish finally. And
in this they are like to hauks, which so long as they live are carried on the
hands of noble men: but when they are dead, they are cast on the dunghill.
Theod. lib. 3. Hist. cap. ^5. I^cob, Berg. chron.
Julian the Apostata was first a man learned and eloquent, and professed the
religion of Christ; but afterward, he fell and wrote a book against the
religion of Christ, answered by Cyril: and on a time, in a battle against the
Persians, was thrust into the bowels with a dart, no man then knew how, which
dart he pulled out with his own hand, and presently blood followed, which as
it gushed out, he took it in his hand, and flung it into the air, saying,
Vicisti Galil^e, vicisti. O thou Galilean (meaning Christ) thou art the
conqueror: thou art the conqueror: thus he ended his days in blaspheming
Christ whom he had professed. The reason of this apostasy is evident. Mat. 13.
28.
Seed, that is not deeply rooted in the earth, at the beginning of the year,
springs up; it is green, and brings forth leaves and flowers, and (it may
be) some kind of fruit too: when the heat of summer comes, it parcheth the
earth, and the corn wanting deep rooting, and therefore wanting moisture,
withers away. Gods word is like seed; which that it may bring forth fruit
unto everlasting life, it must be first received of the ground: secondly, it
must be rooted: the receiving of it, is when the mind understands it, and
remembers it: he rooting of it, is when being believed, it pierces to the
heart, and takes hold of the affections. This rooting is of two sorts: the
first is, when the word rooteth, but not deep enough, as when the word is
received into the mind, and into the heart, by the joy of the heart, but not
with the residue of the affections. The second, is a deep and lively rooting
of the word, when the word is received into the mind and into the heart by the
will and all the affections of the heart. The first kind of rooting of the
word, befalls to a reprobate, who understands and rejoices in the promises
of salvation, yet he does not put any confidence in them: he can not rest in
them, he does not rejoice that his name is written in the book of life, he does
not work out his salvation with fear and trembling. In a word, his heart is in
part softened to rejoice at the preaching of the word of God: Act. 15.16 Ps.
119. 32.
yet his heart is not opened as Lydias was; nor enlarged (as David says) to
embrace the truth: but the Elect, he receives the word, not only into his
mind, least it should be only an imagination, but also it is deeply rooted in
his heart. For, 1 In sure confidence he rests himself on Gods promise. Romans
8.38. Heb. 10.22. 2 He hops and longs to see the accomplishment of it. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. 3 He heartily loves God, for making such a promise to him in
Christ. 1. Ioh. 4.10. 4 He rejoices in it, and therefore does meditate on it
continually. Luke 10.20. Romans 5.2. 5 He hates all doctrines which are against
it. 6 He is grieved when he does any thing that may hinder the accomplishment
of it. Math. 26.75. 7 He uses the means to come to salvation, but with fear
and trembling. Phil. 2.12. 8 He burns with zeal of the spirit, etc. And so
the rest of the affections are exercised about the promises of God in Christ,
and by this means, is the deep rooting of the word in the heart.


Thus it comes to pass, that the Reprobate falls away from faith in the
day of trial and temptation, but the Elect cannot be changed.

XXXIIII.
Thus it appears, how far a reprobate may proceed in religion: the
consideration of this point I direct unto two sorts of men. Carnal gospellers,
and Papists. Carnal gospellers are such among us, as know the word, but obey
it not; or such, as bearing a profession neither know it, nor obey it. And the
best of these come short of reprobates in two points. 1. In faith, they come
short of the devil most of them. The devil believes and trembles: but they
contrariwise living in their sins, believe and hope. How comes this to pass?
The devil knows the Gospel, and the points of it: and withal he believes
the terrible threatenings of the law, and therefore trembles. Drowsy
Protestants believe the Gospel as the devil does; though he conceiues the
points of it better then they do: as for the law and the threatenings thereof,
they do not believe them: and that makes them even when they live in their
sins to hope and presume of mercy. Therefore the devil believes more of
Gods word then they do. Secondly, they come short of wicked men in outward
obedience. The young man not yet converted to Christ, when he was bidden to
keep the commandments of the second Table, answered, Mar. 10. 20,21.
that he had kept them from his youth: and therefore our Savior Christ looked
upon him, and loved him: although this external obedience was not sufficient:
for Christ tells him that one thing is wanting unto him. And in another place
he says, except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Now the careless
Gospeller is far from performing this; in so much that commonly he makes an
open practice of sin one way or other.

The causes of their carelesnes are, first a persuasion that a man may repent
when he will: because the Scripture says, At what time soever a sinner does
repent him of his sin from the bottom of his heart, God will put all their
wickedness out of his remembrance. But indeed late repentance is seldom true
repentance; and it may be justly feared, least that repentance, which men when
they are dying frame to themselves, die also with them. Secondly, they flatter
themselves, imagining that the best man that is, has seven falls every day
into gross sins: whereas the place which they abuse out of the Proverbs, The
righteous man falls seven times in a day and rises again: Prou. 24.1^.
it is rather to be understood of falls into affliction, then falls into
actual sins. Thirdly, they deceive themselves, most falsely thinking, small
sins, or hidden sins to be no sins: and grossest sins in which they
live and lie most dangerously, to be but sins of infirmity.

XXXV.
By this which has bin said, the professors of Christian religion are
admonished of two things. First, Phil. 2.12. 1. Pet. 2. 17. Romans 11.20.
that they use most painful diligence in working their salvation, in attaining
to faith, in dying to sin, in living to newness of life: and that their
hearts be never at rest, till such time as they go beyond all reprobates in
the profession of Christ Jesus. See thou how far a reprobate may go?
press on to the straight gate with maine and might, with all violence lay hold
on the kingdom of heaven Slial. Herod fear and reverence John Baptist, and
hear him gladly? and will thou neglect the Ministers, and the preaching of the
word? shall Pharao confess his sin, nay shall Satan believe and tremble? And
wilt not thou bewail and lament thy sins, and thy wicked conversation? It
behooves thee to fear and take heed, least wicked men, and the devil
himself rise in judgment and condemn thee. For if thou shall come short of
the duties of a reprobate, and do not go beyond him in the profession of the
Gospel, sure it is, thou must look for the reward of a reprobate.

The second thing is, that the professor of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 11. 31. Psalm.
16.12. and 119.59.
diligently try and examine himself, whether he is in the state of damnation,
or in the state of grace: whether he yet bear the yoke of Satan, or is the
adopted child of God. Thou will say, this need not, thou professest the
Gospel, and art taken for a Christian: yet mark and consider, that this often
befalls reprobates to be esteemed Christians: and they are often so like
them, that none Matthew. 25.32,33.
but Christ can discern the sheep from the goats, true Christians from
apparent Christians. Wherefore it behooves all men that show themselves to be
Christians, to lay aside all pride, and all selfeloue, and with singlenes of
heart to put themselves into the balance of Gods word, and to make just
trial, whether in the^, repentance, faith, mortification, sanctification, etc.
give weight answerable to their outward profession: which if they do, let them
praise God: if not, let them with all speed use the means that they may be
borne anew to the lord, and may be inwardly guided by his holy spirit, to give
obedience to his will, least in the day of Gods trial, they start aside from
him like a broken bow, and fall again to their first uncleanness.

XXXVI.
To come to the second sort of men and to conclude; let the most zealous Papist
that is, ^ ^^ue^tto them of the religion of the Church of Rome.
try himself and his whole estate with a single heart as in the presence of
Gods majesty, and he shall find that by his whole religion and profession he
does come short of a reprobate, or at the least not go beyond him in these
points before named. The Lord open their eyes that they may see it.

Amen.
THE ESTATE OF A CHRISTIAN MAN IN this life, which also shows how far the
Elect may go beyond the Reprobate in Christianity, and that by many degrees.
I
(...)
THe Ephesians. 1.4,5, 6,7.
Elect are they whom God of the good pleasure of his will has decreed in
himself to choose to eternal life, for the praise of the glory of his grace.
For this cause the Elect only are said to have their names written in Apoc.
20. 12.
the book of life.

II
Vocation.
Whom God electeth, them he calls in the time appointed for the same purpose.
This calling of the Elect is nothing else but a 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13,14.
singling and a seuering of them out of this vile world, and the customs
thereof, to be Ephesians. 2. 19.
citizens of the kingdom of glory after this life. And the time of their
calling is termed in Scriptures, 2. Cor. 6.2. Luke 19.42.
the day of visitation, the day of salvation, the time of grace.

III.
This Col. 2.7. Ioh. 15.19.
seuering and choosing of the elect out of the world, is then performed, when
God by his holy spirit indueth them with true saving faith: a wonderful gift
peculiar to the elect. For the better knowing of it, there is to be
considered: First, what faith is: Secondly, how God does work it in the hearts
of the elect: Thirdly, what degrees there be of faith: Fourthly, what are the
fruits and benefits of faith.

IIII.
Faith is a wonderful grace of God, by which the elect do apprehend and apply
Christ and all his benefits unto themselves particularly. What faith i^.


Here first it is to be considered, that the very nature of faith stands in a
certain power of apprehending and applying Christ. This is declared by Paul
when he says, Col. 2.12.
Ye are buried with him through baptism, by whom ye are also risen again
with him by the faith of the power of God, who raised him from the dead. Where
it appears that faith is made a means to communicate Christ himself, his
death and burial, and so all other benefits to the believer. Again to believe
in Christ, and to Ioh. 1. 12. Romans 5. 17.
receive or to lay hold on Christ, are put one for another by Saint John: which
declares that there is a special applying of Christ; even as we see, when a
man has any thing given him, he reaches out his hand and pulls it to
himself, and so makes it his own. Moreover, faith is called Gal. 3. 27.
the putting on of Christ: which cannot be unless Christ's righteousness be
specially applied to the heart, as the garment to the back, when it is put on.
Lastly, this may appear, in that faith is called Ioh. 6.36.
the eating and drinking of Christ: for there is no eating of meat that
nourishes, but first it must be tasted, and chewed in the mouth, then it must
be conveyed into the stomach, and there digested: lastly, it must be applied to
the parts of the body that are to be nourished. And Paul prays for the
Eph^sians: that Christ Ephesians. 3.17.
may dwell in their hearts by faith: which plainly imports, this
apprehending and applying of Christ.

I add further, that faith is a wonderful grace of God, which may appear:
first, in that Paul calls it Col. 2. 12.
the faith of Gods power, because the power of God is especially seen in the
begetting of faith. Secondly, experience shows it to be a wonderful gift of
God: when a man neither sees, nor feels his sins, then to say he
believes in Gods mercy, it is an easy matter; but when a man shall feel his
heart pressed down with the weight of his sins, and the anger of God for
them; then to apply Gods free mercy to his own soul, it is a most hard
matter: for then it is the property of the cursed nature of man, to blaspheme
God, and to despair of mercy. Judas who (no doubt) often preached mercy and
redemption by Christ in the security of his heart: when Gods hand was upon
him, and the Lord made him see the vileness of his treachery; he could not
comfort himself in Christ, if one would have given him ten thousand worlds,
but in an hellish horror of conscience hanged himself desperately; which
shows what a wonderful hard thing it is at the same instant when a man is
touched for his sins, then to apply Gods mercy to himself. Yet a true
Christian by the power of faith can do this, as it may appear in David, Psalm.
77. 2. 3.
In the day of my trouble (says he) I sought the Lord: my sore ran and ceased
not in the night: my soul refused comfort: I did think upon God and was
troubled: I prayed and my spirit was full of anguish: and he adds the word
Sebah, a note (very likely) of some wonderful thing. Psalm. 103.1
Again, he being almost in the gulfes of hell, even then cried to the Lord for
help. Job says, Job. 13.15.
If God should destroy him, yet he would for all that believe in him still.
Undoubtedly, strange is the band of faith knitting Christ and his members
together, which the anguish of spirit cannot, and the strokes of Gods hand do
not unloose.

V.
This apprehending of Christ is not done by any corporal touching of him, but
spiritually by assurance, which is, when the elect are persuaded in their
hearts by the holy ghost, of the forgiueuesse of their own sins, and of gods
infinite mercy toward them in Jesus Christ. According to that of 1. Cor. 2.12
Paul. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which
is of God, that we might know the things which are given us of God. The things
which the spirit of God makes known to the faithful particularly, are their
justification, adoption, sanctification, eternal life: and thus when any are
persuaded of these things concerning themselves, they do in their hearts
distinctly apply and appropriate Christ and his benefits to themselves.

VI.
How God works in the heart.
The manner that God uses in the begetting of faith is this. First, he prepares
the heart that it may be capable of faith. Secondly, he causes faith by little
and little to spring and to breed in the heart. The preparation of the heart is
by humbling an softening of it: and to the doing of this there are four things
requisite. The first of them is the knowledge of the word of God, both of the
law and of the gospel, Knowledge.
without the which there can be no faith; according to that saying of Esaiah:
Esa 53. 11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. And that of John:
Ioh. 17.
This is eternal life that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ. The Job. 33.23 Romans 10. 14
only ordinary means to attain faith by, is the word preached: which must
be heard, remembered, practiced, and continually hid in the heart. The least
measure of knowledge, without which a man cannot have faith, is the knowledge
of Elements, or the fundamental doctrines of a Christian religion^. A
fundamental doctrine is that, which being obstinately denied, all religion,
and all obtaining of salvation is ouerthrown. This knowledge has a general
faith going with it, which is an assent of the heart to the known truth of
Gods word. This faith when it is grown up to some great measure, it is called
(...), the Col. 2.2. Romans 14. 14
full assurance of understanding, and it is to be seen in the martyrs who
maintained Gods truth against the persecutions of the false Church, unto death.

VII.
Although both elect and reprobate may be enlightened to know the word of God:
yet the elect in this thing go far beyond all reprobates: for it is
specially said of them, that God is their schoolmasters, that he sofeteneth
their stony hearts, and makes them pliable, that he draws them, that he
opens their senses, hearts, ears, understandings: that the holy ghost is
their annointme^t, and their eie-salue, to clear the eyes of their mind, to
conceive the mysteries of Gods word. And the difference of illumination in
them is threefolde.

I. First, the knowledge which the reprobate has concerning the kingdom of
heaven, is only a general and confused knowledge: but the knowledge of the
elect is pure, certain, sure, distinct, and particular: for Phil. 1.9.
it is joined with a feeling and inward experience of the thing known: though
indeed the mind of man is able to conceive more then any Christian heart can
feel: and this is to be seen in Gal. 5. 17. cum Romans 7.23. and Romans 3. cu^
To. 8. 38.
Paul, who uses not only to deliver the points of Gods word in a general
manner, but also sets them down specially in his own experience. So that
the enlightening of the reprobate may be compared to the sight of the Mar. 8.24.
25.
blind man, who saw men walking like unto trees, that is in motion like men,
but in form like trees: and the elect are like the same blind man, who
afterward saw men a far off clearly. II. Secondly, the knowledge of the
wicked 1. Cor. 8.2. and 14.23.
puffs them up: but the knoweledge of the godly humbles them. III. Lastly,
the elect, besides the knowledge of Gods word, have Psalm. 40.6 2. Tim. 3. 5.
Tit. 1.16.
a free and frank heart to perform it in their lives and conuersations, which
no reprobate can have: for their illumination is not joined with true and
sincere obedience. By this it is easy to discern of the illumination of
Anabaptists, or Familists, and many other, which brag of the spirit.
VIII.
The second is the sight of sin arising of the knowledge of the law. Sight
of sin.
To this Jeremy exhorts the Jews of his time, saying, Ier. 3.13.
Know thine iniquity, for thou have rebelled against the Lord thy God, etc.
The chief cauie of the sight of sin is Christ by his holy spirit, Luke 2.
25. Ioh. 16.8.
who detecteth the thoughts of many hearts, and judges the world of sin.
The manner of seeing our sins must be, to know them particularly: for the
vilest wretch in the world can generally and confusedly say, he is a sinner:
but that the sight of sin may be effectual to salvation, it must be more
special and distinct even in particular sins, so that a man may say with
David, Psalm. 40. 12.
My sins have taken such hold of me that I am not able to look up: they are
more in number then the hairs of mine head: therefore my heart has failed me.
Again, a man must not barely see his particular sins, but he must also see
the circumstances of them, as namely the fearful curses and judgments of
God, which accompany every sin: for the consciences of many tell of their
sins in particular, yet they cannot be humbled for them, and leave them;
because they have not seen that ougly tail of the curse of God, that every
sin draws after it.

IX.
The means to attain to the sight of sin, is by a diligent examination of a
man's own self: This was the practice of the children of Israel in affliction;
Lam. 3.40
Let us try (say they) and search our ways, and turn again to the Lord. And
David gives the same counsel to Saul's Courtiers: Psalm. 4.4.
Tremble and sin not, examine your own heart on your bed, and be still. This
examination must be made by the commandments of the Law, but specially by the
tenth, which ransacketh the heart to the very quick: and was the means of
Paul's conversion. For he being a proud pharisie, To. 7.7. 10
this commandment showed him some ^innes, which otherwise he had not known,
and it killed him, that is, it humbled him. If so be it, that after
examination a man cannot find out his sins (as no man shall find out all his
sins, for Ier. 17.9.
the heart of man is a vast gulf of sin, without either bottom or bank, and
has infinite and hidden corruptions in it) then he must in a godly jealousy,
suspect himself of his unknown sins: as David did, saying, Psalm. 19.12
Who can understand his faults? cleanse me from my secret faults. And as Paul
did, Cor. 4.4.
I know nothing by my self, yet I am not thereby justified. And good reason it
is why men should suspect themselves of those sins which as yet they never
saw in themselves, Luke 16.15
For that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of
God: and the very Job. 4. 18.
Angels are not clean in his sight.

X.
Sorrow for sin.
The third is a sorrow for sin, which is a pain and pricking in the heart
arising of the feeling of the displeasure of god, and of the just damnation
which follows after sin. This was in the Act. 2. 37.
Jews after Peter's first sermon: and in Habacuck at the hearing of Gods
judgments: Hab. 3. 16.
When I heard (says he) my belly trembled: my lips shook at thy voice:
rottennes entered into my bones: and I trembled in my self, that I might rest
in the day of trouble. This sorrow is called the Romans 8. 15
spirit of bondage to fear: because when the spirit has made a man see his
sins, he sees further the curse of the Law; and so he finds himself to be
in bondage under satan, hell, death, and damnation: at which most terrible
sight his heart is smitten with fear and trembling, through the consideration
of his hellish and damnable estate.

This sorrow if it continue and increase to some great measure, has certain
Symptoms in the body, Job. 30.30
as burning heat, Lam. 1. 20. and. 2.11. Osea. 11.8.
rolling of the intralls, Psalm. 32.4.
a pining and fainting of the solid parts.

XI.
In the feeling of this sorrow, three things are to be observed. The first,
all men must look, that it be seriously and soundly wrought in their hearts:
for look as men use to break hard stones into many small pieces and into
dust: so must this feeling of Gods anger for sin bruise the heart of a poor
sinner and bring it to nothing. And that this may be so, sorrow is not to be
felt for a brunt, but very often before the end of a man's life. The godly man
Psalm. 88.15
from his youth suffers the terrors of god. Jacob wrestling with the Angel
gets the victory of him, Ge. 32.25.
but yet he is feign to go halting to his grave, and traile one of his loins
after him continually. Exodus 12. 8 Zach. 12.10
The paschall Lamb was never eaten without sour herbs, to signify that they
which will be free from the wrath of God by Jesus Christ, must feel continually
the smart and bitterness of their own sins. The second, all men must take
heed, least when they are touched for their sins, they besnare their own
consciences: for if the sorrow be somewhat over sharp, they shall see
themselves even brought to the gates of hell, and to feel the pangs of death.
And when a man is in this perplexity, he shall find it a most hard matter to
be freed from it, without the marvelous power and strength of Christ Jesus,
who only is able to help him and comfort him: yea many when they are once
plunged in this distress and anguish of soul, shall never escape it, as may
appear in Cain, Saul, Achitophel, Judas, and now of late in John Hoffmeister a
Monk, and Latomus, who for the space of certain days never left crying that
he was damned, because that he had wilfully persecuted the Gospel of Christ,
and so he ended his life. Therefore most worthy is Paul's counsel for the
moderating of this sorrow: 2. Cor. 2. 6,7.
It is sufficient (says he) unto the incestuous man that he was rebuked of
many, so that now contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him and comfort him,
least he should be swallowed up of overmuch heaviness. And further he gives an
other reason, which follows, least Satan should circumuent us: for we are
not ignorant of his Or policies.
enterprises. And indeed common experience shows the same, that when any man
is most weak, then Satan most of all bestirreth himself to work his
confusion. The third is, that all men which are humbled have not like measure
of Job 6.3.
O that my grief were well weyed, and my miseries were laid together in the
balance, for it would he now heavier then the sand of the sea: therefore my
words are now swallowed up, for the arrows of the Almighty are in me, and
the venom thereof does drink up my spirit, and the terrors of God fight
against me. The same did Ezechias, when on his deathbed he said, Esa. 38.
13,14.
He brake all my bones like a Lion, and like a crane or a swallow, so did I
chatter: I did mourn like a dove, etc. Contrariwise, the thief upon the
cross, and Lydia in her conversion never felt any such measure of grief: for
it is said of her, that God Act. 16. 14
opened her heart to be attentive to that which Paul spoke, and presently after
she entertained Paul and Silas chearefully in her house, which she could not
have done if she had been pressed down with any great measure of sorrow:
neither are any to dislike themselves, because they are not so much humbled as
they see some others: for God in great wisdom gives to every one which are to
be saved, that which is convenient for their estate. And it is often seen in a
festered sore, that the corruption is let out as well with the pricking of a
small pin, as with the wide lance of a raser.

XII.
The fourth thing in true humiliation, is an holy desperation: Good despair.
which is, when a man is wholly out of all hope ever to attain salvation by
any strength or goodness of his own: speaking and thinking more vily of
himself then any other can do; and heartily acknowledging himself to have
deserved not one only, but even ten thousand damnations in hell fire with
the devil and his angels. This was in Paul, when he said of himself that he
was the 1. Tim. 1.15
chief of all sinners. This was in Daniel, when in the name of the people of
Israel he prayed and said, Dan. 7. 9.
O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, and to us open shame, as appears
this day, etc. The same was in the prodigal child, Luke 15.19
who said, Father, I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and I am no
more worthy to be called thy son. Lastly, it was in Ezra, Ezr. 9.6.
who said, O my God I am confounded, and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto
thee, my God: for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass
is grown up unto the heaven.

XIII.
Many are of opinion that this sorrow for sin is nothing else but a
melancholic Sorrow for sin, melancholy.
passion: but in truth the thing is far otherwise, as may appear in the
example of David: who by all conjectures was least troubled 1. Sam. 16. 12.
with melancholy, and yet never any tasted more deeply of the sorrnw and
feeling of Gods anger for sin then he did, as the book of Psalms declares.
And if any

XIIII.
Thus it appears how God makes the heart fit to receive faith, in the next
place it is to be considered how the Lord causes faith to spring and to
breed in the humbled heart. For the effecting of this so blessed a work, God
works four things in the heart. First, Consideration of Gods mercy.
when a man is seriously humbled under the burden of his sin, the Lord by his
spirit makes him lift up himself to consider and to ponder most diligently the
great mercy of God offered unto him in Christ Jesus. Feeling of the want of
Christ.
After the consideration of gods mercy in Christ: he comes in the second place
to see, feel, and from his heart to acknowledge himself to stand in need of
Christ, and to stand in need of every drop of his most precious blood.
Thirdly, Desire.
the Lord stirs up in his heart a vehement desire and longing after Christ
and his merits: this desire is compared to Reu. 21.6 Esaias. 55.1. Luke 1.53.
thirst: which is not only the feeling of the dryness of the stomach, but
also a vehement appetite after drink, and David fitly expresses it when he
says: Psalm. 143. 6.
I stretched forth my hands unto thee: my soul desires after thee as the
thirsty land. Lastly^ Prayer for the pardon of sin.
after this desire he begins to pray, not for any worldly benefit, but only
for the forgiveness of his sins, crying with the poor Publican, O God be
merciful to me a sinner. Now this prayer, it is made, not for one day only,
but continually from day to day: not with the lips, but with greater sighs
and groans of the heart then that they can be expressed with the tongue. Now,
after these desires and prayers for Gods mercy, arises in the heart a lively
assurance of the forgiveness of sin. A lively assurance.
For God, who cannot lie, has made his promise, Mat. 7. Esaias 65.24.
Knock, it shall be opened: and again: Before they call I will answer, and
while they speak I will hear. Therefore when an humbled sinner comes crying
and knocking at his mercy gate for the forgiveness of sin, either then or
shortly after the Lord works in his heart a lively assurance thereof. And
Reu. 21.6 Job. 4.14.
whereas he thirsted in his heart, being scorched with the heat of Gods
displeasure beating upon his conscience, Christ Jesus gives him to drink of
the well of the water of life freely: and having drunken thereof, he shall
never be more a thirst, but shall have in him a fountain of water springing up
into everlasting life.

XV.
For the better understanding of this, that God works saving faith in the
heart of man after this manner; it must be observed that a sinner is compared
Luke 4. 18. Mat. 9. 11. 12.
to a sick man often in the Scriptures. And therefore the curing of a disease
fitly resembles the curing of sin. A man that has a disease or sore in his
body before he can be cured of it, he must see it, feel pain of it, and be
in a fear least it bring him into danger of death: after this he shall see
himself to stand in need of physic, and he longs till he be with the
physician: when he is once come to him, he desires him of all loves to help
him: and to show the best skill he can: he will not spare for any cost: then
he yeeldes himself into the Physicians hands, persuading himself, that by
Gods blessing he both can and will help him: after this he comes to his former
health again. On the same manner, every man is wounded with the deadly wound
of sin at the very heart: and he that would be saved and escape damnation,
must see his sin, be sorrowful for it, and utterly despair of his own
strength to attain salvation thereby: furthermore, he must see himself to
stand in need of Christ, the good Physician of his soul, and long after him,
and cry unto him with deep sighs and groans for mercy: after this, Christ
Jesus will temper him a plaster of his own heart blood; which being applied,
he shall find himself revived, and shall come to a lively assurance of the
forgiveness of all his sins. So it was in David, when he repented of his
adultery and murder. First, God made him see his sins: for he says, Psalm.
51.3.
I know mine iniquities, and my sins are ever before me. Secondly, he felt
Gods anger for his sins, Verse. 8.
make me (says he) to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice. Thirdly, he utterly despaired of his own strength, in that
he said, Verse. 12.
stablish me with thy free spirit; signifying thereby, unless the Lord would
stay him with his glorious power, he should run headlong to his own
confusion. Fourthly, he comes to see himself stand in great need of Gods
favor: Verse. 1.
one mercy will not content him: he prays for the whole innumerable multitude
of his mercies, to be bestowed on him, to do away his iniquities. Fifthly, his
desire and his prayer for the forgiveness of his sin, are set down in the
whole Psalm. And in his prayer he gathers some comfort and assurance of Gods
mercy toward himself, in that he says, The sacrifices of God are a contrite
spirit: Verse. 17.
a contrite, and a broken heart O God, thou will not despise. Again, the like
appears in David, Psalm. 32.3. When I held my tongue, my bones consumed in my
roaring all the day. 4. For thy hand was heavy upon me day and night: my
moisture was turned into the drought of summer. Sela. 5. I confessed my sins
unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquities: I said, I will confess against my
self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin.

To this purpose is the example of R. Glouer, Martyr, who being somewhat
troubled at his entrance into prison, testifies thus of himself. So (says
he) I remained without any further conference of any man by the space of eight
days, and till the bishops coming: in which time I gave my self continually
to prayer and meditation of the merciful promises of God made to all without
exception of persons that call upon the name of his dear son Jesus Christ. I
found in my self daiely amendment of health of body, increase of peace of
conscience, and many consolations from God by the help of his spirit: and
sometimes as it were a taste and glimmering of the life to come: all for his
only son Jesus Christ's sake.

XVI.
There are diverse degrees and measures of this unfeigned faith, Degrees of faith.
according as there be diverse degrees of Christians: some Reu. 12.2. Gal. 4. 19.
are yet in the womb, and have their mother the Church traveling of them:
some 1. Cor. 3.2.
are new borne babes, feeding on the milk of the word: some are Ephesians. 4. 13.
perfect men in Christ, come to the measure of the age of the fullness of
Christ.

XVII.
The least mesure of faith.
The least measure of faith that any Christian can have, is compared to the Mat.
17. 20.
grain of mustard seed, the least of all seeds: and to flax Esa. 43. 2.
that has fire in it, but so weak that it can neither give heat nor light,
but only makes a smoke, and is called by the name of a Mat. 1.25
little faith: and it may be thus described, When a man of an humble heart
does not yet feel the assurance of the forgiveness of his own sins, and yet
he is persuaded that they are pardonable, desiring that they might be pardoned:
and therefore prays to God, that he would pardon them, and give him strength
to leave them.

XVIII.
A little faith may more plainly be known by considering of these four
points: first, that it is only in his heart, who is humbled for sin: Esa.
51.17
For the Lord dwells with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to
receive the spirit of the humble, and to give life to them that are of a
contrite heart. Secondly, it is in a man especially at the time of his
conversion, and calling to Christ, after which he is to grow from faith to
faith. Thirdly, this faith though it be in the heart, yet it is not so much
felt in the heart: this was in David at some times, Psalm. 22.1.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, says he? The first words, my God,
my God, are speeches of faith: yet the latter, why have thou forsaken me? show
that the^ he had no feeling of Gods mercy. A little faith then is in the heart
of man, as in the spring time the fruit is in the bud, which yet appears
not, but only has his nature and substance in the bud. Lastly, the beginnings
and seeds of this faith, or at the least, signs and effects thereof, are
three.

A persuasion that sin is pardonable.
The first is a persuasion, that a man's own sins are pardonable: this
persuasion though it be not faith, yet it is a good preparation to faith: for
the wicked cut themselves off quite from Gods mercy, in that with Cain Genesis 4.
13.
they say, their sins are greater, then that they can be forgiven. A desire
of reconciliation to God in Christ for sin.
The second is a desire of the favor and mercy of God in Christ, and of the
means to attain to that favor. Mat. 5. 6. Luke 1.53. Psalm. 145.19 Psalm. 10.
17. and 38.9. Number. 23. 9.
This desire is a special grace of God, and it has the promise of blessedness;
and it must be distinguished from that desire which wicked men have: who though
they desire life eternal, as Balaam did, yet they cannot sincerely desire the
means, as faith, repentance, mortification, reconciliation, etc. The third is
prayer for nothing in this world, but only for the forgiveness of their sins
with great sighs and groans, from the bottom of the heart, which they are
not able to express, as they feel them. (...) for pardon.
Now this hearty praying and desire for the pardon of sin can never come
from the flesh, but only from the spirit, who Romans 8. 25
stirs up these heavenly motions of longing, desiring, sighing after
remission of sin, and all other graces of God, which he belloweth upon his
children. And where the spirit of Christ dwells there must needs be faith:
for Ephesians. 3. 17.
Christ dwells in the hearts of the faithful by faith. Therefore as Rebecca,
Ge. 25.22.
when she felt the Twins strive in her womb, though it pained her, yet she
knew, both that she had conceived, and that the children were quick in her: so
they who have these motions, and holy affections in them before mentioned, may
assure themselves that the spirit of god dwells in them, and consequently
that they have faith, though a weak faith.

XIX.
Examples of this small faith are evident in the Apostles, who though Mat. 16.
they believed that Christ was the Savior of the world, yet they Mat. 17.23
Luke 9.45.
were ignorant of his death and resurrection, which are the chief means of
salvation. After his resurrection they were ignorant of his ascension, and of
his spiritual kingdom, for they dreamed Act. 1. 6.
of an earthly kingdom; and at his death they all fled from him, and Peter
fearfully denied him. They being in this estate are not said to have no faith,
but to be of Mat. 8.25.
little faith. Another example we have in David, who having continued a long
space in his two great sins adultery and murder, was admonished thereof by
Nathan the prophet: being admonished he confessed his sins, and straightway
Nathan declared unto him from the Lord the forgiveness of them. Yet afterward
David humbles himself, as it appears in the 51. Psalm, and prays most
earnestly for the forgiveness of those and all other his sins, even as though
it had not bin true, that they were forgiven, as Nathan told him: the reason
is: howsoever they were remitted before God, yet David at his first repenting
of them felt none assurance in his heart of the forgiveness of them, only he
had a persuasion, that they might be pardoned. And therefore he vehemently
desired and prayed to the Lord, to remit them, and to sanctify him anew. This
then being the least measure of faith, it must be remembered, that he who has
not attained to it, has as yet no saving faith at all.

XX.
The greatest measure of faith is a full persuasion of the mercy of God. The
greatest mesure of faith.
For it is the strength and ripenes of faith, Romans 4.20.21. Abraham not weak
in faith, but being strengthened in the faith, was fully persuaded, that he who
had promised was able to do it: This full assurance is when a man can say with
Paul, I Romans 8.33.
am persuaded that neither life nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. And least any should think, this saying is peculiar to
Paul, he 1. Tim. 1. 16.
testifies of himself that for this cause he was received to mercy, that he
might be an example to them which after should believe in Christ to life
eternal: and the whole Church, in the Cant^. uses the same in effect: saying,
Cant. 8.6,7.
Love is as strong as death, jealousy is as cruel as the grave, the coals
thereof are fiery coals, and a vehement flame. Much water cannot quench love,
neither can the floods drown it: if a man should give all the substance of his
house for love, they would contemn it.

XXI.
No Christian attaineth to this full assurance at the first, but in some
continuance of time, after that for a long space he has kept a good conscience
before God, and before men: and has had diverse experiences of Gods love and
favor toward him in Christ. This Paul declares to the Romans: To. 5.45.
in afflictions God sheds abroad his love in their hearts, by the holy Ghost,
which is given to them: but how? by degrees: for from afflictions arises
patience, from patience comes experience, from experience hope, and hope
never makes ashamed, or disappointeth him of eternal life. This is evident in
David's practice: Ps. 23.6.
Doubtless, says he, kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life, and I shall live a long season in the house of the Lord. Mark this his
resolute persuasion: and consider how he came unto it: namely, by experience of
Gods favor at sundry times, and after sundry manners. For before he set
down this resolution, he numbered up diverse benefits received of the Lord:
that Psalm. 23. 2,3,4.
he fed him in green pastures, and led him by the refreshing waters of Gods
word: that he restores him and leads him in the paths of righteousness: that
he strengthens him in great dangers, even of death, and preserves him: that
in despite of his enemies, he enriched him with many benefits. By means of
all these mercies of God bestowed on him, he came to be persuaded of the
continuance of the favor of God toward him. Again David said before King
Saul, 1. Sam. 17. 32.
Let no man's heart fail because of Goliath: Thy servant will go and fight with
the Philistine. And Saul said verse. 33.
to David, Thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him:
for thou art but a boy, and he is a man of war from his youth. David
answered, that he was able to fight with, and to slay the uncircumcised
Philistine. And the ground of his persuasion was taken from experience: for
thus he said, verse. 34.
Thy servant kept his fathers sheep, and there came a Lion, and likewise a
Bear, and took a sheep out of the flock, and verse. 35.
I went out after him and smote him, and took it out of his mouth, and when he
arose against me, I caught him by the beard, and smote him and slew him. verse.
36.
So thy servant slew both the Lion and the Bear: therefore this uncircumcised
Philistine shall be as one of the^, seeing he has rayled on the host of the
living God. The like proceeding must be in matters concerning eternal life.
Little David resembles every Christian: Goliath and the army of the
Philistines, resembles Satan and his power. He therefore that will be
resolved, that he shall be able to overcome the gates of hell, and attain to
life everlasting, must long keep watch and ward over his own heart, and he
must fight against his own rebellious flesh, and crucify it: yea he must have
experiences of Gods power strengthening him in many temptations, before he
shall be fully assured of his attaining to the kingdom of heaven.

XXII.
Thus much concerning faith it self: now follow the fruits and benefits of
faith. By means of this special faith, the Elect are truly Ephesians. 3. 17.
joined unto Christ, and have an heavenly communion and fellowship with him;
Union with Christ.
and therefore do Ephesians. 3.20. Ephesians. 1.19. 1. Cor. 13.16
in some measure inwardly feel his holy spirit moving and stirring in them, as
Rebecca felt the Twins to stir in her womb. Christ is as Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
the head in the body; every believer as a member of the same body: now as
the head gives sense and motion to the members, Communion with Christ.
and the members feel themselves to have sense, and to move by means of the
head: so does Christ Jesus revive and quicken every true believer, and by his
heavenly power makes him to do the good which he does. To. 6.4,^. Ioh.
15.1,2. Ephesians. 4.13. 16.
And as from the stock, sap is derived to the grift, that it may live and
grow, and bring forth fruit in his kind: so do all the faithful that are
grafted into Christ the true vine. And as the grift loses his wild nature, and
is changed into the nature of the stock, and brings forth good fruit: so in
like manner it is with them that are in Christ, who by little and little are
wholly renewed Act. 15.9.
from evil to good.

XXIII.
The Elect being thus joined unto Christ, receive three wonderful benefits
from him, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification. Justification is, when the
Elect being in themselves rebellious sinners, and therefore firebrands of hell
fire, and Gods own enemies, 1. Cor. 1.30. 2. Cor. 5.21.
yet by Christ they are accepted of the Lord as perfectly pure and righteous
before him.

XXIIII.
This Justification is wrought in this manner. Justification.
Sin is that which makes a man unrighteous, and the child of wrath and
vengeance. In sin, there are three things which are hurtful to man: the
first is condemnation, which comes of ^inne: the second is, actual
disobedience of the law in sin: the third is, the root and fountain of
sin, original corruption. These are three deadly wounds, and three running
sores in the hearts and consciences of all sinners. Luke 1. 35. Coloss. 2.9.
Ioh. 4.14. Mar. 2. 17.
Now Christ Jesus is perfectly righteous, and in him a sinner may find three
inestimable benefits answerable to the three former evils. First, the
sufferings of Christ upon the cross, sufficient for all men's sins. Secondly,
the obedience of Christ in fulfilling the law. Thirdly the perfect holiness of
the humane nature of Christ: these are three sovereign medecines to heal all
wounded consciences: and they are as three running streams of living water to
bathe and to supple the bruised and contrite heart. Col. 2.14. Gal. 3.13. Ephesians.
1.7.
Now then comes faith, and first lays hold of the sufferings of Christ, and
so a sinner is freed from the punishment and guilt of sin, and from eternal
damnation, and thus the first deadly wound is cured. Romans 4. 18,19. Math. 3.15.
Esa. 53. 11. Phil. 2.8.
Again, faith lays hold on the perfect obedience of Christ, in fulfilling
the law, and thus the second wound is cured. Romans 8.1, 2,3. Ioh. 17.19.
Thirdly, faith applies the holiness of Christ's humane nature to the sinner,
and then he is accepted of God as perfectly righteous, and so his third deadly
wound is cured. Thus a sinner is made righteous by the righteousness of Christ
imputed to him.

XXV.
From true justification, proceed Romans 5.1, 2,4,5,6.
many other benefits, and they are either outward, or inward. Outward benefits
are three. Reconciliation.
The 2. Cor. 5. 18.
first is Reconciliation, by which a man justified is perfectly reconciled to
God; because his sin is done away, and he is arrayed with the perfect
righteousness of Christ. The Romans 5. 10,11. 2. Cor. 6. 9, Heb. 12.6. 2. Sam.
7.14 2. Sam. 12. 13,14.
second is, that afflictions to the faithful are no punishments for sin, but
only fatherly and loving chastisments. Afflictions only chastisments.
For the guilt and punishment of sin was borne of Christ. Now therefore, if a
Christian be afflicted, it is no punishment: for then God should punish one
fault twice; once in Christ, and the second time upon the Christian: which
thing does not agree with his justice: it remains therefore that afflictions
are only corrections in the faithful. The third benefit is, Merit in Christ.
that the man justified does Matthew. 19. 28,29. Apoc. 22.12 and 22. 6.
deserve and merit at Gods hands the kingdom of heaven. For being made
perfectly righteous in Christ and by his righteousness, he must needs merit
eternal life in and by the merits of Christ. And therefore Paul calls it the
justification of life. Romans 5.18.

XXVI.
Inward benefits proceeding from justification, are those which are inwardly
^elt in the heart, and serve for the better assurance of justification, and
they Peace of conscience.
Peace and quietness of conscience. As all men naturally in Adam are corrupt, so
all men naturally have corrupt and defiled consciences, accusing them and
arraigning them before Gods judgment for their sins: in such wise that every
suspicion of death and fear of imminent danger makes a natural man stand
aghast at his wits end, knowing not what to do: Heb. 10.22 Romans 5. 1. and 16.
15.
but by faith in Christ, the Christian is persuaded of remission of his sins,
and so the disquietnes of his conscience is appeased, and he has an inward
peace in all extremities, which can not be taken from him.

XXVII.
A difference between a dead conscience and a quiet conscience.
The slumbering and dead conscience is much like to the good conscience
pacified, and many through ignorance take the one for the other. But they may
be severed and discerned thus. First, let the believing Christian examine
himself, whether his conscience was afflicted with the sense of Gods
judgments and pressed down with the burden of his sin before he came to
that quietness: for then he may be in good hope, that it was the Spirit of God
who brought that peace, because God has promised, Ioh. 7.37. Esa. 57.15.
That he will dwell with the humble and contrite, to revive and quicken them.
But if he have always had that peace from the beginning of his days, he may
easily deceive himself, by taking the numnesse and security of a defiled
conscience, for the true peace of conscience. Secondly, let him search from
whence this peace of his conscience proceeds. Romans 5.1. Heb. 9.14.
For if it come from any thing else but from the certainty of the remission of
sin, it is no true peace: as many, flattering themselves in sin, and
dreaming of a pardon, are thereupon quieted, and the devil is ready enough to
put this into their minds: but this can be no true peace. Thirdly, let him
examine himself, if he have a care to keep a good conscience: which if he
have, he has also received from the Lord a good and a quiet conscience. Act.
23. and 24. 16.
For if God bestow upon any man a gift concerning his salvation, he gives him
also a care to keep it.

XXVIII.
Ephesians. 3.12. Romans 5.2.
An entrance into Gods favor, and a perseverance in it, which is indeed a
wonderful benefit. When a man comes into favor with his Prince, then he is
bold to come unto him, and he may have free access unto his presence, Entrance
with boldness into Gods presence.
and he may sue to his Prince for any benefit or preferment whereof he stands
in need, and may obtain it before any other: so they which are in Gods
favor, by reason that they are freely pardoned, and justified in Christ, do
boldly approach into Gods presence, and they are ready Romans 5.3. and 14.17.
The third is a spiritual joy in their hearts, Love.
even then when they are afflicted: because they look certainly to obtain the
kingdom of heaven. Fe^ling of Gods love.
The fourth is Romans 5.5.
that the love of the faithful by the holy Ghost: that is, that the holy Ghost
does make the faithful very evidently to feel the love of God toward them,
and does as it were, fill their hearts with it.

XXIX.
The second maine benefit is Ioh. 1.12. Gal. 3.26. Heb. 2.11, 12.
Adoption, whereby they which are justified, are also accepted of God as his
own children. From Adoption proceed many other benefits. First the elect
child of God hereby is made a brother to Secondly he is a King, and the
kingdom of heaven is his inheritance. Thirdly, he is lord over all creatures
save Angels. 1. Pet. 2.9.
Fourthly, the holy Angels minister Heb. 6.7,8.
and therefore death (which is most terrible) unto him is no entrance into
hell, but a narrow gate to let him into everlasting life. Lastly, being thus
adopted, he may look for comfort at Gods 1. Cor. 3. 32. Heb. 1.14, 15.
as God has promised.

XXX.
The inward assurance of Adoption is by two witnesses. The first is our spirit,
that is, an heart and conscience sanctified, Rom.8. 28. 2. Cor. 12.7.
by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ. Heb. 2. 15. 1. Cor. 15. 54,56. Romans
5.5. 1. Cor. 10. 10.
Now because it comes to pass that the testimony of our spirit is often
feeble and weak, God of his goodness has given his own spirit to be a fellow
witness with our spirit: for the Elect have in themselves the spirit of Jesus
Christ, Assurance of adoption.

The spirit of adoption.


testifying unto them and persuading them that they are the adopted children of
God. Romans 8. 16. Gal. 4. 6. 1. Pet. 3.21.
For this cause the holy Ghost is called the spirit of adoption, because it
works in us the assurance of our adoption: 2. Cor. 1.21
and it is called a pawn or earnest. For as in a bargain, when part of the
price is paid in earnest, then assurance is made, that men will pay the whole:
so when the child of God has received thus much from the holy Ghost to be
persuaded that he is adopted and chosen in Christ, he may be in good hope, and
he is already put in good assurance, fully to enjoy eternal life in the
kingdom of heaven.

Romans 8.25. 1. Ioh. 3.2. Coloss. 3.3. 1. Cor. 3.1. Ephesians. 4. 14.
Indeed this testimony is weak in most men, and can scarce be perceived:
because most Christians, though they may be old in respect of years, yet
generally they are babes in Christ, and not yet come to a perfect growth: and
may find in themselves great strength of sin, and the graces of God to be in
small measure in them. And again, the children of God being most distressed,
as in time of trial, and in the hour of death, then the inward working of the
holy Ghost is felt most evidently. But a reprobate can not have this testimony
at all: though indeed a man flattereth himself, and the devil imitating the
spirit of God, does usually persuade carnal men and hypocrites that they shall
be saved. But that deuillish illusion, and the testimony of the Spirit may be
discerned by 2. notes. The I. is hearty and fervent prayer to God in the name
of Christ. Labor in prayer: for it is the proper spirit of adoption: and in
prayer, we shall most of all feel the spirit of adoption.
For the same spirit that testifies to us that we are the adopted children of
God, does also make us cry, that is, fervently with groans and sighs filling
heaven and earth, pray to God. Now, this hearty, fervent, and loud crying in
the ears of God, can the devil give to no hypocrite: for it is the special
mark of the Spirit of God. The other note is, that they which have the
special testimony from the spirit of God, have also in their hearts the same
affections to God, which children have to their father: namely, love, fear,
reverence, obedience, thankfulness, for they call not upon God, as upon a
terrible Judge, but they cry Abba, that is, father. And these affections they
have not, whom Satan illudeth with a fantastical imagination of their
salvation: for it may be, that through hypocrisy, or through custom, they may
call God father, but in truth they can not do it.

XXXI.
The elect being thus assured of their adoption and justification, are endued
with hope: Hope.
Romans 8.25. and 5.5. 2. Cor. 5.6.7. Heb. 11.2.
by which they look patiently for the accomplishing of all good things which
God has begun in them. And therefore they can undergo all crosses and
afflictions with a quiet and contented mind: because they know that the time
will come when they shall have full redemption from all evils. This was 1. Th.
1.3. Romans 8.38.
the patience of Paul's hope, when he said, that nothing in the world could
sever him from the love of God in Christ. And like to this was the patience of
Policarpe, and of Ignatius, who when he was condemned and judged to be thrown
to wild beasts, and now heard the Lions roaring, he boldly and yet patiently
said; I am the wheat of Christ, I shall be ground with the teeth of wild
beasts, that I may be found good bread. Also the same was the patience of the
blessed Martyr S. Laurence, who like a meek lamb suffered himself to be
tormented on a fiery gridyron: and when he had bin pressed down with fire
pikes for a great space, in the mighty spirit of God, spoke unto the Emperor
that caused him thus to be tormented, on this wise: This side is now roasted
enough,
turn up, O tyrant great:
Assay, whether roasted or raw
thou think the better meat.


XXXII.
Sanctification
The third maine benefit, is Act. 15.9. Ps. 103.5. Eze. 11.19. Psalm. 51.12.
inward sanctification: by which a Christian in his mind, in his will, and in
his affections is freed from the bondage and tyranny of sin and satan, and
is by little and little enabled through the spirit of Christ to desire and
approve that which is good, and to walk in it. And it has two parts. Gal.
5.24. Col. 3.5.
The first is mortification, when the power of sin is continually weakened,
consumed, and diminished. Ephesians. 1.1. 1. Cor. 15. 45.
The second is vivification, by which inherent righteousness is really put into
them, and afterward is continually increased.

XXXIII.
This sanctification is wrought in all Christians after this manner. After that
they are joined to Christ, Mortification.
and made mystically bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, Christ works
in them effectually by his holy spirit, and his works are principally three.
First, To. 6.3,4. Col. 2.12. and 3.2,5.
he causes his own death to work effectually the death of all sin, and to
kill the power of the flesh. For it is as a corrasiue, which being applied to
the part affected, V^uification in the first resurrection.
eats out the venom and corruption: and so the death of Christ by faith
applied, fretteth out and consumes the concupiscence and the corruption of the
whole man. Secondly, his burial causes the burial of sin, as it were in a
grave. Phil. 3.10. Romans 6.4.
Thirdly, his Resurrection sends a quickening power into them, and serves to
make them rise out of their sin, in which they were dead and buried, to work
righteousness, and to live in holiness of life. Lazarus body lay four days,
and stanke in the grave, yet Christ raised it and gave him life again, and made
him do the same works that living men do: so also Christ deals with the
souls of the faithful; they rot and stink in their sins, and would perish
in them, if they were left alone: but Christ puts a heavenly life into them,
and makes them active and liu^ly to do the will of God in the works of
Christianity, and in their works of their callings. And this sanctification is
throughout the whole man in the spirit, soul, and mind, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. And
here the spirit signifies the mind and memory; the soul, the will and
affections.

XXXIIII.
The sanctification of the mind is the enlightening of it with the true
knowledge of Gods word. It is of two sorts, either spiritual understanding, or
spiritual wisdom. Spiritual understanding is a general conceiving of every
thing that is to be done or not to be done, out of Gods word. Spiritual
wisdom is a worthy grace of God, by which a man is able to understand out of
Gods word, what is to be done or not to be done in any particular thing, or
action, according to the circumstances of person, time, place, etc. Both these
are in every Christian, otherwise Paul would never have prayed for the
Colossians, Col. 1.9.
That they might be fulfilled with knowledge of Gods will, in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding. In both these excelled David, who testified of
himself, that Gods word Psalm. 119. 105.
was a lantern to his feet, and a light to his paths: and that v. 98,99.
God by his commandments had made him wiser then his enemies: that he had more
understanding then all his teachers: because Gods testimonies were his
meditations, 100.
that he understood more then the ancient, because he kept Gods precepts. The
properties of the mind enlightened are specially two. The first is, that by it
a Christian sees his own blindness, ignorance, and vanity, as appears in
David, who being a Prophet of God, yet prayed: 18.
Open mine eyes (O Lord) that I may see the wonders of thy law. And thence it
is that the godly so much bewailed the blindness of their minds. Contrariwise,
the wicked Ioh. 9.41.
man in the midst of his blindness, thinks himself to see. The second is,
that the mind runs and is occupied in a continual meditation of Gods word.
So David says, the Psalm. 1.2.
righteous man's delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does he
meditate day and night.

XXXV.
The memory also is sanctified in that it can both keep and remember that
which is good and agreeable to Gods will: Sanctifcation of the memory.
whereas naturally it best remembers lewdnes, and wickedness, and vanity. This
holy memory was in David: Ps. 119.11.
I have hid thy promises in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.
And Marie Luke 2. 19.
kept all the sayings of Christ and pondered them in her heart. And to the
exercise of this memory, Solomon has a good lesson, My son, hearken unto my
words, incline thine ears unto my sayings: Prou. 2.1.
let them not depart from thine eyes, but keep them in the midst of thine
heart.

XXXVI.
Furthermore, the will of a Christian is renewed and purified by Christ,
Sanctification of the will.
which appears in that it is so far forth freed from sin, that it can will
and choose that which is good and acceptable to God, and refuse that which is
evil, according to that of Paul, Phil. 2. 13.
It is God which works in you the will and the deed, even of his good
pleasure. Now, if a man be considered as he is naturally, he can neither will,
nor perform that which is good, but only that which is evil: Job 15.16. Ephesians.
2.2. Luke 11. 21.
for he is sold under sin, as the ox or the ass, and commits iniquity, as
the fish draws in water; yea he is in bondage under Satan, who inspireth his
mind with vile motions, and boweth his will, affections, and the members of his
body to his cursed will: so that for his life, he is not able to do any thing
but sin and rebel against God. And it must be remembered, that although the
Christian man's will be freed in part from the bondage of sin in this life,
yet it shall not be free from the power of sin until the life to come: for
Romans 7. 14.
Paul that worthy Saint says of himself being regenerate, that he was
carnal and sold under sin.

XXXVII.
San^tification of the affections.
Sanctified affections are known by this that they Romans 12.9.
are moved and inclined to that whiah is good, to embrace it: and are not
commonly affected and stirred with that which is evil, unless it be to eschew
it. Examples hereof are these which follow. Romans 12.15.
To rejoice with them that rejoice. And to weep with them that weep. Luke
10.20.
To rejoice because a man's name is written in heaven. Ps. 143.6.
To desire Gods presence and favor, as the dry land desires water. Esa. 66.2.
To fear and tremble at Gods word. Psalm. 48.2.
To long and to faint after the places where God is worshipped. 2. Pet. 2. 8.
Ps. 119. 136
To be vexed in soul from day to day in seeing and hearing the unlawful
deeds of men: and to shed rivers of tears because men break Gods
commandments. To. 12. 11.
In feruencie of spirit to serve the Lord. Col. 3. 12
To put on the bowels of compassion toward the miseries of men. Ephesians. 4.26.
To be angry and sin not. 2. Cor. 7.11
To sorrow for the displeasing of God. 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
To love the brethren i^ Christ. Psalm. 119. 128.
To admire at the word of God. verse. 127.
To love Gods commandments above gold. Mat. 8.10.
To admire the graces of God in others. Psalm. 2.11.
In fear to serve God, and to rejoice in trembling. Act. 9.31.
To walk in the fear of God, and to be filled with the joy of the holy Ghost.
1. Pet. 1.6.
To be heavy through manifold temptations. 1. Pet. 4.13.
To rejoice in being partaker of the sufferings of Christ. Psalm. 33. 20,21
To wait on the Lord, to rejoice in him, and to trust in his holy name. Romans
8.23.
To wait for the full redemption. 2. Cor. 5.2.
To sigh, desiring to enjoy eternal life. Psalm. 86. 8.
To love the habitation of Gods house, and the place where his honor dwells.
Phil. 3.8. Zeal for Gods glory.
To esteem all things as loss and dung in respect of Christ.

XXXVIII.
But among all these sanctified affections, there are four specially to be
marked. The first is a zeal for Gods glory: by which a Christian is thus
affected, that rather then God should loose his glory, he could be content to
have his own soul damned. As it was with Moses, who feared least God should
loose his glory, if he did utterly destroy the Israelites for their idolatry,
whom he had chosen to be his people: and therefore in this respect prayed unto
the Lord, Ex. 32. 12.
Therefore now if thou pardon their sin, thy mercy shall appear: but if
thou will not, I pray thee raze me out of the book which thou have written.
Romans 9.3.
And Paul could have wished with all his heart to be cut off from all
fellowship with Christ, and to be given up to eternal destruction, for his
country men the Jews, and for Gods glory specially. Some may say, this
affection is not common to all, but particular to such as are lead with such an
exceeding affection, as these holy men were, and which have their hearts so
pierced and kindled with divine love, and so ravished with the same out of
themselves, that they forget all other things, yea themselves, having nothing
before their eyes but God, and his glory. To this I answer, that this
affection is common to all, though the measure of it be diverse, in some more,
in some less: which appears in that our Savior Christ teaches every one in
his prayer which he made, before he crave any other thing, either concerning
God, or himself, to pray that Gods name may be sanctified. For by this all
Christians are taught that they are to ouerpasse all considerations of
themselves, their own pleasure and profit; their salvation or damnation: and
absolutely with an hearty affection, to seek after the glory of God in all
their doings, that as Gods glory is most dear unto himself, so it may
appear also that it is most dear unto them. If any think it strange that
Moses, Paul, or any other should be content to fall into misery, to loose
their lives, and to be cast into eternal perdition in hell fire, with
reprobate and damned spirits, rather then Gods honor should be turned into
dishonor and blasphemy: let them consider that wonderful is the power of
true love, 1. Cor. 13. verse. 7.
which makes all things easy: Cant. 8. verse. 6.7.
which is as strong as the grave, that ouercomes all, and was never yet
overcome: which is as a flaming fire, that a whole sea of water cannot quench.
And the love which these men had to God did so ravish them, that they felt no
fear of hell fire.

XXXIX.
The second affection is the fear of God, The fear of god
a most excellent and wonderful grace of God. Solomon Eccl. 12. 14.
matcheth it, yea and prefers it too, before all things in this world,
making it the end of al. Without it a man cannot be wise, it is the first step
to wisdom, Pro. 14.26
in it is assured strength: also it is a welspring of life to eschew the snares
of death. The Churches of Judea being in peace, were edified, and walked in
the Act. 9. 31.
fear of GOD, and were abundantly filled with the comfort of the holy ghost.
In this fear of GOD there be two parts: the first is a persuasion in the
heart, that a man is in Gods presence wheresoever he is, and when he by
infirmity forgets GOD, a drawing of himself into Gods presence. As it was in
David, Psalm. 26.8
I have (says he) set the Lord always before me. For he is at my right hand,
therefore I shall not slide. And this his being in the presence of God, he
sets down most excellently in the 139 Psalm. Genesis 5. 22.
Enoch walked with God. Genesis 17. 1.
Abraham is commanded to walk before God and to be upright. The second part of
the fear of God is, in Gods presence to stand in awe of him; which is when a
man takes heed to his ways least he offend God. This advise David gives to
Saul's Counselors. Psalm. 4.4.
Stand in awe and sin not. Pharao commanded the Midwiues of Egypt to kill all
the male children of the Israelites at their birth: they did it not, because
Exodus 1.17
they stood in awe of God, fearing to displease him. And hence it is that the
Esa. 66.3.
godly hear Gods word with fear and trembling.

XL.
The third is, the hatred and detestation of sin, H^tred of sin.
because it is sin, and specially of a man's own corruptions: wherewith a
Christian is so turmoyled, that in regard of them and for no other cause, he
most heartily desires to be forth of this most miserable world, that he may be
dis^urdened of his sin, and leave off to displease God. Paul feels in
himself a la^ge mass of deadly corruption, it makes him deem himself most
miserable, and to mourn because he was not delivered from it, saying To. 7. 24.
Oh miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Again, it is sin that makes the Church complain that Cant. 1. 4.
she is black, that the sun has looked upon her, and therefore she cries,
Reu. 22.20.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

XLI.
The fourth is, joy of heart in consideration of the neerenes of presence of
the terrible day of judgment. The Luke 21.27
reprobate either trembles at the consideration of the day of judgment, or
else in the security of his heart he regards it not. And when he shall see
the signs of the coming of Christ, 2. Tim. 4.8. 2. Cor. 5.6,7
his heart shall fail him for very fear, and he shall Luke 21.26.
call the hills to fall upon him: but contrariwise, the faithful love the
second coming of Christ, and therefore wait and long for it: and when they
shall see the signs of it, they shall Luke 21.28
lift up their heads, because the full accomplishment of their redemption is at
hand.

XLII.
Sanctification of the body.
The sanctification of the body is when Romans 6. verse. 19.
all the members of it are carefully preserved from being means to execute
any sin: and are made the instruments of righteousness and holiness. So Paul
prayed for the Thessalonians These. 4.4.
that they might know how to possess their vessels in holiness, and in
honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles do which know
not God. And Job Job. 31. verse. 1.
made a covenant with his eyes not to look on a woman. In whose example it
appears how every member is to be kept pure and holy.

XLIII.
A consolation.
If any humbled Christian find not this measure of sanctification in himself,
yet let him not be discouraged. For if any man have a Romans 8. 5. verse. 1.
willingness, and a desire to obey all Gods commandments, he has the spirit,
and he who has the spirit is in Christ, and he who is in Christ shall never
see damnation. And though he fail greatly in the action of obedience, yet God
will accept his affection to obey, as obedience acceptable unto him. God will
approve of thee for his own work which he has wrought in thee, and not
reject thee for thine.

XLIV.
Repentance.
From sanctification arises repentance. For a man cannot hate his own sins
before he be sanctified: and he cannot truly repent for them before he hate
them. Repentance is when a man Act. 26.26
turns to GOD, and brings forth fruits worthy amendment of life. This turning
unto God has two parts: The first a purpose and resolution of heart never to
sin any more, but to lead a new life. This was in David, who fully purposed
to keeps Gods commandments, and Psa. 112.6
applied his heart to fulfill his statutes unto the end. And unto this did
Barnabas exhort the brethren at Antioch, Act. 11.23.
that with full purpose of heart, they would cleave unto the Lord. The second
part is an holy labor in man's life and conversation to purify and cleanse
himself from sin: of this speaks John, 1. Ioh. 3.3.
And every one that has this hope in him purges himself even as he is pure.
This did David practice, as may appear in that he said: Psalm. 73.13
Certainly, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocence. If any marvel how repentance follows sanctification, considering
it is the first thing of all, that the Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of GOD
preach unto the people whom they would win to Christ: Repentance after faith
and sanctification in nature but first in sense: and appearance.
I answer, that all other graces are more hidden in the heart, whereas
repentance is open, and sooner appears to a man's own self, and to the eyes
of the world. It is like the budde in the tree, which appears before the
leaf, the blossom, the fruit: and yet in nature, it is the last; for a man
must be renewed, and come to an utter disliking of his own sins, before he
will turn from them, and leave them.

XLV.
By this it may appear, that there is one manner of sinning in the godly, and
another in the ungodly, though they fall both into one sin. A wicked man when he
sins in his heart he gives full consent to the sin: but the godly though
they fall into the same sins with the wicked, yet they never give full consent:
for they are in their minds, wills, and affections partly regenerate, and
partly unregenerate, and therefore their wills do partly will and partly
abhor that which is evil: according as Saint Paul says of himself, To. 7.
22.
I delight in the law of God according to the inner man, but I see another law
in my members rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive,
etc. And that the godly man never gives full consent to sin, it is evident
by three tokens. First before he comes to do the sin, he has no purpose
nor desire to do it: but his purpose and desire is to do the will of God
contrary to that sin. Secondly in the act or doing of the sin, his heart
rises against it, yet by the strength of temptation, and by the mighty
violence of the flesh, he is haled and pulled on to do wickedness. Paul
says of himself, that he was sold under sin, that is, he was like a
slave, who desires to escape out of his masters hands, and yet is feign in
great misery to serve him. Thirdly, after he has sinned he is sore
displeased with himself for it, and truly repents. As Mat. 26. 69.70,71, 72.
Peter before the denying of his master, had no purpose to do it, but rather to
die in his cause. In the act he had a striving with himself, as appears by
this that first he answered faintly, I know not what thou say: and yet
after when the assault of Satan more prevailed, he fell to swearing, cursing
and banning. After his fall he repented himself and wept bitterly for it. All
was contrary in Judas, who went to betray his master with full intent and
purpose: for the devil long tempting him unto it, entered into him, that is,
made him yield, and resolve himself to do it. Ioh. 12.2. 27.
Afterward when Christ was betrayed and condemned, Judas was not sorrowful for
his sin with a godly sorrow, but in despair of mercy hanged himself.

XLVI.
Fruits worthy of ame^dment of life are such fruits as the Esa. 61. 3. 1. Tim.
1.5.
trees of righteousness bear, Fruits of repentance.
namely, good works: for the doing of a good work there be three things
requisite: First, it must proceed from justifying faith. For the work cannot
please God except the person please him, and the person cannot please him
without this faith. Secondly, it is to be done in obedience unto Gods revealed
word. 1. Sam. 15. 22.
To obey is better then sacrifice, and to harken is better then the fat of
Rams. Thirdly, it is to be referred to Gods glory, 1. Cor. 10. 31.
Whether ye eat or drink (says Paul) or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God. The special all works of Christians, which they and none but
they truly perform, are these five which follow.

XLVII.
Hearing of the word.
The first is the good hearing of the word, Ioh. 10.27. Job. 8.47.
My sheep (says Christ) hear my voice and follow me. And again: he which is
of God hears his voice. And this was one note of the faithful in the
primitive Church to assemble to hear the word. This good hearing of the word
is the saving hearing that brings life eternal. In this action, Christians
are usually thus disposed. Before they come to hear the word of God they make
themselves ready to hear it, as the men of Berea did, Act. 17.11.
who received the word with all readiness. This preparation stands in two
points: First, they disburden themselves of all impediments, that like unto
runners in a race, they may Iam. 1. 12. Psalm. 26.67.
be swift to hear: these impediments are sin and troubled affections: and
they come with humble hearts 1. Cor. 3.18
as fools, that they may become wise. Secondly, they quicken up themselves,
and come unto the assemblies, hungring and thirsting after the word of God, as
men do after meat and drink.

When they are in hearing Gods word, first, their minds are fixed and
attentive only to that which is spoken, as Act. 16.14.
Lydias was. Secondly, they truly believe the word of God, and carefully apply
it to their own souls. Thirdly, they feel the lively power of it in
themselves. It is as Mar. 9.40.
salt in them, to draw out their inward corruption; it is to them the Ephesians. 6.17.
sword of the spirit, and as a To. 15.16
sacrificing knife in the hand of Gods minister, by which their flesh is
killed, and they are offered up in a living sacrifice to God: it is Ioh. 6. 63.
spirit and life to quicken and revive their souls that are dead in sin: and
the reason of this is plain: The word of God preached is as a cup of wine: the
true Christian, is the Lords guest, but he has sauce of his own: he brings
his sugar with him, namely, his true faith, which Heb. 4.2.
he tempereth and mingleth with Gods word, and so it becomes unto him as a
cup of sweet wine, and as water of life. Now the hypocrit, because he brings
no faith with him, drinks of the same, but he finds the wine to be sour and
tart, and void of relish, and in truth it is unto him as a cup of rank
poison. Again, Act. 10.34 Esa 66.3.
they hear the word of God as in Gods presence, and therefore their hearts
are full of fear and trembling. And they receive the Word, not 1. Th. 2.13
as from man, but as from Christ Jesus the only Mat. 17.5 1. Pet. 5.4.
Doctor of the Church: And they regard not so much the Ambassador, or his
ability, as the Embassage of reconciliation sent from the king of heaven.

After they have heard the word, they are bettered in knowledge and in
affection, and they Psalm. 119. 11.
remember it, and meditate upon it continually, that they may frame all their
doings by it. Worldly men use to buy books of statutes, and to have the^ in
their houses to read on, that they may know how to avoid danger of law. And so
the faithful do always set before the^ Gods word, and in all their doings it
is Psalm. 119. 24.
their Counselor, least they should come into danger of Gods displeasure.

XLVIII.
Receiving of the Sacrament^.
The second work is, the receiving of the Sacraments, of Baptism once only,
when a man is openly and solemnly admitted into the Church: and of the Lords
supper often. The first seals up to the heart of a Christian, that he is
united unto Christ, and has true felloship with him in being fully justified
before God, and inwardly sanctified. The second serves to seal up in the
heart of a Christian the continual growing and increasing of the same graces.
This thing every true believer shall have often experience of, either in or
after the receiving of the Sacrament: and yet it shall not be so always, for
sometimes the Church being Cant. 2.5.
brought into Christ's wine seller, shall fall into a swowne and not feel any
refreshing there. Yet the believer is not to be dismayed, if he feel not
always comfort presently after the Sacrament. A sick man feels no comfort or
nourishment, when he eats meat, and yet it preserves his life: So the weak
christian though he feel himself not nourished at the Sacrament by Christ's
body and blood, yet he shall see in time that his soul shall be preserved
thereby unto everlasting life. Furthermore, when a christian feels no comfort
by the Sacrament, let him then humble himself before the Lord more heartily
then ever before, confessing his sins and praying for increase of grace, and
then he shall feel the fruit of the Sacrament.

XLIX.
The third work is, a relieuing of the poor brethren in Christ, Relief of
the poor.
proceeding of a brotherly kindness toward them. This is a special work not
to be done to all men alike, as Saint Paul says, Gal. 6. 11.
Do good to all men, but especially to them of the household of faith.
Directions for this matter are the faithful of Jerusalem, Act. 2.44.
Who were all in one place, and had all things common: Act. 4. 32.
namely in use. And they sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to
all men: as every one had need. Also the brethren at Corinth in their extreme
poverty 2. Cor. 8.23
relieved the churches of Macedonia liberally, not only according to their
power, but also straining themselves beyond their power. Yea this relief must
go further, even to the bestowing of a man's life, if need so require, (as
Saint John says) 1. Ioh. 3.16
Hereby we have perceived love, that he laid down his life for us: therefore
we ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren.

L.
The fourth work, is true prayer: and Saint Luke sets out the faithful,
Prayer.
and the children of God, by this description: Act. 9. 14.
That they call on the name of the lord: As on the contrary it is said of the
wicked, Psalm. 14.4.
That they call not upon God. Ps. 145.18
The true Christian calls on the Lord in truth. For Romans 8.16.
the spirit of adoption, which is the Zac. 12.10
spirit of prayer is his Schoolmaster to teach him to do it.

In prayer he is thus disposed: first, before he prays, Eccl. 5.1. Dan. 9.4.
he is stricken with some fear and reverence in regard of Gods majesty, for he
considers that prayer is a familiar talking with God.

Secondly, he is inwardly Dan. 9.4.
touched with a lively feeling of his own wants, but especially he is vexed and
grieved at his own sin and rebellion: and this sense of his misery is as a
spur to quicken his benumbed heart.

Thirdly, he humbles himself before his God, and lays 1. Sa^. 1.15.
open his heart before the Lord, showing a fervent and longing desire to obtain
those things of which he finds an extreme want in himself, as the Prophet
David did, whose Ps. 143. 6. and 42. 1,2.
desire was like the yawning of the dry ground; and this proceeds from Romans
8. ^6.
the spirit of God which stirs up groanings in the heart, which a man
oftentimes for his life cannot express.

Fourthly, when he makes his request, he doubts not, but by Mar. 1^.^8.
faith he believes that God will grant his requests, which he makes according
to his word. The ground of his persuasion is double: the first is, Romans 8.32.
Christ Jesus, by whose merits as he has obtained remission of sins, so he
looks to obtain all things else: The 1. Ioh. 5.14 15.
other ground is, the comfortable promises of God which he has made, that he
will hear them who truly call upon him.

Fifthly, he prays not for a brunt or two, but he continues in prayer: And
although God seem not to hear him at the first, 1. Th. 5. 17
yet he patiently waits on the Lord, and still calls upon him.

LI.
A lawful calling.
The fifth work is, to walk in some lawefull calling with painfulness, and
uprightness, so that in performing all the duties of it, a Act. 14. 10
man may keep a good conscience before God and men. Thus David determined to
walk in the government of his house and kingdom. Psalm. 101.2
I will do wisely (says he) in the perfect way till thou come to me, I
will walk in the uprightness of mine heart, in the midst of mine house: I
will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that fall
away: it shall not cleave unto me. This sincerity of David's behavior in his
calling made him bold to offer himself to be tried not only by men, but much
more by the Lord God himself, and to be punished accordingly. Psa. 26.1.2
Psa. 119.23. Psalm. 18.22. 24.
Judge me O Lord (says he) for I have walked in mine innocence: Prove me, O
Lord, and try me, examine my reins and mine heart: So upright and clear was
he in all his doings.

LII.
Thus much of faith and the benefits that come by faith: Now follows the
spiritual exercise of a Christian in his manifold temptations, Spiritual
exercise in temp^ation^.
which are in this life inseparable companions of grace. The reason is, because
the devil hates Christ with a deadly hatred, and shows this hatred in a
continual persecution of his members: (as Saint John says) Reu. 12.17.
the dragon was wroth with the woman and went and made war with the remnant
of her seed, which kept the commandments of god, and have the testimony of
Jesus Christ. Now therefore as soon as Christ Jesus begins to show any
token of his love to any man, the devil contrariwise shows forth his enmity,
and stirs up his fellow champions the flesh and the world to war against him
for his confusion. And furthermore the Lord in great wisdom permits
temptations to the last end of a Christian man life Deu. 8.2, 3 2. Cor. 16.
12.18.
to try his faith, to purge him of sin, to humble him, and to make him
depend of his Majesty, to quicken and revive the graces of his spirit, which
otherwise would be dead and decay.

LIII.
Inward motions of the flesh.
The temptations of a Christian are specially six. The first is when inwardly
in his heart, Iam. 1.14.
he is drawn away and intised by his own concupiscence unto any sin. The
Christians exercise in temptation is Gal. 5. 17.
a fight and battle betwixt the flesh and the spirit. And this fighting
stands in four things: First, the flesh stirs up evil thoughts and desires,
as a burning furnace continually sends up smoke and sparks of fire; and it
eggeth a man forward to evil words and deeds, according to that of S. Mark,
Mar. 7.1.2
For from within, even from the heart of a man proceed evil thou^hts,
adulteries, fornications, murders, thef^s, covetousness, wickedness, deceit,
vn^leannes, a wicked eye, backbiting, pride, foolishness.

II. The flesh hinders and choketh the good motions and desires of the heart,
as Paul says. To. 7.23.
I see another law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind, and
leading me captive to the law of sin which is in my members. Again the same
flesh mingleth every good motion and desire with some corruptions: so that the
godly mislike the best thing they do. Esaias says of his own and the peoples
righteousness, that it is but a Esaias 64. 6.
menstruous cloute. To. 8.3.4.
The prayers of the Saints must be perfumed with sweet odours, before they can
assend up sweet and sauorie into the nosthrils of God. And Paul said of
himself, he did that which he disliked: not that he was overtaken with gross
sins; but because when he was to do his duty the flesh hindered him, that he
could To. 7. 15.
not do that which he did exactly and soundly according to his will and desire:
even as a man who has a journey to go, his mind is to dispatch it in all
haste, yet when he is in his travel he goes but slowely, by reason of a
lamenesse in his joints.

III. The spirit on the contrary, kindles in the heart good motions and
desires, and puts a man forward to good words and deeds, as it was in David.
Gal. 9.24. Psalm. 16.8.
I will praise the Lord (says he) who has given me counsel: my reins also
teach me in the night season.

IV. The spirit rebukes a man for his evil intents and desires, and represseth
the force of the^, and as it were nips them in the head. Thus Esaias describes
the inward motions of the spirit, Esa. 30.21
And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee saying, this is the way, walk
ye in it, when thou turnest to the right hand and when thou turnest to the
left. And Saint John says, The spirit Ioh. 16.8.
judges the world of sin. This was in David, who when he did any evil, his
heart smote him. 2. Sam. 24. 10. Out of this doctrine issues a notable
difference betwixt the wicked and the godly: In the godly when they are tempted
to sin, there is a fight between the heart and the heart; that is, between
the heart and it self: In the wicked also there is a fight, when they are
tempted to sin: To. 2.14.15.
but this fight is only between the heart and the conscience. The wicked man
whatsoever he is has some knowledge of good and evil: and therefore when he is
in doing any evil, his conscience accuses, checketh, and controuleth him, and
he feels it stirring in him, as if it were some living thing that crauled in
his body, and gnawed upon his heart, and thereupon he is very often grieved for
his sins, yet for all that he likes his sins very well, and loves them, 1.
Pet. 4.3.4
and could find in his heart to continue in them for ever: so that indeed when
he sins, he has in his heart a striving and a conflict, Psalm. 67.10. Psalm.
119. 104.118. Romans 7. 15.
but that is only between himself and his conscience. But the godly have an
other kind of battle and conflict, for not only their consciences prick them
and reprove them for sin, but also their hearts are so renewed, that they
rise in hatred and detestation of sin; and when they are tempted to evil by
their flesh and Satan, they feel a lust and desire to do that which is good.

LIVE.
The second temptation is a disquietnes in the heart of a Christian, Little
feeling.
because he cannot according to his desire, have fellowship with Christ Jesus,
he is exercised in this temptation on this manner.

I. Cant. 6. 2.
Christ lets him see his excellency and how he is affected toward him. II.
verse. 3.
Then the Christian considering this^ desires Christ and his righteousness.
III. He delights himself in Christ, and has some enjoying of his benefits.
IV. verse. 4.
Then he comes into the assembly of the Church as into Gods wineseller, that
in the word and Sacraments he may feel a greater measure of the love of
Christ. V. But he verse. 5.
falls loue-sicke: that is, he becomes troubled in spirit, because he cannot
enjoy the presence of Christ in the said manner, as he would. VI. verse. 6.7.
verse. 8.
In this his spiritual sickness he feels the power of Christ supporting him,
that the spirit be not quenched, and he hears Christ as it were whispering in
his heart, as a man speaks to his friend when he is coming toward him a
far off. VII. verse. 9.
After this Christ comes nearer, but the Christian can no otherwise enjoy him,
then a man enioyes the company of his friend, who is on the other side of a
wall looking at him through the grate or latteise. VIII. The^ his eyes are
opened, to see the causes, why Christ so withdraws himself, to be his 10,11,
12, 13,14,15.
own security and negligence in seeking to Christ, his slacknes in spiritual
exercises, as in prayer and thanksgiving, the deceitfulnes and malice of false
teachers. IX. verse. 17.
Then he comes to feel more lively his fellowship with Christ. X. Lastly, he
prays that Christ would continue with him to the end.
LV.
No feeling.
The third temptation is, trouble of mind, because there is no feeling of
Christ at all, who seems to be departed for a time. The exercise of a
Christian in this tentation is this.

1 Cant. c. 3. Verse. 1.
The poor soul lying as a man desolate in the night without comfort seeks
for Christ by private prayer and meditation, but it will not prevail. 2 verse.
2.
He uses the help, counsel, and prayer of godly brethren, yet Christ cannot
be found. 3 verse. 3.
Then he seeks to godly ministers, to receive some comfort by them, by their
means he can feel none. 4 verse. 4.
After that all means have bin thus used, and none will prevail, then by Gods
great mercy, when he has least hope, he finds Christ, and feels him come
again. 5 Presently his faith reuiueth, and lays fast hold on Christ. 6 And
he has as near fellowship with Christ in his heart as before. 7 verse. 5.
Then comes again the joy of the holy Ghost: and the peace of conscience as a
sweet sleep falls upon him. 8 verse. 6.
Then his heart arises up into heaven by holy affections and prayers, which do
as pillars of smoke mount upward, sweet as myrrh and incense. 6 verse. 8,9,
10.
Also he is ravished ther^ ^ith the meditation of the glorious estate of the
kingdom of heaven. 10 verse. 11.
He labors to bring others to consider the glory of Christ and his kingdom.
11 Cap. 4. verse. 1. to the 15.
After all this Christ reueales to his servant, what his blessed estate is,
both in this life, and in the life to come, more clearly then ever before, and
makes him see those graces which he has bestowed on him. 12 verse. 16.
Then the Christian prays that Christ would breath on him by his holy spirit,
that he may bring forth the fruits of those graces which are in him. 13 verse.
1. c. 5.
Lastly, Christ grants him this his request.
LVI.
The fourth temptation is security of heart, A spiritual slumber in worldly
pleasures.
rising of overmuch delight in the pleasures of the world. The exercise of a
Christian in this temptation is this.

1 He slumbers and is half asleep in the pleasures of this world. Cant. 5.
Mat. 25. 5. Cant. 5.
2 Christ by his word and spirit labors to withdraw him from his pleasures,
and verse. 2.
to make him more heartily receive his beloved. 3 But he ver. 3.
delayeth to do it being loath to leave his ^ase and sweet delights. 4 verse.
4.
Then Christ awakes him and stirs up his heart: by making him to see the
vanity of his pleasures. 5 He then begins to be more earnestly affected
toward Christ. 6 verse. 5.
With sorrow he sets his heart to have fellowship with Christ after his old
manner: and this he expressed by bringing forth sweet fruits of righteousness.
7 verse. 6.
Then he feels that Christ has withdrawn his spirit. 8 He almost despaires
for this. 9 Yet by private prayer seeks for Christ. 10 verse. ^.
When that will not help, he resorts to the ministers of the word, at whose
hands he finds no comfort. 11 verse. ^^ 10,11,^^ 13,14,15, 16.
Not recovering his first estate, through impatience of the love of Christ, he
makes his misery known to strangers, to see if they can comfort him, and he
somewhat co^forts himself in describing Christ's excellency to the^. 12 verse.
17.
They then are ravished with him to seek Christ, and require then to know
where to find him. 13 Cap. 6. ^.^
Answer is made, in the assemblies of the Church. 14 verse. 2.
After this communication the Christians faith and feeling reuiueth, Christ
returning to him again. 15 verse. 3.10. the 7. verse of cap. 7.
The^ Christ assures him in his heart of his love and liking toward him. 16
Giving further assurance to him that he shall grow up and be made fruitful
in every good grace. 17 After this the Christian comes in such a high measure
to love Christ, that nothing shall be able to sever him from Christ.
LVII.
The fifth temptation is a fall into some great sin, A fall into some sin.
as Noah into drunkenness, David into Adultery, and murder, Peter into the
denial of Christ. The exercise of a Christian in this temptation is this: 1 At
the first his heart is usually dulled and made secure with sin. 2 Yet after a
while there by some means arises in his heart a godly sorrow: which is when
he is g^ieued for this only cause, that by his sin he has displeased. God,
who has been to him so loving and merciful a father, whose favor he would
be content to purchase, (so he might have it and obtain it) even with the
damnation of his own soul. 3 2. Cor. 7.11
Then he begins to repent himself of his sins, renewing afresh his former
repentance. 4 This repentance he shows by seven signs. 1 A care to leave
that sin into which he is fallen. As they which crucified our Savior Christ,
when they were pricked in their hearts at Peter's sermon, they showed this care
in saying, Act. 2.37
Men and br^thren, what shall we do to be saved? 2. An Apology, which is when
a man in the heaviness of his heart, shall not excuse or defend his sin, but
confess it to the Lord, and utterly condemn himself for it: acknowledging
withal that there is no way to escape the wrath of God, but by having Gods
free pardon in Christ. 3 Indignation which is an inward anger and fretting
against his ownselfe, because he was so careless in looking to his own ways.
Peter when he had denied his master, he wept and that bitterly, which shows
that with sorrow, he had also an anger against himself. 4 mat. 29.75
A fear rising not so much from the judgments of God, as from this, least he
should hereafter fall into the same sin again, and by so doing more
grievously displease God. 5 A desire ever after more carefully to please God. 6
Zeal in the service of God. 7 Revenge upon himself for his former offenses:
for example, if a man sin in surfeiting and drunkenness, if he ever repent, he
will bring under his corrupt nature by sparing and moderating himself.



LVIII.
Outward afflictions.
The sixth temptation is outward afflictions, which the godly in this life must
suffer. mat. 16.24
If any will go after Christ, he must deny himself, take up his own cross
and follow him. And S. Peter says, 1. pet. 4.17
that judgment begins at Gods house. Act. 14.22
And Paul, that we must enter into the kingdom of heaven through manifold
temptations. The exercise of a Christian in affliction is this: 1 Heb. 12.11
At the first they are very heavy and bitter. 2 He suffers them with great
lenity and patience, submitting himself under the hand of God. Yet Ioh. 3.
if they be in great measure, they will drive him to impatience. 3 If they
continue he shall feel (according to his own judgment) the Ioh. 6.2,3.
wrath and displeasure of God in his heart. 4 Job. 13. 26.
His old sins will come a fresh into his remembrance, and trouble him. He is
sleepie, 1. Reg. 19. 4,5,7.
and in his sleep he has visions, and dreams, and anxietie of spirit. 5 Job
13. 15.
In this misery God supports his faith, that it fail not, and he then forsake
Christ. 6 Romans 5.4.
He feeling thus Gods power to strengthen him, has experience of it in
himself. 7 From experience proceeds hope, that the grace of God shall never
be wanting unto him in any afflictions to come: and as he hops, so it comes
to pass. 8 With this hope is joined Job 42.5,6.
a serious humiliation before the Lord heb. 12.11
with the fruit of peace and righteousness.


If the afflictions be for Christ's cause unto death, then he in more special
manner is filled with the joy of the holy Ghost, and he is then stablished with
the greatest measure of the strength of Christ, that no torment is able to
foil, and to bring him from Christ, though the Christian should die a thousand
times for it. According to that of Paul, Phil. 1.29
To you it is given for Christ not only to believe in him, but also to suffer
for his sake. And this is grounded upon the promise of God, Esa. 43. 2.
When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through the
floods that they do not ouerflow thee: when thou walk through the very
fire, thou shall not be burnt: neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

LIX.
Hence arises a notable difference, between the godly and the wicked, in the
suffering of afflictions. A Reprobate the more the Lord lays his hand on him,
the more he Exodus 8.
murmureth and rebelleth against God: it is contrary with the true Christian:
none feels more the power and rebellion of sin then he: none is more
assaulted by Satan then he, and oftentimes it comes to pass that God
withdraws the signs of his favor from him, and lets him feel his wrath.
And this is the greatest temptation of all other, when a man shall see the Lord
to be his enemy, and to his thinking to arm himself against him to his
destruction. As Esa. 38.
Ezechias did, who says, that the Lord did crash his bones like a Lion. Or Job
6.34.
as Job says, that the arrows of the almighty were in him, and the venime
thereof drunk up his spirit, and the terrors of God did fight against him.
Yet the true Christian when the world, the flesh, and the devil, and God
himself too are against him, does even then most of all rest in the Lord, and
by faith cleave to him. Job 13. 15.
Though God should destroy me, yet would I trust in him (says Job.) Psalm. 22.
1.
And David says, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? When he says that
God had forsaken him, it may seem to be the complaint of a desperate man, not
having so much as one spark of faith: yet then he says, My God, my God: which
words contain a confession proceeding from true faith: so that in David it
appears, that the faithful when they feel themselves forlorn, and utterly
rejected of God, according to the sense and judgment of the flesh, yet by
faith they can apprehend his hidden mercy, and behold it a far off in the
glass of his promise. And so they do often show contrary affections in their
prayers as David does. Genesis 32.28
Jacob when he wrastled with the Angel for life and death, never gave over: and
when he was foild he would not cease before the Lord had blessed him. This his
wrestling is a type of the conflicts which the faithful are to have with the
Lord himself, who uses to bring his own children (as it were) to the field:
and he assaileth them with the one hand, and with the other he holds them up,
that so he may prove and exercise their faith. And for this cause the Church
Psalm. 130.
is called by the name of Jacob. An example may be had in the woman of Canaan.
Mat. 15. 22,23,24, 25,26,27.
First, our Savior Christ gave her faith, and by that faith she was moved to
seek to him: but when she was once come to him, he gave her three repulses.
First, by saying nothing. Secondly, by denying her. Thirdly, by calling her
dog. Thus Christ in appearance made show, as though he would never have
granted her request. But she at every repulse was more instant, crying more
earnestly unto him: and she plainly opposed her self to him, and would take
no denial: for such is the nature of true faith. Wherefore, the faithful when
they feel themselves overwhelmed with sin, turmoiled with co^flicts of
Satan, when they feel the anger of God offended with them, yet they can even
then lift up their eye lids, and give a glimps at the brazen serpent Jesus
Christ, and can fling themselves into the arms of Gods mercy, and catch hold
of the hand of God buffeting them, and kiss it.

LX.
Dangerous fall^ of a Chri^tian.
By these temptations it comes to pass, that a Christian though he can not fall
finally from Christ, yet he may fall very dangerously from his former estate.
First, the graces of God may be by his default lessened in him: else Paul would
not have given out these exhortations, 1. Th. 5.19
quench not the spirit. Ephesians. 4.30.
Grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. Secondly, the graces of God may be buried in him, and covered for a
time, so that he may be like a man in a trance, who both by his own sense and
by the judgment of the Physician is taken for dead. This was the estate of
Peter, who though he confessed that Christ was the Son of the living Lord,
Matthew. 16. 16,26,70.
yet he denied him and forswore him at the voice of a damsel. Thirdly, he may
fall again into the same sin after repentance. Indeed this is a dangerous
case; yet it may befall a true christian. Otherwise when as the Israelites
(Gods people) had fallen away from him by their sins, and idolatries, he
would not still have offered them mercy, Esa. 14. 18
as he does by his Prophets. And 2. Cor. 5. 20.
Paul prays the Corinthians in Christ's stead that they would be reconciled to
God: who nevertheless were before reconciled to God. Fourthly, he may commit a
sin of presumption, which is a fearful sin, being done wittingly of
knowledge and willingly, and with some wilfulness. Therefore David prayed,
psalm. 19.13.
Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins: and to show himself to be in
danger of it, he prays further, let them not have dominion over me. Lastly,
he may fall into despair of Gods mercy for a time, and this is a dangerous
sin. For he which despaires, makes all the promises of God to be false: and
this sin of all other is most contrary to true saving faith. In this estate
was David, when being in trouble, he said, psalm. 77.11
this is my death. And Paul shows that the incestuous man might have fallen
into desperation, 2. Cor. 2.2.
when he says, Comfort him, least he be swallowed up of overmuch heaviness. And
it must be remembered that the church of Rome erreth in this, that she teaches
desperation to be a sin against the holy Ghost. This sin against the holy
ghost is a blasphemy spoken against the known truth of Gods word, or a
denial of Christ, of a wilful and obstinate malice. But desperation may arise
through ignorance of a man's own estate: through horror of conscience for
sin: through an often relapse into some sin: through the ouerdeepe
consideration of a man's own unworthiness: lastly, by abiuration of the truth,
through compulsion and fear. What is to be thought of Fr. ^pira.
This befell Francis Spira, who after his Apostasy despaired. Yet they are
much ouerseene that write of him as a damned creature. For first, who can tell
whether he despaired finally or no. Secondly, in the very midst of his
desperation, he complained of the hardness of his heart, which made him that he
could not pray: no doubt then he felt his hardness of heart: and the feeling of
corruption in the heart, is by some contrary grace; so that we may
conveniently think, that he was not quite bereft of all goodness: though he
never felt it then, nor showed it to the beholder.

LXI.
The cause why a Christian cannot quite fall away from grace, is this:
Corroboratio^.
after that he is sanctified, he receives from God another special grace,
which may be called Corroboration. For he has in him not only the
sanctifying, but also the strengthening power of Christ. Therefore Paul prays
for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3. 16.
that they may be strengthened in the inner man: for the Colossians, Col. 1.9.
that they might be strengthened with the glorious power of Christ. And of
himself he says, Phil. 4. 13.
that he is able to do all things through the power of Christ that
strengthens him. Psalm. 103.
David says, that God renueth them that fear him, as the eagle renueth her
decayed strength. Patience.
From hence as from a special cause arises patience and perseverance unto the
end: Perseverance.
for when a man is supported by the power of Christ, he may be able to bear
many crosses patiently with a contented mind, and persevere in bearing of it how
long soever the cross endures.

LXII.
Thus much of the estate of a Christian in this life. Now I will add some
reasons in the way of persuasion to all men, A persuasion to Christianity.
but especially to worldlings, and to loose professors of the Gospel, that
they would utterly deny themselves, 2. cor. 5.17
and use all means to become true Christians by being made new creatures in
Christ, and Tit. 2.^0.
by leading such a life as may adorn the Gospel of Christ.

My first reason is this; the man that lives in this world, not being a true
Christian, is far more vile then the basest creature of all, even the dog,
or toade. For first he is nothing else but a filthy dunghill of all abomination
and uncleanness, the Romans 8.20.
stink whereof has infected heaven and earth, and no perfumes could ever delay
it in the nostrils of God, but only the suffering of Christ being Ephesians. 5.2.
a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God. We make it very dainty to come
near a lazar man that is full of botches, blaines, and sores; but much more
are those men to be abhorred, which have lien many years stark Ephesians. 2.1.
dead in sins and trespasses: and therefore now do nothing else but rot and
stink in them like ugly loathsome carrions.

Secondly, he which is no Christian is under the power of darkness, having
Satan for his prince 2. Cor. 4.4.
and god, and giving unto him in token of homage his best parts, even his mind
and conscience Luke 11. 24.
to be his dwelling place: and his whole conversation is nothing else but a
perpetual obedience to Satan. If Atheists, and worldlings, and carnal
gospellers were persuaded of the truth of this (as it is most true) it would
make them howl and cry, though now they live at ease without feeling any
prick of conscience for sin. And if they had but the least sense of it in the
world, it would make their flintie hearts to bleed, and it would make them
shed rivers of tears. But how long shall they continue in this vile estate?
Truly, until they come to Christ: awake therefore thou that sleep, and
stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light: open thine heart to
receive Christ, and then he will come and bind the strong^ man Satan, and
cast him out, and dwell in thee himself.

Thirdly, he which is no Christian is in danger of all the judgments of God,
so that every moment some of them may befall him. He may perish suddenly by
water with the old world, he may be consumed with fire and brimstone with Sodom
and Gomorrha, he may be swallowed up of the earth with Dathan, and Abiram, he
may hang himself with Judas, he may have his brains dashed against the ground
and be eaten up of dogs with Iesabel, he may die in hardness of heart with
Pharao, he may despair with Caine and Judas, he may be stricken with sudden
death with Ananias and Saphira his wife, he may be eaten of worms with Herod,
he may be smitten with trembling that he cannot hear Gods word with Foelix, he
may void his guts at the stool with Arius, he may cry at his death that he
is damned with Latomus, he may be left unto himself to mock, blaspheme, and
renounce Christ with Iuhan: and he may suffer many more fearful judgments,
whereof the Lord has Deuteronomy. 32. 34.
great store, and all tend to the confounding of them which will not be humbled
under his hand. Contrariwise, the true christian is so far out of the reach
of Gods judgments that they cannot hurt him: Esa. 4.6.
Christ is a covering and a cloud against the heat and tempest of Gods
judgments, Exodus 12. 22.
when a man's heart is sprinkled with the blood of this immaculate Lamb, all
the the plagues of God pass over him. In the destruction of Jerusalem the
Ezec. 9.4.
righteous bear a mark in their foreheads and are saved. Therefore let him
that has regard to his own safety become a Christian.

Thirdly, the man which is no Christian is in danger of eternal death and
damnation in hell fire: and they which fall into this estate it had been ten
thousand fold better for them if they had never bin borne: 1. Th. 1.9.
for they are quite separated from the presence of God and from his glory: all
the company they have is with the devil and his angels. Their bodies and
souls are tormented with infinite horror and anguish arising of the feeling of
the whole wrath of God, in which as into a bottomless sea, they are plunged.
Thus they are always dying, and yet are never dead. Furthermore, the length of
this torment must be considered which greatly aggrauates the pain. If a man
might be delivered from the pains of hell when he had suffered them so many
years as there be drops in the sea, or little sands in the whole earth, it
were some comfort: but after that those years be expired there shall come no
release, but the damned shall continue in shriking, yelling and gnashing of
teeth, enduring the consuming heat of Gods wrath without any end for ever and
ever. Yea to go further, a wicked man carries an hell about him in this life,
A godless m^n carries hell in his bosom.
namely, an evil conscience, which if it be never so little touched with any
part of Gods anger, a man shall feel himself to have even the pangs of hell
in his heart. Now therefore they that would escape out of this hellish and
damnable estate, while they have time let them pray for the pardon of their
sins in Christ, and walk according to the spirit in newnes of life; and then
they may assure themselves, that there is no condemnation can belong to them.
And it must be always remembered that he which would live, when he is dead,
must die while he is alive, namely to sin. And again, he which would rise to
eternal life in the day of judgment, must rise from sin before he die, unto
newness of life.

The fourth reason: God has appointed unto every man that lives in the Church
a certain time of repentance, and of coming to Christ. And he which
mispendeth that time and is not made a christian then, can never be saved. This
made our Savior Christ weep for Jerusalem, and say, Luke 19.4^
O if thou had known at the least in this thy day, those things which belong
to thy peace, but now are they hidden from thine eyes. And he further
signifies the destruction of Jerusalem, verse. 44.
because she knew not the time of her visitation. Again, the neglecting of
this time is one cause, why not one or two, but many Luke 13.24.
shall seek to enter into the kingdom of heaven, and yet shall not be able. It
is a marvelous thing, that they which seek to be saved should perish, but the
fault is theirs which seek when it is too late. Now therefore thou secure
worldling, thy conscience tells thee that thou have not yet repented, and
that thou art not as yet a lively member of Jesus Christ. And thou know
further, that howsoever thou art alive at this time, yet thou have no lease of
thy life. God may call thee forth of this world the next year, the next week,
the next hour: yea he may strike thee with sudden death at this very present.
And in very truth, if thou go forth of this world being no repentant sinner,
thou go damned to hell. Wherefore delay not one minut of an hour longer,
but with all speed repent and turn unto God, and bring forth fruits worthy of
amendment of life, that all thy sins may be done away, when the day of death,
or the day of judgment shall be. And do not think with thy self that it
shall be sufficient to defer thy turning unto God till the last end. For
late repentance is seldom true repentance. And he which continues long in any
sin is in a dangerous case. If a man lie long in any disease he will scarce
recover his former health; and he which is grown in the custom of any sin,
and the sin is become ripe in him, it is a thousand to one, he is never
saved; according to that of Saint James, Iam. 1. ^3.
sin being perfited brings forth death.

The fifth reason. Eternal life is a thing desired of all men: yet none shall
be made partakers of it, but the true christian, and the glorious estate of
this life would move any man to be a christian. First of all, they which have
eternal life are freed from all pains, sicknesses, infirmities, hunger,
thirst, cold, wearines; from all sin, as anger, forgetfulness, ignorance; from
hell, death, damnation, Satan, and from every thing that causes misery:
according to that of Saint John: And Reu. 21.4.
God will wipe away al tears from their eyes: and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the
first things are passed. Secondly, the faithful shall be in the presence of
Gods maies^ie in heaven there to behold his face, that is, his glory, as our
Savior Christ says, Father, Ioh. 17.24.
I will that they which thou have given me, be with me even where I am, that
they may behold my glory which thou have given me. And David says, In Ps. 16.
11. Reu. 22.4.
thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore. Thirdly, they 1. Cor. 15. 28.
shall have such an excellent communion with God, that he shall be unto them
all in all. For in the end of the world, when the whole number of the elect is
accomplished, Christ shall present them to his father, and as he is Mediator
he shall cease to be a King, a Priest, a Prophet: for though the efficacy of
his offices be everlasting: yet the execution of them shall cease, as Paul
says, 1. Cor. 1^. 24.
Then shall be the end, when he has delivered up the kingdom to God even the
father, when he has put down all rule, all authority and power. Again,
among the elect there shall not be king and subject, father, mother, child,
master, servant, noble, ignoble, rich, poor, living, dead. Some will say, what
then shall be? I answer, one glorious and everlasting God, the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost shall be in all the elect, all that heart can wish
and desire. Men shall not be in darkness, neither shall they need the light of
the Sun, Moon, or Stars, God himself immediately shall be their light,
Reu. 21.23
as John says, And the city has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon
to shine in it, for the glory of God does light it, and the Lamb is the light
of it. Men shall not then need meat, drink, clothing, sleep, recreation,
fire, shade, respiration, or any other such like, but God himself immediately
shall be their life, and all things concerning life by Christ. Which John
signifies when he says, that he Reu. 22. 1, 2.
saw a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the
throne of God, and of the Lamb: there being by either side of it the tree of
life which bare two manner of fruits, and gave fruit every month. And whereas
God is continually to be worshipped in heaven: they need no other tabernacle
or temple thereunto, but God himself shall be their temple: as John says,
Reu. 21.22
I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God almighty and the Lamb are the
temple of it. Fourthly, from this glorious communion which is between God and
Christ as he is man, and all the Saints which are his members, there arises an
unspeakable joy and gladness wherewith they are filled. David says, Psalm. 36.
that Gods children shall be satisfied with the fatnes of his house, and that he
shall give them drink out of the rivers of his pleasures. This joy undoubtedly
is infinite, and the saints are not only replenished with it, but they are
also swallowed up of it as with an huge and infinite sea of waters, as may
appear in Peter, who at the transfiguration of Christ, was so ravished out of
measure with joy at the sight of it, that he quite forgot himself, saying Mat.
17.4.
to Christ, Master, it is good being here: let us make three Tabernacles, one
for thee, one for Moses, and another for Elias. Lastly, out of this communion
arises a perfect love of God, whereby the Saints love God with all their
hearts, with all their souls, and strength, and this love shows it self in
that they are eternally occupied in Reu. 7.11, 12.
worshipping God, by singing of songs of praise and thanksgiving unto him. Now
then seeing the kingdom of heaven is so glorious, and none can have it but the
true Christian, let all men account the best things in this world Phil. 3.8.
as dross and dung, so that they may obtain Christ and his righteousness.

The last reason is the endless love of Jesus Christ showed in his death and
passion. Thou art by nature the child of wrath and vengeance. Satan has
wounded thee with many a deadly wound of sin: thou lie bleeding at the
heart and art like to die eternally. Thou being in this estate, there is no
man on earth, no Saint in heaven, no Angel, no creature at all, is able to
help thee; Christ only was able: he therefore came down from heaven and
became man, for this cause, to work thy deliverance. Furthermore in the curing
of the wound of sin, no herb, no water, no plaster, no physic, can do
thee any good: only the body and blood of Christ is sovereign for this
matter, being stieped in the wrath of God. He therefore subjected himself to
the death, even the death of the cross, upon which he suffered the wrath of
God due to the sin of man^ind: and of his own heart blood he tempered for them
a sovereign medicine to heal all thy wounds and sores. Now therefore
despise not this mercy; seek unto Christ, lay open all thy sores, pray him,
that he would vouchsafe thee if it be but one drop of his blood; the^ he will
come unto thee by his holy spirit, he will wash and supple thy wounds in his
blood, and bind them up. He is the Reu. 21.23
tree of life the leaves whereof heal the nations. If thou get but one leaf
of him thou art well, it will heal thee and restore thy dead soul, that thou
may live eternally in the kingdom of heaven. If this reason will not move
thee to be a Christian, thy case is desperate. It is the best reason that Peter
could use to this purpose. As obedient children (says he) fashion not your
selves unto the former lusts of your ignorance 1. Pet. 1. 14,15.
but as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. His reason follows: Ver. 18.19
Knowing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things as silver and gold
from your vain conversation received by the tradition of the Fathers, but with
the precious blood of Christ, as a Lamb undefiled and without spot.

Thus much have I spoken to the worldling, who in his heart makes no more
account of Christ then of his old shoes: and who had rather be without
Christ, then be without his pigges, with the Gaderens. Mat. 2.
Now for the true Christians I have nothing to say but this. The Lord increase
the number of them. And the Col. 12. 9,10,11.
Lord fulfill them with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding, that they may walk worthy of him, and please him in
all things, being fruitful in all good works and increasing in the knowledge
of God. And whereas they are at continual war against the flesh, the world,
and the devil: Lord Jesus strengthen them with all might through thy glorious
power, unto all patience and long suffering with ioyfulnes. And dear father of
all mercy plant that government in thy Church every where which thou have
revealed in thy word, that thy Saints may worship thee in those means, in that
order and comelines, which thou have appointed abounding in righteousness,
peace of conscience, and joy of the holy ghost.

Amen, Amen.
A DIALOGVE OF THE STATE OF A CHRISTIan man, gathered here and there out of the
sweet and sauorie writings of Master Tindall and Master Bradford.
TImotheus. Because of our ancient acquaintance and familiarity (dear friend
Eusebius) I will make bold with you to ask such questions as may be for my
edification and comfort, and of no other matters but even of religion, whereof
I see you are an old professor. And the first of all, let me be bold to ask
this question of you, how it pleased God to make you a true Christian, and a
member of Christ Jesus whom I see you serve continually with a fervent zeal.


Eusebius. For that old acquaintance that was between us, and for that you are
desirous to live a godly life in Christ Jesus, I will not conceal the good
work of my God in me: therefore I pray you mark a little what I shall say, and
I will declare unto you the truth even forth of the feeling of mine own
conscience. The fall of Adam did make me the heir of vengeance and wrath of
God, and heir of eternal damnation, and did bring me into captivity and
bondage under the devil: and the devil was my Lord, my ruler, my head, my
governor, and my prince, yea, and my God. And my will was locked and knit
faster unto the will of the devil, then could a hundred thousand chains bind
a man unto a poast. Unto the devils will did I consent with all my heart, with
all my mind, with all my might, power, strength, will and life: so that the
Law and will of the devil was written as well in my heart, as in my members,
and I ran headlong after the devil with full sail, and the whole swing of all
the power I had: as a stone cast into the air comes down naturally of it
self with all the violent swing of his own weight. O with what a deadly and
venomous heart did I hate mine enemies? With how great malice of mind inwardly
did I sley and murder? With what violence and rage, yea with what fervent lust
committed I adultery, fornication, and such like uncleanness? With what
pleasure and delectation like a glutton served I my belly? With what diligence
deceived I? How busily sought I the things of the world? Whatsoever I did work,
imagine or speak was abominable in the sight of God, for I could refer
nothing unto the honor of God: neither was his law or will written in my
members, or in my heart, neither was their any more power in me to follow the
will of God then in a stone ascend upward of it self. And besides that I was
asleep in so deep blindness that I could neither see nor feel in what misery,
thraldom and wretchedness I was, till Moses came and awaked me and published
the law. When I heard the law truly preached how that I ought to love and
honor God with all my strength and might from the low bottom of the heart,
because he did create me Lord over it, and my neighbor, yea mine enemies as my
self inwardly from the ground of my heart, because God has made them after
the likeness of his own image, and they are his sons as well as I, and
Christ has bought them with his blood, and made them heirs of everlasting
life as well as I: and how I ought to do whatsoever God bids, and to abstain
from whatsoever God forbids, with all love and meekenes, with a fervent and
burning lust from the center of the heart. Then began my conscience to rage
against the Law and against God. No sea, be it never so great a tempest was so
unquiet, for it was not possible for me a natural man to consent to the Law
that it should be good, or that God should be righteous which made the law: in
as much as it was contrary unto my nature, and damned me and all that I could
do, and never showed me where to fetch help, nor preached any mercy Romans 4.
but only set me at variance with God, and provoked and stirred me to rail on
god, and to blaspheme him as a cruel tyrant. And indeed it was not possible to
do otherwise, to think that God made me of so poisoned a nature, and gave me
an impossible law to perform: I being not borne again by the spirit, and my
wit, reason, and will being so fast glewed, yea nailed and chained unto the
will of the devil. This was the captivity and bondage whence Christ delivered
me, redeemed, and loosed me. His blood, his death, his patience in suffering
rebukes and wrongs and the full wrath of God, his prayers and fastings, his
meekenes and fulfilling the uttermost points of the law, appeased the wrath of
God, brought the favor of god to me again, obtained that God should love me
first, and be my father, and that a merciful father, that would consider my
infirmity and weakness, and would give me his spirit again, which he had taken
away in Adam, to rule, govern and strengthen me, and to break the bands of
Satan, wherein I was so straight bound. When Christ was on this wise preached,
and the promises rehearsed which are contained in the book of God (which
preaching is called the Gospel or glad tidings,) and I had deeply considered
the same: then my heart began to wax soft and melt at the bounteous mercy of
God, and kindness showed of Christ. For when the gospel was preached, the spirit
of God (me thought) entered into my heart, and opened my inward eyes and
wrought a lively faith in me, and made my woofull conscience feel and taste how
sweet a thing the bitter death of Christ is, and how merciful and loving God
is through Christ's purchasing and merits, and made me to begin to love
again, and to consent to the law of God how that it is good and ought so to
be, and that God is righteous that made it: lastly, it wrought in me a desire
to be whole, and to hunger and thirst after more righteousness and more
strength to fulfill the law more perfectly: and in all that I do or leave
undone to seek Gods honor and his will with meekness, evermore condemning
the imperfectnes of my deeds by the law.

Now then this good work of God to my salvation stands in two points, the
working of the law, and the working of the gospel: the preaching of the law was
a key that bound and damned my conscience, the preaching of the gospel was
another key that loosed me again. These two salues (I mean the law and the
gospel) used God and his preacher to heal and cure me a wretched sinner
withal. The law did drive out my disease and made it appear, and was a sharp
salve and fretting corrasiue, and killed the dead flesh, and loosed and drew
the sore out by the root, and all corruption. It pulled from me all trust and
confidence I had in my self, and in mine own works, merits, deseruings, and
ceremonies, and robbed me of all my righteousness, and made me poor. It
killed me in sending me down to hell, and bringing me almost to utter
desperation, and prepared the way of the Lord, as it is written of John
Baptist. For it was not possible that Christ should come unto me as long as I
trusted in my self or in any worldly thing, or had any righteousness of mine
own, or riches of holy works. Then afterward came the gospel a more gentle
plaster, which suppled and swaged the wounds of my conscience and brought me
health: it brought the spirit of God, which loosed the bands of Satan, and
coupled me to God and his will through a strong faith and fervent love. Which
bands were to strong for the devil, the world, or any creature to loose. And
I a poor and wretched sinner felt so great mercy that in my self I was most
sure that God would not forsake me, or ever withdraw his mercy and love from
me. And I boldly cried out with Paul, saying, Who shall separate me from the
love of God, etc. Finally, as before when I was bound to the devil, and his
will, I wrought all manner of wickedness, for I could do no otherwise, it was my
nature: even so now since I am coupled to God by Christ's blood, I do good
freely, because of the spirit, and this my nature. And thus I trust I have
satisfied your first dema^d.


Timoth. Yea, but me thinks you do too much condemn your self in respect of
sin. For I can remember that from your childhood you were of a good and
gentle nature, and your behavior was always honest and civil, and you could
never abide the company of them that were roysters and ruffians, and swearers,
and blasphemers, and contemners of Gods word, and drunkards, which now are
termed good fellows. And your dealing with all men has bin ever commended
for good, faithful and just. What mean you then to make your self so
abominable and accursed, and to say, you were so wholly addicted unto
wickedness, and your will so fearfully and miserably in captivity unto the
will of the devil.


Eusebius. Brother Timothy, I know what I say, God give me grace to speak it
with more lively feeling of my weakness and with a more bitter detestation of my
sin. By nature through the fall of Adam am I the child of wrath, heir of the
vengeance of God by birth: yea and so from my first conception: and I had my
fellowship with the damned devils under the power of darkness and rule of
Satan, while I was yet in my mothers womb: and although I showed not the
fruits of sin as soon as I was borne nor long after: yet was I full of the
natural poison, from whence al wicked deeds do spring, and cannot but sin
outwardly, as soon as I am able to work (be I never so young) if occasion be
given: for my nature is to sin as is the nature of a serpent to sting: and
and as a Serpent yet young, or yet vnbroughtforth is full of poison and cannot
afterward (when time and occasion is given) but bring forth the fruits
threreof. And as an adder, a toade, or a snake is hated of man, not for the
evil it has done, but for the poison that is in it, and hurt which it cannot
but do: so am I hated of God for that natural poison which is conceived and
borne with me before I do any outward evil. And as the evil which a venomous
worm does, makes it not a serpent, but because it is a venomous worm,
therefore does it evil, and poisoneth: even so do not our evil deeds make us
evil first, but because we are of nature evil, therefore do we evil, and
think evil, to eternal damnation by the law, and are contrary to the will
of God in our will and in all things consent unto the will of the fiend.


Timoth. As yet I never had such a feeling of my sin as you have had, and
although I would be loath to commit any sin, yet the Law was never so
terrible unto me, condemning me, pronouncing the sentence of death against me,
and stinging my conscience with fear of everlasting pain, as I perceive it
has bin unto you: therefore I fear oftentimes least my profession of religion
should be only in truth mere hypocrisy, I pray you let me hear your mind.


Eusebius. A true saying it is that the right way to go unto heaven, is to sail
by hell, and there is no man living that feels the power and virtue of the
blood of Christ, which first has not felt the pains of hell. But yet in these
pains there is a difference: and it is the will of God, that his children in
their conversion shall some of them feel more, and some less. Ezechias on his
death bed complains that the Lord breaks his bones like a Lion, that he
could not speak by reason of pain, but chattered in his throat like a Crane,
and mourned like a Dove. Esa. 38. Job. 6.4. Job. 13.
Job says, that God is his enemy, and has set him up as a mark to shoot at,
and that the arrows of the Almighty are upon him, and that the poison of them
has drunk up his spirit. David bewaileth his estate in many Psalms, but
especially in the 130. Psalm, Psalm. 132.
where he begins on this manner: Out of the deep places have I called unto
thee, O Lord: which is as though he should say; O my poor soul fall not flat
down, vex not thy self out of measure: the burden of thy sins press thee
sore indeed, but be not for all that quite overwhelmed, thou art thrust down so
low into the depth of deepes, that thou had need cry aloud to be heard of
him which dwells in the highest heightes: and the ever burning hell fire is
not far from that lake whither thine iniquities have plunged thee, so that
thou may perceive as it were the Echo of their cries and desperate
howlings, which be there cast out of all hope of ever coming forth. But the
Lord which brings forth even to the borders of hell his best beloved when
they forget themselves, knows also how well to bring them back again. Go
no further then downward, but lift up thy heart together with thine eye, and
seek unto the Lord, to reach unto thee his merciful and a helping hand.
Again in the Scriptures we find examples of men converted unto the Lord
without any vehement sorrow of their sins. What anguish of conscience had the
thief upon the cross for his former life in his present conversion at the
hour of death? How was Lydia dismayed and cast down in respect of her
wickedness, like as David was or Job, whose heart God only is said to have
opened to give attendance to the preaching of Paul and Silas, who also even
presently after was ready to entertain them, and to make them a feast in her
house, which she could not have done if she had been in the perplexities of
Ezechias, or David. The same may be spoken of the Iayler, and of them which
heard Peter's sermon at Jerusalem, who for all that they had murdered our Savior
Christ, yet in their conversion, their hearts were only for the time pricked.
So then God in preparing us, which in truth are nothing but fleshly and
stinking dunghills of sin; nay, very uncleanness and pollution it self, I
say in preparing us to be the Temples of his holy Spirit to dwell in, and the
storehouses to hoord up his heavenly graces in, does otherwhiles use a mild
and gentle remedy, and makes the Law to look upon us, though with no loving
and gentle, yet with no fearful countenance; and otherwhiles in some he
sets a sharp edge upon the Law, and makes it to wound the heart very deep,
and as a strong corrasiue to torment them, and to frette and gnawe upon their
consciences. And we see by experience^ that a botch or a byle in a man's body,
is as well eased of the corruption that is in it by the pricking of the point
of a small needle as by the launcing of a great raser. Wherefore if God by his
spirit have wrought in you sorrow for sin in any small measure, though not in
as great measure as you desire, you have no cause to complain: and in that you
are grieved with a godly sorrow for your sins, it is a good token of the
grace of God in you.


Timoth. Surely this is a great comfort you give me, God make me thankful for
it. And I pray you more plainly show me the state of your life till this hour,
that I and all other may take warning by it.


Eusebius. That which may do good unto other men I will never conceal, though it
be to my perpetual shame. As I was conceived and borne in sin, so my parents
brought me up in ignorance, and never showed me my shame, and misery by Gods
law: and lived a long time, even as a man in a dead sleep or trance, and in
truth I lived as though there were neither heaven nor hell, neither God nor
devil. And the devil himself (as I now perceive) did often persuade my
secure conscience that I was the child of god, and should be saved as well as
the best man in the world: and I yielded to his persuasion, and did verily
think it: so that when the preacher for wickedness and security denou^ced Gods
judgments and hell fire, I have said unto my neighbors that I hoped I should
be saved, and he should go to hell: and when I was asked whether I could keep
all the commandments of the law, I said that I could: and being asked whether
I never sinned, I said I thought that otherwhiles I did; but for them which
were but few, I hoped God would have mercy, and have me excused, and all my
neighbors were glad of my company, they spoke well of me, and I was taken for
an honest man, when as indeed, before God I was a vile beast, and the child of
wrath, inspired with the spirit of the devil continually. Well, after I heard
the Law preached, and I saw and remembered many fearful judgments of God upon
men, whom I in reason thought were as good men as I, then I began to consider
mine own estate, and to perceive my sins, and my cursednes, and upon a time
above all other, the curse of the law made me inwardly afraid, and my flesh
then began to tremble and quake: then I could not sleep in the night season; I
was afraid of every thing. If I were in my house, I thought the house would
fall on my head: if abroad, I thought every crannie of the earth would open it
self wider and swallowe me. I started at every straw and at the moving of a
fly: my meat was loathsome unto me, and I thought I was not worthy of so good
a creature of God, and that God might justly turn it to my bane: the grief of
my heart for my life past made me shed abundance of tears: and upon that I
remembered in David's Psalms, that his tears were his drink, and that he did
wet his bed with tears. And now the devil changed both his coat and his
note, and in fearful manner cried in my ears, that I was a reprobate, his
child: that none of Gods children were as I am, that this grief of my soul
was the beginning of hell. And the greater was my pain, because I durst not
open my mind unto any for fear they should have mocked me, and have made a
jest of it. Wherefore I was feign to go to a godly learned preacher; I showed
mine estate unto him; after I had continued with him the space of two or three
days, I received comfort both by the promises of mercy, which he showed me
in the book of God, and by his fervent, godly and effectual prayers: and I
thank God ever since I have had some assurance (in spite of the devil) that I
do appertain to the kingdom of heaven, and am now a member of Jesus Christ,
and shall so continue for ever.


Timoth. How know you that God has forgiven your sin?


Eusebius. Because I am a sinner and he is both able and willing to forgive me.


Timoth. I grant that he is able to forgive you, but how know you that he^
will^ you know your sins are very great.


Eusebius. I grant: but Christ's passion is far greater: and although my sins
were as red as scarlet and as purple, yet they shall be as white as snow, and
as soft as wool.


Timoth. Oh but you have sinned very often.


Eusebius. Tell me not I pray you what I have done but what I will do.


Timoth. What will you do?


Eusebius. By Gods grace it is my full purpose, and my earnest prayer to God is,
hereafter to take better heed, and to amend my former life.


Timoth. Is that enough think you?


Eusebius. What lacks?


Timoth. The favor and mercy of God, that may clean forsake you.


Eusebius. Nay, that I will never grant: for I am certainly persuaded of the
favor and mercy of God even to the salvation of my soul.


Timoth. Oh show me that, that is the thing I earnestly desire, to be assured
of Gods special goodness, even by your experience.


Eusebius. According as God has given me to feel the same, so will I show it
you. And first of all the dealing of God toward me is a good argument to me. In
the first commandment, God has commanded me to take him to be my God, and in
the Lords prayer he teaches me to call him father: he has created the world
generally, and every creature particularly for man, and so for me, to serve for
my commodity, necessity, and admonition. Also he has made me for his own
image, having a reasonable soul, body, shape, where he might have made me a
Toad, a Serpent, a swine, deformed, frantic. Moreover, he has wonderfully
preserved me in my infancy, childhood, youth, middle age hitherto from
manifold dangers and perils: all which do confirm in me a persuasion of Gods
fatherly love: and that I should not doubt hereof: where I might have been
borne of Turks, lo it was the will of God, that I should be borne of
Christian parents, and be brought into Gods Church by baptism, which is the
Sacrament of adoption, and requires faith, as well of the remission of my
sins as of sanctification, and holiness to be wrought of God in me by his
grace and holy spirit: where I might have been borne in an ignorant time and
religion, God would that I should be borne in these days and in this country
where is more knowledge revealed then ever was here or in many places else is.
Where I might have been of a corrupt judgment, and entangled with many
errors of Papistrie, and of the Family of Love, and of the schism of Brown,
by Gods goodness my judgment is reformed, and he has lightened mine eyes to
see, and my heart to embrace his sincere truth. By all which things I do
confirm my faith of this, that God always has bin, is, and will be for ever
my father, and at my departing forth of this world will give me the crown of
everlasting glory. Secondly, when as man is evermore doubting of the promises
of God be they never so certain, God of his infinite mercy to prevent al
occasions of doubting, promises to give his own spirit as a pledge, pawn, or
earnest penny unto his children of their adoption, and election to salvation.
Now, since it pleased God to call me from hypocrisy to be a member of his
Church, I feel that in my self which I never felt or heard of before. In
times past, I came to prayers and to the preaching of gods word, even as a
Bear comes to the stake; now the word of God is meat and drink to me, and
prayer is no burden unto me, but my ordinary exercise. If I rise in the
morning I am not well till I have prayed and given thanks to God, if I do any
thing, it comes into my mind to pray. In my prayers I find great joy and
comfort and exceeding favor of God, I never think I can well take my rest, or
do any thing else except first I ask it at Gods hand in Christ. Lastly, when
my mind and heart is wholly occupied in worldly matters, I am stirred up, and
as it were drawn to pray unto god for the remission of my sins, and the
assurance of my salvation, and in prayer I have had those groans which for
their greatness cannot be expressed. Now from whence comes all this? From the
devil? No. In these actions I have found him my enemy, and a continual
hinderer of them. For he by his craft when I have been heavy and weak, has
assailed to provoke me to some sins whereunto my cursed nature was most
given, and I having yielded to him, have been so hardened and blinded by those
sins, that for a time I have made light account of the word of God and
prayer. Well then, peradventure this came from mine own self? No neither.
This cursed nature of mine has been more pleased and delighted with sin,
and with the pleasures of the world, then with such exercises, from which it
draws me and presses me down as lead. I cannot think that such a poisoning
Cockatrice can lay such good eggs, or that wild crab trees (such as all men are
in Adam) can bring forth sweet fruits according to the will of God, except
God pluck them forth of Adam, and plant them in the garden of his mercy, and
stock them, and graft the spirit of Christ in them. Wherefore these are the
works of Gods spirit, and my conscience is thereby certified that God has
given me the spirit of adoption, and therefore that his favor and mercy shall
continue toward me for ever. For the gifts of God are without repentance, and
whom God once loves, him he loves for ever. Thirdly, there be certain
fruits of Gods children which I find in me by which I am confirmed in Gods
favor. S. John in his first Epistle says, that hereby we know that we are
translated from death to life because we love the brethren. Truly I feel in
my heart a burning love toward them which are good Christians, though I never
knew them nor saw them, and I am very desirous to do any good for them: and if
drops of my heart blood would do them good they should have them. Moreover, I
hate all sin and wickedness with a bitter hatred, and I long to see the
coming of my Savior Christ to judgment, I am grieved and disquieted because
I cannot fulfill the law of god as I ought, all which I have learned forth of
Gods word to be tokens of Gods children. And thus you see what evidence I have
to show that I am a true member of the Church militant, and in the favor of
God.


Timoth. Have you a steadfast faith in Christ, (as these arguments seem to
prove) without all wavering, doubting, and distrusting of Gods mercy.


Eusebius. No, no. This my faith which I have in Christ is even fought against
with doubting, and ever assailed with desperation, not when I sin only, but
also in tentations of adversity, into which God brings me to nurture me and
to show me mine own heart, the hypocrisy and false thoughts that there lie
hid, my almost no faith at all, and as little loue^ even then happily when I
thought my self most perfect of all: for when temptations come I cannot stand,
when I have sinned faith is feeble, when wrong is done unto me I cannot
forgive, in sickness, in loss of goods, in all tribulation I am impatient,
when my neighbor needs my help that I must depart with him of mine own,
then love is cold. And thus I learn and feel that there is no power to do
good but of god only. And in all such temptations my faith perishes not
utterly, neither my love and consent to the law of God: but they be weak,
sick, wounded, and not clean dead. As I dealt with my parents being a child,
so now deal I toward God my loving father. When I was a child my father and
mother taught me nurture and wisdom, I loved my father and all his
commandments, and perceived the goodness he showed me, that my father loved me,
and all his precepts are unto my wealth and profit, and that my father
commands nothing for any need he has thereof, but seeks my profit only,
and therefore I have a good faith unto all my fathers promises, and love all
his commandments, and do them with good will, and with good will go every
day to the school: And by the way happily I saw a company play, and with
the sight, was taken and ravished of my memory, and forgot my self, and stood
and beheld, and fell to play also forgetting father and mother, and all their
kindness, all their Laws, and mine own profit also. Howbeit, the knowledge
of my fathers kindness, the faith of his promises, and the love that I had
again unto my father, and the obedient mind were not utterly quenched, but
lay hid, as all things do when a man sleeps or lies in a trance. And as
soon as I had played out all my lusts, or else by some had been warned in the
mean season, I came again to my old profession. Notwithstanding many
tentations went over my heart, and the law as a right hangman tormented my
conscience, and went nie to persuade me that my father would thrust me away,
and hang me if he catched me, so that I was like a great while to run away,
rather then to return to my father again. Fear and dread of rebuke, and of
loss of my fathers love, and of punishment, wrastled with the trust which I
had in my fathers goodness, and as it were gave my faith a fall. But I rose
again as soon as the rage of the first brunt was past, and my mind was more
quiet. And the goodness of my father and his old kindness came unto my
remembrance, either by mine own courage, or by the comfort of another. And I
believed that my father would not put me away or destroy me: and he hoped that
I would do no more so. And upon that I got me home again dismayed, but not
altogether faithless: the old kindness would not let me despair, howbeit all
the world could not set mine heart at rest, until the pain had been past,
and until I had heard the voice of my father, that all is forgotten.


Timoth. Seeing that you have thus plainly and truly showed the weakness of
yours, and consequently of all men's faith, show me I pray you how by the
weakness of faith a Christian is not rather discomforted then comforted, and
assured of his salvation.


Eusebius. God does not so much regard the quantity of his graces as the truth of
them, he approves a little faith if it be a true faith: yea, if faith in us
were no more but a grame of mustard seed (which is the least of all other
seeds) it should be effectual, and God would have respect unto it. The poor
diseased beggar with a lame hand, having the palsy also, is able
nevertheless to reach out the same and receive an alms of a King: and so in
like manner a weak and languishing faith is sufficiently able to reach out it
self, and to apprehend the infinite mercies of our heavenly king offered unto
us in Christ. Faith in the 3. of John, is compared unto the eye of the
Israelite, which although it were of dim sight, or looked a squint, yet if it
could never so little behold the brazen serpent, it was sufficient to cure the
stings of the fiery serpents, and to save life.


Timoth. Seeing that you satisfy me in every point so fully, show me I pray
you, whether a man may be wicked and have faith, and whether faith entering
expels wickedness. For I have heard some say, that a man might believe the
word of God, and yet be never the better in his life, or holier then before he
was.


Eusebius. Many there are which when they hear or read of faith, at once they
consent thereunto, and have a certain imagination and opinion of faith: as
when a man tells a story, or a thing done in a strange land that pertains
not to them at all; which yet they believe and tell us a true thing, and this
imagination or opinion they call faith. Therefore as soon as they have this
imagination or opinion in their hearts, they say, verily, this doctrine seems
true, I believe it is even so: then they think that the right faith is there;
but afterward when they feel in themselves no manner of working of the Spirit,
neither the terrible sentence of the Law, and the horrible captivity under
Satan, neither can perceive any alteration in themselves, and that any good
works follow, but find they are altogether as before, and abide in their
old estate, then think they that faith is not sufficient, but that works
must be joined with faith to justification: but true faith is only the gift of
god, and is mighty in operation, ever working, being full of virtue: it
renueth man, and begets him a fresh, alters him, changes him, and
turns him altogether, into a new creature and conversation: so that a man
shall feel his heart clean changed, and far otherwise disposed then
before, and has power to love that which before he could not but hate, and
delights in that which before he abhorred, and hates that which before he
could not but love. And it sets the soul at liberty, and makes her free
to follow the will of God, and is to the soul as health to the body. After
that a man is pined with long sickness, the legs can not bear him, he cannot
lift up his hands to help him, his taste is corrupt, sugar is bitter in his
mouth, his stomach lo^geth after slubbersauce and swash, at which a whole
stomach is ready to cast his gorge: when health comes she changes and
alters him clean, gives him strength in all his members, lust and will to
do of his own accord that which before he could not do, neither could suffer
that any man should exhort him to do, and has now lust in wholesome things, and
his members are free and at liberty, and have power to do all things of his
own accord which belong to a sound and whole man to do. And faith works in
the same manner, as a tree brings forth fruit of his own accord: and as a man
need not bid a tree bring forth fruit, so is there no law put to him that
believes and is justified through faith, to force him to obedience, neither is
it needful. For the Law is written and graven in his heart, his pleasure is
daily therein, and as without commandment even of his own nature he eats,
drinks, sees, hears, talks, goes: even so of his own nature without any
compulsion of the law, he brings forth good works: and as a whole man when he
is a thirst tarieth but for drink, and when he hungreth abides but for meat,
and then drinks and eats naturally: even so is the faithful ever a thirst,
and an hungered after the will of God, and tarieth but for an occasion: and
whenever an occasion is given he works naturally the will of God. For this
blessing is given them that trust in Christ's blood, that they thirst and
hunger to do Gods will. He that has not this faith, is but an unprofitable
babbler of faith and works, and neither wotteth what he bableth, nor whereunto
his words tend. For he feels not the power of faith nor the working of the
spirit in his heart, but interprets the Scriptures which speak of faith and
works after his own blind reason, and foolish fantasies, not having any
experience in himself.


Timoth. Every member of Christ's congregation is a sinner, and sins daily,
some more, and some less: for it is written, 1. Ioh. 1. If we say we have no
sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. And Paul Romans 7. That
good which I would, that do I not: but that evil which I would not, that do
1. So it is not I that do it (says he) but sin that dwells in me. So the
Christian man is both a sinner and no sinner: which how it can be, show it me
by your experience.


Eusebius. I being one man in substance and two men in quality, flesh and
spirit, which in me so fight perpetually the one against the other, that I must
go either backward or forward, and cannot stand long in one estate. If the
spirit overcome in tentations, then is she stronger and the flesh weaker. But
if the flesh get a custom, then is the spirit none otherwise oppressed of the
flesh, then as though she had a mountain on hi^ back, and as we sometime in
our dreams think we bear heavier then a millstone on our breasts: or when we
dream now and then that we would run away for fear of some thing, our
legs seem heavier then lead: even so is the spirit oppressed and ouerladen
of the flesh through custom, that she struggleth and strives to get up, and
to break loose in vain, until the God of mercy which hears my groan
through Jesus Christ, come and loose her with his power, and put something on
the back of the flesh to keep her down, to minish her strength, and to
mortify her. So then no sinner I am if you regard the Spirit, the profession
of my heart toward the Law of God, my repentance and sorrow that I have both
because I have sinned, and am yet full of sin, and look unto the promises of
mercy in our Savior Christ, and unto my faith. A sinner am I if you look to
the frailty of my flesh which is a remnant of the old Adam, and as it were the
stock of the old olive tree, ever and anon when occasion is given, shooting
forth his branches, leaves, budde, blossom, and fruit also: which also is as
the weakness of one which is newly recovered of a great disease, by the reason
whereof all my deeds are imperfect, and when occasions be great I fall into
horrible deeds, and the fruit of the sin which remains in my members
breaks out. Notwithstanding, the Spirit leaves me not, but rebukes me, and
brings me home again unto my profession, so that I never cast off the yoke
of God from off my neck, neither yield up my self unto sin to serve it,
but fight a fresh, and begin a new battle. And I had rather you should
understand this forth of the Scriptures, by the example of Jonas and the
Apostles. Jonas was the friend of God, and a chose^ servant of God, to testify
his will unto the world. He was sent from the land of Israel, where he was a
Prophet, to go amongst an heathen people and the greatest city of the world,
then called Niniue, to preach that within forty days they should be
destroyed for their sins: which message the free will of Jonas had as much
power to do as the weakest hearted woman in the world had power, if she were
commanded to leap into a tubbe of living snakes and adders: as happily if God
had commanded Sara to sacrifice her son Isaac, as he did Abraham, she would
have disputed with God, ere she had done it, a^ though she were strong
enough. Well, Jonas hartened by his own imagination, and reasoning after this
manner; I am here a Prophet unto Gods people the Israelites: which though they
have Gods word testified unto them daily, yet despise and worship God under the
likeness of calves, and after all manner of fashions save after his own word,
and therefore are of all nations the worst and most worthy of punishment. And
yet God for love of a few that are among them, and for his names sake spares
and defends them: how then shall God take so cruel vengeance on so great a
multitude of them to whom his name was never preached, and therefore are not
the tenth part so evil as these? If I therefore shall go preach, I shall lie
and shame my self and God too, and make them the more to despise God. Upon
this imagination he fled from the presence of God, and from the country where
God is worshipped. When Jonas entered into the ship, he laid him down to
sleep, for his conscience was tossed between the commandment of God which
sent him to Niniue, and his fleshly wisdom which dissuaded and counseled him
to the contrary, and at last prevailed against the commandment, and carried
him another way as a ship caught between two streams (as the Poets feign
the mother of Meleager to be between diverse affections; while to avenge her
brothers death she sought to slay her own son) whereupon for very pain and
tediousnes he lay down to sleep to put the commandment out of mind, which did
so gnaw and fret his conscience: as also the nature of all the wicked is, when
they have sinned in earnest, to seek all means with riot, revel, and pastime
to drive the remembrance of sin forth of their hearts, as Adam did to cover
his wickedness with aprons of figleaues. But God awoke him out of his dream,
and set his sins before his face: for when the lot had caught Jonas, then be
sure that his sin came to remembrance again, and that his conscience raged
no less then the waters of the sea. And then he thought, he only was a
sinner, and thought also that as verily as he had fled from God, as verily God
had cast him away: for the sight of the rod makes the natural child not only
to see and acknowledge his fault, but also to forget al his fathers old mercy
and goodness. And then he confessed his sin openly, and of very desperation to
have lived any longer he had cast himself into the sea betimes, except they
would be lost also: for all this God provided a fish to swallow Jonas. When
Jonas had been in the fishes belly a space, the rage of his conscience was
somewhat quieted, and he came to himself again, and had received a little
hope, and the qualmes and pangs of desperation which went over his heart were
half overcome: then he prayed to God, and gave thanks unto him. When Jonas was
cast upon the land again, then his will was free, and he had power to go
whither God sent him, and to what God commanded him, his own imagination laid
apart: for he had been at a new school, and in a furnace where he was purged
of much refuse and dross of fleshly wisdom which resisted the wisdom of God.
For as far as we be blind in Adam we cannot but seek and will our own
profit, pleasure, and glory: and as far as we be taught in the spirit, we
cannot but seek and will the pleasure of God only. Then Jonas preached to
Niniue, and they repented: then Jonas showed again his corrupt nature for all
his trying in the Whales belly. He was so displeased because the Ninevites
perished not, that he was weary of his life, and wished death for very sorrow,
that he had lost the glory of his prophesying, in that his prophecy came not
to pass, but he was rebuked of God, as in his prophecy you may read.

The Apostles, Christ taught them ever to be meek and to humble themselves:
yet often they striued among themselves who should be greatest: the sons of
Zebede would fit one on the right hand of Christ, the other on the left. They
would pray that fire might descend from heaven and consume the Samaritans. When
Christ asked, Who say men that I am? Peter answered, Thou art the son of the
living God, as though Peter had bin as perfect as an angel. But immediately
after when Christ preached unto them of his death and passion, Peter was angry
and rebuked Christ, and thought earnestly that he had raued, and not wist what
he had said: as at another time in which Christ was so fervently busied in
healing the people, that he had no leisure to eat, they went out to hold him,
supposing that he had bin beside himself. And one that cast forth devils in
Christ's name they forbad, because he waited not on them, so glorious were they
yet. And though Christ taught always to forgive, yet Peter after long going to
school, asked whether men should forgive seven times, thinking that eight
times had been too much. And at the last supper, Peter would have died with
Christ, but yet within few hours after he denied him both cowardly and
shamefully. And after the same manner, though he had so long heard that no man
must avenge himself, but rather turn the other cheek to the smiter again,
yet when Christ was in taking, Peter asked whether it were lawful to smite
with the sword, and tarried no answer, but laid on rashly. So that although we
be once reconciled to God, yet at the first we be but children and young
scholars, weak and feeble, and must have leisure to grow in the spirit, in
knowledge, love, and deeds thereof, as young children must have time to grow in
their bodies: and so in like manner the sting of the serpe^^ is not pulled out
at once, but the poison of our nature is minished by little and little, and
cannot before the hour of death be wholly taken away.


Timoth. I perceive by your godly discourse, the manifold conflicts between the
flesh and the spirit, and that the flesh is like to a mighty giant, such a one
as was Goliath, strong, lusty, stirring, enemy to God, confederate with the
devil: and the spirit like to a little child, such a one as was little David,
newborn, weak and feeble, not always stirring: now then what means do you
use to weaken the flesh, and strengthen the spirit?


Eusebius. I use to tame my flesh with prayer and fasting, watching, deeds of
mercy, holy meditations and reading the Scriptures, and in bodily labor, and
in withdrawing all manner of pleasures from the flesh, and with exercises
contrary to the vices which I find my body most inclined to, and with
abstaining from all things that encourage the flesh against the spirit: as
reading of toys and wanton books, seeing of plays and enterludes, wanton
communication, foolish jesting, and effeminate thoughts and talking of
covetousness, which Paul forbids, Ephesians. 5. magnifying of worldly promotions.
If these will not mortify my flesh, then God sends me some troubles, and so
makes me to grow and wax perfect, and fineth and tries me as gold in the
fire of tentations and tribulations. Thus very often he makes me to take up my
cross and nayleth my flesh unto it, for the mortifying thereof. Mark this, if
God send thee to the sea, and promise to go with thee, he will raise up a
tempest against thee, to prove whether thou will abide his word, and that thou
may feel thy faith and weakness, and perceive his goodness: for if it were
always fair weather and thou never brought into such ieopardie, whence his
mercy only delivers thee, thy faith should be only a presumption, and thou
should be ever unthankful to God, and merciless unto thy neighbor. If God
promise riches, the way thereupon is poverty: whom he loves, him he
chasteneth: whom he exalts, he casts down: whom he saves he first
damneth: he brings no man to heaven, except he send him to hell first: if he
promise life, he slays first: when he builds, he casts down all first:
he is no patcher; he cannot abide another man's foundation: he will not work
till all be past remedy, and brought to such a case that men may see how that
his hand, his power, his mercy, his goodness, his truth has wrought
altogether: he will let no man be partaker with him of his praise and glory:
his works are wonderful and contrary to man's works; who ever (save he)
delivered his own son, his only son, his dear son, his darling unto the
death, and for his enemies, to win his enemies, to overcome them with love,
that they might see love and love again, and of love likewise to do to other
men, and to overcome them with well doing? Joseph saw the sun and the moon
and seven stars worshipping him, nevertheless ere that came to pass God
laid him where he could see neither sun, nor moon, neither any star of
the sky, and that many years, and also undeserved, to nurture him, to make
him humble and meek, and to teach him Gods ways, and to make him apt and
meet for the room and honor again he came to it; that he might be strong in
the spirit to minister it well. God promised the children of Israel a land with
rivers of milk and honey, yet he brought them forth the space of forty
years into a land wherein no rivers of milk and honey were, but where so much
as a drop of water was not, to nurture and teach them as a father does his
son, and to do them good at the latter end, to subdue their cankred nature,
to make them strong in the spirit to use his benefits aright. Lastly, God
promised David a kingdom, and immediately stirred up Saul against him to
persecute him, and to hunt him as men do hares with gray-hounds, and to ferret
him out of every hole, and that for the space of many years, to turn him, to
make him to mortify his lusts, to make him to feel his own diseases: in
fine, to make him a good man, and a good king.


Timoth. But how if it come to pass that you be tempted to any great sin,
and the flesh overcome the spirit, in what case are you then?


Eusebius. There is no body here but you and I, and I take you to be a Christian
and a faithful friend: therefore I will show a little of my experience. The
last year by reason of the dearth, I and my family were put to great pinches,
and most commonly we had nothing but bread and water: hereupon I bethought me
how I might get somewhat to relieve my family: it came into mind that in our
town a rich man had a great flock of sheep, and that I might take one of
them without any hurt of him. I was very loath at the first: but because there
was such great stealing of sheep, and I was in extremity, in the night I went
among his sheep and took a lamb, and I told my family that it was given
me: I presently killed it, the skin and the entralles I buried in my
backside, the flesh we dressed by quarters, and did eat it with thanksgiving
(as my manner is) but surely very coldly, and me thought my prayer was
abominable in Gods sight. After I had thus done: we fared well for the space of
two days, but I felt my heart hardened, and my lips were almost locked up,
that I could not as I was wont praise the Lord. The third night after, I went
with a quiet conscience (me thought) to my bed, and then I slept soundly till
three of the clock in the morning, but I dreamed that one came to carry me to
prison, upon that on a sudden I awaked, and being afraid looked about me, and
fell to consider why I should be afraid, and I remembered that I had sinned
against God by robbing my neighbor: O then my fear increased, and I thought
that hell gaped to devour me, and the law looked upon me with such a terrible
countenance, and so thundered in mine ears, that I durst not abide in my bed,
but up and to go. Then the devil assailed me on every ^ide, to persuade that
God had cast me away: saying, they that be Gods, have power to keep his laws,
thou have not, but breakest them: th^rfore thou art a castaway and a damned
creature, and hell gapeth and sets open his mouth to devour thee. And I
thought with my self that I had been always a rank hypocrite: for as the
clouds of the air do cover the sun, so that sometimes a man cannot tell by
any sense that there is any sun, the clouds and winds hiding it from our
sight: even so my cecitie and blindness, and corrupt affections, and the rage of
my conscience did so ouershadow the sight of Gods seed in me, and so ouerwhelme
his spirit, as though I had bin a plain reprobate. And thus it came to pass
that David making his prayer to God according to his own sense and feeling, but
not according to the truth; desired of God to give him again his spirit. Which
thing God never does indeed: although he made me to think so for a time: for
always he holds his hand under his children in their falls, that they lie
not still as other do which are not regenerate. I being thus turmoyled and
stung with the conscience of sin and the cockatrice of my poisoned nature,
having beheld her self in the glass of the righteous law of God, there was no
other salve or remedy but to run to the brazen serpent Christ Jesus which
shed his blood, hanging upon the cross, and to his everlasting testament and
merciful promise, that was shed for me for the remission of my sins,
therefore I got me speedily into a close corner in my house, and there upon my
face groueling, I confessed my sin and prayed after this manner in effect.
Father, what an horrible monster am I? What traitor? What wretch and villain?
Thy mercy is wonderful, that hell has not devoured me having deserved a
thousand damnations. I have sinned, I have sinned against thy godly, holy, and
righteous law, and against my brother by robbing him, whom I ought to love for
thy sake as dearly as my self: forgive me father for thy son Christ his
sake, according to thy most merciful promises and testament: forget not good
Lord thy old mercies showed upon me, let them not at this time in me be quite
removed. On this manner praying I continued many hours, and God which is
near to all them that call upon him, heard me, eased my pain, and assured me
of the remission of my sin. After presently, for the more easing of my
conscience I went to my neighbor, and between him and me upon my knees
confessed my fault with tears, desiring him to forgive me, and I would (as
Gods law requires) restore that which I stole, fourefold: he (I thank him)
was contented and took pity on me, and ever since has been by Gods mercy my
good friend. So by little and little, God restored me to my first estate: but
(me thinks) I have not that feeling which I had before, and have been worse
ever since: God of his great mercy amend me, and increase his graces in me.


Timoth. But I pray you, what think you, will not God condemn his own elect
children if they sin?


Eusebius. No, for the groundwork of our salvation is laid in Gods eternal
election, and a thousand sins in the world, nay all the sins in the world,
nay all the devils in hell cannot overthrow Gods election. And it may be that
sins do harden our hearts, weaken our faith, make sad the spirit of God in
us: but take away faith, or altogether quench the spirit, they cannot. God
condemns no man for his sins, if he be adopted in Christ. For then Joseph,
Abraham, David, Peter, Marie Magdalene, should be condemned. God is like a
father: and a father if his child be sick, and therefore be froward, and
refuse and cast away his meat, and having eaten it spew it up again, and in
his ^it be impatient, and rave, and speak evil of his father, yet I say the
father will not cast him forth of his doors, but pitieth him, and provides
such things as may restore him to health, and when he is whole remembers not
his disordered behavior in his sickness.


Timoth. What means do you find most effectual to strengthen your faith, to
increase Gods graces in you, and to raise you up again when you are fallen?


Eusebius. Surely I have very great comfort by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper:
for whereas I am spiritually diseased, and am prone and ready to fall, and am
most cruelly oftentimes invaded of the fiend, the flesh, and the law, when I
have sinned, and am put to flight, and made to run away from God my father:
therefore has God of all mercy and of his infinite pity and bottomless
compassion set up his Sacrament as a sign upon a high hill, whence it may be
seen on every side far and near, to call again them that be run away.
And with this Sacrament he (as it were) clocketh to them, as a hen does for her
chickens, to gather them under the wings of his mercy: and has commanded his
Sacrament to be had i^^ continual use, to put us in mind of his continual
mercy laid up for us in Christ blood, and to witne^^e and te^tifie it unto
them, and to be the seal thereof. For the Sacrament does much more lively
print the faith, and make it sink down into the heart then do bare words
only. Now when the words of the testament and promises are spoken over the
bread (this my body that was broken for you: this is my blood that was shed
for you) they confirm the faith; but much more when the Sa^rament is seen
with the eyes, and the bread broken, the wine powered out and looked on: and yet
more when I taste it and smell it: As you see when a man makes a promise unto
another with light words between themselves and so they departed, he to whom
the promise is made begins to doubt whether the other spoke earnestly or
mocked, and doubts whether he will remmber his promise to abide by it or no.
But when any man speaks with aduiseme^t, the words are more credible: and if
he swear, it confirms the thing more, and yet the more if he strike hands,
if he give earnest, if he call record, if he give hand writing and seal it:
so is he the more and more believed, for the heart gathers: lo, he spoke with
aduisement, deliberation and good sadness, he clapped hands, called record,
and put to his hand and seal: the man cannot be so faint without the fear of
God as to deny all this: shame shall make him abide his promise, though he
were such a man as I could not compel him, if he would deny it. And thus we
dispute: god sent his son in our nature, and made him feel our infirmities,
and named his name Jesus, that is a Savior, because he should save his people
from their sins, and after his death he sent his Apostles to preach these
glad tidings, to thrust them in at the ears of us, and set up a Sacrament of
them to testify them and to seal them, and to thrust them in, not at the
ears only by rehearsing the promises of the testament over its neither at our
eyes only in beholding it, but beat them in through our feeling. tasting and
smelling also, and to be repeated daiely and to be ministered to us. He would
not (think we) make half so much a do with us if he loved us not, and would
not have his Sacrament to be a witness and testimony between him and us, to
confirm the faith of his promises that we should not doubt in them, when we
look on the seals of his obligations wherewith he has bound himself: and
this to keep the promises and covenants better in mind, and to make them the
more deeply to sink into our hearts, and be more earnestly regarded.


Timoth. Considering that this which you say is too plain, great shame it is
that there is such neglect of the Sacrament as there is, and that it is so
seldom used: but surely want of faith and the security which ouerspreadeth
this our country is the cause of it, the Lord if it be his will remove the
same. Now let me hear a little how you lead your life, and have your
conversation among men?


Eusebius. I have my conversation among men as sincere as I can in righteousness
and holiness, which is after Gods commandments: our Savior says, Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your father which is in heaven.


Timoth. It is but a dim light which we can carry before men, and small are
our good works, and to be esteemed of no value: if we were preachers or rich
men, or noble men, then we might save souls, give good counsel, help many by
your alms, but you and I are poor men, of base birth, and of low degree, how
can we then do any good works?


Eusebius. As touching good works by that measure of knowledge that god has
given me, I think that all works are good which are done according to the
obedience of Gods law in faith and with thanksgiving to God, and with a mind
desirous of his glory alone, and I think that I or any man else in doing them
please God whatsoever I do within the law of God, as when I make water. And
trust me if either wind or water were stopped, I should feel what a precious
thing it were to do either of both, and what thanks ought to be given God
therefore. Moreover, I put no difference between works, but whatsoever
comes into my hands that I do as time, place, and occasion gives, and
according to my degree. For as touching to please God there is no work better
then other: God looks not first on my works as the world does, or as though
he had need of them: but God looks first on my heart what faith I have to
his word, how I believe him, trust him, and how I love him, for his mercy
that he has showed to me, he looks with what heart I work, and not what I
work, how I accept the degree he has put me in, not of what degree I am. Let
us take example. You are a minister and preach the word, I am a kitchen boy,
and wash my masters dishes. Of the Ministry hark what the Apostle says: If I
preach I have naught to rejoice in, for necessity is put upon me: If I preach
not the gospel; as who should say, God has made me so, woe is to me if I
preach not. If I do it willingly (says he) then I have my reward: that is,
then I am sure that Gods spirit is in me, and that I am elect to eternal life.
If I do it against my will, the office is committed to me, that is, I do it
not of love to God, but to get a living thereby, and for a worldly purpose, and
had rather otherwise live: then do I that office which God has put upon me,
but do not please God. So then if you preached not, or in preaching had not
your heart aright, you minis^er the office, and they that have the spirit of
God hear his word, yea, though it were spoken by an Ass, and the woe
belongs to you: but and if you preach willingly with a true heart and
conscience to God, then you shall feel the earnest of eternal life, and the
working of the spirit of God in you, and your preaching is a good work in you.
Now I that minister in the kitchen, and am but a kitchen boy, receive all
things at the hand of God, know that God has put me in such an office, submit
my self to his will, and serve my master, not as a man but as Christ himself,
with a pure heart according as Paul teaches me, putting my trust in God, and
of him seek my reward. Moreover, there is not a good deed done, but mine
heart rejoices therein, yea, when I hear that the word of God is preached by
you and see the people turn unto God: I consent to this deed, my heart
breaks out in me, yea it springs and leapeth in my breast that God is
honored, and in my heart I do the same that you do with the like delectation
and feruency of spirit. Now he that receives a Prophet, in the name of a
prophet, receives a prophets reward, that is, he that consents to the deed
of a prophet and maintains it, the same has the spirit and earnest of
everlasting life, which the prophet has, and is elect as the prophet is. Now
if we compare work to work, there is a difference betwixt washing of dishes,
and preaching the word of God: but as touching to please God none at all. For
neither that nor this pleases God, but as far forth as God has chosen a
man, and has put his spirit in him, and purified his heart by faith and trust
in Christ. As the scriptures call him carnal which is not renewed by the spirit
and borne again in Christ's flesh, and all his works like, even the very
motions of his heart and mind, as his learning, doctrine, and contemplation of
hie things, his preaching, teaching, and study in the scripture, building of
Churches, founding of Colleges, giving of alms, and whatsoever he does,
though they seem spiritual, and after the law of God never so much: So
contrariwise he is spiritual which is renewed in Christ, and all his works
which spring from faith seem they never so gross, as the washing of the
disciples feet done by our Savior Christ, and Peter's fishing after the
resurrection, yea deeds of matrimony are pure spiritual if they proceed of
faith, and whatsoever is done within the laws of god though it be wrought by
the body, as the wiping of shoes and such like, howsoever gross they appear
outwardly, yet are sanctified.


Timoth. What be the special things in which you lead your conversation?


Eusebius. One thing is the reading of the scripture.


Timoth. It is dangerous to read the scriptures, you that have no learning may
easily fall into errors and heresies.


Eusebius. As he which knows his letters perfectly, and can spell, cannot but
read if he be diligent: and as he which has clear eyes without impediment or
let, and walks thereto in the light and open day, cannot but see, if he
attend and take heed: even so I having the profession of my Baptism only
written in my heart, and feeling it sealed up in my conscience by the holy
Ghost, cannot but understand the scripture, because I exercise my self
therein, and compare one place with another, and mark the manner of speech,
and ask here and there the meaning of a sentence of them that be better
exercised then I: for I feel in my heart, and have a sensible experience of
that inwardly, which the spirit of God has delivered in the scriptures. So
that I find mine inward experience as a commentary unto me.


Timoth. We are all baptized, belike then we shall all understand the Scripture.


Eusebius. But alas very few there be that are taught and feel their ingrafting
into Christ, their justification, their inward dying unto sin and living unto
righteousness, which is the meaning of their Baptism. And therefore we
remain all blind generally, as well the great Rabbis which brag of their
learning, as the poor unlearned lay man. And the scripture is become so dark
unto them, that they grope for the door and can find no way in, and it is
become a maze unto them in which they wander as a mist, or as (as we say) led
by Robbin goodfellow. And their darkness cannot comprehend the light of the
Scriptures, but they read them as men do tales of Robbin hood, as riddles, or
as old Priests read their Ladies Mattins which they understood not. And
until a man be taught his Baptism, that his heart feel the sweetness of it,
the scriptures are shut up from him, and so dark that he could not understand
it, though Peter, Paul, or Christ himself did expound it unto him, no more
then a man stark blind can see though thou set a candle before him, or show
him the sun, or point with thy finger unto that thou would have him look
upon. As for heresy there is no danger if a man come to the scripture with a
meek spirit, seeking there to fashion himself like unto Christ, according to
the profession and vow of his baptism: but contrariwise he shall there find
the mighty power of God to alter and change him in the inner man by little and
little, till in process he be full shapen after the image of our Savior in
knowledge and love of all truth, and power to work thereafter. Heresies
spring not of Scripture, no more then darkness of the Sun, but are dark
clouds which spring out of the blind hearts of hypocrites given to pride and
singularity, and do cover the face of the Scripture, and blind their eyes
that they cannot behold the bright beams of the scripture.


Timoth. By this I also can gather that the Papists which cannot read the
Scriptures, except they fall into errors, have not the spirit of Christ working
in them, and teaching them, but the lying spirit of Antichrist the devil, and
that if God would give them any true feeling, and open their eyes, they would
quite change their minds. But what other exercises have you?


Eusebius. Prayer and thanksgiving to God. For God has promised very bou^tifully
unto them which pray in truth, and it is one of the greatest comforts I have
at all times. Again, God which commanded me not to steal, commands me also
to pray, and his will is, that one commandment should be as well kept as
another: and therefore I am persuaded that condemnation will befall a man as
well for the one as for the other. And that prayer ought to be continually
even in every business a man does, me thinks it most agreeable to Gods will.
For if I should come into my neighbors house and take his goods, and use them,
not borrowing them, or asking any leave, they would lay hands on me, and make
me a thief. The world, and all the things in the world are the Lords, not
mine: so then if I shall daily use them, never seeking to the Lord by prayer
for the use of them, before God I am an usurper, nay a rank thief, and
therefore I desire of God heartily that I may use all his good creatures with
fear and reverence; and that I may sanctify his name in them, which Paul
shows me to be done by the word of God and prayer, the word showing me the
lawefull use of his creatures: prayer obtaining at Gods hands, that I may use
them aright. If this practice were used of men in their professions and
callings, I am persuaded there would be a thousand vices cut off which in men
abound, and are committed without shame.


Timoth. I think the rest of your Christian exercises be the practicing of the
Commandments of the law.


Eusebius. Yea they are indeed.


Timoth. Me thinks it is an hard point of the law for a man to love his enemy.


Eusebius. It is indeed: yet in the faithful it will be so: for they have in
their hearts a persuasion, that whereas they are damned in themselves, yet in
Christ the mercy of God is most plentiful to their salvation, and all this God
confirms and seals unto them by his holy spirit, and therefore they cannot
but love God again, and that with a fervent love even above all things in the
world, and so they love all Gods creatures, and even their enemies, because
they bear the image of God whom they love: like as I have a friend and love
him, I love all of his name, all his kindred, and all that appertain unto him.
And by the way, here is a good way to know whether we have faith or not^ though
faith only justify and make the marriage between our soul and Christ, and is
properly the marriage garment, yea, and the sign Tau, that defends us from
the smiting and power of evil angels, and is also the rock on which Christ's
church is built, and stands against all weather of wind and tempest: yet is
faith never severed from hope and charity: then if a man will be sure that his
faith is perfect, let him examine himself whether he love the law: and in like
manner if he will know whether he love the law, that is, love God and his
neighbor, then let him examine himself whether he believe in Christ only for
the remission of sin, and obtaining the promises made in the Scripture. And
even so let him compare his hope of the life to come with faith, and love, and
to the hatred of sin in his life, which hatred the love of the law ingendreth
in him. And if they accompany not one another all three together, then let him
be sure all is but hypocrisy.


Timoth. Yet by your leave faith cannot make a man just before God without hope
and charity: then they also with faith has some stroke in justification.


Eusebius. I answer, though they be inseparable, yet I praise God I do conceive
how these three have three separable and sundry offices. Faith, which only is
an undoubted and sure affiance in Christ, and in the Father through him,
certifieth the conscience that the sin is forgiven, and the damnation of the
law taken away. And with such persuasions mollifieth the heart and makes it
love God again and his law. And as often as we sin, faith only keeps, that
we forsake not our profession, and that love utterly quench not, and hope
fail, and only makes the peace again: for a true believer trusts in
Christ alone, and not in his own works, nor ought else for the remission of
sins. The office of love is to power out again the same goodness that it has
received of God upon her neighbor, to be to him as it feels Christ to be to
it self. The office of love is only to have compassion, and to bear with her
neighbor the burden of his infirmities. 1. Pet. 4. Love covers the multitude
of sins: that is to say, considers the infirmities, and interprets all to
the best, and takes for no sin at all a thousand things, of which the least
were enough (if a man loved not) to go to law for, and to trouble and disquiet
an whole town, and sometime a whole realm too. The office of hope is to
comfort in adversity, and to make patient that we faint not, nor fall down
under the cross, or cast it off our backs. Thus these three inseparable have
separable offices and effects, as heat, and drines, being inseparable in the
fire have yet their separable operations, for drines only expels the
moystnes of all that is consumed by fire, and heat only destroieth the
coldness. And it is not all one to say, the drines only, and the drines that is
alone, neither is it all one to say, faith only, and faith that is alone.


Timoth. You are to be commended, you are so perfect in these high points of
religion, but I know you speak of experience, for in you faith and hope
toward God, and charity toward your neighbor are inseparable.


Eusebius. I require no commendations: shame and confusion befall me eternally,
that all glory may be unto God.


Timoth. But let us talk on further of our duties which we must perform if
we will live Christian like among men. And I pray you tell me what do you mean
that you give so much unto the poor, considering you are so poor your self,
I speak my conscience if you had ability, you would do more then an hundred of
those rich men do.


Eusebius. God knows my heart, it is a hell unto me to see my brother for whom
Christ shed his blood, to want, if I have any thing in the world to give him.
Among Christian men, love makes all things common: every man is others debtor,
and every man is bound to minister to his neighbor, and to supply his
neighbors lack of that wherewith God has endued him. Christ is Lord over
all, and every Christian is heir annexed with Christ, and therefore Lord over
all, and every one is Lord of whatsoever another has: if then my brother or
neighbor need, I have to help him: and if I show not mercy but withdraw my
hands from him, then rob I him of his own, and am a thief. A Christian man
has Christ's spirit: now Christ is merciful, if I shall not be merciful, I
have not Christ's spirit: if I have not Christ's spirit then am I none of his.
And though I show mercy unto my brother, yet if I do it not with such
burning love as Christ did it unto me, I must knowledge my sin and desire
mercy in Christ.


Timotheus. If a man must be frank and free, then a man must give of his own
stock to the poor members of Christ, and diminish his own substance.


Eusebius. Yea indeed (if need so require) we are made stewards of those goods
which God has given us, shall a steward take all unto himself without
reproof? I am sure that they which were converted at Peter's first Sermon after
Christ's ascension, Act. 2.
diminished their substance when they sold them and gave them to the poor. I
am sure that the Churches which were in Macedonia, which sent relief unto
their Churches even above their ability, they being in extreme poverty did
diminish their possessions: 2. Cor. 8.
and God grant our conuersatio^s may be like theirs. And that we should be
like them, their examples of great compassion are recorded in the scriptures.


Timoth. Many of us have our selves, wife, children, father, mother, and
kinsfolk to relieve, so that it will be heard to deal after this manner.


Eusebius. Had not these men so? yea, I warrant you had they. And the want of love
which you deem of, the Gospel of Christ knows not, that a man should begin
at himself, and then descend I wot not by what steps. Love seeks not her
own profit, but makes a man to forget himself, and turn his profit to
another man, as Christ sought not himself or his own profit but ours. This
term (my self) is not in the gospel, neither yet father, mother, sister,
brother, kinsman, that one should in love be preferred before another. The
love that springs out of Christ excludes no man, neither puts difference
between one another. In Christ we are all of one degree without respect of
persons. Notwithstanding though a Christian man's heart be open to all men^ and
receives all men, yet because his ability of goods extends not so far,
this provision is made that every man should care for his own houshold^ as
father, mother, thine elders that have helped thee, wife, children, and
servants. When a man has done his duty to his household, and yet has further
abundance of the blessing of God, that he owes to the poor that cannot
labor, and cannot get work, and yet are destitute of friends; to the poor I
mean which he knows, and to them of his own parish. For that provision
ought to be had in the Church, that every parish provide for the poor. If his
neighbors which he knows be served, then is he a debtor to the brethren a
thousand miles off, if he hear of their necessity and have himself any
plenty: yea, to the very Infidels he is a debtor if they need, ^s far
forth as he does not maintain them against Christ. Thus is every man that
needs my help my father, mother, sister, and brother in Christ: even as
every man that does the will of the father, is father, mother, sister, and
brother unto Christ.


Timoth. Now ye somewhat persuade me of that which me thought at the first
blush, was against common sense.


Eusebius. By Gods grace I will persuade you more yet. How if our Savior Christ
Jesus should now dwell upon the earth in poverty and want, could not you be
contented to bestow half your goods on him?


Timoth. Half my goods? Nay truly all: and my heart blood: for I know if I
should loose my li^e for him, I should save it.


Eusebius. Very well, Christ is al in all. Every Christian man to another is Christ
himself, and whatsoever is done to the poor, is done to Christ himself, and
therefore your neighbors need has as good right in your goods as has Christ
himself which is heir and Lord over all. And look what you owe to Christ,
that you owe to your neighbors need: to your neighbor owe you your heart and
life, and whatsoever you have or can do.


Timoth. We need not give our relief except the poor require it.


Eusebius. Ask or not, if they want, you are bound to releive them; As Christ
loved you, so love them. Christ loved you being his enemy, when I am sure of
it you never asked remission of sins.


Timoth. We need not relieve them often, need we?


Eusebius. Yes, as long as you are able, and as often as they want. If Christ should
forgive us but once, we should come short of heaven.


Timoth. The world is full of naughtines, and lewd people take pleasure in
doing wrong, and in slandering, and in hindering their brethren: how can you
live among them in quietness, do you use to give like for like?


Eusebius. No, you must understand that there be two states or regiments in the
world, the kingdom of heaven which is the regiment of the gospel: and the
regiment of the world, which is the temporal kingdom. In the first state
there is neither father nor mother, neither master, mistress, maid, nor
servant, nor husband, nor wife, nor Lord, nor subject, nor inferior, but
Christ is all, and each to other is Christ himself, there is none better then
other, but al alike good, all brethren, and Christ only is Lord over all
neither is their any other thing to do, or other law, save to love one an
other as Christ loved us: in the temporal regiment, is husband, wife, father,
mother, son, daughter, mistress, maid, manseruant, subject, Lord? Now every
person is a double person, and under two regiments: In the first regiment I am
a person of mine own self under Christ and his doctrine, and may neither hate
nor be angry, and much less fight or revenge: but must after the example of
Christ, humble my self, forsake and deny my self, and hate my self, and
cast my self away, and be meek and patient, and let every man go over me,
and tread me under foot, and do me wrong: and yet I am to love them, and
pray for them, as Christ did for his crucifiers: for love is all, and
whatsoever is not of love, is damnable and cast forth of that kingdom. In the
temporal regiment thou art a person in respect of another, thou art husband,
father, mother, daughter, wife, Lord, subject, and there thou must do
according to thine office. If thou be a father, thou must do the office of a
father and rule, or else thou damnest thy self: thou must bring all under
obedience, whether by fair means or by foul: thou must have obedience of thy
wife, of thy servants, and of thy subjects: if they will not obey in love, thou
must chide, fight, and correct, as far as the law of God and the law of the
land will suffer thee. Now to the purpose: whether a man may resist violence,
and defend or revenge himself: I say nay, in the first state where thou art a
person for thy self alone, and Christ's Disciple, there thou must love and of
love do, study, and enforce: yea and suffer all things (as Christ did) to
make peace, that the blessing of God may come upon thee, which says, Blessed
are the peacemakers for they shall be the children of God. If thou suffer and
keep peace in thy self only, thy blessing is the possession of this world:
but if thou so love the peace of thy brother that thou leave nothing undone or
vnsuffered to further it, thou shall possess heaven. But in this worldly state
where thou art no private man, but a person in respect of other, thou must, and
art bound under pain of damnation to execute thine office. Of thy servants
thou must exact obedience, and must not suffer thy self to be despised. If
thou art a ruler, thou must take, imprison, and sley too, not of malice and
hate to revenge thy self, but to defend thy subjects and to maintain thine
office: the ruler must not oppress his subjects with rents, fines and
customs, at all: neither pill them with taxes, and such like to maintain his
own lusts: but be loving and kind unto them as Christ was to him: for they be
the price of his blood. I will show my mind more plainly by one example. You
are in your fathers house among your brethren and sisters, there if one fight
with another, or if any do you wrong, you may not revenge or smite, for that
pertains to the father only. But if your father give you authority in his
absence and command you to smite, if they will not be ruled but abuse you,
then you are another person. Notwithstanding, yet you have not put off the
first person, but are a brother still, and must ever love and prove all things
to rule with love: but if love will not serve, then you must use the office of
another person, or sin against your father. Even so when you are a temporal
person you put not off the spiritual: therefore you must ever love, but when
love will not help, you must with love execute the office of the temporal
person. You must love your neighbor in you heart, because he is your brother
in the first state; yet you must obey your ruler who has power over you, and
when need requires at his commandment you must go with the Constable or
like officer and break open your neighbors door, if he will not open it in the
Kings name: yea if he will not yield in the Kings name, you may smite him to
the ground till he be subdued, and look^ what harm he gets, that be upon
his own head.


Timoth. I understand you well. As I am a member of the spiritual body of
Christ, I must in all my conversation follow him with patience, meeknes, and
long suffering, ouercomming other men's evils with well doing: yet if the hurt
be greater then I can bear, I must take a new person on me, and if I be a
ruler, with love seek amendment: if a subject, then in the fear of God,
complain to my ruler. But further I pray you soil me this doubt. If I shall
be taken for a soldier, me thinks that I should then shake off all love and
meeknes, and then I could not practice this Christian rule.


Eusebius. Yes, if our Queen (God save her grace) should send you on warfare into
another country, you must obey at Gods commandment, and go and avenge your
princes quarrel, which you know not but that it is right. When you come
thither, remember the two states in which you are: and know that in the first
state, that is, the regiment spiritual, you must love them with whom you fight,
and that they are your brethren bought with Christ's blood, as well as you, and
for Christ's sake hate them not, yet as you are in the second state a soldier
at your princes commandment you must fight against them, and maintain your
princes quarrel, and bring them under her power: and therwithall be content
with your princes wages, neither desire your adversaries life or goods, save to
advantage your prince. So then a soldier need not cast away meekness, for
he may fight with his enemy and sley him, and yet love him.


Timoth. Another thing I would know of you, which now comes to my mind, I
have a Landlord, he seems to be a very good man, he countenanceth all the
good preachers in our country, and he rides usually ten miles to hear
sermons: I hold of him a house and a little land, not scarce enough to find
my poor family: my lease is come out, and I have taken a new lease, but I
have paid such a great fine, and my yearly rents are so racked, that I fear
I and all my household are like to beg our bread: this is it disquieteth me,
and almost makes me at my wits end, what is your counsel and advise?


Eusebius. Surely, it makes my heart to bleed to see how many men brag of the
gospel, and yet what little fruit the gospel has in them, and what little
love they show, even they which abound in rents and lands. My poor advise is
this, that you would with patience depend upon Gods providence. It is said,
Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth. Then let all the world
study to do you wrong, yea, let them study to bring you to extreme misery,
and do it too: yet if you be meek, you shall have foood and raiment enough for
you and yours. And no doubt, God (who is always true of his promise) shall
raise up some to help you. And my counsel is that you give your Landlord now
and then a capon, now a pigge, now a goose; and if you be able ^ lamb or a
calfe, and let your wife visit your landladie now and then with spiced cakes,
with apples, pears, cherries, and such like: and be you ready with your oxen,
or horses, five or six times in the year, to fetch home their wood^ to plow
their land, then no doubt God may soften their hearts and move them to have
some pity and compassion on your poor estate.


Timoth. I have done all this. Nay (may it be spoken between you and me) I am
at commandment, and am as a drudge to them, to do their business, and to
leave my own undone, and yet have neither meat, drink, nor money.


Eusebius. More is the pity. But remember that they which cannot come to see men
deal uprightly in the world, yet do in their hearts hunger and thirst after
this righteousness, are pronounced blessed.


Timoth. To let this pass: show me one rule how I might generally in all
matters behave my self among men, and then for this time I will cease to
trouble you.


Eusebius. Ask your own conscience what you may or ought to do. Would you men
did so with you? Then do you it. Would not be so dealt with? Then do it not.
You would not that men should do you wrong and oppress you. You would not
that men should do you shame and rebuke, he on you, kill you, hire your house
from you, or tice your servant away, or take against your will ought that is
yours. You would not that men should sell you false ware, when you put them in
trust to make it ready, or to lay it ought for you: and you would not that men
should deceive you with great oaths, swearing that to be good which is indeed
very naught: you would not that men should sell you ware that is naught, and
too dear, to undo you: do no such thing then unto your neighbors, but as
loath as you would be to buie false ware, and too dear, for undoing your
self: so loath be you to sell false ware, or too dear, for undoing your
neighbor. And in all cases how glad would you be to be helped, so glad be to
help your neighbor. So in all things ask your conscienc^ what is to be done
between your neighbor and you, and she will teach you. But because you are
weary of reasoning I will also end. Desiring God to increase in us his
heavenly graces, as faith, and repentance, and love, according to his good
pleasure.


Amen.
The assertion.
A Reprobate may in truth be made partaker of all that is contained in the
Religion of the Church of Rome: and a Papist by his religion cannot go beyond
a Reprobate.

The first argument.
HE which may in truth be made partaker of the chief points of the Popish
religion, may be made partaker of all: but a Reprobate may be made partaker of
the chief poin^s of the Popish religion: therefore a Reprobate may be made
partaker of all.

The proof of the Argument.
THe proposition is plain, and every Papist will grant it: all the
controversy is of the assumption: wherefore I prove it thus:

The Sacrament of Penance (as they call it) is one of the chief things in the
religion of the Church of Rome: for it is such a Sacrament, Catech. Romans p. 424.
that by the power and efficacy of it, the blood of Christ is delivered to us
to wash away our sins: and they say Ibid. page 419. Tho. 4. did. 14. q. 5.
art. 1.

Canis. and pe^ exp.


it has such virtue that the kingdom of heaven is promised to it in the
Scriptures, and that it is not regeneration, but an healing of a man
regenerate, and that it pardons sin, as baptism. And as touching
Contrition, Papists write, Catech. Romans p. 447. Lumb. lib. 4. did. 17.
it has power to do away sin, and to obtain pardon at Gods hand: the same
they speak of Confession, which they say delivers from death, opens
paradise; and gives hope of salvation: and hereby it may appear, that
penance is one of the greatest points of the popish religion.

But a reprobate may be truly made partaker of the popish sacrament of penance,
and indeed perform all in it. There be three parts of penance, Contrition of
the heart, Confession of the mouth, Satisfaction in the deed. All these three
Judas performed: first, he had Contrition: for when he saw that our Savior was
condemned, Mat. 27.3.
then he saw his own finne, and was stricken with a grief for his own
treachery, and repented, and presently after he verse. 4^
confessed his sin openly unto the chief Priests and Elders. Also he made
Satisfaction, when he brought again the thirty pieces of silver which he
took to betray his master.

Again, Contrition of the heart is the ground of penance: and Papists say, it
is not an act of the holy Ghost Catech. Romans p. 437.
but an act of man's free will proceeding from it: and therefore a reprobate may
have it. And as for Satisfaction, if a reprobate cannot do it by himself, yet
he may perform it by another: for so they say Tho. lib. 4. did. 2. q. 1. art.
1.
that one may satisfy by anoth^r: wherefore for any thing I can see, a
reprobate may have all that is contained in the popish sacrament of penance.

Faith is another of the chiefest points, that is in the religion of the Church
of Rome, for Trid. Council. sess. 6. c. 8. Rhem. Test. Romans
they say, it is the foundation and ground work of Justification. But
reprobates may have that faith which they mean. For they say, that it is
nothing else, but Canis. Oper. ca. pa. The. Test. 2. Cor. 13.5. And. lib. 6.
page 543.
a gift of God, and a certain light of the mind, wherewith a man being
enlightened giu^th sure, and certain assent to the revealed word of God. And the
Rhemists say, it is only an act of the understanding: and Andradius says,
that Faith is only in general actions, and cannot come to the particular
applying of any thing: now all this reprobates may have, Heb. 6.5. Luke 8.13.
Iam. 2.19.
for their minds are enlightened to know the truth, and to be persuaded of it,
and therefore they have this act of the understanding: and this is a general
faith: yea the devil himself can do thus much, who believes and trembles.
And their implicit faith which saves the lay man, what reprobate cannot have
it? for there is nothing else required, but to believe as the Church believes,
though he know not how the Church believes. And the Papists themselves say as
much: for their Trid. Confess. 6. cap. 9. Andr. lib. 3. page 200.
Councels hold, that a wicked man and an heretic may have confidence in
Christ, and that an heathen man, by the natural knowledge of God, and by the
works of creation, might have faith, and in a general manner believe in Christ.

The second argument.
THat religion whose precepts are no directions to attain peace of conscience,
leaves a man still in a damnable case: but the precepts of the religion of the
Church of Rome, are not directions to attain peace of conscience, therefore it
leaves a man in a damnable case: which if it be true, a reprobate may be as
sound a professor of ^ as any other.

The proof.
THe proposition is certain: because as long as any man has his conscience to
accuse him of sin before God, he is in state of damnation, as 1. Job. 3.20.
Saint John says: If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and
knows all things. And this is peculiar and proper to the elect children of
God, Romans 5.1.
to receive these gifts and graces from God, Heb. 10.22
the enioyning of which, brings peace of conscience. True it is indeed, that
reprobates receive many graces and gifts at Gods hand, but they are no other
then such as may be joined with the trembling of the conscience, as the devil
is said to believe, but withal to tremble.

The assumption (namely, that the religion of the church of Rome can not
pacify the conscience) may be easily proved on this wise.

mat. 11.28.
Come unto me (says our Savior Christ) all ye which are wearied and burdened,
and I will ease you. Whereby it appears, that they who are to have their
consciences refreshed in Christ, must first of all be afflicte^ with the sense
of Gods judgment: yea they must be pressed down to helward with the weight
and burden of their sins, that they may see, and from their hearts confess,
that in themselves there is no way to escape damnation. Mat. 9.12. mat. 15.24.
esa. 44.11. 1. cor. 11.23.
The good Physician Christ Jesus cannot heal us before he has lanced our
wounds to the very bottom: he never can find any of his sheep before they
be quite lost: he never powers into us the living waters of his spirit, before
we be barren and dry ground void of all moisture, and that man must condemn
himself, that would not have Christ to pronounce sentence of damnation against
him.

Now, this true humiliation of a sinner can not be wrought in any man's heart by
the religion of the Church of Rome. True and sound humiliation is wrought by
two means: first, by making a man to see the greatness of his sin and
wickedness: secondly, by making him to acknowledge, that he is destitute, and
quite bereft of all goodness. For if a man either see not the greatness of his
sin, or have confidence of any thing in himself, he can not be humbled: but
neither of these two things are performed in the church of Rome. As touching
the first, the Romish religion is so far from amplifying and enlarging the
greatness of men's sins, that it does extenuate them, and lessen them out of
measure: for it makes some sins to be venial, Gal. 3.13.
when as the least sin that can be against Gods law deserves damnation,
Canis. Oper. Cat. page 491.
it teaches that lesser sins are done away by an humble accusation of a man's
self, by saying the Lords prayer, by knocking upon the breast, and by such
like: the greater sins may be done away by alms deeds, and such like
satisfactions. But how can any sin be great, that may be done away with such
easy and slight means? Furthermore it teaches, that evil thoughts and
desires, and motions of the heart without consent are no sins: and this
opinion cutteth off all true humiliation: for Paul never repented, before he
understood the meaning of the last commandment, and perceived thereby, that
the desires and lusts of his heart, to which he did not yield his consent, were
sins damnable before God, and knowing this, he then saw himself to be most
miserable, and renouncing his own righteousness, he sought for righteousness in
Christ. Lastly, Cens. Col. page 46. 54.
it teaches, that original sin is done away in Baptism, and that it is the
least sin of al other. What is this but to extenuate man's corruption, for
when the root of corruption is taken away, and it is made so little a sin,
actual sins cannot be taken for such heinous matters.

And for the second point, the Church of Rome does too too much extol the
power of man, and his natural strength. And. lib. 3. Trid. Co^f. 6. cap. 7.
It says, that all actions of men unregenerate are not sins, and that
original sin needs no repentance, Trid. Confess. 6. cap. 1.
that a man has some freewill to do spiritual things, that Gabr. Biel. ^.
sen. d. 27
a man by mere naturals may love God above all things, fear God, believe in
Christ, if we respect the very act of the work, Andr. l. 3. page 292.
that the Gentiles might gather out of philosophy knowledge sufficient for
salvation, Andr. l. 3. page 280.
that a man without the help of the holy Ghost, may perform things acceptable
to God, Catech. Romans in prim.
that the mind of man understands of it self many things which be
spiritual and heavenly, Trid. confess. cap. 18.
that a man regenerate may fulfill the whole law of God: that a man may prepare
himself to receive grace, and after preparation merit grace at Gods hand: that
he may do works of supererogation, etc. By this it appears that the church
of Rome ascribes too much to man, Genesis 6. Ephesians. 2.1.2,
which in himself is only and altogether evil, dead in sin, chained up in
miserable bondage under Satan the prince of darkness: and therefore it is
evident, that all the preaching that is used in that church, will not humble a
sinner, and make him deny himself, and therefore their preaching may
peradventure benumme a corrupt conscience and make it secure, but it cannot
pacify the troubled conscience, nor disquiet it by the threatening of the law,
that by the promises of the gospel it may be quieted.

Again, Trid. Confess. 6. cap. ^.
this religion teaches, that a man must doubt of his salvation as Prou. 2^.
saying of Solomon must needs agree to him: The wicked flies when no man
pursues (by reason of the guiltines of his conscience) but the godly is bold
as a Lion. Again, Psalm. 32. ^.
Blessed is the man (says David) whose sins are pardoned: where he makes
remission of sins to be true felicity: now there is no true felicity but
that which is enjoyed, and felicity can not be enjoyed, unless it be felt,
and it cannot be felt unless a man know himself to be in possession of it, and
a man cannot know himself to be in possession of it, if he doubt whether he
has it or not: and therefore this doubting of the remission of sins is
contrary to true felicity, and is nothing else but a torment of the
conscience. For a man cannot doubt whether his sins be pardoned or not, but
strait way (if his conscience be not feared with an hot iron) the very
thought of his sin will strike a great fear into him: for the fear of
eternal death, and the horror of Gods judgments will come to his remembrance,
the consideration of which is most terrible. Undoubtedly, this religion must
needs be comfortless. Alas poor souls, we are no better then passengers in
this world, our way it is in the middle of the sea, Heb. 6.10, 1^.
where we can have no sure footing at all, and which way soever we cast our
eyes, we see nothing but water, even opening it self to devour us quick: the
devil and our rebellious flesh raise up against us infinite thousands of
tempests and storms to overthrow us: but behold, God of his great and endless
mercy has brought us to Christ, as to a sure anchor-hold: he bids us to
undo our gables, and fling up our anchors within the veil, and fasten them in
Christ: Cant. 1.5.
we do it as we are commanded: but a sister of ours (I mean the Church of
Rome) passing in the ship with us (as it seems) who has long taken upon her
to rule the helm, deals too too unkindly with us: she vnlooseth our anchors,
and cutteth in pieces our gables, she tells us that we may not presume to
faste^ our anchor on the rock: she will have us freely to roue in^ the middle
of the sea in the greatest fogges and the fearefullest tempests that be: if we
shall follow her advise, we must needs look for a shipwreck: for the least
flaw of wind shall ouerturne us, and our poor souls shall be plunged in the
gulfes of hell.

Esa. 64.6. Romans 7. 14. ^^^ 16.
appear both in the prophet Esaias, and in Paul, both which had a great
misliking of that good which they did, because it was mingled with sin. And
again, every man is bound by duty to keep the whole law, so that if a man
could keep it perfectly, he should do no more then he is by duty enjoined to
do: and therefore he which looks to merit eternal life at Gods hand by
keeping the law, trusts but to a broken staff, and is like the bankrout,
that will pay one debt by another: for by his sin, every man is indebted to
the Lord, and is bound to answer to the Lord the full punishment of all his
sins: this debt, the Papist says, we may discharge by obedience to the law,
that is by a new debt, which we are as well bound to pay to our God as the
former.

To end this point, let a man look to be saved by works, and therefore let a
man employ himself to do the best works he can, yet he shall never come to
know when he has done sufficient to satisfy Gods wrath: and this
uncertainty, all his life, but especially in the hour of death, must needs
disquiet him. And truly, when a man shall have done many thousand works, yet
his heart can never be at quiet, as it appears in the young man, who though he
had labored all his life to fulfill the law thereby to be saved, yet
distrusting all his doings, he asks further of our Savior Christ, Mat.
10.17. Cono^^. Trid. sess. 5.
what he might do to be saved.

Furthermore, it is the doctrine of the church of Rome, that there is nothing
in the regenerate that God can hate: and that they are inwardly pure and
without spot. A doctrine that will make any Christian conscience despair. For
if a man shall fall to examine himself, he shall find Romans 7.14.
that he is sold under sin, Heb. 12. 1.
compassed about of sin, Ps. 40. 12.
he shall see his particular sins to be as the hairs of his head: at the
sight and feeling of which, he shall find that there is much matter in him
worthy of hatred and damnation too. He being in this case, will begin to
doubt whether he be the child of God or not: and perseuering in this doubting,
he shall be driven to despair of Gods love toward him, considering that he
cannot find any such pureness in himself as the doctrine of the church of Rome
requires.

Lastly, experience it self teaches that the Romish religion can bring no
peace to the conscience, in that some for the maintaining of it have despaired.
As Francis Spira, who against his own conscience having abiured the truth; and
subscribed to the doctrine of the Romish Church, most fearfully despaired of
his salvation: Illiricus de fide.

Epist. Senar. de morte Diazy.


which could not have been if that doctrine had been agreeable to Gods word
which is spirit and life to the receiver. For the same cause Latomus a doctor
of Louane despaired, crying that he was damned, because he had opposed himself
to the known truth. This also befell Gardner at his death, as the book of
Acts and Monuments declares.

The third argument.
THat religion which agrees to the corruption of man's nature, a Reprobate may
truly profess it: the religion of the Church of Rome agrees to the corruption
of man's nature: therefore a reprobate may truly profess it.

The proof.
I Need not stand to prove the proposition, the assumption is rather to be
confirmed: which first I will prove by induction of particulars. First, that a
man should be justified by works, is an opinion settled in nature, as may
appear in them that crucified our Savior Christ: for when they were pricked
in their hearts at Peter's sermon, Act. 2.37. Ioh. 6.28. Mar. 10.17.
they said, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? and this said the
young man before named, not what should I believe, but what should I do to be
saved. So then in them it appears, that it is a natural opinion of all men
to think that they must be saved by doing of somewhat. A Papist will say,
though this be natural thus to think, yet it may be good: for there is some
goodness in nature.

I answer that the wisdom of the flesh is enmity to Gods wisdom, Romans 8.7.
and a^l men by nature are nothing but flesh: for naturally they are the
children of wrath. Secondly, the worshipping of god in images, is a great
matter in the Church of Rome: but this manner of worshipping is nothing but a
work of the flesh, which thus I prove: Gal. 5. 20.
Idolatry is natural, and a work of the flesh; but to worship God in images,
is idolatry. The children of Israel when they erected the golden calfe^ they
did commit idolatry, and yet they did not worship the calfe it self, b^^ God
in the calfe. For when the calfe was made, they Exo. 32.5.
proclaimed an holy day, not to the calfe, but to the Lord. And Baal, that
detestable idol, was nothing but the image of God, as appears in Hosea the
prophet. At that day, says the lord, Hos 2.16.
thou shall calm no more Baal.

It remains therefore, that to serve God in an image, is a work of the flesh,
and altogether agrees to the vile corruption of nature. Thirdly, (...). 20.^.
pride, and a desire to be a advanced above other, is a natural corruption: to
this agrees the Popes primacie, his double sword, and triple crown: yet the
outrageous pomp of that seat is as a pair of bellows to kindle the
concupiscence, and to make the hidden sparks of pride to break out into a
great flame. Fourthly, Doubting of Gods providence and mercy is a natural
corruption in all men: to this agrees, and from hence issues that foolish and
vain opinion, concerning doubting of our salvation, and of the remission of
sins. Fifthly, self-love, and selfe-liking are natural corruptions: to this
agrees that doctrine of the Papists, not overmuch to abase our selves, but to
maintain freewill by nature, and to think that we have so much goodness, that
we are able to prepare our selves to receive, and in some sort to merit grace.
Sixthly, idleness and riotousnes is a natural corruption, and to it very fitly
answers the great number of feasts, of holy days, of half holy days which
the Church of Rome uses. Seventhly, Covetousness is a natural corruption, and
to the feeding of this vice serves Purgatory, a fire of great gain, which in
very truth, if it had not burned very hot, the fire in the Popes kitchen had
burned very cold: hitherto serve Pilgrimages, saying of Masses, and selling of
pardons for money. Eighthly, to be at liberty is the desire of nature:
answerable to this is that opinion, that the spirituality is to be exempted
from subjection to Magistrates. Ninthly, to commit adultery is natural: to
this agrees the Stews, and the permission of simple fornication. Tenthly,
ignorance is a filthy corruption in nature: this the Church of Rome makes the
mother of devotion, and it is enjoined the lay man as a means of his
salvation: for he must believe as the church believes, he is not bound to
know. XI. Infidelity is natural, and to this agrees that they call upon
Saints and Angels, the Lord having commanded them to call upon him in the name
of Christ, what argues this else, but hearts distrusting Gods goodness, and
guilty consciences? XII. Images in the Church of Rome came from infidelity,
because men in reason could not persuade themselves that God was present,
unless that were made manifest by some sign and image. Which thing the
Israelites declared when they said to Aaron in the wilderness in Moses absence,
Exodus 32. 1.
Make us gods to go before us. XIII. Satisfactions for sin are natural: for
wicked Mich. 6.7. Isa. 58.4,5.
men when they have offended God, they have always used some ceremonies to
pacify God with, which when they have performed, then they think they have
done enough. XIV. The church of Rome says, that the Scriptures are dark and
obscure: the blind man finds fault with the darkness of the sun: If the
Scriptures appear to any to be obscure, the fault is not in the Scriptures,
but in the blindness of the mind of him which reads and hears them. XV.
Lastly, pardons open a gap to all licentiousnes: therefore they agree to man's
corrupt nature: for who almost will not sin, when he may get a pardon for his
sins, for a little piece of money, as twenty shillings or four nobles? And
what is it but cosonage to sell pardons which shall be in force many years
after the end of the world as the Pope does.

It is natural to a man to serve God in certain ceremonies, without the power
of godliness: and this service is prescribed by the religion of the Church of
Rome, F^^ Ac^. ^^ ^ eg^^
which stands only in outward and corporal ceremonies, as the outward
succession of Bishops, garments, vestures, gestures, colors, choice of meat,
difference of days, times, and places, hearing, seeing, saying, touching,
tasting, numbering of beads, gilding and worshipping of images, building
Monasteries, rising at midnight, silence in cloisters, abstaining from flesh
and white meat. Fasting in Lent, keeping Imber days, hearing Mass and divine
service, seeing and adoring the body in form of bread, receiving holy water
and holy bread, creeping to the cross, carrying Palms, taking ashes, bearing
Candles, Pilgrimages going, censing, kneeling, knocking, altars, superaltars,
candlestickes, pardons: In orders, crossing, anointing, shauing, forswearing
marriage: In baptism, salting, crossing, spatling, exorcising, washing of
hands: At Easter, confession, penance, dirge, satisfaction, and in receiving
with beards new shaven, to imagine a body where they see none: and though he
were there present to be seen, yet the outward seeing and touching of him, of
it self without faith conduces no more then it did the Jews. At Rogation
days to carry banners, to follow the Cross, to walk about the fields:
After Pentecost to go about with Corpus Christi play. At Hollowmasse to watch
in the Church, to say Dirge or commendation, and to ring for all souls, to pay
tithes truly, to give to the hie Altar. And if a man will be a priest, to say
Mass and Mattens, to serve the Saint of that day, and to lift well over the
head. In sickness to be anneled, to take his rites, after his death to have
funeral and Obites said for him, and to be rung for at his Funeral, months
mind, and year mind. This is the sum of the catholic religion, standing
in bodily actions, not in any motions or work of the holy Ghost, working in
the heart.

The moral law containing perfect righteousness, is flat opposite to man^
corrupt nature: therefore whatsoever Religion shall repeal and make of none
effect the commandments of the moral law, that same religion must needs
join hands with the corruption of nature, and stand for the maintenance of it.
This does the religion of the Church of Rome: it may be it does not plainly
repeal them, yet in effect it does: Mat. 15.^
and if it shall frustrate but any one point of any one commandment, yea, the
whole law thereby is made in vain. 1. The first commandment requires, that
we have the true Iehoua for our only God: Church of Rome makes other gods
beside this true God: it makes the body of Christ to be god, because they hold
it may be in many places, in heaven, in earth at the same time, which thing is
only proper to God. It makes every Saint departed to be God, because it
holds that Saints do hear us now being upon the earth, and that they know
our thoughts when we pray to them, which none but the true God can do. It
makes the Pope to be God, and that in plain words. Dec. did. 69. satis
euidenter.
Pope Nicholas says, Constat, summum Pontificem a pio principe Constantino Deum
appellari: It is well known that the Pope of the godly prince Constantine was
called God. Again, in Extraua. Ioh. 22. cum inter. in glossa.
the extra^agants of the same Cannon law it is written, Dominus Deus noster
Papa, Our Lord God the Pope. And again, Council. Later. sess. 4.
Christopher Marcellus said to the Pope, Tu es alter Deus in terris, Thou art
another God upon earth: and the Pope took it to himself. As the Pope in
plain words is made God, so the power given to him declares the same. Extra
de mayor. and ^bedientia.
He can make holy that which is unholy, and justify the wicked and pardon
sins: Did. 34. can. lect. in gloss. did. ^2. can. Presbit.
he may dispense contrary to the saying of ^n Apostle: he can change the
nature of things, and of nothing make somewhat. What is all this, but to place
the Pope in Gods room, and to rob the Lord of his Majesty?

Again, the Church of Rome makes Marie the mother of Jesus to be as God. In
the Breuiary reformed and published at the commandment of Pius the V. In
officio par. beatae Mariae, ad Matut.
she is called a Goddess, in express words: and she is further termed the
Queen of heaven, the Queen of the world, the gate of heaven, the mother of
grace and mercy: Yea she is far exalted above Christ, and he in regard of
her is made but a poor underling in heaven: for papists in their service unto
her pray on this manner, saying: Show thy self to be a mother: and cause thy
son to receive our prayers: set free the captives and give light to the
blind. Breuiar. refor. in festo Exalt. Cru^is.
Lastly, the very cross is made as a God. For they salute it by the name of
their only hope and pray it to increase justice to the godly, and to give
sinners pardon. Wherefore the Church of Rome beside the one true God
distinguished into three persons, the father, the son, and the holy ghost,
makes also many other, and so in truth has repealed his first commandment.

And they have very plainly repealed the second commandment, in that they
teach it lawful to make images of the true God, and to worship him in them.
For the flat contrary is the very scope of this commandment: namely that no
image must be made of the true Iehoua: nor any worship be performed unto him in
an image: which appears thus. In Deutronomie Moses makes a large Commentary
of this commandment, and this very point he sets down expressly, saying,
Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16.
take heed to your selves: for ye saw no image in the day that the Lord spoke
unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire: that ye corrupt not your
selves, and make you a graven image, or representation of any figure, etc. His
argument I set down thus. As God appeared in mount Horeb, so he is to be
conceived and represented: but he appeared in no image in mount Horeb, only
his voice was heard: therefore he is not to be conceived or represented in any
image: but men are to be content, if they may hear his voice. Again, that sin
to which the people of Israel were specially given, even that does the Lord
specially forbid: but to this were the people of Israel specially given, not so
much to make images of false gods, as to make images of the true God, and to
worship him in them: which I prove thus.

In the book of Judges it is said, that the children of Israel did wickedly in
the sight of the Lord, Judge. 2. ^0.
and served Baalim. Now these Baalims, what are they? Surely Idols resembling
the true God: as the Prophet Hosea declares. Hos. 2. 12.
And at that day says the Lord, thou shall call me Ishai, and shall call me no
more Baali. Here it appears that the Israelites meaning was not to worship a
false god, but the true God in Baalim. And Aaron when he made the golden calfe
proclaimed that the next day should be holy day, Eoxd. 32.5.
not of any false god, but of the Lord that brought them out of Egypt. The
prophet Esaias after that he had set forth Gods majesty very worthily, Esa. 40.
18.
he comes in with this conclusion: To whom the^ will ye like^ God? or what
similitude will ye set up of him? which declares that the Jews after the manner
of the Gentiles ran a whoring after Idols, that is, Images not only of false
gods, but also of the true God. I conclude therefore as I began, that the
Church of Rome, by maintaining images, has repealed this commandment.

Neither does it show less favor to the third commandment: which also is
repealed. 1. Cor. 1^. 28.
First, in that they teach men to give the glory which is proper to God, to
some thing else: it is proper to God after the day of judgment to be all in
all: this they give to Marie, saying that she is all in all.

It is proper to Christ in respect of other creatures to be a light lightening
all that come into the world, yet they pray to Marie to give light to the
blind. Ioh. 10.9. Breuiar. and miss. and refor^^.
It is proper to Christ to be the redeemer of mankind, and this work of
redemption is ascribed to Marie, whom the Papists call their hope, their joy,
their med^atresse, a medicine for the diseased, a defense from the enemy, a
friend in the hour of death. Again, they make S. Martin a priest according to
the order of Melchisedech, which is proper to Christ.

Secondly, they hold that the people is to be barred from the reading of the
Scriptures, unless it be in an unknown tongue, and so they maintain
ignorance and the profaning of Gods name, for the preaching of the word, and
therefore also the hearing, learning, reading, searching of it, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
is the glorifying of the word, and so the glorifying of Gods name.

The fourth commandment is repealed in that they require that their feast
days should be kept as solemnly as the Lords sabbath: For they must be kept in
all honor and comlines: Con. M^gunt. c. 36. 37.

Matiscon. 2. c. 1.2.


and men must rest from their labors, from morning to evening, as on the
Sabbath: whereas contrariwise the Lord has given permission to his servants
to labor the six days, so be it, on the seventh they will rest from the
works of their callings, and do the works of the spirit.

They repeal the fifth commandment in that they teach that their Clergy has
an immunitie, and therefore is not bound to perform obedience to magistrates,
for so they have decreed, Matisc. con. c. 7.9.8.
that Clearkes are to be judged only of Bishops: and that they are only to
reskue them from injuries. Again, that the Bishop must not be judged of the
secular power: and that the Pope himself owes no subjection to Kings,
Princes, Emperors, but has power to make them, and to put them down at his
pleasure. But S. Paul for the maintaining of the fifth commandment, bids every
soul be subject to the higher powers: and therefore the pope with his clergy
(as Chrysostom has expounded it) must be subject to civil magistrates, unless
they will exclude themselves out of the number of men, for Paul speaks to all.

Against the sixth commandment they have decreed asyles for murderers, plainly
permitting them which fear authority, Matis. 2.^.^.
to have safety in the lap of their mother the Church. Thus they annihilate
Gods commandment, yea and more then this, whither tends all that they teach
but to the very murdering of souls? For example, salvation by works of grace,
is one of their chief points. But that man that is persuaded that he must be
saved by his works, must also put his trust in them, and he which trusts to
his works is accursed before god. Ier. 17.5.
For cursed is that man that trusts in man, whether it be himself or other.

The seventh Commandment is repealed diverse ways. First, in that they
maintain the occasions of Adultery and fornication: namely, the vow of
single life both in men and women, when as they have not received the gift from
God to be continent: which gift when they want, and yet are bound to single
life, they must needs break out into much loosenes. This sin made Mantuan,
Palingenius and Petrarch to cry out against the Church of Rome. Again, ^elog.
5. lib. 4.5.9.
some Papists defend the toleration of the stews in Rome, for the avoiding of
greater evils. And in the Council of Trent, chastity and Priests marriage are
made opposite, so that marriage with them is a filthy thing, although God has
ordained it for the avoiding of fornication in all. Sess. 24. c. 6.
Furthermore, that which is most abominable and proves the Church of Rome to
be an Antichristian Church: they maintain marriages within the degrees
forbidden both by the law of nature, and of gods word. For in the table of
consanguinitie they which are placed in the transuerse unequal line cannot
marry, because they are as Parents and children: yet if they be distant four
degrees on diverse sides from the common stock they may marry together by the
Canon law. As for example, the graund uncle may marry his sisters nephews
niece, Greg. cap. 8. de consang. a^unculus maximus abnepotis.
a thing very filthy in nature, considering that a man cannot marry with any
honesty his sisters child. To go further, by Gods word they which are distant
four degrees in the transuerse equal line, are not forbidden to marry
together, as cousin germans. Thus the daughters of Zelophehad were married to
their fathers brothers sons: this example (as I take it) may be a warrant of
the lawfulnes of this marriage: Yet the Canon law utterly condemns this
marriage of cousin germans, and the marriage of their children after the^,
though they be eight degrees dista^t. Number. 36.11.
Thus the Church of Rome does overthwart the Lord: where he gives liberty,
they restrain it; and when he restrains men, then they give liberty.

They repeal the 8. commandment by their spiritual merchandise in which they
sell those things which are not to be sold, as Crosses to dead men, Images,
prayers, the sound of bells, remission of sins, and the merits by which men may
come to the kingdom of heaven: their shaueling priests will do no duty without
they be fed with money; hence comes the proverb, no penny no pater noster.

They teach men to bear false witness, and so to sin against the ninth
commandment, in that they hold that Marie is the Queen of heaven: whereas
indeed she is no Queen, but does continually cast down her crown before
Christ with the rest of the Saints. Re^. 7.12. and 5.10.
And a man may as well bear false witness in speaking too much, as in speaking
too little.

In the tenth commandment the first motions that go before consent are
forbidden: otherwise there shall be no difference between it and the rest. For
they also are spiritual, and forbid inward motions: but the difference is that
they forbid only the motions that go with consent. Now the papists say, that
these motions are no sin properly unless consent follow: and therefore they in
express words repeal this commandment. For if concupiscence and the first
motions be no sins properly, then there need no prohibition of them.

The fourth Argument.
THat religion which is contrary to it self, is only a mere invention of
man: the religion of the Church of Rome is quite contrary to it self:
therefore it is only an invention of man: which if it be true, as well a
Reprobate as any other may perform the things required in it.

The Proof.
THe proposition is most true, because it is a privilege of Gods word, and so
of the true religion gathered forth of it, to be consonant to it self in all
points: which properly no doctrines nor writings beside can have. The
assumption may be made manifest by an induction of particular examples.

I. The Church of Rome says, that men are saved by grace: and again it says,
Romans 11.6.
that men are saved by works. A flat contradiction. For Paul says, if
election be of grace, it is no more of works: or else were grace no more grace:
but if it be of works, it is no more grace: for else were work no more work.
Answer is made, Rhem. Test. upon Romans 11.6. Ephesians. 2. 8,9.
that in this place Paul speaks of works of nature, which indeed are
contrary to grace, but not of works of regeneration, which are not contrary to
grace. This answer is false: for Paul in a like place unto this opposes grace
and works of regeneration. Ye are saved by grace (says he) through faith, and
that not of your ^elues: for it is the gift of God, not of works, least any
should boast himself: for we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, that we should walk in them. Now let the Church of Rome speak
what are the works of which any man may most of all boast? And what are the
works for the doing of which we must be fashioned anew in Christ Jesus?
Assuredly they must be the works of regeneration, dipped and dyed in the blood
of Christ (as they speak:) wherefore it is evident, that Paul's meaning is to
conclude, that if we be saved by grace, we cannot be saved by works of
regeneration. II. The Church of Rome confuteth and condemns in Councels, and
derideth this doctrine that we teach that men are to be justified by the
imputation of the righteousness of Christ: which righteousness is not in us but
in Christ. And the Rhemists call it a fantastical justice, a new no-iustice.
Rhem. Test. Rem. 2.13. Rhem. Test. Col. 2.24.
But herein that Church is contrary to it self: for it defends works of
supererogation, and works of satisfaction of one man for another: and their
ground is, because the faithful are all members of one body, and have
fellowship one with another, and therefore one may satisfy for another. Hereby
it is plain, that the church of Rome most of al defends that imputation of
righteousness, which most of all it has oppugned. For when one man satisfies
for an other, the work of one man is imputed to another. But what? shall one
man satisfy for another, and shall not Christ by his righteousness satisfy for
us? shall God accept the work of one man for another, and not accept the
righteousness of Christ for us? Truly there is greater fellowship and
conjunction between the head and the members, then of the members among
themselves: because they are joined together by means of the head. III. It
holds that the guilt and fault of sin may be remitted by Christ: and yet
the temporal punishment of sin be vnremitted: but these are quite contrary.
Paul says, Romans ^.1.
there is now no comdemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Yet if a man
were punished for his sin after he were in Christ, and had the fault of sin
remitted, some condemnation should now remain him. And David says, Blessed is
the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin: Psalm. 32.1.
therefore he to whom the Lord imputes no sin, has not only the guilt of
sin, but also the punishment of his sin remitted: otherwise he could not be
blessed but miserable. and this agrees not with gods justice, when the fault
is quite pardoned, and a man is guilty of no sin, that then any punishment
should be laid on. And S. Austin says, August. de verb. Domi. Ser. 37.
that Christ by taking upon him the punishment of sin, and not taking upon him
the fault, took away both the punishment and the fault. Wherefore this
opinion, that Christ has taken away the guilt of sin, overthrows all
Satisfactions and Purgatory, because the fault and guilt being taken away,
all punishment for sin is also taken away. IV. Transubstantiation is a
monster, standing on manifold contradictions. First, it makes Christ's body to
be in many places: an evident contradiction. For it is of the nature and
essence of a body to be in one place only: which I prove thus. A body is a
magnitude, a magnitude is a continued quantity, a continued quantity cannot
be but in one place: therefore a body cannot be but in one place. In his
argument the doubt is only of the last part: which undoubtedly is most true.
For it is called a continued quantity, because his parts are continued and
knit together the one with another in a common term or bond, as a line by a
point, a plane and his parts by a line, a solid by a Superficies or plane.
Now these points can in no wise be continued, unless every one of them keep
one only special place. For examples sake: suppose the plane, a, b, c, d, to
be divided into three parts, I, k, l, by two lines, e, g, and f, h, which do
both divide the three parts and continue the^ the one with the other. Now I
say, that every one of the parts may be continued with his next fellow, it is
necessary that every one of them should have one special and distinct place.
That the first place of the plane, i, may be continued with, k, it must be
situated only there where it is, and no where else: for if it shall be situate
else where, as in the place m, then it cannot be continued with k. Now then, if
the parts must of necessity have their own particular place only, then the
whole figure, a, b, c, d, must also be only in one place. Arist. Categ. cap.
de qua^t.
And this is that which the prince of Philosophers teaches, that every
magnitude has his parts sited in some one place, one by another, so that a man
may say of them, here it is, and there it is not. To conclude therefore, this
must needs agree to a body and to the parts of it, to be in one only place
alone. So that the Church of Rome when it says that Christ's body is in many
places: in effect they say, that Christ's body is no body: for if it be a
body, it is only in one place: and if it be in many places, it is no body.
They object that God is omnipotent. True indeed, but there be some things,
the doing of which agrees not with Gods power, as to make contradicentia,
things contradictorie to be both true: of which sort these are. For, that
Christ's body is a true body, and that it is in many places at once, are
flat contrary: beccause (as has bin showed) it is essential to all
magnitudes to be in one place, and therefore to a body. And God cannot take
away that which is essential to a thing, the essence remaining whole. 2.
Again, transubstantiation makes the Accidents of bread and wine to remain
without the substance. Here also is another contradiction as impossible as the
former: for it is a common saying in schools, Accident is esse, est inesse. It
is of the essence of an Accident to be in the substance. Now therefore, if the
Accidents be, there is also the bread and wine: and if there be no substance
of bread or wine, neither can there be any accidents. 3. It holds that bread
is turned into the body of Christ, and therefore it must needs hold, that
Christ's body is made of bakers bread, and yet it holds and teaches that
Christ's body is only made of the seed of Marie. quite overthrowing the
former Transubstantiation. V. It teaches, that a man must always doubt of his
salvation: and likewise it teaches, that in praying we are to call GOD father,
which are things quite contrary. For who can truly call GOD father, unless
he have the spirit of adoption, Romans 8. 16.
and be assured that he is the child of God? For if a man shall call god
father, and yet in his heart doubt whether he be his father or not, he plays
the dissembling hypocrite: wherefore to doubt of salvation, and to say Our
father, etc. in truth are contrary. VI. The Church of Rome makes prayer to
be one of the chief means to satisfy for sins. Can. Tres sant. de pena^
did. 1.
But prayer indeed is an asking of pardon for sin: Now asking of pardon and
satisfaction for sin are contrary: therefore by the judgment of the Papists,
Lumb. lib. 4. did. 16.
prayer which is a satisfaction is no satisfaction. And indeed let us consider
what madness is contained in this popish divinity: the poor beggar comes
very hungry to the rich man's door to crave his alms: Can. de qu^tis. die.
poenit. did. 3.
and straightwaies by his begging he will merit and deserve it. The same does
the papist, he prays very poorly for the thing which he wants, yet he
looks very proudly to merit no less then the kingdom of heaven by it. VII.
Doubting of salvation and hope cannot agree together, for hope makes a man not
to be ashamed, that is, it never disappointeth him of the thing which he
looks for. And therefore it is called the anchor of the soul both sure and
steadfast, which enters into that which is within the veil. Romans 5.5. Heb.
6.1^.
So that true hope and the certain assurance of salvation go together. VIII.
True prayer and justification by works cannot stand together. For he which
prays truly must be touched inwardly with a lively feeling of his own
misery, and of the want of that grace, whereof he stands in need. Now this
cannot be in the heart of that man that looks to merit the kingdom of heaven
by his works: for he that can do this may justly conceive somewhat of his
own excellency. IX. Papists teach, that it is great boldness to come
immediately unto God without the intercession of Saints: and therefore they use
to Breuiar. 1. and Missa. 1. refet. vbique
pray to Marie, that she would pray to Christ to help them: yet on the
contrary, when they have so done, they pray to God immediately, that he would
receive the intercession of Marie for them. And thus they are become
intercessors between Marie and God. Yea when they offer up Christ, praying God
to accept their gifts and sacrifices, the humble priest that will not pray to
God but by the mediation of Saints, is then a mediator between Christ Jesus and
God the father. X. It holds, that in the mass the Priest offers up Christ
to his father an unbloody sacrifice. This is a thing impossible: for if Christ
in the mass be sacrificed for sin, then he must die and his blood must be
shed, Heb. 9.22. And in the Scriptures these two sayings (Christ is dead,
Christ is offered up in Sacrifice) are all one. So then, the Papist when he
supposes that there may be an unbloody sacrifice, in effect he says thus
much: There is a sacrifice, which is no sacrifice. And it is not possible that
a bloody sacrifice should be offered in an unbloody manner. XI. In the Canon
of the mass, the Church of Rome prays on this wise. We humbly beseech thee
most merciful father, by Jesus Christ thy son and our Lord, that that thou
would accept these gifts and oblations and these holy Sacrifices, which thy
Church offer to thee, etc. where first they offer up Christ to God the father
in the name of Christ, and so they make Christ to be his own mediator.

Again, they desire God to bless and to accept his own son: for they offer
up Christ. If they say he needs now the blessing of his father, they make
Christ a weak and imperfect Christ: if he need not the blessing of his father,
their prayer is needelesse. Also they desire God to accept not one gift or one
sacrifice, but in the plural number, these gifts and sacrifices: whereas they
hold that Christ's body is one only body, and therefore but one sacrifice. And
thus they are at variance with themselves.

XII. Papists, in word they say, that they believe and put their trust in God:
yet whereas they look to be saved by their works, they set the confidence of
their hearts in truth upon their own doings. XIII. They put such holiness in
matrimony, that they make it one of their 7. Sacraments, which The. Test. page
523.
confer grace to the partakers of them: yet they forbid their Clergy to
marry, Papa Syricius. Decret. epist. Sess. 24. c. 9.
because to live in marriage is to live according to the flesh, and the
Council of Trent opposes marriage and chastity. XIV. It teaches that souls
kept in purgatory, may be redeemed by Sacrifices and Suffrages. Against this,
is a Canon of their law taken out of Saint Hierome, Can. in present. 11. 13.
q. ^.

Can. legatur 4. q. 1.


we know that in this life we may help one another, either by prayers, or by
good counsel: but when we shall come before the judgment seat of Christ,
neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noe, may entreat for any: but every man is to
bear his own burden. And according to another Canon going under the name of
Gelasius Bishop of Rome. Either there is no Purgatory, or the souls which go
thither, shall never return. XV. And to conclude, the most points of their
religion are contrary to their Canons, as by searching may appear in these
examples. Con. fatendum. 13. q. 2.
1 The dead cannot hear the prayers of them which call upon him. C. Beati. 2.
q. 7.
2 Peter and Paul were two of the chief Apostles, and it is hard to say, which
was above the other. C. de Capitulis did. 16.
3 Leo the fourth living in the year ^46. acknowledged Lotharius the Emperor
for his prince. C. nullus did. 99.
4 No Bishop may be called universal. C. legimus did. 93.
5 The Church of Rome has no more authority over other Churches, then other
Churches over it. C. legimus. did. 93.

C. Olim. did. 95.


6 A Priest and a Bishop were in times past all one. C. verbum 6. magna.

C. Conuertimini de penit. did. 1.


7 The Pope has no power to give or sell pardons. C. quod di^it. did. 4.1.
8 There can be no merit by fasting, or abstinence from flesh. C. luminosa. 18.
q. 25.
9 The mass is nothing but the form of divine sacrific^.

By this which has been said, it does in part appear, that the religion of,
the Church of Rome is repugnant to it self, and it could not so be, if it were
from the word of God.

A Corollarie gathered out of the former assertion.
1. A man being endued with no more grace then that which he may obtain by
the religion of the Church of Rome, is still in the state of damnation.

A DIALOGVE CONTAINING THE CONFLICTS between Satan and the Christian.
Satan. OVile helbound, thou art my slave and my vassal, why then shakest
thou off my yoke?


Christian. By nature I was thy vassal, but Christ has redeemed me.


Satan. Christ redeemeth no reprobates such as thou art.


Christian. I am no reprobate.


Satan. Thou art a reprobate, for thou shall be condemned.


Christian. Lucifer, to pronounce damnation, belongs to God alone: thou art
no judge, it is sufficient for thee to be an accuser.


Satan. Though I cannot condemn thee, yet I know God will condemn thee.


Christian. Yea but God will not condemn me.


Satan. Go too let us try the matter. Is not God a Lord and a King over
thee? and may he not therefore give thee a law, to keep, and punish thee with
hell fire, if thou break it?


Christian. Yes.


Satan. And have thou kept the law of this thy Lord and King?


Christian. No.


Satan. Let us proceed further: Is not the same Lord also a most righteous
judge? And therefore a most sharp revenger of sin?


Christian. Yes truly.


Satan. Why then will thou flatter thy self thou hypocrite: God cannot wink
at thy sins, except he should be unjust. Wherefore there is no remedy, thou
art sure to be damned: hell was provided for thee, and now it gapeth to devour
thee.


Christian. There is remedy enough to deliver me from condemnation. For God is
not only (as thou affirmest) a Lord and a judge, but also a saving, and a most
merciful father.


Satan. But thou firebrand of hell fire, and child of perdition, look for no
mercy at Gods hands, because thou art a most grievous sinner: for, 1 Original
sin runs wholly over thee, as a loathsome botch or leprosy. 2 Thy mind
knows not the things that be of God. 3 In the law of God thou art stark
blind, saving that thou have a few principles of it to make thee inexcusable. 4
The Gospel is foolishnes and madness unto thee: thou make no better account of
it then of thine own dream. 5 Thy conscience is corrupt, because it
flattereth thee, and excuses thy sin. 6 Thy memory keeps and remembers
nothing, but that which is against Gods word: but things abominable and wicked,
it keeps long. 7 Thy will has no inclination to that which is good, but
only to sin and wickedness. 8 Thy affections are set only on wickedness: they
are as mighty giants and princes in thee, they have thee at commandment.
Remember, that for very anger thou have bin sick: that the lust of thy flesh
has driven thee to madness: forget not thy Atheism, thy contempt of Gods word,
thy inward pride, thy envy, hatred, malice, thy covetousness, and infinite
other wicked desires, which have led thee captive, and made thee outrageous in
all kind of naughtines. 9 Thy actual sins committed partly in secret, partly
in public, are most filthy and most infinite. Remember how in such a place,
at such a time, thou did commit fornication: in another place thou did
steal, etc. God saw this I warrant thee: yea, all thy sins are written in
his book: wherefore thou cursed wretch, all hope of mercy is cut off from
thee.



Christian. Isa. 1.18.
But Gods mercy far exceeds all these my sins: and I can not be so
infinite in sinning, Act. 1.23. ^8.
as God is infinite in mercy and pardoning.


Satan. Dare thou presume to think of Gods mercy? why, the least of thy
sins deserves damnation. 1. Tim. 1.15.



Christian. Ps. 103.11. 12,13.
None of my sins can fear me, or dismay me. Christ has borne the full wrath
and vengeance of his Father upon the cross, even for me, that I might be
delivered from condemnation, Isa. 53.2,3, 4.5.
which was due unto me.


Satan. If Gods purpose were not to condemn thee, persuade thy self, he
would never lay so many afflictions and crosses on thee, as he does. What is
this want of good name? this weakness and sickness of thy body? these
terrors of the mind? this dullness and frowardnes of thy heart? what are all
these (I say) and many other evils, but the beginnings and certain flashings
of the fire of hell?


Christian. Heb. 12.6^ 9. 10.
Nay, rather my afflictions are lively testimonies of my salvation. For God as a
loving father, partly by them, as with scourges chasteneth my disobedience, 1.
Pet. ^.21.
and brings me into order: partly conformeth me unto my Savior Christ, Genesis
42. 21.
and so by little and little, lays open to me mine own sins, that I may
dislike my self and hate them: 1. Cor. 11. 12.
and makes me to renounce the world, thy eldest son, and stirs me up to
call upon him, and to pray earnestly with groans and sighs, Romans 8.26.
which I am not able to express with any words as I feel them.


Satan. Thy afflictions are heavy, and comfortless, therefore they can not
be arguments of Gods favor.


Christian. Indeed their nature is to bring grief and heaviness to the soul,
but I have had joy in the midst of my afflictions, Romans 5. 8,3.
and strength sufficient to bear them, Romans 8.28.
and after them have bin many ways bettered, which befalls to none of the
wicked: and for that cause, it is a great persuasion to me that I shall not be
damned with the wicked world, Ps. 119.71.
but in spite of all thy power, pass from death to everlasting life.


Satan. After these thy manifold afflictions, thou must suffer death, which is
most terrible, and a very entrance into hell.


Christian. Death has lost his sting by Christ's death: and unto me it shall be
nothing else but a passage unto everlasting life.


Satan. Admit thou shall be delivered from hell by Christ, what will this
avail thee, considering that thou shall never come to the kingdom of heaven?
for Christ's death only delivers thee from death eternal, it cannot advance
thee to everlasting life.


Christian. I am now at this time a member of Christ's kingdom, and after this
life shall reign with him for ever in his everlasting kingdom.


Satan. Thou never did fulfill the law, Romans 5. 8,3, 4.
therefore thou can not come into the kingdom of heaven.


Christian. Christ has perfectly fulfilled every part of the law for me: and
by this his obedience imputed unto me, I my self do keep the law.


Satan. Be it so, for all this, thou art far enough from the kingdom of
heaven, into which no unclean thing shall ever enter: then, although that
Christ has suffered death, and fulfilled the law for thee; yet thou art in
part unclean: thy cursed nature and the seeds of sin are yet remaining in
thee.


Christian. Christ in the virgins womb was perfectly sanctified by the holy
Ghost: Romans 2. 3. Ioh. 16. 1^.
and this perfect holiness of his humane nature is imputed to me: even as Iaacob
put on Esaus garments to get his fathers blessing: so I have put on the
righteousness of Christ, as a long white robe covering my sins, and making me
appear perfectly righteous, even before Gods judgment seat.


Satan. Indeed God has made promise unto mankind of all these mercies and
benefits in Christ: but the condition of this promise is faith, which thou
want, and therefore can not make any account, that Christ's sufferings,
Christ's fulfilling the law, Ioh. 3.14, 15
Christ's perfect holiness, can do thee any good.


Christian. I have true saving faith.


The conflicts of Satan with the strong Christian.
Satan. THou say that thou have true faith, but I shall sift thee and
disprooue thee.


Christian. The gates of hell shall never prevail against my faith, do what
thou can.


Satan. Tell me then, do thou think that all the world shall be saved?


Christian. No.


Satan. What, shall some be saved, and some condemned?


Christian. So says the word of God.


Satan. Thou then art persuaded that God is true even in his merciful
promises, and that he will save some men, as Peter and Paul, and David, etc.
and this is the only belief, by which thou will be saved.


Christian. Nay, this I believe, and more too, that I particularly am in the
number of those men which shall be saved by the merit of Christ's death and
passion: and this is the belief that saves me.


Satan. It may be thou art persuaded that God is able to save thee: but that
God will save thee, that is, that he has determined to advance this thy body,
and this thy soul into his kingdom, and that he is most willing to perform
it in his good time; herein thou wauerest and doubtest.


Christian. Nay Satan, Job. 1. 12,13 Ioh. 6.35.54 Mark. 9.23.
I in mine own heart am fully persuaded, that I shall be saved, and that
Christ is specially my redeemer: and (O Lord) for Christ's sake, help thou my
doubting and unbelief.


Satan. This thy full persuasion is only a fantasy, and a strong
imagination of thine own head: it goes not with thee as thou think.


Christian. It is no imagination, but truth which I speak. For me thinks I am
as certain of my salvation as though my name were registered in the Scriptures
(as David's and Paul's are) to be an elect vessel of God: 2. Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1.
14. Romans 8.18.
and this is the testimony of the holy spirit of Jesus Christ, assuring me
inwardly of my adoption, and making me with boldness and confidence in Christ,
to pray unto god the Father.


Satan. Still thou dreamest and imaginest, thou love and likest thy self,
and therefore thou think the best of thy self.


Christian. Act. 1 3.9. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
Yea, but God of his goodness has brought forth such tokens of faith in me,
that I cannot be deceived. I. I am displeased with my self for my manifold
sins, in which sometime I have delighted and bathed my self, Romans 7.15.24.
II. I purpose never to commit them again, if God give me strength, as I trust
he will. III. I have a very great desire to be doing those things which God
commands. IV. Those that be the children of God: if I do but hear of them,
I love them with my heart, and wish unto them as to my self. 1. Ioh. 3.14. V.
My heart leapeth for gladness, when I hear of the preaching of the word. VI.
I long to see the coming of Christ Jesus, that an end may be made of sinning,
and of displeasing God. Apoc. 22.70. VII. I feel in my heart the fruits of the
spirit, joy, love, peace, gentleness, meeknes, patience, temperance: the works
of the flesh I abhor them, fornication, adultery, uncleanness, wantonness,
idolatry, strife, envy, anger, drunkenness, bibbing and quaffing, and all such
like. Gal. 5. 19,20,22.


All these cannot proceed from thee, Satan, or from my flesh, but only from
faith which is wrought in me by Gods holy spirit.


Satan. If this were so, God would never suffer thee to sin as thou do.


Christian. Romans 7.15. Mat. 26.65. 72.74,75.
I shall sin as long as I live in this world, I am sure of it; because I am
taught to ask remission of my sins continually. But the manner of my sinning
now is otherways then it has been in times past. I have sinned heretofore
with full purpose and consent of will; but now doubtless, I do not. Before I
commit any sin, I do not go to the practicing of it with deliberation, as
the carnal man does, who takes care to fulfill the lusts of the flesh: but if
I do it, Romans 13. 14.
it is flat beside my mind and purpose: in the doing of any sin, I would not
do it, my heart is against it, and I hate it, and yet by the tyranny of my
flesh being overcome I do it: afterward, when it is committed, I am grieved
and displeased at my self, and do earnestly with tears ask at Gods hand
forgiveness of the same sin.


Satan. Indeed, this is very true in the children of God: but thou art sold
under sin and with great pleasure do commit sin, and love it with thy
whole heart: otherwise, thou would not fall to sin again after
repentance, and commit even one and the same sin, so often as thou do.
Thou hypocrite, this thy behavior turns all the favor of God from thee.


Christian. Indeed it is dangerous to fall again into the same sin after
repentance: yet it is the order of the Prophets to call men to repentance which
have fallen from the fear of God, Isa. 1.8. Ier. 2.1.
and from the repentance which they professed: and God in thus calling them,
puts them in hope of obtaining mercy. And the law had sacrifices offered
every day for the sins of all the people, and for particular men, both for
their ignorances, and their voluntary sins: which signifies, that God is
ready to forgive the sins of his children though they sin often. Genesis 12.
14, 15. Genesis 20. 2,3. Genesis 42. 25.
Abraham twice lied and swore that Sara was not his wife. Joseph swear twice by
the life of Pharao. David committed adultery often, because he took unto him
Bathsheba, Vriahs wife, and also kept six wives, and ten concubines. Gods will
is, that men forgive till seventy seven times: and therefore he will have much
more mercy. And for my part, so often as I shall fall into the same sin, so often
I shall have Christ my advocate and intercessour to the Father for me, who will
not damn me for the infirmity which he finds in me, I will abstain from
external iniquity, and I will not make my members servants unto sin: and so
long I trust my imperfections shall have no power to damn me: for Christ's
perfection is reputed to be mine by faith, which I have in his blood: 1. Ioh.
21. Dan. 9.6.
God is not displeased, if my body be sick and subject to diseases: no more is
he displeased at the disease and sickness of the soul. A natural father will
not slay the body of his child, when he is sick, and abhors comfortable
meats: Romans 8.28.
and my heavenly father will not condemn my soul, although through the
infirmity of faith, and the weakness of the spirit, I commit sin, and often
loath his heavenly word, the food of my soul. Nay, (which is a strange thing)
I know it by experience, that God has turned my filthy sins to my great
profit, and to the amendment of my life: like as the good Physician, of rank
poison is able to make a sovereign medecin to preserve life.


Satan. Well, be it so, that now thou art in the state of grace, yet thou
shall not continue so: but shall before death depart from Christ.


Christ. I know I am a member of Christ's mystical body: I feel in my self
the heavenly power, and virtue of my head Christ's Jesus: and for this cause I
can not perish, but shall continue for ever, and reign in heaven after this
life with him.


The conflicts of Satan with the weak Christian.
Satan. Thy mind is full of ignorance and blindness, thy heart is full of
obstinacy, rebellion, and frowardnes against God: thou art wholly unfit for
any good work; wherefore thou have no faith, neither can thou be justified,
and accepted before God.


Christian. If I have but one drop of the grace of God, and if my faith be no
more then a little grain of mustard seed, Mat. 27.28.
it is sufficient for me: God requires not perfect faith, but true faith.


Satan. Yea, but thou have no faith at all.


Christian. I have had faith.


Satan. Thou never had true faith: for in time past, when according to thine
opinion thou did believe, then thou had nothing but a shadow of faith and a
foolish imagination, which all hypocrites have.


Christian. Psalm. 77.5.
I will put my trust in God for ever, and his former mercies shewmed me
heretofore strengthen me now in this my weakness. 1 He created me when I was
nothing. 2 He created me a man, when he might have made me an ugly toad. 3 He
made me of comely body, and of good discretion, whereas he might have made me
ugly, and deformed, frantic and mad. 4 I was borne in the days of
knowledge, when I might have bin borne in the time of ignorance and
superstition. 5 I was borne of Christian parents, but God might have given me
either Turks or Jews, or some other sauadge people for my parents. 6 I might
have perished in my mothers womb, but he has preserved me, and provided for
me by his providence even unto this hour. 7 Soon after my birth, God might
have cast me into hell, but contrariwise I was baptized, and so received the
seal of his blessed covenant. 8 I have had by Gods goodness some sorrow for my
sins past, and have called on him, in hope and confidence that he would hear
me. 9 God might have concealed his word from me, but I have heard the
ple^tifull preaching of it: I understand it, and have received comfort by it.
10 Lastly, at this time God might power his full wrath on me: which he does
not, but mercifully makes me to feel mine own wants, that I might be
humbled, and give all glory unto him for his blessings. Wherefore, there is no
cause why I should be disquieted: but I will trust still in the Lord, and
depend on him, as I have done.



Satan. Thou feel no grace of the holy Ghost in thee, nor any true tokens
of faith, but thou have a lively sense of the rebellion of thy heart, and of
thy lewd and wretched conversation: therefore thou can not put any confidence
in Christ's death and sufferings.


Christian. Psalm. 32. 1. 2. Cor. 5.21.
Yet I will hope against all hope, and although, according to mine own sense
and feeling, I want faith: yet I will believe in Jesus Christ, and trust to be
saved by him.


Satan. Though the children of God have bin in many perplexities, yet never
any of them have been in this case, in which thou art at this present.


Christian. Psalm. 73.22, 23. Romans 7. 12, 25.
Herein thou prouest thy self to be a lying spirit: for the prophet David says
of himself, that he was foolish, and as a beast before God: and yet he even
then trusted in God. And Paul was so led captive of sin, that he was not
able to do the good he would, but did the evil which he hated: and so in
great pensiuenes of heart, desired to be delivered from this world, that he
might be disburdened of his corrupt flesh.


Satan. Thou miserable wretch, do thou feel thy self graceless, and will thou bear the face of a Christian? and by thy hypocrisy offend God? as thou
art, so show thy self to the world.


Christian. Avoid Satan, Christ has vanquished, and overcome thee for my
cause, that I might also triumph over thee. I am no hypocrite: for whereas I
have had heretofore some testimony of my faith, at this time I am less moved,
though faith seem to be absent: like as a man may seem to be dead, both in
his own sense, and by the judgment of the physician, and yet may have life in
him: so faith may be, though always it do not appear.


Satan. But thou art a man stark dead in sin, God has now quite forsaken
thee: he has left thee unto me to be ruled: he has given me power over thee,
to bring thee to damnation: he will not have thee to trust in him any longer.


Christian. Strengthen me good Lord; remember thy merciful promises, that thou will revive the humble, Isa. 57.15.
and give life to them that are of a contrite heart.


Satan. These promises concern not thee, which have no humble and contrite,
but a froward, a rebellious heart.


Christian. Good Lord forget not thy former mercies: give an issue to these
temptations of mine enemy Satan. And you my brethren, which know my estate,
pray for me, that God would turn his favorable countenance toward me: Iam.
5.16.
for this I know, that the prayer of the righteous avails much, if it be
fervent.


HOW A MAN SHOULD APPLY ARIGHT the word of God to his own soul.
I.
EVery Christian contains in himself two natures, flat contrary one to
the other, the flesh and the spirit: and that he may become a perfect man in
Christ Jesus, his earnest endeavor must be, to tame, and subdue the flesh, and
to strengthen and confirm the spirit.

II
Answerable to these two natures, are the two parts of Gods word. First, the
Law, because it is the ministry of death, it fitly serves for the taming and
mastering of the rebellious flesh: and the Gospel containing the bountiful
promises of God in Christ, is as oil, to power into our wounds, and as the
water of life, to quench our thirsty souls: and it fitly serves for the
strengthening of the spirit.

III
Well then, art thou secure? Art thou prone to evil? Feel thou that thy
rebellious flesh carries thee captive unto sin? Look now only upon the
law of God, apply it to thy self, examine thy thoughts, thy words, thy deeds
by it: Romans 8. 1^.
pray unto God, that he would give thee the spirit of fear, that the law may
in some measure humble and terrify thee: Pr^^. 28.14.
for (as Solomon says) blessed is the man that fears always, but cursed is
he that hardneth his heart.

IV.
In the Law, these are most effectual meditations to humble and bridle the
Dan. 7.10. Ier. 17.1. Deuteronomy. 22.31
God is present, and his holy Angels, and that he is an eye-witnes, that he
takes a note of thy sin, and registreth it in a book. Think daily of thy
end: and know that God may strike thee with sudden death every moment: and
that, if then thou have not repented before that time, there is no hope of
salvation. Think on the sudden coming of our Savior Christ to judgment,
let it move thee continually to watch and pray. If these will not move thee,
think on this, that no creature in heaven or in earth, was able to pacify the
wrath of God for thy sins: but his own Son must come down from heaven,
out of his Fathers bosom, and must bear the curse of the law, even the full
wrath of his Father, for thee.

V.
When by these means thou art feared, and thy mind is disquieted in respect
of Gods judgment for thy sin: have recourse to the promises of mercy
contained in the old and new Testament. Is thy conscience stung with sin?
And does the law make thee feel it? With all speed run to the brazen
serpent Christ Jesus, look on him with the eye of faith, and presently thou
shall be healed of thy sting or wound. Job. 3.14.


VI.
When thou do meditate on the promises of the Gospel, diligently consider
plenteouslie. By Adam, came death to thee, and it is an entrance to hell: by
Apoc. 22.2.
which is within the heavenly Jerusalem. Fear no danger, be bold in Christ to
eat of the fruit, as God has commanded thee: it will quicken thee, and
revive thee being dead: thou can not do Satan a worse displeasure, then to
feed on the godly fruit of this tree, and to smell on the sweet leaves,
which it bears continually, that give such a refreshing savor.

VII.
Most men now a days, are secure and cold in the profession of the gospel,
though they have the plentiful preaching of it. And the reason is, because
they feel not in themselves the virtue and mighty operation of Gods word, to
renew them: and they can not feel it, because they do not apply the word
aright unto their own souls. Plasters, except they be applied in order and
time, and be laid upon the wound, though they be never so good, yet they can
not heal: and so it is with the word of God, and the parts of it, which
except they be used in order and time convenient, will not humble and revive
us, as their virtue is.

VIII.
The common Christian every where is faulty in this thing. Whereas he loves
himself, and wishes all good that may be to himself, he does usually apply
unto his own soul the gospel alone never regarding the law, or searching out
his sins by it. Tell him what ye will, his song is this: God is merciful,
God is merciful. By this means it comes to pass, that he leads a secure
life, and makes no conscience of covetousness, of usury, of deceit in his
trade, of lying, of swearing, of fornication, wantonness, intemperancie in
bibbing and quaffing, etc. But he plaieth the unskillful Chirurgian, he uses
healing plasters, before his poisoned and cankered nature have felt the power
and pain of a Corasiue. And it will never be well with him, until he take a
new course.

IX.
On the contrary part, many good Christians leave to apply the comfort of the
gospel to themselves, and only have regard to their own sins, and Gods
infinite vengeance. And even when Satan accuses them, they will not stick to
give ear to Satan, and also accuse themselves: and so they are brought into
fearful terrors, and often draw near to desperation.

X.
There is a third sort called Sectaries, who addict themselves to the opinion
of some man. These commonly never apply the law or the Gospel to themselves,
but their whole meditation is chiefly in the opinions of him whom they
follow. As they that follow Luther, few of them follow his Christian life:
they regard not that: but about consubstantiation and vbiquitie, about Images
and such like trumperie, they infinitely trouble themselves and all Europe too.

And in England there is a schismatical and indiscreet company, that would
seem to cry out for discipline, their whole talk is of it, and yet they
neither know it, nor will be reformed by it, and yet they are enemies to it:
as for the law of God, and the promises of the Gospel, they little regard:
they maintain vile sins in refusing to hear the reading or the preaching of
the word: and this is great contempt of Gods benefits and unthankfulness to
him. They are full of pride, thinking themselves to be full, when they are
empty: to have all knowledge when they are ignorant, and had need to be
catechized: the poison of Aspes is under their lips; they refuse not to
speak evil of the blessed servants of God. Well, do they above all things
seek the kingdom of GOD? then let them be sincere seekers of it: which they
shall do, if in seeking Christ's kingdom they seek the righteousness
thereof: unto which they can never come but by the applying of the threatenings
of the law, and the comforts of the gospel to their own consciences. But
whereas they seek the one and not the other, they give all men to understand
with what spirit they speak.

CONSOLATIONS FOR THE TROVBLED consciences of repentant Sinners.
Sinner. GOod sir, I know Esa. 50.4.
the Lord has given you the tongue of the learned, to be able to minister a
word in time to him that is weary: therefore I pray you help me in my misery.


Minister. Ah my good brother what is the matter with you? and what aile you?


Sinner. I lived a long time, the Lord he knows it, after the manner of the
world, in all the lusts of my filthy flesh, and then I was never troubled: but
it has plesed GOD of his mercy to touch my heart, and to send his own son
that good sheapheard Jesus Christ, to fetch me home to his own fold, even upon
his own neck: and since that time it is a wonder to see how my poor heart
has been troubled: my corruption so boyles in me and Satan will never let me
alone.


Minister. Your case is a blessed case: for not to be troubled of Satan, is to
be possessed of him: that is, to be held captive under Coloss. 1.13
the power of darkness, and to be a slave and vassal of Satan: for Lu. 11.24.
as long as the strong man keeps the hold, all things are is peace.
Contrariwise he that has received any sparkle of true faith, shall see Math.
16. 18.
the gates of hell, that is, the devil and his angels in their full strength^
to stand up against him, and to fight with an endless hatred for his final
confusion.


Sinner. But this my trouble of mind, has made me oftentimes fear least God
would reject me, and utterly deprive me of the kingdom of heaven.


Minister. But there is no cause why it should so do. For how should heaven
be your resting place, if on earth you were not troubled? how could god wipe
away your tears from your eyes in heaven, if on earth you shead them not? You
would be fre^ from miseries, you look for heaven upon earth. But if you will
go to heaven, the right way is to sail by hell. Bradford.
If you will sit at Christ's table in his kingdom; you must be with him in his
temptations. You are as Gods corn, you must therefore go under the f^aile,
the fan, the millstone, and the oven, before you can be Gods bread. You are
one of Christ's Lambs, look therefore to be fleeced, and to have the bloody
knife at your throat all the day long. If you were a market sheep bought to
be sold, you should be stalled and kept in a fat pasture: but you are for Gods
own occupying, therefore you must pasture on the bare common, abiding storms,
tempests, Satan's snatches, the worlds wounds, contempt of conscience, and
frettes of the flesh. But in this your misery I will be a Simon unto you, to
help you to carry your cross, so be it you will reveal your mind unto me.


Christian. I will do it willingly: my temptations are either against my faith
in Christ, or against repentance for my sins.


Minister. What is your temptation as touching faith?


Christian. Ah woe is me, I am much afraid least I have no faith in Christ my
Savior.


Minister. What causes this fear?


Christian. Diverse things.


Minister. What is one?


Christian. I am troubled with many doubtings of my salvation: and so it comes
into my mind to think, that by my incredulity I should quite cut off my
self from the favor of God.


Minister. But you must know this one thing, that he that never doubted of his
salvation never believed, and that he which believes in truth, feels many
doubtings and wauerings, even as the sound man feels many grudgings of
diseases, which if he had not health he could not feel.


Christian. But you never knew any that having true faith doubted of their
salvation.


Minister. What will you then say of the man that said, Mar. 9.24. Psalm. 77.
ver. 8.9. 10.
Lord I believe, Lord help mine unbelief? And of David who made his moan
after this manner: Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail
for evermore? Has God forgotten to be merciful? Has he shut up his tender
mercy in displeasure? Yea he goes on further, as a man in despair. 11.
And I said this is my death. Hereby it is manifest, that a man endued with
true faith may have not only assaults of doubting, but of desperation. This
further appears in that he says in an other place, Psa. 24.^^
Why art thou cast down my soul? Why art thou disquieted within me? Wait on
God, for I will yet give thanks, he is my present help and my God. And in
very truth you may persuade your self that they are but 2. The. 3.^.
unreasonable men, that say they have long believed in Christ without any
doubting of their salvation.


Christian. But David had more in him then I have, for me thinks there is
nothing in this wicked heart of mine, but rebellion against GOD, nothing but
doubting of his mercy.


Minister. Let me know but one thing of you: these doubtings which you feel,
do you like them? or do you take any pleasure in them? and do you cherish
them?


Christian. Nay, nay, they appear very vile in mine eyes, and I do abhor
them from my heart: and I would feign believe.


Minister. Romans 7.5.
In man we must consider his estate by nature, and his estate by grace. In the
first, he and his flesh are all one, for they are as man and wife: therefore
one is accessarie to the doings of the other. When the flesh sins the man
also sins, that is in subjection to the flesh; yea when the flesh perishes
the man likewise perishes, being in this estate, with the flesh; a loving
couple they are, they live and die together. But in the estate of grace, though
a man have the flesh in him, Romans 7.17. Romans 8.1.
yet he and his flesh are divorced asunder. This diuorcement is made when a
man begins to dislike and to hate his flesh, and the evil fruits of it: this
separation being made, they are no more one but twain, and the one has
nothing to do with the other. In this case though the flesh beget sin, and
perish therefore, yet the Christian man shall not incur damnation for it. To
come more near the matter; you say the flesh begets in you wauerings,
doubtings, and distrustings: what then? it t^oubleth you, but fear not,
remember your estate; you are diuourced from the flesh, and you are new married
unto Christ: if these sins be laid at your door, account them not as your
children, but renounce them as Bastards: say with Paul, I doubt indeed, but I
hate my doubtings, and I am no cause of these, but the flesh in me which shall
perish when I shall be saved by Christ.


Christian. This which you have said does in part content me: one thing more
I pray you show me concerning this point: namely how I may be able to overcome
these doubtings.


Minist. For the suppressing of doubtings, you are to use three meditations.

The first, that it is gods commandment that you should believe in Christ: So
S. John says, 1. Ioh. 3.23.
This is his commandment that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ.
Thou shall not steal is Gods commandment, and you are loath to break it,
least you should displease God and pull his curse upon your head. This also is
Gods commandment, thou shall believe in Christ, and therefore you must take
head of the breach of it: least by doubting and wavering you bring the curse
upon you. Secondly, you must consider that the promises of salvation in Christ
are g^neral, or at the least indefinite excluding no particular man: as in one
for all may appear. God so loved the world that he gave his only begoten
son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting
life. Now then, so often as you shall doubt of Gods mercy, you exclude your
own self from the promise of God, whereas he excludes you not. And as when a
prince gives a pardon to all thieves, every one can apply the same unto
himself, though his name be not set down in the pardon: So the King of kings
has given a general pardon for free remission of sins, to them that will
receive it Believe therefore that God is true in his promise, doubt not of your
own salvation, challenge the pardon to your self. Indeed your name is not set
down, or written in the promise of grace; yet let not any illusion of Satan,
or the consideration of your own unworthiness exclude you from this free mercy
of God: which he also has offered to you particularly, first in Baptism, then
after in the Lords supper: and therefore you are not to waver in the applying of
it to your self. Thirdly, you are to consider that by doubting and despairing
you offend God as much almost as by any other sin. Romans 4. 1^.
You do not above hope believe under hope (...) you should do. Secondly, you
rob God of his glory, in that you make his infinite mercy to be less then your
sins. Thirdly, you make him a lier, who has made such a promise unto you. And
to these three meditations add this practice. When your heart is toyled with
unbelief and doubtings, then in all have draw your self into some secret
place, humble your self before God, pour out your heart before him: desire
him of his endless mercy to work faith, and to suppress your unbelief, and
you shall see Romans 1^ ^^
that the Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon his name.


Christian. The Lord reward you for your kindness: I will hereafter do my
endeavor to practice this your counsel. Now I will make bold to show another
that makes me to fear least I have no faith. And it is, because I do not
feel the assurance of the forgiveness of my sins.


Minister. Faith stands not in the feeling of Gods mercy, but in the
apprehending of it, Heb. 11.^. Romans 1.2^
which apprehending may be when there is no feeling; for faith is of invisible
things, and when a man once comes to enjoy the thing believed, then he
cease to believe. And this appears in Jobs example, when he says, ( Lo,
though he sley me, yet will I trust in him, and I will reprove my ways in his
sight: he shall be my salvation also: for the hypocrite shall not come before
him) he declares his faith: yet when he says presently afterward, Wherefore
hidest thou thy face, and take me for thine enemy? he declares the want of
that feeling which you speak of.


Christian. Yet every true believer feels the assurance of faith: otherwise
Paul would not have said, Prove your selves whether you are in the faith or
not.


Minister. Indeed sometimes he does, but at some other times he does not: as
namely at that same time when God first calls him, and in the time of
temptation.


Christian. What a case am I in then? I never felt this assurance: only this I
^eele that I am a most rebellious wretch, abounding even with a whole sea of
iniquities: me thinks I am more ugly in the sight of God, then any toad can be
in my sight. O then what shall I do? let me hear some word of comfort from thy
mouth thou man of God.


Minister. Tell me one thing plainly: you say you feel no assurance of Gods
mercy?


Christian. No indeed.


Minister. But do you desire with all your heart to feel it?


Christian. I do indeed.


Minister. Then doubt not, you shall feel it.


Christian. O blessed be the Lord, if this be true.


Minister. Why, it is most true. For the man that would have any grace of God
tending to salvation, if he do truly desire it, he shall have it: for so
Christ has promised, The desire of grace, is gra^^ (...) self.

R^^. ^.^.


I will give to him that is a thirst of the well of the water of life freely.
Whereby I gather that if any want the water of life, having an appetite after
it, he shall have enough of it: and therefore fear you not; only use the
means which God has appointed to attain faith by, as earnest prayer,
reverent hearing of Gods word, and receiving of the Sacraments: and then you
shall see this thing verified in your self.


Christian. All this which you say I find in my self by the mercy of God: my
heart longs after that grace of God which I want. I know I do hunger after
the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof: and further though I
want the feeling of Gods mercy, yet I can pray for it from the very root of
my heart.


Minister. Be careful to give honor to God for that you have received
already. For these things are the motion^ of the spirit of God dwelling in
you. Phil. 1.6.
And I am persuaded of this same thing, that God which has begun this good
work in you will perfect the same unto the day of Jesus Christ.


Christian. The third thing that troubles me, is this: I have long prayed for
many graces of God, and yet I have not received them, whereby it comes often to
my mind, that God loves me not, that I am none of his child, and therefore that
I have no faith.


Minister. Psalm. 69.4.
You are in no other case then David himself, who made the same complaint: I am
weary of crying, my throat is dry, mine eyes fail, whiles I wait for my God.


Christian. But David never prayed so many years without receiving an answer
as I have done.


Minister. Good Zachary waited longer on the Lord, before he granted his
request, Luke 1.7.13.
then ever you did: it is like he prayed for a child in his younger years, yet
his prayer was not heard before he was old. And further, you must note that
the Lord may hear the prayers of his servants, and yet they be altogether
ignorant of it: For the manner that God uses in granting their requests is not
always known; as may appear in the example of our Savior Christ, Heb. 5.7.
Who in the days of his flesh, did offer up prayers and supplications with
strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and
was also heard in that which he feared. And yet we know that he was not
freed from that cursed death, but must needs suffer it. How then was he heard?
On this manner: he was strengthened to bear the death, he had an Angel to
comfort him, he was afterward freed from the sorrows of death: And so it is
with the rest of Christ's body, as it was with the head. Some being in want
pray for temporal blessings: God keeps them in this want, and yet he hears
their prayers, in giving them patience to abide that want. Some being in
wealth and abundance pray for the continuing of it, if it be the will of God.
The Lord flings them into a perpetual misery, and yet he hears their
prayers, by giving them blessedness in the life to come. You pray for the
increase of faith and repentance, and such like graces: you feel no increase
after long prayer: yet the merciful God has no doubt heard your prayer, in
that by delaying to perform your request, he has stirred up in you the spirit
of prayer, he has humbled you, and made you feel your own wants, the better
to depend on his mercy: for the beginning and increasing of every spiritual
grace.


Christian. The fourth thing that troubles me, is that I cannot feel faith
purify my heart, and to work by love in bringing forth lively fruits.


Minister. If this be so continually, that faith brings forth no fruit it is
very dangerous and argues a plain want of faith, yet for a certain time it
may be so: faith has not only a spring time and a summer season, Cant. 2.12.
Esa. 42.2.
but also a winter when it bears no fruit. And there is many a true
Christian like the bruised reed, that is ouerturned with every blast of wind:
and like the flax that has fire in it, which by reason of weakness, gives
neither heat nor light, but only a smoke.


Christian. Thus much shall suffice for my first temptation, wherein I take my
self satisfied: now if you please, I will be glad to rehearse the second.


Minister. I am content, let us hear it.


Christian. I am afraid least I have not truly repented, and therefore that
all my profession is only in hypocrisy.


Minister. What moves you to think so?


Christian. Two causes especially, the first is, they which repent leave off to
sin: But I am a miserable sinner, I do continually displease God by my evil
thoughts, words, and deeds.


Minister. You need not fear, Romans 5.20
For where sin abounds (that is, the knowledge and feeling of sin) there
grace abounds much more.


Christian. I find not this in my self.


Minist. But yet you find thus much in your self: those corruptions which you
feel, and those sins that you commit, you hate them, you are displeased with
your self for them, and you endeavor your self to leave them.


Christian. Yea that I do with all my heart.


Minister. Then how miserable soever you feel your self by reason of the
mass of your sin, yet you are not subject to condemnation, Romans 8.5. cum 8.1.
but shall most certainly escape the same. Take this for a most certain
truth, that the man that hates and dislikes his sins, both before and after
he has done them, shall never be damned for them.


Christian. I am even heart sick of my manifold sins and infirmities, and
these good words which you speak are as flaggons of wine, to refresh my weary,
laden, and weltring soul. Cant. 2.5.
I have begun to flee sin and to detest it long ago. I have been often
displeased with mine infirmities and corruptions: when I offend God my heart is
grieved, I desire to leave sin, I flee the occasions of sin: I would feign
fashion my life to Gods word: and I pray unto God that he would give me grace
so to do: and yet (which is my grief) by the strength of the flesh, by the
sleights and power of Satan I am often overtaken, and fall maruellously, both
by speech and by deed.


Minister. Have courage my good brother, for whereas you have an affection to
do the things that are acceptable unto God, it argues plainly that you are a
member of Christ: according to that of Paul: Romans 8.5.
They which are of the spirit, savor the the things of the spirit. Well then,
if Satan ever object any of your sins to you, make answer thus, that you have
forsaken the first husband the flesh, and have espoused your self to Christ
Jesus, who as your head and husband has taken upon him to answer your debts,
and therefore if he urge you for the^, refer him over unto Christ. For there is
no suit in law against the wife the husband living: yea, I add further, if you
be ouercarried with Satan's temptations, and so fall into any sin, you shall
not answer for it but Satan, it shall surely be reckoned on his score at the
day of judgment, for he was the author of it: if you fall by the frailty of
your flesh, it shall perish therefore: but you shall still have Christ your
advocate.


Christian. Indeed as you say I have in me an affection to please God, but
when I come to perform my obedience, there I fail.


Minister. Therefore mark this further. As long as the children of god are i^
this life, Genesis 12. 12 Mal. 3.17.
God regards more the affection to obey, then the obedience itself: And they
shall be unto me says the Lord of hosts, in that day I shall do this, for a
flock, and I will spare them, as a man spares his own son that serves him.
The father when he shall set his child to do any business, though he do it
never so untowardly, yet if he show his good will to do the best he can, his
father will be pleased: and so it is with the Lord toward his children, you
look to have some perfection in your self, but in this life you shall receive
no Romans 8. 2.
more but the first fruits of the spirit, which are but as a handful of corn,
in respect of the whole corn field: and as for the accomplishment of your
redemption you must wait for it till after this life: you would be kissed
with the kisses of Christ's mouth, but here in this world you must be content,
if you may with Marie Magdelen kiss his feet. For the perfection of a
Christian man's life, stands in the feeling and confession of his
imperfections. And as Ambrose says, Ambrose.
obedience due to God stands more Affectu magis quam effectu.
in the affection then in the work.


Christian. But why will God have those whom he has sanctified labor still
under their infirmities?


Minister. The causes are diverse. First, hereby he teaches his servants, to
see in what great need they stand of the righteousness of Christ, that they may
more carefully seek after it. Secondly, he subdueth the pride of men's hearts
and humbles them by counteruailing the graces which they have received, with
the like measure of infirmities. Thirdly, by this means the godly are
exercised in a continual fight against sin, and are daily occupied in
purifying themselves.


Christian. But to go on forward in this matter: there is another cause that
makes me fear, least I have no true repentance.


Minister. What is that?


Christian. I oftentimes find my self like a very timberlog, void of all
grace and goodness, froward and rebellious to any good work, so that I^ fear
least Christ have quite forsaken me.


Minist. As it is in the strait seas, the water ebs and flows, so is it in the
godly: in them as long as they live in this world according to their own
feeling, there is an access and recesse of the spirit. Otherwhiles they be
troubled with deadnes and dulnes of heart, as David was, who prayed to the
Lord, Psa. 119.88. Psalm. 119.5.
to quicke^ him according to his loving kindness, that he may keep the
testimonies of his mouth: And in another place he says, that Gods promises
quickened him. Which could not be, unless he had been troubled with great
dulnes of heart. Again, sometimes the spirit of God quite withdraws is self
to their feeling: as it was in David. Psalm. 77.2.3. 3.^.
In the day of my trouble (says he) I sought the Lord, and my soul refused
comfort. I did think upon god and was troubled, I prayed and my spirit was full
of anguish: Again, Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he show
no more favor? has God forgotten to be merciful? etc. Cant. 3.1.
The Church in the Canticles complains of this: In my bed I sought him by
night whom my soul loved: I sought him, but I found him not. Ca. 5.4,5,6.
And again, My wellbeloued put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my
heart was affectioned toward him: I rose up to open to my well-beloved, and my
hands did drop down mirrhe, my fingers pure mirrhe upon the handles of the
bar, I opened to my well-beloved: but my well-beloved was gone and past, mine
heart was gone when he did speak; I ^ought him, but I could not find him, I
called but he answered me not. Romans 5.5.
Contrariwise, God at some other times sheds abroad his love most abundantly
in the hearts of the faithful; Cant. 1. 13.
and Christ lies between the breasts of his Church, as a posie of myrrh
giving a strong smell.


Christian. But how can he be a Christian that feels no grace nor goodness in
himself?


Minister. The child which as yet can use no reason, is for all that a
reasonable creature: and the man in a swowne feels no power of life, and yet
he is not dead. The Christian man has many quames come over his heart, and he
falls into many a swown, that none almost would look for any more of the life
of Christ in him, yet for all that he may be a true Christian. This was the
state of Peter, when he denied our Savior Christ with cursing and banning,
Luke 22. 31.
his faith only fainted for a time, it failed not.


Christian. I have now opened unto you the chief things that troubled me: and
your comfortable answers have much refreshed my troubled mind. The God of all
mercy and consolation requite you accordingly.


Minister. I have spoken that which God out of his holy word has opened unto
me, if you find any help thereby, give God the praise therefore, and carry
this with you for ever, Act. 24.^2.
that by many afflictions both in the body and the mind you must enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Raw flesh is noisome to the stomach, and is no good
nourishment before it be ^odden: Hooper.
and unmortified men and women be no creatures fit for God: and therefore they
are to be soaked and boiled in afflictions, that the fulsomnes and rankenes of
their corruption may be delayed, and that they may have in them some relish
acceptable unto God. And to conclude, for the avoiding of all these
temptations, use this sweet prayer following which that godly Saint Master
Bradford made.

Oh Lord God and dear father, what shall I say that feel all things to be
(in manner) with me as in the wicked? Blind is my mind, crooked is my will,
and perverse concupisce^ce is in me, as a spring of stinking puddle. O how
faint is faith in me? how little is my love to thee or thy people? how great is
my self love? how hard is my heart? by reason whereof I am moved to doubt of
thy goodness toward me, whether thou art my merciful father, and whether I
be thy child or no: indeed worthily might I doubt, if that the having of these
were the cause, and not the fruit rather of thy children. The cause why thou
art my father, is thy merciful goodnes^ grace and truth in Christ Jesus, which
cannot but remain for ever. In respect whereof thou have borne me this good
will to bring me into thy Church by baptism, and to accept me into the number
of thy children, that I might be holy, faithful, obedient and innocent: and to
call me diverse times by the ministry of thy word into thy kingdom: besides
the innumerable other benefits always hitherto powered upon me. All which thou
have done of this thy good will which thou of thine own mercy barest to me in
Christ before the world was made. The which thing as thou requirest straightly
that I should believe without doubting, so would thou that I in all my needs
should come unto thee as to a father, and make my moan without mistrust of
being heard in thy good time, as most shall make to my comfort. Lo therefore
to thee dear father I come through thy son our Lord, our Mediator, and
Advocate Jesus Christ, who sits on thy right hand making intercession for
me; I pray thee of thy great goodness and mercy in Christ to be merciful to me
a sinner, that I may indeed feel thy sweet mercy as thy child: the time (oh
dear father) I appoint not, but I pray thee that I may with hope still expect
and look for thy help. I hope that as for a little while thou have left me,
so thou will come and visit me, and that in thy great mercy, whereof I have
great need, by reason of my great misery. Thou art wont for a little season
in thine anger, to hide thy face from them whom thou love: but surely (O
Redeemer) in eternal mercies thou will show thy compassions. For when thou
leauest us, O Lord, thou do not leave us very long, neither do thou leave
us to our loss, but to our lucre and advantage: even that thy holy spirit with
bigger portion of thy power and virtue may lighten and cheer us: that the want
of feeling of our sorrow may be recompensed plentifully with the lively sent of
having thee to our eternal joy: and therefore thou swearest that in thine
everlasting mercy thou will have compassion on us. Of which thing, to the end
we might be most assured, thine oath is to be marked, for thou say: as I
have sworn, that I will never bring any more the waters to drown the world:
so have I sworn that I will never more be angry with thee, nor reprove thee.
The mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down, but thy loving
kindness shall not move, and the bond of thy peace shall not fail thee: thus
say thou the Lord our merciful redeemer. Dear father therefore, I pray
thee remember even for thine own truth and mercies sake the promise and
everlasting covenant, which in thy good time I pray thee to write in my heart,
that I may know thee to be the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent: that I may love thee with all my heart for ever: that I may love thy
people for thy sake: that I may be holy in thy sight through Christ: that I may
always not only strive against sin, but also overcome the same daily more
and more as thy children do: above all things desiring the sanctification of
thy name, the coming of thy kingdom, the doing of thy will on earth as it is
in heaven, etc. through Jesus Christ our Redeemer, Mediator, and Advocate,


Amen.
A DECLARATION OF CERTAIN Spiritual Desertions, serving to terrify all
drowsy Protestants, and to comfort them which mourn for their sins.
AMong all the works of Gods eternal counsel, there is none more wonderful
then is Desertion: which is nothing else but an action of God forsaking his
creature.

Furthermore, God forsakes his creature, not by withdrawing his essence or
being from it: for that cannot be, considering God is infinite; and therefore
must needs at all times be every where: but by taking away the grace and
operation of his Spirit from his creature.

Neither must any think it to be cruelty in God to forsake his creature which
he has made: for he is sovereign Lord over all his works: and for that cause
he is not bound to any; and he may do with his own whatsoever he will. And
this his will is not to be blamed: for men are not to imagine, that a thing
must first be just, and then afterward that God does will it: but contrariwise,
first God wills a thing, and thereupon it becomes just.

Again, sin is so wretched a thing in the eyes of God, that he utterly
forsakes his creature for a punishment thereof. Now every thing, so far forth
as it is a chastisment or punishment, is good; considering that the inflicting
thereof is the execution of justice.

And God never forsakes the creature against the will thereof: but in the very
time of Desertion, it voluntarily forsakes and refuses grace, and chooses to
be forsaken: wherefore if any hurt or misery ensue thereof, let the creature
blame it self and praise the Lord.

Desertions thus described are of two sorts, eternal and temporary.

Eternal desertions are those, whereby God upon just causes known to himself
forsakes his creature wholly and for ever. Thus the devil with his angels, and
that part of mankind which is prepared to destruction, is forsaken. For first,
God before all worlds, did decree according to the purpose of his own will to
refuse them without the grant of any mercy. Secondly, after they are created
and live in the world, he gives them no Savior. For Christ is only the
redeemer of the Elect, and of no more: which may thus appear. For who^ Christ
makes no Intercession, for the^ he has wrought no Redemption. But for them
only which are elected and shall believe in him, he makes intercession. I pray
(says he) not for the world, but for them which thou have given me. And
again, Ioh. 17.9,20^
I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in me through
their word. Wherefore Christ is a redeemer to none but to the Elect. Thirdly,
he reserueth them to eternal damnation for their sins; which is a total
separation from God, and the accomplishment of all other Dese^tions.

For the effecting of this, God exercises wicked men and reprobates in this
life with diverse particular desertions, and that after this manner. He bestows
all sorts of benefits on them as on his own servants: but yet so, as that he
withdraws that part of his benefit, which has the promise of life eternal
annexed to it in the word. And in this matter he deals as a man that sets
many trees in his orchard, but so as he takes away the heart or the pith
thereof. And this the Lord does either in temporal or spiritual benefits.

I. For temporal benefits, as wealth, honor, liberty, outward peace, the
Lord deals very bountifully with them: Math. 5.45.
He makes his sun to shine upon the just and unjust: he fills their bellies
with his hid treasures: and as David says, I fretted at the foolish, when I
saw the prosperity of the wicked: for there is no bonds in their death, but
they are lusty and strong, they are not in trouble as other me^, neither are
they plagued as other men. Ps. 73.4,5.
But yet he holds back that which is the principal thing, and the very
glory of these benefits, that is, Dat legitin^um. 1. lege permissum, sed (...)
sanctum vsum. Tit. 2. 15.
the right use of them. For that a man may purely use Gods creatures, two
things are required. First, his person must stand just and sanctifieed before
God by faith in Christ. For until a man's person please God, his work shall
never please him. Secondly, he must use the same creatures purely: which is
done partly by invocation of Gods name, and partly by referring them to their
set and appointed ende^; which are Gods glory, a man's own and his neighbors
good. But all this is flat contrary in the ungodly man. For first, he is forth
of Christ, so that his person stands unjust before God. And therefore all his
actions (even those which otherwise are lawful and good) in him are mere
sins. Secondly, he uses Gods gifts and blessings with an evil conscience.
For by reason of his want of grace to believe, he cannot resolve himself, that
God as his father does bestow his blessings on him as his beloved child in
Christ; yet as a thief and an usurper, against his conscience he uses them.
Add further, the creatures are used of him without invocation: for such an one
can not pray; and therefore he does but as the swine in the ^orrest, which
feeds on the mast, but never looks up to the tree whence it falls.
Thirdly, he uses Gods gifts to eui^l ends: because either he makes an idol of
them by setting his heart on them, or else he imploieth them to riot, pride, and
the oppression of godly men. A master of music has his house furnished with
musical instruments of all sorts: and he teaches his own scholars
artificially to use them, both in right tuning of them, as also in playing on
them: there comes in strangers, who admiring the faide instruments, have leave
given them of the master to handle them, as the scholars do: but when they
come to practice, they neither tune them aright, neither are they able to
strike one stroke as they ought^ so as they may please the master and have his
commendation. This world is as a large and sumptuous palace, into which are
received, not only the sons and daughters of God, but also wicked and
ungodly men: it is furnished with goodly creatures in use more excellent then
all musical instruments: the use of them is common to all: but the godly man
taught by Gods spirit, and directed by faith, so uses them, as that the use
thereof is acceptable to God: as for the impure and unbelieving, indeed they
enjoy the creatures and gifts of God, but the pure use is wanting: for they
cannot but abuse them: and therefore the wicked and the reprobate, though they
should commit no other sins in the world, yet for the use of their wealth and
honor, for their very eating and drinking (which in themselves are most
lawful) shall be damned. II. Concerning spiritual blessings, first God cease
to grant so much as an outward calling to many men. For how many nations since
the beginning of the world, much more particular men, have their bin, are, and
shall be, which never heard the preaching of the Gospel; nay not so much as
the name of Christ, God is known in Jury, (says David) and he has not done
so to any nation. And often in Moses and the Prophets it is mentioned that the
covenant was in former times made peculiar to the Jews. And Paul in the Acts
says, Act. 14. 16.
that God suffered the Gentiles in former times to walk in their own ways:
and of the Ephesians, before their calling he says, Ephesians. 2.2.
that they were strangers from the promises, and without God in the world. III.
He graunts the outward means of salvation, namely the Word, Prayer,
Sacraments, Discipline abundantly: but yet he quite withdraws the operation
of his spirit, whereby a conversion might be wrought. For they never have that
pearcing of the ear which David mentions, Psalm. 40. 6. Act. 16. 14. Ioh. 6.
45.
nor the opening of the heart with Lydia, nor that teaching of God, when they
are drawn of the father to Christ. And in so doing indeed, only he offreth
grace, but does not exhibit and confer it: not that he mocketh any, but that
in so doing he may every way convince and bereave them of excuse. As the Lord
speaks to Esaias, Esa. 6. 9,10.
Go and say to this people, ye shall hear indeed, but ye shall not
understand: ye shall plainly see, but not perceive: make the heart of this
people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, least they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and
convert, and he heal them. If our Gospel be hid (says Paul) it is hid in
them that perish. Men that have long lived under the preaching of the Gospel,
2. Cor. 4. 5.
and yet still remain ignorant and impenitent, let them beware and take heed
of this desertion; and they are with trembling to lay to their hearts, that
which the holy Ghost speaks of Hophni and Phinehas, 1. Sam. 2.25
They obeyed not the voice of their father, because the Lord would destroy
them. IIII. To go further, he bestows on them many worthy properties of
faith. As first, a knowledge of the divine truth in the Law and the Gospel.
Secondly, an assent to the said truth. Thirdly, a joyful rejoicing and
boasting in speaking and hearing of it. Fourthly, an outward profession of it
for a time. But he does not bestow that quality and virtue of faith, which is,
as it were, the very soul of it: without which faith is dead and saves none,
namely, the inward assurance and certificate of his love and favor in Christ,
with a sense and feeling of the same in heart. Neither are the former duties of
faith perpetual and sound in them, for the reprobate is not induced to them by
any assurance of Gods mercy, but by other sinister occasions, as are: First,
desire of knowledge in divine mysteries. Secondly, a delight in it. Thirdly,
praise and commendation among men. Fourthly, the maintaining of wealth and
honor. Fifthly, the getting of wealth or honor. Sixthly, a desire to be at
unity and concord with the Nation or people where the Gospel is preached.
Therefore when these ends and occasions of their believing cease, then also
their faith and profession cease. In this kind of desertion, it is to be
feared, that most men are. All in our Church will profess faith in Christ: yet
seeing the sound conversion to God, and the sincerity of life and doctrine is
very rare, we may presume that, that maine property of faith which is the
receiving and apprehension of Christ, is wanting in most: therefore let every
man look to himself and betime labor to turn his temporary faith (if he
find it in himself) into a true saving faith, wherefore he must strive first
to feel his extreme need of Christ and his merits. Secondly, to hunger and
thirst after him, as after meat and drink. Thirdly, to be nothing in
himself, that he may be all in all out of himself in Christ. Fourthly, to be
able to say that he lives not, but Christ lives in him by faith. Fifthly, to
loathe his own sins with a most vehement hatred, and to prize and value
Christ and the least drop of his blood above a thousand worlds. V. Again in
repentance he bestows, first, a sight of sin: secondly, a kind of sorrow
for it: thirdly, a confession of it: fourthly, a resolution for a time to sin
no more. But that part of repentance which has the promise of mercy annexed,
that is, a conversion of the whole man to God he never gives it. Dat spiritu^
reprimente^, non renova^tem.
VI. Lastly, God gives to the reprobate his spirit, but so far forth as it
shall not any whit regenerate or renew his nature: but only in the outward
action repress the act of sin: so as thereby without any inward change he
shall be as ciuily just and upright in outward conversation, as any in the
world.
Thus much of those desertions which befall the devil and his angels and all
reprobates: now follow those wherewith God exercises even his own elect
children: for the blessings that God bestows on them are of two sorts, either
positive or privative: positive, are real graces wrought in the heart, by the
spirit of God: Privativa gratiae sunt plures quam positiva.
privative are such means whereby God preserues men from falling into sin:
as crosses, desertions. And these in number exceed the first, as long as men
live in this world.

Before it can be declared, what these desertions are, this conclusion is to
be, laid down: He which is once in the estate of grace shall be in the same for
ever. This appears in the 8. of the Romans 30. where Paul sets down the golden
chain of the causes of salvation that can never be broken; so that he which is
predestinate shall be called, justified, glorified. And a little after he
says, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? and, Who shall sever
us from the love of Christ? and, I am persuaded that no creature shall be able
to sever us from the love of Christ: which he would not have said, if men
being in the estate of grace, might fall quite from grace. And how should they
which are justified have peace with God, if they were not sure to persevere
righteous before God to the end? And how shall it be said, that hope makes not
ashamed, because the love of God (wherewith Gods loves his elect) is shed
abroad in their hearts, by the holy Ghost which is given them, if any may
utterly fall from that love? How should the testimony of the spirit, which
testifies to the elect, that they are the children of God, be true and certain,
if it may be quite extinguished? Lastly, how shall that of John be true, They
went out of us, becanse they were not of us: if they had been of us, they
should have remained with us, if a man may wholly fall from Christ which has
once bin made a true member of him? Our Savior Christ says, Ioh. 10.27. and
6.37.
My sheep hear my voice: and I know them, and they follow me: and I give life
eternal to them, and no man shall take them out of my hand, or out of my
fathers hand, and whatsoever my father gives me shall come unto me, and
whosoever comes to me, I will not cast out. And if any of the elect being
effectually called might wholly fall from grace, then there must be a second
insition or ingrafting into the mystical body of Christ, and therefore a
second Baptism: nay for every fall a new infition, and a new Baptism; which
must in no wise be granted: wherefore they which are predestinate to be in the
state of grace, are also predestinate to persevere in the same to the end.

Hereupon it follows that the desertions of Gods elect, are first of all
partial, that is, such as wherein God does not wholly forsake them but in some
part. Secondly, Esa. 54. 10.
temporary, that is for some space of time, and never beyond the compass of
this present life. For a moment (says the Lord in Esaias) in mine anger I hid my
face from thee for a little season, but with everlasting mercy have I had
compassion on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. And to this purpose David well
acquainted with this matter, Psalm. 119. 8.
prays, forsake me not over long.

This sort of desertions, though it be but for a time, yet no part of a
Christian man's life is free from them; and very often taking deep place in the
heart of man, they are of long continuance. David continued in this dangerous
fall about the space of an whole year before he was recovered. Luther
confesses of himself, that after his conversion, he lay three years in
desperation. And common experience in such like cases can make record of longer
time.

The manner, God uses in forsaking his own servants, is of two sorts; the
first is by taking away one grace and putting another in the room: the second,
by hiding his grace as it were in a corner of the heart.

God takes away his grace, and puts another in the room, diverse ways.

I. First, he bereaueth his own children of outward prosperity, yea he will
load them with crosses; and yet he will make a good supply by giving
patience. David is driven out of his kingdom by his own son: a heavy
cross: yet the Lord ministers an humble and patient spirit, so as he was
content to speak, 2. Sam. 15. 26.
If the Lord thus say, I have no delight in thee: behold here I am, let him do
to me as seems good in his eyes. So likewise Christian Martyrs are bereaved
of all outward safety, and laid open to the violence and persecution of
tyrants; yet inwardly they are stablished by the power of the might of God,
when they are most weak they are most strong, and when they are most foiled,
then they obtain victory. II. Secondly, the Lord cuts off the days of this
life, and for recompense to his own elect gives life eternal, Esa. 57.1.
The righteous is taken away for the evil to come. This is manifest in Josias,
of whom it is said, 2. Reg. 22. 20.
Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be put in thy grave
in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon
this place. III. Thirdly, God takes away the feeling of his love, and the joy
of the holy Ghost for a season: and then in the room thereof he kindles an
earnest desire and thirsting with groans and cryings unto heaven, to be in the
former favor of God again. This was David's case, when he complained and
said, Psalm. 77. 1, 2,3.
My voice came to God when I cried, my voice came to God and he heard me: in
the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, my sore ran and ceased not in the
night: my soul refused comfort. I did think upon God and was troubled: I
prayed and my spirit was full of anguish. Selah. The like was the estate of the
Church making her moan unto God in Esaias, Esa. 63. 17
O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways? and hardened our hearts
from thy fear? Return for thy servants sake, and for the tribes of thine
inheritance. IV. Fourthly, God graunts his servants the holy means of
salvation, namely preaching, prayer, sacraments, and holds back the efficacy
of his spirit for a time. In this case they are like the corn field that is
plowed and sowed with good corn: but yet for a time, it never gives rooting
beneath, nor so much as a show of any blade appears above. Thus the spouse of
Christ, when she comes into his wine-seller, she falls into a swowne; so as
she must Cant. 2.4, 5.
be stayed with flaggons, and comforted with apples, because she is sick of
love. V. Fifthly, God gives his children a strong affection, to obey his will,
but he lets them fail in the act of obedience it self, like as the prisoner
who has escaped the hand of his gayler, has an affection to run a thousand
miles every hour; but having happily his bolts on his legs, he can not for
his life but go very softly, gauling and cha^ing his flesh; and with much
grief falling again into the hands of his keeper. This is it, that Paul
complains of when he says, Romans 7.22, 23,24.
I delight in the law of God, concerning the inner man: but I see another law
in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to
the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death?
The second manner of Gods forsaking his Elect is, when he hides his graces for
a time: not by taking them quite away, but by covering them and by remoouing
all sense and feeling of them. And in this case they are like the trees in the
winter season, that are beaten with wind and weather, bearing neither leaf
nor fruit, but look as though they were rotten and dead, because the sap does
not spread it self, but lies hid in the root. David often was in this case,
as namely when he says, Ps. 77.78.
Will the Lord absent himself for ever? And will he show no more favor? is his
mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Has God
forgotten to be merciful? Has he shut up his tender mercies in displeasure?
Selah.

Cuncta Dei opera sunt in medys contrarys.
This comes to pass, because the Lord very often in and by one contrary works
another. Clay and spittle tempered together in reason should put out a man's
eyes: but Christ used it as a means to give sight to the blind. Water in
reason should put out fire: but Elias when he would show that Iehoua was the
true God, poures water on his sacrifice, and fills a trench therewith to make
the sacrifice burn. The like appears in the work of grace to salvation. A
man that has lived in security, by Gods goodness has his eyes opened to see
his sins and his heart touched to feel the huge and loathsome burden of
the^, and therefore to bewail his wretched estate, with bitterness of heart.
Hereupon he presently thinks that God will make him a firebrand of hell:
whereas indeed the Lord is now about to work, and frame in his heart
sanctification and sound repentance never to be repented of. The man which has
had some good persuasions of Gods favor in Christ, comes afterward upon many
occasions to be troubled and to be overwhelmed with distrustfulnes and grievous
doubtings of his salvation, so as he judges himself to have been but an
hypocrite in former times, and for the time present a castaway. But indeed
hereby the Lord exercises, fashioneth, and increases his weak faith. In one
word, mark this point, That the graces of God peculiar to the elect, are
begun, increased, and made manifest in or by their contraries.

A man in this desertion cap discern no difference between himself and a
castaway: and the rather if with this desertion be joined a feeling of Gods
anger: for then arises the bitterest temptation that ever befell the poor
soul of a Christian man, and that is a wrestling and struggling in spirit and
conscience, not with the motions of a rebelling flesh, nor the accusations of
the devil, which are oftentimes very irksome and terrible, but against the
wrath of a revenging God. This hidden and spiritual temptation more tormenteth
the spirit of man, then all the rackes or gibbets in the world can do. And it
has his fittes after the manner of an ague, in which even Gods own servants
ouercarried with sorrow may blaspheme God, and cry out that they are damned.
Job was in this estate: as he testifies, Job. 22.3.4
Oh that my grief were waied (says he) and my miseries were laid together in
the balance: for it would be heavier then the sand of the sea: therefore my
words are swallowed up; for the arrows of the Almighty are in me: the venom
thereof does drink up my spirit, and the terrors of god fight against me. And
further he complains that the Lord is Job. 13.24.
his enemy, that he writes bitter things against him, and that he Job. 16.12.
sets him as a But to shoot at. This was David's temptation when he said, Psalm.
61.2. 3,4.
O Lord rebuke me not in thy anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath, have
mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed,
my soul is also sore troubled: but Lord how long will thou delay? Return O
Lord, deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies sake.

Hence it follows, that when any that has been a professor of the gospel
shall despair at his end; that men are to leave secret judgments to God, and
charitably to judge the best of them. For example, See the books written of his
death.
one Master Chambers at Leicester of late, in his sickness grievously despaired,
and cried out that he was damned, and after died: yet it is not for any to note
him with the black mark of a reprobate. One thing which he spoke in his
extremity ( O that I had but one drop of faith) must move all men to conceive
well of him. For by this it seems that he had an heart which desired to
repent and believe; and therefore a repentant and believing heart indeed. For
God at all times, but especially in temptation, of his great mercy accepts the
will for the deed. Neither is it to be regarded that he said he was damned; for
me^ in such cases speak not as they are, but as they feel themselves to be.

Yea, to go further, when a professor of the gospel shall make away
himself, though it be a fearful case, yet still the same opinion must be
carried. First, Gods judgments are very secret. Secondly, they may repent in
the very agony for any thing we know. Thirdly, none is able to comprehend the
bottomless depth of the graces and mercies which are in Christ.

Thus much of the manner which God uses in forsaking his elect; Now follow
the kinds of desertion, which are two: desertion in punishment, desertion in
sin.

Desertion in punishment is, when God deferreth either to mittigate or to
remove the cross and chastisement which he has laid upon his children. This
befell Christ on the cross, Mat. 27. 46.
My God (says he) my God, why have thou forsaken me? This was the complaint of
Gedeon, Did not the Lord bring us out of Egypt? But now the Lord has forsaken
us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites. Judge. 6. 13. Fox. Act.
Mon. 1555 September.
Master Robert Glouer Martyr at Couentrie, after he was condemned by the
Bishop, and was now at the point to be delivered out of the world, it so
happened, that two or three days before his death, his heart being lumpish
and desolate of all spiritual consolation, felt in himself no aptness nor
willingness, but rather a heaviness and dullness of spirit, full of much
discomfort to bear the bitter cross of martyrdom ready now to be laid upon
him: whereupon he fearing in himself, least the Lord had withdrawn his wonted
favor from him, made his moan to one Austine his friend, signifying unto him
how earnestly he had prayed day and night unto the Lord, and yet could receive
no motion nor sense of any comfort from him, unto whom the said Austine
answered again, willing him patiently to wait the Lords pleasure, and
howesoeuer his present feeling was, yet seeing his cause was just and true, he
exhorted him constantly to stick to the same, and to play the man, nothing
doubting but the Lord in his good time would visit him, and satisfy his desire
with plenty of consolation, etc. The next day when the time came of the
martyrdom, as he was going to the place, and was now come to the sight of the
stake, although all the night before praying for strength and courage, he could
feel none, suddenly he was so replenished with the holy Ghost, that he cried
out clapping with his hands to Austine, and saying with these words; Austine,
he is come, he is come, etc. and that with such joy and alacrity, as one
seeming rather to be risen from some deadly danger to liberty of life, then as
one passing out of the world by any pains of death.

Desertion in sin, is when God withdrawing the assistance of his spirit, a
man is left to fall into some actual and grievous sin. And for all this no man
is to think that God is the author of sin, but only man that falls, and
Satan. A resemblance of this truth we may see in a staff: which, if a man
shall take and set upright upon the ground, so long as he holds it with his
hand, it stands upright; but so soon as he withdrawes his hand, though he
never push it down, it falls of it self. In this desertion was the good king
Hezechiah, of whom the holy Ghost speaks thus: 2. Chr. 32. 31.32.
Hezechiah prospered in all his ways, therefore dealing with the Ambassadors
of the Princes of Babel which set to him to enquire of the wonder which was
done in the land, God left him (namely, to the pride of his heart to exalt
himself) in tempting him, that he might try out all that was in his heart.
To this place appertain, Noes drunkenness, David's adultery, Peter denial of
Christ. The reason of such desertions may be this. If a patient shall be
grievously sick, the physician will use all manner of means that can be
devised to reco^er him, and if he once come to a desperate case, the physician
rather then he will not restore him, will employ all his skill; he will take
poison, and so temper it, and against the nature thereof he will make a
sovereign remedy to recover health. The elect children of God, are diseased
with an inward, hidden, and spiritual pride; whereby they affect themselves,
and desire to be something in themselves forth of Christ: and this sin is
very dangerous: first^ because when other sins die in a man, this secret
pride gets strength: for Gods grace is the matter of pride, in such wise, that
a man will be proud, because he is not proud: for example, if any shall be
tempted of the devil to some proud behavior, and by Gods grace get the
victory; then the heart thus thinks, Oh thou have done well, thou have
foiled the enemy, neither pride nor any other sin can prevail against thee;
such and such could never have done so: and a very good man shall hardly be
free from such kind of motions in this life. Secondly, there is no greater
enemy to faith then pride is: for it poisoneth the heart and makes it
incapable of that grace, so long as it bears any sway: for he that will
believe in Christ must be annihilated, that is, he must be bruised and battered
to a flat nothing, in regard of any liking or affection to himself, that he may
in spirit mount up to heaven, where Christ sits as the right hand of the
father, and as it were with both the hands of faith graspe him with all his
blessed merits, that he may be wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
redemption, life, good works, 1. Cor, 1.30. Ioh. 15.2. Gal. 2.20.
and whatsoever good thing he is, neither in, nor by, nor for himself; but
every way forth of himself in Christ. Now, this blessed co^ditio^ of a
believing heart, by natural self-love and self-liking is greatly hindered.
God therefore in great mercy to remedy this dangerous corruption, lets his
elect servants fall into trouble of mind and conscience, and if they happily
be of greater hardness of heart into some actual sin: and so declaring his
wonderful mercy in saving them, he is feign against his mercy to bring them
to his mercy, and by sin to save them from sin. By this means the Lord,
who can bring light out of darkness, makes a remedy of sin to slay pride,
that invincible monster of many heads, which would slay the soul.

Though this be so, yet none must hereupon venture to commit any sin against
Gods commandments, least in so doing they cast away their souls. For the
godly man, though he fall into sin, yet it is against his purpose, and it
makes his heart to bleed: and the course of his life shall be always upright
and pleasing unto God: because he is led by the spirit of God.

The ends for which god uses desertio^s are three, the first is the
chastisme^t of sins past in the former part of man's life, that he may search
them out, consider the^, and be heartily sorrowful for the^: for this end was
Jobs trial. Job. 13.26.
Trou writest (says he) bitter things against me, and make me to possess
the sins of my youth.

The second end is, that God may make trial of the present estate of his
servants: not that he is ignorant what is in man, but because he would have
all men know themselves. To this effect says Moses. Deuteronomy. 8.2. and 13.3.
And thou shall remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee in the
wilderness for to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine
heart, whether thou would keep his commandments or no. This also was the
end why the Lord left Ezechias to prove and try what was in his heart.

This trial by desertion serves for two purposes: for otherwhiles the Lord
uses it for the manifestation of some hidden sin, that the godly may be
deeplier humbled, and crave more earnestly pardon of that and other sins. For
as the beggar is always mending and peecing his garment, where he finds a
breach: so the penitent and believing heart must always be exercised in
repairing it self where it finds a want.

Again, ofttimes this trial serves to quicken and revive the hidden graces of
the heart, that men may be thankful for them, and feel an increase of the^
in the heart. The good husbandma^ cuts the branches of the Vine, not that he
has a purpose to destroy them, Ioh. 15.2.
but to make them bear more fruit. In the Ca^ticles when Christ left his
spouse, then she rises out of her bed, she opens the door, Cant. 5.
her hands drop mirrhe on the bar of the door: then further she seeks and
calls for him, and praises him more then ever before. David testifies the
like of himself: Psalm. 30.6.
In my prosperity I said I shall never be moved, etc. but thou did hide thy
fa^e and I was troubled. Then cried I to thee, O Lord, and prayed to my Lord.
Lastly, men that live in the Church, being for a time left of God, become so
impenitent as that they must be given up to Satan; yet for no other cause, but
that the flesh may be killed, 1. Cor. 5.5.
and the spirit made alive in the day of the Lord.

The third end is the preue^ting of sin to come. This appears in Paul; Least
(says he) I should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of
revelations, there was given unto me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet me because I should not be exalted out of measure. 2. Cor.
12.17, 8.
In the former times when the Lord among many others had set out Cranmer for
the maintenance of his blessed truth against his and Gods enemies, he left
him for a while to fall from his religion, and to make a dangerous recantation:
but so as thereby he prevented many sins, and prepared him to a glorious
martyrdom. As some of his own words may testify which he spoke a little
before his end: And now (says he) I come to the great thing that so much
troubles my conscience more then any thing that ever I did or said in all my
life, and that is the setting abroad of a writing contrary to the truth,
which now here I renounce as things written with my hand contrary to the
truth which I thought in my heart, and that for fear of death and to save my
life, etc. and for as much as my hand offended writing contrary to my heart, my
hand shall be first punished therefore: for may I come to the fire it shall be
first burned. Answerablie, when he was at the fire, first he burnt his right
hand which subscribed; his body suffered the flame with such constancy and
stedfastnes as he never almost moved: his eyes lift up to heaven often he
repeated his unworthy right hand. Thus, death which he most feared, he most
desired, that he might take revenge of himself for his sin.

The use that all good Christian hearts are to make of these their desertions,
is manifold. First, Act. 9.31. To. 11.20.
if they have outward rest and walk in the fear of God, and be filled with
the joy of the holy Ghost, let them not be high minded, but fear, least a
forsaking follow. Secondly, if in any temptation they judge themselves
forsaken, let them consider this wonderful work of spiritual desertions
which God exercises upon his own children very usually: and then it may please
the Lord, they shall find it to be a restoratiue against many a quame and swoune
of spirit and conscience into which otherwise they would certainly fall.
Thirdly, seeing God for their trial does often withdraw himself from them,
let the^ again draw near to God and press unto him; even as a man that
shiuers of an agne is alwaie creeping to the fire. If it be demanded how a
man should come near God, the answer is, by the use of his word and prayer.
For by his word he speaks to thee, and by prayer thou speak to him. Lastly,
seeing by desertions God will take experience of his servants, Iam. 3.10. Psa.
119.50 Act. 24. 16. Psalm. 26.1,2
let every man try and searc^ his ways, and ever be turning his feet to the
ways of Gods commandments: let him endeavor to keep a good conscience
before God and before all men, that so he may with David say, Judge me O Lord,
for I have walked in mine innocence: my trust has bin always in the Lord: I
shall not slide: prove me, O Lord, and try me, examine my raines and my heart.

FINIS.
A CASE OF CONSCIENCE, THE GREATEST THAT EVER WAS; HOW A MAN MAY KNOW whether
he be the child of God, or no.

Resolved by the word of God.

Whereunto is added a brief Discourse taken out of Hier. Zanchius.

2. Pet. 1.10. Give all diligence to make your Election sure, for if ye do
these things ye shall never fall. Printed for Thomas Man, and John Porter. 1600.

To the godly Reader.
IN Gods Church commonly they who are touched by the spirit, and begin to come
on in Religion, are much troubled with fear that they are not Gods children;
and none so much as they. Therefore they often think on this point: and are
not quiet till they find some resolution.

The spirit of God, (as best knowing the estate of Gods children) has penned
two parcels of holy scripture, for the full resolving of this case; namely the
15. Psalm and ^he first Epistle of Saint John.

And for the helping of the simple and unlearned, who desire to be informed
concerning their estate, I have propounded these two parts of scripture, in the
form of a Dialogue: and have joined thereunto a little discourse concerning
the same matter, penned in Latin by H. Zanchius, a learned Divine, and now
englished.

Use this labor of mine for thy benefit and comfort: and the Lord increase
the number of them which may rejoice that their names are written in heaven.

W. Perkins.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN, IN form of a Dialogue. The Speakers. John. Church.
CHAP. I.
Church. MAny among us deny the Godhead, and many the manhood of Christ.


John. That which was from the beginning [ and therefore true God] which we
have heard [ namely speaking] which we have seen with these our eyes, Verse. 1.
which we have looked upon, and these hands of ours have handled of that word [
not the sounding but the essential word of the Father,] of life [ living of
himself, and giving life unto all other.]


Chapter Before you go any further, this word of life is invisible, how then could
it be seen?


Ioh. [ Yes] for that life was made manifest [ to wit, in the flesh,] and we [
I with many others] have seen it, and bear witness, Verse. 2.
and publish unto you that eternal life, which was with the father [ eternally
before this manifestation] and was made manifest unto us.


Chapter Menander, Ebion, and Cerinthus, having been teachers among us,
confidently deny these things which you say: and they bear us in hand, that
they seek our good.


Ioh. That [ which I will repeat again for more certainties sake] which we
have seen and heard, Verse. 3.
declare we unto you, they ye may have fellowship with us, and that our
fellowship also may be with the father, and with his son Jesus Christ.

And these things write we unto you, that your joy might be full [i. might
have sound consolation in your consciences. Verse. 4.
]


Chapter Well then lay us down some ground, whereby we may come to be assured that
we have fellowship one with another, and with Christ.


Ioh. This then is the message which we have heard of him, Verse. 5.
and declare unto you that God is light [i. pureness it self and blessedness;
whereas men and Angels are neither, but by participation] and in him is no
darkness.


Chapter Some that make profession among us, continue still in their old course
and conversation; and yet they say they have fellowship with God.


Ioh. If we say that we have fellowship with him, Verse. 6. profession without
practice, a note of an hypocrite.
and walk [ lead the course of our liues] in darkness, [i. ignorance,
error, impiety,] we lie, [ dissemble,] and do not truly [ deal not
sincerely.]


Chapter What then is the true mark of one which has fellowship with God?


Ioh. If we walk in the light, Verse. 7. Since^itie of life and religion, a
note of communion with God.
[ lead the course of our lives in sincerity of life and doctrine] we have
fellowship one with another.


Chapter We are so defiled with sin, that we often doubt, least we have no
fellowship with God.


Ioh. The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin.


Chapter Some among us are come to that pass, that they say they have no sin:
and that this estate is a sign of fellowship with God.


Ioh. Verse. 8. To profess perfe^^ ^an^i^^cation in the life, a n^te of an
hypocrite.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, [ imagining that to be true
which is otherwise] and the truth is not in us.


Chapter How then may we know that our sins are washed away by Christ?


Ioh. Verse. 9. Humble confession of sin to God, is a note of remi^^ion of sin.
If we confess our sins [ namely with an humbled heart desiring pardon] he is
faithful and just [ in keeping his promise,] to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Verse. 10.
If we say [ as they before named doe] we have not sinned, we make him a lier [
whose word speaks the contrary,] and his word is not in us [ his doctrine has
no place in our hearts.]


CHAP. II.
Chapter IF this be true which has been said, that the blood of Christ does
cleanse from all sin; and that if we do confess them they shall be pardoned;
our corruption tells us that we may sin freely.


Ioh. Verse. 1.
My little children, these things I write unto you that ye sin not.


Chapter Alas, we fall often by infirmity: what shall we then do?


Ioh. If any man sin, we have an advocate [ who in his own name and by his
own merits pleads our cause] to the Father Jesus Christ the just [ and
therefore fit to make intercession.]


Chapter But how may every one of us in particular know that Christ is his
advocate?


Ioh. Verse. 2.
He is the propitiation [i. a covering of sin or reconciliation, as the
propuiatorie of the Arc covered the law,] and not for our sins only, but
also for the sins of the whole world [ not only Jews but also Gentiles of
all sorts.]


Chapter Be it that I know him to be my advocate, may I not be deceived? how may
I know that this my knowledge is effectual to salvation?


Ioh. Verse. 3. An endeavor to keep the commandments, a sign of faith.
Hereby are we sure that we know him [ here, that knowledge is meant, whereby
a man applies Christ and all his benefits to his own soule] If we keep [ to
keep is not to fulfill, but to have a care and desire to do it; for God of his
mercy, to his servants accepts the will for the deede] his commandments.


Chapter Many among us profess that they know Christ, but their lives be not
according.


Ioh. Verse. 4. Faith without obedience, a note of an hypocrite.
He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a lier, and the
truth is not in him.


Chapter How may it be proved, that the endeavor to keep Gods commandments is a
mark of faith and fellowship with Christ.


Ioh. Verse. 5.
[ He in whom the love of god is perfect, may hereby know that he is in Christ.]
But he that keeps his word, in him is the love of God: [i. not that love
wherewith God loves him; but that, whereby he loves God] is perfect indeed:
[i. sincere and sound: perfection being opposed not to imperfection, but to
hypocrisy:] hereby [ therefore] we know that we are in him.

Verse. 6.
He that says he remains in him, ought to walk even so, as he has walked:
[ and therefore he must needs endeavor himself in the commandments.]


Chapter Declare unto us some of the principal of these commandments?


Ioh. Verse. 7.
Brerhren, I write no new commandment unto you: But an old commandment which
ye have heard from the beginning: this old commandment is the word which ye
have heard from the beginning.

Again, a new commandment I write unto you, Verse. 8.
that, which is true [ to wit that the commandment is new which he will not
write [in him] who renueth the commandment of old given to Moses] and also in
you, for the darkness is past [i. the hardening of the minds of men under the
old testament, whereby they did but in a small measure understand the word [and
that true light] a greater measure of illumination, as also the writing of Gods
laws, not in tables of stone, but in the fleshie hearts; so as they be
transformed into the obedience thereof] now shines.


Chapter Well, set down this commandment which is so ancient, and is now renewed.


Ioh. He that says [ as many among you doe] that he is in that light [ than
is, Verse. 9. Profession joined with ha^re^ and malice, a note of an hypocrite.
that he is both plentifully enlightened and borne anew] and hates his brother,
is in darkness [ under the estate of damnation, not yet truly regenerate,]
until this time.

He that loves his brother abides in that light; [ is truly enlightened and
regenerate^] and there is no offense, [i. he will give no occasion of euill] in
him.

But [ on the contrarie] he that hates his brother is in darkness, Verse. 10
Love of our ^rother, a sign of regeneration.
and walks in darkness [ leads his life in ignorance and vngodlinesse]
and knows not whither he goes because that darkness has blinded his eyes.


Chapter What mooneth you to deliver unto us all these notes and signs of our new
birth, and communion with Christ?


Ioh. Little children I write unto you because your sins are forgiven you;
Verse. 11. Verse. 12.
for his names sake [i. by Christ and his merit; that ye may be certified to
your comfort of this.]

[ And that no kind of men among you might doubt of this, Verse. 13.
] I write unto you Fathers, because ye [ delighting to tell and hear of old
and ancient matters] have known him [ that is, Christ] that is from the
beginning^ I write unto you young men, because ye [ delighting to show your
valor and strength] have overcome the evil one, [ that is, Satan:] I write
unto you little children, [ who delight always to be under the fathers wing,]
because ye have known the father.

[ And again, because we are dull to mark^ and remember that which is good for
us: Verse. 14.
] I have written unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the
beginning: I have written unto you young men, because ye are strong, and the
word of God abides in you: and ye have overcome that wicked one.


Chapter If we be in the estate of grace under Gods favor in Christ; how may
we abide in it?


Ioh. Love not this world [ the corrupt estate of mankind out of Christ, Verse.
15.
] neither the things that are in the world [ for first of all; to give
reasons,] if any man love this world, the love of the Father [ wherewith he
loved the father] is not in him.

[ Secondly] for all that is in this world, as the lust of the flesh [ the
corruption of nature, Verse. 16.
which chiefly breaks out in evil concupiscence] the lusts of the eyes [ the
fruit of the former, stirred up by outward prouocations, especially in the
eye, as it is manifest in adultery or couetousnesse] and the pride of life [i.
Arrogance and ambition among men in common conversation of life,] is not of the
father, but of the world.

And [ thirdly] this world passes away and the lust thereof: Verse. 17.
but he that fulfilleth the will of God, abides for ever.


Chapter What other things are we to do, that we may continue?


Ioh. Verse. 18.
Little children, it is the last time; and as ye have heard that Antichrist
shall come, [ a special Antichrist, the chief of all other; who is now
manifest to be the Pope of Rome] even now are there many Antichrists [
heretics, denying either the natures of Christ, or his offices; or the vnio^
and the distinction of his natures:] whereby we know that it is the last time.


Chapter Those whom you call Antichrists, were of our company, and professed as
we do.


Ioh. Verse. 19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they should have continued with us. But this comes to pass, that it might
appear that they are not all of us.


Chapter How can we be assured of our continuance in grace: for we may fall as well
as they do?


Ioh. Verse. 20. Gods spirit dwelling in the heart, a sign of perseverance.
But ye have annointment, [ the grace of Gods holy spirit, resembled by the
annointings in the old Testament] from that holy one [ Christ, Luke 1. 15.] and
know all things.


Chapter If we know all things, then you need not write unto us of these matters.


Ioh. Verse. 21.
I have not written unto you, because ye know not the truth: but because you
know it, and that no lie is of the truth [i. ye can distinguish between the
sound doctrine of the Gospel and errors.]


Chapter What is this lie which you speak of?


Ioh. Verse. 22. Papists deny Jesus to be Christ: for though in words they
magnify him, yet in their doctrine by necessary consequent they deny him to
be a king, a priest, a prophet.
Who is a lier, [ a deceiuer, a seducer,] but he that denies that Jesus is
Christ, [ the Messiah or Savior of mankind.] The same is that Antichrist, that
denies the Father and the Son.


Chapter These whom you mean (say they) defend the doctrine of God as well as we;
and they use to call him Father.


Ioh. Who so denies the Son, has not the Father.


Chapter What do you infer upon this, if it be the last time as you have said?


Ioh. Let therefore abide in you, that same [ doctrine concerning Christ] which
ye have heard from the beginning: Verse. 23. Verse. 24.
[ which the Apostles preached, and before them the Prophets since the
beginning of the world] If that which ye have heard from the beginning remain
[ ye believing and obeying it] in you, ye also shall continue in the same, and
in the father.

Verse. 25. Perseverance in the knowledge and obedience of the Gospel, a sign
of communion with Christ.
And this is the promise which he has promised us, even life eternal.


Chapter We cannot persuade our selves of perseverance, seeing men so commonly fall
away from Christ among us?


Ioh. These things have I written unto you, concerning them that deceive you; [
not meaning them of you, as you seem to take it.]

Verse. 26. Verse. 27.
But that anointing [ the spirit which ye have received of Christ and which
has led you into all truth] which ye have received of him, dwells in you [
ubideth in you, and will so continue:] and ye need not that any man teach you,
[ any other doctrine beside this which ye have learned already:] but as the
same Anointing teaches you all things, and is true and not lying, and as it
taught you, ye shall abide in him.

Verse. 28.
And now, little children abide in him; that when he shall appear, we [ being
justified in Christ.] may have boldness, and not be ashamed, [ neither Satan
nor our consciences accusing us for sin,] before him at his coming.


Chapter We are still in doubt to return back to that which you said before, how
an endeavor to keep the commandments, should be a sign of fellowship with
Christ.


Ioh. If we know that he [ God] is righteous, Verse. 29.
know ye that he which works righteousness is borne of him [ as a child is
known to have such a man for his father, because he resembles him.]


CHAP. II.
Chapter ARe not we then borne of God?


Ioh. Behold what love the Father has given to us, Verse. 1.
that we should be called the sons of God.


Chapter The world does not report us as the sons and daughters of God, but for
the refuse and offscouring of the world.


Ioh. For this cause the world knows not you, because it knows not him.


Chapter Can Gods children be subject to such infirmities and miseries as we are?


Ioh. Dearly beloved now are we the sons of God, Verse. 2.
but yet it is not made manifest what we shall be: and we know that when he
shall be made manifest, we shall be like him; [ having not equality, but
likeness of holiness and glory:] for we shall see him as he is; [ for now we
see him as it were through spectacles in the word and Sacraments.]


Chapter Alas poor wretches, we are not like Gods children; for we are even sold
under sin, and daily carry a mass of corruption about us.


Ioh. Every one that has this hope [ to see him as he is] purifieth [i. though
he be subject to sin, yet he desires and uses the means to cleanse himself
from sin: Verse. 3. A desire, and an endeavor to use good means to cleanse
ourselves of our corruptions and privy sins, is a mark of adoption.
] even as he is pure, [ setting before him Christ as a pattern to follow.]


Chapter How prove you that an endeavor to purify our selves, is a note of
adoption?


Ioh. [ By the contrarie] whosoever commits sin [ p^actiseth sin with
full consent of will, not endeavoring himself in holiness of life,]
transgresses also the law: [ and for that cause, being under the curse of the
law, can not be Gods children:] for sin is the transgression of the Law, [
understand, by Law, not moral Law, but any commandment of God, whether it be
in the law or Gospel.

And [ againe] ye know that he was made manifest, Verse. 4. Verse. 5.
[ took our nature on him] that he might take away our sins [ the guilt and
punishment at once, and the corruption by little and little,] and in him is no
sin.

[ Thirdly] whosoever abides in him sins not: Verse. 6.
[ he does not give himself to sin, so as it should reign in him:]
Whosoever sins; has not seen him, nor known him: [ to wit, effectually,
so as he can apply Christ and all his benefits to himself.]


Chapter But some teach that faith is sufficient, and they embolden us to live as
we will.


Ioh. Little children, Verse. 7.
let no man deceive you; he that works righteousness, is righteous, as he is
righteous.

He that commits sin, Verse. 8.
[ though he say he does believe, and therefore thinks himself justified
before God,] is of the Devil, [i. resembles the Devil, as the child does the
father; and is governed by his spirit:] for the devil sins from the
beginning [ of the world] [ which appears that] for this purpose was made
manifest the Son of God; that he might dissolve the works: [ for the beginning
and continuance of all rebellion and disobedience to God,] of the Devil.

Verse. 9. Loosenes of life or the practi^e of sin, a note of the ^hild of the
devil for the present time.
[ And further, to display th^se seducers] whosoever is borne of God sins
not, [i. does not keep a course in sin, howsoever he fall by infirmity:]
for his seed [i. Gods word cast into the heart by the operation of the Spirit,
making a man to spring up into a new creature,] remains in him: neither can
he sin because he is borne of God.


Chapter Briefly to come to the point: how may it be known, who is Gods child,
and who (is to be reputed) the child of the devil.


Ioh. Verse. 10.
In this are the children of God known and the children of the devil:
whosoever works not righteousness, is not of God; neither [ to give you a
plai^ example,] he that loves not his brother.

Verse. 11.
For, this is the message which ye have heard from the beginning, that we should
love one another.

Verse. 12.
Not as Cain: he was of that evil one [ Satan,] and slew his brother: and
wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his brothers
good.


Chapter Yet if we love those which be our brethren, according to the flesh never
so much, they cease not to hate and persecute us.


Ioh. Verse. 13.
Marvel not my brethren, though this world hate you.


Chapter If not to love, be a note of the child of the devil, what is the note of
gods child?


Ioh. Verse. 14. To love a Christian because he is a Christian or godly man, is
a note of Gods child.
We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren, [i. such as be Christians, because they are Christians,] [ as on the
contrarie] he that loves not his brother, abides in death: [ is under the
state of damnation.]

Whosoever hates his brother, is a manslayer, and ye know that no manslayer
has eternal life abiding in him. Verse. 15.



Chapter You have showed us fully, that love is a work of adoption: Now show us
how we may know whether we love our brethren or not?


Ioh. Verse. 16.
Hereby we have perceived love, that he laid down his life for us: therefore we
ought [ carried with the like affection of loue] to lay down our lives for the
brethren.


Chapter Many in speech do pretend love, but we find not this willing affection
and readiness to show love.


Ioh. Verse. 17. Compassion stirring in the heart a note of love.
Whosoever has this worlds good, [ wherewith this life is sustained] and sees
his brother have need, and shuts up his bowels [i. has no compassion,
because it shows it self by the rolling of the intralls] from him, how
dwells the love of God in him?


Chapter What other note is there of true love?


Ioh. Verse. 18. Works of mercy, signs of love.
My little children, let us not love in word, nor in tongue only, but in deed
and in truth [ sincerely.]

Verse. 19. Sincere love, ^ note of s^ncere profe^sion.
1. For thereby we know that we are of the truth, [ sound professors of the
gospel of Christ,] 2. and shall before him appease our hearts [ in regard of
any accusation that our conscience shall lay unto us before Gods judgment
seat.]

Verse. 20.
If our heart condemn us, [ an evil conscience accuse vs] God is greater then
our heart [ namely in judging of us:] and knows all things.


Chapter How may we know that our consciences will not condemn us?


Ioh. Beloved, if our hearts condemn us not, verse. 20. Boldness in prays a
sign of a pacified conscience.
then have we boldness toward God, [i. to come unto him by prayer.]


Chapter What other fruits is there of true love?


Ioh. Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him; verse. 21.
because we keep his comma^dements, and do those things which are pleasant in
his sight.


Chapter What are these commandments?


Ioh. This then is his commandment, verse. 22.
that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as
he gave commandment.


Chapter Have they which keep these commandments their prayers granted? prove
this.


Ioh. [ Yes] For he that keeps his commandments dwells in him, verse. 23.
and he in him.


Chapter How may we know that God dwells in us, and we in him?


Ioh. Hereby we know that he abides in us, verse. 24. The operation of Gods
spirit in sanctifying us, a sign of communion with God.
by that spirit [ of sanctification, whereby we are renued] which he has given
us.


CHAP. IIII.
Chapter TO return again to that which was before mentioned: shall we believe all
that say they have the spirit?


Ioh. Dearly beloved, Verse. 1.
believe not every spirit [i. doctrines, which men bragging of the spirit do
teach;] but try the spirits whether they be of God: for many false prophets
are gone out into the world.


Chapter How may we discern of spirits?


Ioh. Hereby shall ye know the spirit of God; v. 2.
every spirit [ doctrine] which confesses that Jesus Christ [ the Messias] is
come in the flesh [ is made true man; this being the substance of the Gospel,]
is of God.

And every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
v. 3.
is not of God: but this is the spirit of Antichrist, of whom ye have heard,
that he shall come, and now already he is in the world.


Chapter We fear: because these false spirits are of great power, to persuade and
seduce many.


Ioh. Little children, ye are of God, and have overcome them: v. 4.
for greater is he that is in you [ Gods spirit,] then he that is in the world
[ the spirit of Satan.]


Chapter But the doctrine of these men is of great account, and has many followers
in the world; ours has but few which embrace it.


Ioh. They are of this world, therefore speak they of this world, v. 5.
and this world [i. ignorant and ungodly men] hears them.

We are of God: he which knows God, hears us: v. 6.
he which is not of god hears us not. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and
the spirit of error [ namely by the liking and applause of the world.]


Chapter How may we preserve our selves against these seducers?


Ioh. Beloved, let us love one another, for love comes of God: v. 7.
and every one that loves is borne of God, and knows God: [ by a special
knowledge, whereby they are assured that God the father of Christ is their
father: Christ their Redeemer: the holy Ghost their sanctifier.]

He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love, v. 8.
[i. wholly bent to show his love and compassion to his people.]

Verse. 9.
[ For a proof of this,] herein was that love of God made manifest among us,
because God sent that his only begotten Son into the world, that we might
live through him.

verse. 10.
Herein is that love, not that we loved God; but that he loved us: and sent his
Son to be a reconciliation for our sins.


Chapter What of all this?


Ioh. verse. 11.
Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also one to love another.


Chapter How can God manifest his love to us, he being a spirit invisible?


Ioh. verse. 12.
No man has seen God at any time: [ neuertheles] if we love one another, [
that is a signe] that God dwells in us, and his love is perfect in us: [i.
that love wherewith he loves, is thoroughly made manifest toward us by our
love: as the light of the moon shining on us, argues the light of the Sun
shining upon the moon, of whom (as from the fountain) the moon takes her
light.]


Chapter How may we know that God dwells in us?


Ioh. verse. 13.
Hereby do we know, that we dwell in him, and he in us: because he has given
us of his spirit.


Chapter What other sign have you of Gods dwelling in us?


Ioh. verse. 14.
We have seen and do testify, that the Father sent that Son to be the
Savior of the world.

verse. 15. A sincere confession or the Gospel, a note of communion with Christ.
Whosoever confesses [ in faith and loue] that Jesus is the Son of God; in
him dwells God, and he in God.


Chapter The devil will confess Christ.


Ioh. And we [ which is more] have known and believed the love which god has
in us.


Chapter Declare how our love should be a sign of Gods dwelling in us?


Ioh. verse. 16.
God is love, and [ therefore] he that dwells in love, dwells in God and God
in him.


Chapter God is love we grant, but how may we know, that God is love to us?


Ioh. verse. 17. To ^e like God in holiness of life, is a ^igne of his love to us
particularly.
Hereby is that love perfect, [i. fully made manifest in us;] that we may have
boldness [ to stand before him without fear,] in the day of judgment: for
even as he is, even so are we in the world [ not in equality, but in
conformity of holiness.]

verse. 18.
[ As may appear by the contrarie] there is no fear in love [i. when a man is
assured of Gods love to him, he does not distrust nor seruilely fear him in
respect of his sinnes] but perfect love casts out fear: for fear has
painfulnes [ checkings and torments of conscience;] and he that fears is not
perfect in love.


Chapter What other sign is there that God is love to us?


Ioh. verse. 19. Our love of God, a sign that he loves us particularly.
We love him because he loved us first [ as when a man warmes him, the heat of
his body is because the fire is first hot.]


Chapter If this be so, then they which love not their brethren, are loved of God
in Christ: seeing all generally say they love God.


Ioh. verse. 20.
If any man say, I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar: for how can he
that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God whom he has not
seen?

verse. 21.
And this commandment have we of him, that he that loves God, should love his
brother also.


CHAP. V.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is that Christ [ true Messias] is borne of
God: Verse. 1.
and every one that loves him which did beget [i. God the father,] loves him
also which is begotten of him, [ the child of God a true Christian.]

Chapter This being manifest that they are hypocrites which say they love god, yet
show no love to their brethren; teach us how we may know that we love our
brethren.


Ioh. In this we know that we love the children of God, v. 2. An endeavor to
obey the comma^dements, a ^igne of love of our brother.
when we love God and keep his commandments, [ that is, endeavor to keep;
the beginning of the action being put for the whole.]

For this is the love of God [ the duty of love to God] that we keep his
commandments.


Chapter But no man can keep the Law.


Ioh. His commandments are not burdenous [ to them that are in Christ, v. 3.
and are freed from the curse of the law, which makes the law grievous, and are
also guided by his holy spirit.]

[ And this is apparant] for all that is borne of God overcomes the world, v.
4.
[ Satan with all corruptions and works of darkness.]


Chapter By what means?


Ioh. And this is the victory which has overcome the world, even our faith [
which is the instrument and hand whereby we lay hold on him, that he in us, and
so we by him might overcome the world.]

Who is that overcomes this world, v. 5.
but he which believes that Jesus is that Son of God?


Chapter How may we be resolved that Jesus of Nazareth the son of Mary, was the
son of God, and the Messiah: he came but basely into the world?


Ioh. This is that Jesus Christ, which came by water, v. 6. Proofs invincible
that Jesus of Nazareth the son of Marie was the son of God against the Jews.
[ sanctification signified by the legal washings,] and blood [ imputation of
Christ's righteousness, or the sprinkling of his blood:] not by water only, but
by water and blood: [ because Christ works both justification and
sanctification together:] and it is that spirit [ a man's own conscience
inwardly purified] that bears witness: for that spirit is truth: [ that is,
that the testimony of the Spirit of adoption, certifying us that we are the
sons of God, is true.]

For [ that I may speak yet more plainly] there are three which bear record
in heaven, v. 7.
the Father, the Word, [ the Sonne] and the holy Ghost: and these three are
one, [ namely in testimony.]

And there are three which bear record in earth, the Spirit; and the water, v.
8.
and blood; and these three agree in one.


Chapter How show you that these witnesses be authentical, and to be believed?


Ioh. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: verse. 9.
for this is the witness of God, [i. that was said to come from heaven;] which
he testifies of his Son.

[ Again,] he that believes in that Son of God, has the witness in
himself, verse. 10.
[ the peace of conscience which he may feel in himself: [ And further,] he
that believes not God, makes him a liar: because he believed not the record,
that God witnessed of his Son.


Chapter What is the effect of that which these witnesses testify?


Ioh. verse. 11.
And this is that record, to wit, that God has given unto us eternal life, and
this life is in his Son.

verse. 12.
He which has the Son, has life: and he which has not the son of God,
has not life.

verse. 13.
[ And to conclude,] these things have I written unto you that believe in the
name of the son of God, that ye may know that ye have life eternal, and that
ye may believe [i. increase in faith] in the name of that son of God.


Chapter How can we have life eternal now, that are so miserable, and so full of
wants?


Ioh. verse. 14.
And this is that assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us.


Chapter How may we know that God grants our prayers, made according to his
will?


Ioh. verse. 15. A sign of our prayers granted us, if God do but hear them.
If we know that he hears [ that is (as it were) to give an ear to our
prayers,] whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have
desired of him [ though the things which we asked, be not given us in that
measure, and manner, and time, in which we asked them.]


Chapter Let us hear an example of those things which God will grant, when we
pray?


Ioh. verse. 16.
If a man see his brother sin a sin, that is not unto death; [ that is,
which may be pardoned,] let him ask [ pardon in his behalf,] and he shall
give him life for them that sin not unto death; there is a sin unto death [
after which necessarily damnation follows, as the sin against the holy
Ghost:] I say not that thou should pray for it.


Chapter But is not every sin a sin to death?


Ioh. verse. 17.
All unrighteousness is sin [ and therefore deserves death:] but there is a
sin not unto death; [ namely, that which is pardoned in Christ.]


Chapter We fear least we have committed this sin which is to death.


Ioh. verse. 18.
We know that whosoever is borne of God, sins not: but he that is begotten of
God, keeps himself, and that wicked one [ Sathan] touches him not [i. does
him no violence, or he can not give him a deadly wound.]

verse. 19.
We know that we are of God, and this whole world lies in evil: [ that is, in
servitude under Satan and sin.]


Chapter How show you that we are of God?


Ioh. verse. 20.
We know that the son of God is come, and has given us a mind to know him
that is true, and we are in him that is true: that is, in his Son Jesus
Christ: this same is that very God, and that eternal life.


Chapter verse. 21.
How may we keep our selves in God, and never commit the sin to death?


Ioh. Little children, keep your selves from Images, [ whether they be of
false gods, or of the true God.]


PSALM XV.
Iehoua. David. Verse. 1.
O Iehoua! who shall dwell [ as Pilgrims dwell in tents] in thy tabernacle,]
the Church militant?] who shall rest in thy holy Mountain, [ the kingdom of
heaven?]


Ieho. He that walks perfectly, [ that is, he which leads the course of his
life uprightly.]


Dau. Who is the upright man? Verse. 2. Sincerity of life, in righteousnes^e
and holiness, a note of gods child.



Ieho. He that works righteousness [ according to the commandments of the
second table,] and speaks the truth in his heart [ as he thinks, his heart
and tongue agreeing.]


Dau. By what notes may this upright man be know, and who is he?


Ieho. I. He that slandereth not with his tongue: Verse. 3. Seven notes of an
upright man.
II. nor does hurt to his neighbor: III. nor receives a false report against
his neighbor.

IV. In whose eyes a vile person, Verse. 4.
[ an ungodly and unrighteous man;] is contemned, but he honors them that
fear God: V. Verse. 5.
He that having sworn to his own hinderance, changes not.

VI. He that gives not his money to usury. VII. neither takes reward of the
innocent.


Dau. Are these notes infallible? Verse. 6.



Ieho. He that does these things, shall never be moved, [ shall abide in Gods
favor for ever.]


A BRIEF DISCOVRSE, TAKEN OVT OF THE writings of Hier. Zanchius. Wherein the
aforesaid case of Conscience is disputed and resolved.
Assertion. I.
Only the elect, and all of them: not only truly may be, but also are in
that time which god has appointed them in this life, indeed assured of their
Election to eternal life in Christ: and this is done not one way, but many
ways.

We say that the Elect alone may be, and indeed are made sure of their
election: that so we may exclude the reprobate hypocrites: for considering
they are not elected, they can never be truly persuaded that they are elected.
I say truly: because it may come to pass that many in their own thinking
shall be predestinate: yet in truth they are not persuaded so: for they are
deceived. We have an example in temporary Christians, who think of themselves
that they believe in Christ, but truly do not believe: 1. Cor. 2. 10. Mat.
11.27
for their faith is in hypocrisy: and for a time only. Wherefore a true and
certain persuasion of election can never befall any of the reprobates: because
the true persuasion of heavenly matters, comes of the holy Ghost; which never
persuades any false matter. Wherefore how can reprobates be persuaded that
they are elected? This considered, it is not amiss, that we attribute this
persuasion (of which we now speak) to the elect alone. We add further, that
all the elect, not only may be, but are indeed made sure of their Election:
which must be demonstratiuely confirmed against Schoolmen, and other our
adversaries. We say, this is done in the time appointed; because the elect,
before they be called to Christ, are never sure of their election: nay they
never think of it; as appears in Paul before he was called, and in others.
Again in like manner after they have been called; yet not presently are made
sure of their election: but some sooner, some later. Lastly we add, that this
is done many ways, what they are, (if not perfectly, yet in part I will
afterward show.) Now let us come to the matter.

^. Cor. 2.16. To. 12. 34. The elect by the testimony of the holy Ghost are
m^de sure of their election.
The Schoolmen demand whether a man may be made sure of his Election? And they
determine that a man cannot, except it be by divine revelation: because
Predestination is in God, and not in us. And no man knows the things of God,
but the spirit of God: as no man knows the things of man, but the spirit of
man which is in him. Again, who knows the mind of the Lord? therefore (say
they) some special revelation is needful: if any desire to be certified,
either of his own or of any other man's predestination, their sayings are not
simply to be disliked: but in that meaning, in which they understand them,
they are no way to be approved. For they take a special revelation to be
this, if God shall signify and say expressly to any: either by some Angel
outwardly, or by his spirit inwardly, that he is predestinate to life: after
which sort, they hold that Paul and a few other Saints had their
predestination revealed to them. So they conclude that, because every man has
not his election revealed to him after this manner, that all men cannot be
assured of their election. But they are deceived; for God, not only by this
one manner which they speak of, does reveal his will and his counsels; but by
many: for God reuealeth things, either by the inward inspiration of his spirit,
or outwardly by his word: or both inwardly and outwardly by inward and outward
effects. By his spirit he did inspire his Prophets, and open many things to
come. And Christ said to his Apostles, as concerning the holy Ghost: Ioh. 16.
13.
He shall lead you into all truth. By his word he spoke unto the prophets,
and in like manner, by his word he teaches us his will. Also by diverse
effects, he declares either his mercy or his justice: as it is known. The
same must be thought of the revealing of his election: to wit, that God
reuealeth the same to the elect, by the holy Ghost, by the word, and by the
most certain effects of predestination.

The first testimony, by which God assures us of our election, is the inward
testimony of the spirit, of which the Apostle says: The spirit (of God)
testifies unto our spirits, that we are the children of God. Now what is it
to be the son of God, but first of all to be predestined to be the child of
God by adoption: and then to be made actually the son of God by faith: and
lastly by the same spirit also to be regenerate as Gods children are, and to
put on the nature of the son of God, or rather the son of God himself, as
the Apostle speaks. Therefore the holy Ghost, whilst he inwardly bears
record unto our spirits, that is, to our minds being enlightened by his light,
that we are the sons of God, most plainly reuealeth that we were predestinate
from all eternity to adoption: for men are not made the sons of God by
faith, nor regenerate to be the sons of God, nor put on Christ; except they be
first of all predestined to adoption. And there can be nothing more certain
then this testimony: for who better knows the things o^ god, his counsels
and decrees, then the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.10.
which searches all things, yea the deep things of god: therefore he can most
truly reveal unto every one of us the certainty of our election. Ioh. 16.13.
And he cannot deceive us in revealing it: for he is the spirit of truth which
can neither deceive nor be deceived. If an angel from heaven should be sent to
thee, as he was sent to Marie, and as he spoke unto the fathers, and should tell
thee in the name of God, that thou were elected to life everlasting: would
not thou say that thou could not then doubt any longer of thy election? But
so much the more certain is the testimony of the spirit, which bears record
to our spirit, that we are the sons of god: by how much the holy ghost does
more know the things of God then any angel: and can less deceive then an
angel. And so much the more sure is this testimony, considering it is not kept
in the bodily ears, where it might soon vanish away, but in our mind and
spirit: because the spirit bears record to our spirit. And further, that the
holy Ghost never departs from our spirit, but dwells in us, abides in us,
speaks in us, Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4.6.
shows forth his power in us, prays in us. Therefore the Apostle says,
that we have received the spirit of adoption, by which we cry Abba, father: as
though he should say, this testimony of the spirit is altogether so sure, by
which he bears us record that we are the sons of God: that presently
without doubting, we can call upon God, and cry, Abba, Father. And all the
elect have this testimony, being made the sons of God by faith, and being
renewed by the holy ghost: Romans 8.9.
and ingraffed into Christ. For so the Apostle speaks, if any man have not
the spirit of Christ, he is not his: therefore, whosoever is Christ's, and is
ingraffed into Christ, it is necessary he should have the spirit of God. And
whosoever have received and do enjoy the spirit of Christ; to their minds the
same spirit bears record, that they are the sons of God, and makes them
to cry Abba, Father. And it is certain, that no man is renewed by the holy
Ghost, which is not persuaded that God is his most merciful and most loving
father: and therefore can call upon him as a father. Therefore although all men
in that they are assured by the certainty of faith, that God is their Father,
and they are his sons, do not thereby argue and conclude that they are
elected to eternal life; yet all men indeed have thereby a sure testimony of
their election to glory: because if they be the sons of God, they are also
heirs of eternal life. This testimony I will briefly comprise within this
Demonstration: Whosoever call upon god and in their hearts cry Abba, Father,
they are the sons of God: and it is certain that they thus cry by the
spirit of God. And they which are the sons of God, are also heirs of
eternal life, and they have been predestinate to adoption: therefore it must
needs be, that all they which are persuaded, that they are the sons of God
by the holy ghost, are predestinate to eternal life, and must be persuaded of
it. This is the first testimony and the first way, by which God reuealeth to
every Elect man his predestination: namely, by the holy ghost within our
hearts, bearing record unto us, that we are the sons of God in Christ, and by
Christ. And let this be the first argument, also serving to confirm our
assertion.

The second way, Verse. 2. The elect out of the word of God their conscience
making the assumption, at length they may be certainly persuaded of their
predestination.
by which God reuealeth to every man his predestination, is by his word. I
mean not any particular word, by which he does declare to any outwardly in
private and special manner, and that in express words, his election: but the
general word of the Gospel, by which Christ calls all them which believe in
him, elect, both by himself and by his Apostles, as in the new Testament every
where is most manifest. For although in particular propositions he say not to
thee, or to him particularly, Thou art elect to eternal life: yet by means of
general propositions, he does as well conclude in the heart of every one that
believes, that he is elected: as any man shall be able to conclude unto
particular men, that every one of them is a living creature endued with reason
by this general proposition: Every man is a reasonable creature endued with
reason: the assumption being suppressed. Therefore after this manner deals
God; He has chosen all and every several man whom he was to indue with
faith, to have the everlasting inheritance.

Furthermore, he publishes it to all the Elect by the Apostles in this
general proposition, that all the faithful are elect to eternal life: That
whereby a man applies the general promi^e to himself.
the assumption is concealed in the word of God. But when he gives us faith,
he makes every one of us to make an assumption by himself in his mind: But I
am of the faithful: for I find in my self that I truly believe in Christ.
Therefore who is it that makes this conclusion for thee, that thou art
predestinate to everlasting life? even God himself: the proposition being
taken forth of the gospel, and the assumption proceeds of the gift of faith.
But that indeed by which we properly attain to the knowledge of the matter
contained in the conclusion, is the middle term, as they call it. Wherefore
it is manifest, that God by the word of his gospel, where he says; that all
the faithful are elect: does reveal to every faithful man his own
predestination. Only this one thing is to be required, that the faithful man
hearing the universal propopositions, in his mind should make an assumption:
But I am faithful by the gift and grace of God. And is not God said to have
revealed to every man his special malediction in this general proposition,
Curs^ ^is every one that does not continue in all things that are written in
this book: Deuteronomy. 27.26
although he say to no man specially, thou art accursed: for every one does
make this assumption, that he is accursed: because he knows most certainly
that he does not continue in all things that are written in the book of the
law. Therefore the Schoolmen are deceived, when they say, it may be that
every man may be sure of his election: namely, if GOD which is able, will
reveal it to him: yet; that he does only reveal it to a very few, as the
Apostles: for God (as has bin proved and declared) even by his word, in
general propositions does reveal to every man his predestination: for what
can be more certain then this demonstration? Whosoever do truly believe in
Christ, they are elect to eternal life in Christ: but I truly believe in
Christ; therefore I am elected. But some make an exception and say, that this
were a demonstration, and that most certain and evident, if a man might be
able to know that he were endued with true faith in Christ: but here lies all
the difficulty. For many think that they truly believe in Christ, whereas
nevertheless their faith is hypocritical and temporary: as appears by the
Evangelists.

They which do truly believe, know that they believe.
Answer. We grant that they which believe by such a faith^ which is in
hypocrisy and only lasts for a time; that they are deceived whilst they
think that they do truly believe, and yet do not indeed: for they are like
them which dream that they are kings, when as they very beggars: but we say,
that they which believe by a true faith, do know whether they truly believe or
no: and they are not deceived when they say and think that they truly believe.
For they are like unto them, which handling a precious stone, by reason that
they are endued with sense, know and say, that they handle it. And if no man
might certainly know, whether he believed truly or not: why does the Apostle
say, 2. Cor. 15. 65.
Try your selves whether you be in the Faith? And if it be so, no man can ever
certainly know, whether he be justified: considering that they only which truly
believe, can be justified. And if a man giving credit to an other man's words,
does certe^ly know that he believes him: how much more does he know it, which
being endued with true faith by the holy Ghost, believes the Gospel? In a
word, godly writers have proved against Schoolmen, that they which are endued
with true faith in Christ, can not be ignorant of it. But (say they) no man is
certain of his perseverance in faith: and therefore out of this universal
proposition, He which believes, namely, with a true and constant faith, is
elected to life, no man c^n conclude that he is elected, by reason that albeit
he may know, that he is endued with true faith, yet he can not tell whether it
shall be perpetual. This collection is absurd, and the learned have fully
proved, that true faith is perpetual. And therefore they which certainly know,
that they believe in a true faith, are also certain, that the same their true
faith shall never perish in this world: partly for the promise of God, I will
put my fear into their hearts, that they may never depart from me: Ier. 32.40.
Luke 22. 32.
and partly for the prayer of Christ, I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy
faith do not fail. Seeing it is so, it is very certain, that God by his
word, in which generally he says, that all the faithful are elect, does
reveal to every man his election: considering that the proposition taken out
of the Gospel, is most certain, and every faithful man may certainly assume
to himself, that he is endued with true faith in Christ.

The third way by which God reuealeth to every one of us his Predestination,
Verse. 3. ^y the effects of prede^tination a man may gather his predestination.
is by the effects of predestination, as well inward in us, as outward: by
which, as by certain marks imprinted in us, he does seal us to himself in
Christ: and does so seal us, that if we shall give diligent heed, we may
thereby evidently perceive, that we are set apart from the common sort of men,
which is often called by the name of the world: that we are foreknowne for his
sons, and loved in Christ, and predestined to eternal life; yea, and that
we appe^taine no longer to the world, but to that city which is above, that
has his foundation as the Apostle says. Heb. 11.10.
And we have a twofold reason of this argument: one, because these effects (of
which we speak, and which we will afterward handle) God works not in any,
but in his elect: as also afterward we will show. Therefore by right a man may,
by a true feeling and experience of these effects in himself, be assured of
his particular election and predestination, The effects of predestination which
are in us, are like se^l^s imp^inting the im^ge of Gods ^lecti^n in us.
to have fellowship with Christ in all his graces. For if predestination (as
Augustine witnesses) be a preparation to the blessings of God, by which most
certainly they are made free, whosoever are made free; therefore whosoever
feels himself freed through these graces of God, may be assured and
certified of his predestination. The other reason is, that these effects are
not only the effects simply of predestination, but also such effects they
are, that may also be seals of it: namely in printing in us a lively form and
image of GOD, foreknowing us, loving us, electing us. And therefore, albeit we
cannot see the purpose, the foreknowledge, the election and predestination of
God as concerning our selves, in God himself foreknowing, willing, and
electing us: yet we may behold in our selves some sure representations of all
these imprinted, and even stamped in us by the word: and so by the beholding
of these forms and impressions in our selves, we shall easily be brought to
the knowledge of those patterns, (as it were) which are in the Lord himself.
The matter (by reason it is very good and comfortable) may be declared by a
similitude: God is like unto the sun in regard of us: the sun when it
shines upon upon us, and after a sort looks us in the face, it does after
such a sort imprint an image of his light in our eyes, that we also in like
manner being made partakers of his light, may look again upon the sun it
self, and upon his light: for the light of the sun and his beams being
sent down upon us, are bea^en back and reflected again toward the sun. So
in like manner the foreknowledge of God, by which he has and would acknowledge
for his from all extremity, it always rests in God, and cannot of it self
be perceived of us. But yet whilst God does acknowledge us for his, he does
portrait in us his elect, a certain form and image of his foreknowledge: by
which he makes us, renouncing all other gods, to acknowledge him for our only
true God. Thus it comes to pass, through this true knowledge of God, which
he vouchsafes us and by which we do acknowledge God for our God and father: we
may after a sort behold in God himself his foreknowledge, by which he has
foreknowne us for his fonnes. For first of all, God does acknowledge us for
his, and then the elect being made partakers of this his light and knowledge,
he causes us in like manner to acknowledge him. To this purpose serves that
which our Savior Christ says: Ioh. 10. 14.
first, (says he) I know my sheep, after he adds, and again, I am known of
mine. As though he should say, whiles I acknowledge them for my sheep, I make
them by means of this my light and knowledge that they also can acknowledge me
for their pastor. So the Apostle says to the Galathians: when ye shall know
God, or rather are known of him: he teaches therefore, that God knew the
Galathians, because he had first acknowledged them for his, Gal. 4.9.
in his eternal predestination: and by giving unto them this his wisdom he
made them acknowledge the true God for their God. The same may be said of the
love of God, by which he loved us in Christ to everlasting life, before the
foundation of the world: god by loving us does print in our hearts the image of
his love, by which we may love him again from our hearts: and as it were by
the reflection of the funne beams sent down into our hearts, we may be
provoked to love again. For the love of God to us being eternal, and causing
eternal life, begets in the time appointed a certain love in us, serving
for his eternal glory. And to his purpose is that of S. John: 1. Ioh. 4. 10.
1. Ioh. 4.7. Romans 5.51.
not that we first loved God, but because he first loved us As though he had
said, therefore we love GOD; because he first, that is before the foundation
of the world loving us in Christ, by the ingrauing of his love in our hearts,
causes us to love him again as a father. So love is said, (to wit, that love
by which we love God) to be of God: that is, to proceed of the love of God
toward us. And Paul writes that the love of God, (namely, that love by which
he loved us) to be shed in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given us: and
by this shedding of the love of God in our hearts, it comes to pass that
love is also wrought in our hearts toward God. And therefore by that sound
love by which we seele our selves to love God, we are made to know how great
that love of God is, by which he loved us from all eternity in Christ. And
what is that love else but predestination?

In like manner, election by which he singled us from the rest of the world in
Christ, that we might be holy before him; begets in us a certain image even of
God himself, that is, another election, by which we renouncing all other Gods
which are worshipped in the world, make our choice of this our true God
Jehovah, to be our god, that he may be always before our eyes, he which
sanctifies us, and the author of our whole salvation. Wherefore through this
constant election which is in us, we perceive, that the election which is in
god, as concerning us, is firm and sure: not only as we gather the cause by
the effect, but also as we gather the pattern by the picture: like as by the
similitude of the form of a seal fashioned in wax, we do easily understand
what is the very form and fashion of the seal. Therefore it is manifest, that
it is the manner of God by the effects of his election and predestination
imprinted in us, to reveal to every one of us his own election and
predestination: And that two ways, both because there are certain eff^cts of
predestination, and by the effects, the causes are known: and also because
there are certain lively types of Gods foreknowledge and election, by which we
are sealed up unto God.

Now by the imprinting of these forms and types in us, as the seal is in wax:
the very first patterns themselves are known what they are.

Furthermore, that there is no man elected to eternal life, which shall not be
sealed up in the time appointed with these marks of Gods election: It is
manifest out of these places of scripture, which treat of election and
predestination. The Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 8. 3^.
that we were elected, that we might be holy and without blame. Also he
teaches, that all they whom God has predestined, are likewise called and
justified, and by consequent endued with faith and knowledge of God, by which
they take him for their father: with love also, wherewith they love him as a
father: Also with a good will and constant purpose, by which they desire
constantly his glory. Again, he says in another place, the foundation
stands sure, having this seal (in respect of GOD) the Lord knows who are
his. 2. Ti. 2.19.
Now in respect of us, he puts down another seal, saying: let him depart
from iniquity which calls upon the name of the Lord: for with this mark,
all the elect are branded. They call upon the name of the Lord, and depart from
iniquity: seeking after holiness and a good conscience. Apoc. 2.3. Ioh. 6.27.
2. Cor. 1.21. Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30.
And this is that sealing which is so often mentioned in the scriptures: As
when in the Apocalypse it is said, that an innumerable multitude was sealed to
the Lord. For, like as the father sealed Jesus Christ as he was man and
Mediator; so also the rest of his children he has sealed, and does daily
seal with sure notes and seals to distinguish them from other men, and the
children of this age. For God is said to have anointed us, and sealed us, and
given us the earnest of his spirit in our hearts. And again, to have sealed us
with the holy spirit of promise, and that to the day of redemption. As it is
easy to discern a right seal from a counterfeit, so the true souls of God
(by the sealing of the spirit) are distinguished from hypocrites, and lawful
children from bastards.

The chief effects of prede^^ination by which the elect are discerned from the
reprobate.
It remains, that we should declare some effects of predestination: by which,
as by marks and seals, the Elect may be discerned from Reprobates. The first
effect of Predestination, is Christ himself; as he is a Mediator and a
Savior, dwelling in our hearts by his holy spirit. For as we are elected in
him and by him redeemed; so by the sprinkling of his blood, we are cleansed and
sealed: and by his dwelling in us quickened, (for he is our life, and that
eternal) and therefore we are severed from Reprobates which always remain
in death, as in the holy Scriptures we are taught. We say that this is the
first effect of Predestination, because we can enjoy none of the gifts of god,
either of election, vocation or justification, except in Christ, and by Christ:
For he has poured out all the effects of predestination into us. In that
therefore every elect faithful man feels Christ to dwell in him, and to
quicken him; he has a seal in himself, by which he may know that he was
elected to everlasting life in the same Christ: A part and beginning of which
life, is this spiritual life, by which we now live to God. And as every man
knows himself to be the son of God in Christ, because he calls upon God
from his heart as a father: he may conclude, that he is predestined to be
the son of God for Christ's cause. And that by this first note the faithful
may know that they are elect to eternal life: the Apostle shows, 2. Cor.
13.5.
Know ye not (says he) your selves that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
Reprobates? And no doubt a Type of this kind of sealing, was that sealing which
was done in Egypt, by the blood of the Lamb: namely, when the houses of the
Israelites were sprinkled with this blood, that they might be discerned from
the houses of the Egyptians: and so be passed over untouched of the Angel. And
by Christ, as by the chief effect: yea and the cause too of all the effects
which follow: all other effects of Predestination are put into us, and we are
sealed with them. Romans 8. 30.
The Apostle names three principals, our calling, (to wit effectual) our
justification and glorification. This third effect, we shall obtain in the
life to come, the two first in this life. And to these two may very well be
referred all other, which we receive in this life by Christ, with the
effectual, we join a sound hearing of the word of God, and the understanding
of it, accompanied with great and constant delight and joy: faith also and a
true knowledge of the deity, humanity, and office of Christ. Unto
justification, we refer a persuasion of the remission of our sins by Christ
(for by this we are justified:) and regeneration too, or sanctification, and
renouation of life, a good conscience, love not feigned, a pure heart and
clean, patience in adversity, and boasting in tribulation, all good works and
fruits of the spirit: add hereunto the cross it self, which we bear for the
truth of the gospel; wherefore, whosoever feels that he is effectually
called, that he does willingly hear the word, that he does believe the
gospel, that he is sure of the remission of his sins, that he burns with
true love to his neighbor, that he is bent to every good work: he cannot
but must needs be persuaded of his election: for God only does communicate
these unto the elect. Therefore it is plain, that the elect are confirmed in
the assurance of their election, by the effects of Predestination, and that
there is a threefold way, by which God reuealeth to every man his
Predestination.

But if any shall take an occasion the rather of doubting of his election, then
The weakness of our faith as touching our eternal elec^ion, by what stays it
may be held up.

Ioh. 16. 13. Ephesians. 1.5.


of that which has been spoken as concerning the fruits of the spirit, and
the effects of predestination: and that peradventure because he can feel in
himself few and very weak fruits of regeneration and election: yet let him
not be discouraged, neither let him doubt of his election: but let him underset
himself with these proppes. First of all, if ever he truly felt in himself
that testimony of the spirit (which before I mentioned) namely that he is the
son of GOD: let him know undoubtedly, that he is such a one, and therefore
elected to eternal life. For the holy ghost never bears record, or
persuades a man of that which is false, for he is the spirit of truth. And
they are not the sons of God, except they have been predestinate (as the
Apostle says) to adoption by Christ: and none that is the Son of God and a
man elected, can be made a reprobate, and the child of the devil. Therefore,
albeit he feel in himself both few and feeble effects of regeneration, yet
let him not doubt of his election: otherwise he shall disgrace the testimony
which he has received of the holy Ghost, yea and that too which as yet he
enjoys: although peradventure by reason that his mind is troubled by evil
affections, that testimony of the holy spirit can scarce be heard in him. For
the true testimony of our adoption by the holy Ghost, being once given unto
our spirit, lasts for ever: although it is otherwhiles heard more plainly,
How a man may know whether the testimony which is given of the spirit, be of
the spirit or no^.
and at other times is more slenderly and scarce perceived. But how (say you)
may I know, whether the testimony does proceed from the holy Ghost, and
therefore whether it be a true and certain testimony. I answer first by the
persuasion: secondly, by the manner of the persuasion: lastly, by the effects
of this testimony and persuasion. For the first, the holy Ghost does not
simply say it, but does persuade with us, that we are the Sons drawn of
God; and no flesh can do this. Again he persuades us by reasons drawn not
from our works, or from any worthiness in us; but from the alone goodness of
God the Father, and grace of Christ. In this manner the devil will never
persuade any. Lastly, the persuasion of the holy Ghost is full of power, for
they which are persuaded that they are the sons of God, cannot but needs
must call him Abba, Father, and in regard of love to him, do hate sin, and
whatsoever is disagreeing to his will: and on the contrary, they have a sound
and a hearty desire to do his will. If at any time thou have felt in thy
self any such testimony, persuade thy self it was the testimony of the holy
ghost: and that very true and certain too: and therefore that thou art the
child of God, and predestinate to eternal life. This is the prop by which we
must underset that weak belief we have of our certain election to eternal
life. Again, hold this without wavering whatsoever thou art, that art tempted
to doubt of thy election: even as nothing is required at our hands to work our
election, (for God chose us of his only mere goodness) so, that we may truly
know whether we be elect or not: this one thing shall be sufficient, namely, if
we shall attain to the certain knowledge of this, that we are in Christ, and
partakers of him: for, he that is now ingrafted in Christ, and is justified, it
cannot be, but that he was elected in Christ before the foundation of the
world. And that we may be in Christ, faith is both required, and is sufficient:
not perfect faith, but true faith, though it be so little as a grain of
mustard seed, and feeble like a young borne babe, and that sore diseased too.
Now that faith, which is a lively and a true faith lasts always as has
been before declared, neither can it at any time altogether fail. And so it
comes to pass, that they which once have been truly ingrafted into Christ,
remain always and continue in him, according to that saying; All that my
Father gives me, shall come to me: and he which comes unto me I will not
cast forth. That is true no doubt, that look how much the faith is more
perfect, so much the greater power it has, to knit us more and more to Christ:
and therefore we must always endeavor to increase in faith. Yet for all that,
this is most certain; one little sparkle of true faith is sufficient to
engraft us into Christ. And for that cause, we must in no wise doubt of our
engrafting into Christ, and of our election too by reason of the weakness of
faith, and the small and slender fruits it brings out.

Whereby a man may know whether his faith be true faith or not.
But how shall I certainly know (say you) whether my faith be a true and lively
faith, or not? Out of the same grounds, from whence the testimony of our
adoption is perceived. First of all, if you shall truly feel, that you are
persuaded of the truth of the Gospel, yea and that all your sins are pardoned
you for Christ, and you received to favor. Again, if you see that this
persuasion is grounded not upon any merits of yours, but on the sole goodness of
God, and grace of Christ.

Lastly, if you feel such a confidence to approach unto, and call upon the
Father, and such a love toward him and his Son Jesus Christ, that ye do hate
and detest whatsoever is against his glory (as all sin is) and on the
contrary, be carried away with a desire to do those things which serve for
the advancing of his glory: and therefore that you love all those, which
desire and seek the same, as the brethren and friends of Christ. For these be
the effects which can never be severed from true faith. And this is the
disposition of true faith: therefore as long as thou feel these effects in
thy self, albeit very slender and greatly languishing, yet assure thy self
thou art endued with true faith, although it be weak: and therefore thou art
in Christ, yea and in Christ elected too. Wherefore thou must not doubt of thy
salvation and election, by reason of thy daily slippes, proceeding from thy
weakness of faith, no not for heinous crimes: like as neither David for his
adultery and murder, not Peter for his threefold denial, did despair of
their election: which appears, in that being plunged in the very gulfes of
their temptations, they held fast their faith as an anchor, and called upon God.
This is the second prop. Lastly, in no wise we must forget, namely that our
election is certain and immutable: and therefore, as it is done without respect
of any works of ours: so in like sort it can never be changed by any of our
evil deserts. For as it first proceeded from the only free purpose of God; so
it is grounded thereon. True it is: we provoke Gods wrath against us by our
sins, and neither will God let them escape unpunished, but he chastises us
by diverse, both inward and outward scourges: as may appear in David above all
other. Yet for all that, it is his good pleasure, that for his goodness sake and
truth, for the obedience of Christ, that his purpose should remain sure, and
our election. So it comes to pass, that he gives us repentance anew, to
raise us up, and to receive us to favor. Therefore, although for the present,
thou feel thy self to be of weak faith, and to have fallen to diverse
sins: yet whereas hertofore thou have had many and evident testimonies of thy
election, as the testimony of the holy Ghost, and the testimony taken from
faith, and the effects of faith: at this present assuredly thou can not doubt
of thy election, for thy sins committed, but thou shall much derogate from
this free election, and also from the testimonies of thy election heretofore
enioied, yea and those which yet thou enioyest. For if thy sins displease thee,
and thou desire to live without blame, only for that thy sins displease
thee: why now thou have a new testimony of thy election: for such repentance
as this is, is only proper unto the elect. Therefore, by these three props we
must uphold our faith, as touching every ones particular election. And thus
much as concerning the certentie, with the which every man must be persuaded
that he is elected in Christ to eternal life, before the foundation of the
world.

Assertion. II.
Whosoever are predestined to the end, they are also predestinate to the
means without which they cannot attain to the end: and therefore as the elect
necessarily at length do come unto the end, by reason of the certentie of
their election; so also by reason of the same certentie, it is necessary that
they should be traced through those means which tend to the same end.

WE must mark the end to which we are predestinate, The end of our
predestination.
and to which we say that one day we shall be brought: for there is a double
end of our election: the one concerns the elect themselves, namely their
glorification, or their eternal life and glory in heaven. Of which is spoken,
Romans 8. The other concerns God himself which chooses, namely, the glory of
God: that is, that the glory of his grace may be known, and eternally made
manifest, of which is mention made, Ephesians. 1. Both of them are so coupled
together, that whosoever are praeelected to the first, are also predestinate to
the latter, and the latter follows of the former. For the more we shall be
made partakers of the grace of God and the heavenly glory: so much also more
and more shall the glory of God be made manifest in us. But because the end
which concerns God, is almost all one in the reprobation of the wicked, and
in the predestination of the Saints: namely, that by the salvation of these
which proceeds of his mere goodness, the glory of his grace is made
manifest: so also by the just damnation of the other, the glory of his divine
justice may be made known to all. Nevertheless, considering that the end, to
which the elect shall attain, is far diverse from that (for it is eternal
life) unto which the reprobates are appointed (for that is eternal death:)
therefore the end of which we treat in this assertion, is our eternal
glorification and everlasting life in heaven.

Let us now see in the second place, what are those means, by which the elect
are brought unto this end: and therefore to which means we hold, that all are
predestinate whosoever are predestinate to the end. The means to which we are
predestinate, how many they be, and which.
And they are of two sorts, some of them are so necessary unto all, that
without them no man simply can attain unto eternal life and glory: and they
are Christ, as he is mediator and high priest, and his obedience and justice
(for without Christ no man can be saved:) also our effectual calling to Christ
by the holy Ghost: and that which follows this, is our justification, yea and
our regeneration too. For these four, predestination, vocation, justification,
and glorification, are so linked together, that it is not possible to sever the
one from the other. And therefore no man can be glorified, which is not
justified, and no man can be justified, which is not effectually called, as
also no man can be effectually called which is not predestinate: therefore
without these, not so much as children and infants can be brought to this end
of eternal glory. And therefore even all the elect infants are inwardly, in a
certain peculiar manner, by the holy Ghost, called, and justified, and
glorified. Now there are some certain means annexed unto these, which albeit
they have no place in infants, by reason of their age, yet they belong to all
other elect, howsoever they are found in some more plenteous and lively, and in
other some more slender and weak. As namely, a lively faith, the hearing of
the word, a detestation of sin, the love of righteousness, patience in
adversity, a care to do good works (and such like) all which the Apostle
comprehends under the name of good works; when he says, that we are created,
that is, borne a new in Christ, Ephesians. 2.20.
unto good works, which God has prepared, that we might walk in them, that
is, that we might lead our lives in them, and so walking at length might come
to eternal life: for without them, we cannot come to eternal glory; but by
them God trayleth us thither. Therefore we say, that all which are elect to
that end, are also predestinate to the same means. For predestination is not
only of the end, but also of the means which concern the end: and all, as
well the end as the means are the effects of predestination. And therefore it
is very true which Augustine says: Predestination (says he) is a preparation
to the graces of God, by which they indeed are freed, whosoever are freed.

The first benefit of God, predes^^nat^ng us is Christ.
Therefore, the first gift of God (that we may briefly consider the effects of
predestination) prepared for all the elect, without which they can in no wise
come to the end: and therefore the first effect of predestination is our Lord
Jesus, with his obedience, merits, death, resurrection, glory: namely, in that
respect he is made mediator between God the father and us, and the head of
all the elect. And therefore, in as much as he is such a one, he is also the
cause of all other graces and benefits, which come unto us by the free
predestination of God. For the effects of predestination are so ordered among
themselves that the first, which go before, are the causes efficient, or (if
we will so speak) the material causes of the latter, and those that follow.
Therefore, seeing Christ is the first effect of predestination, he is also the
cause of all other effects, by whom we are made partakers of them. Ephesians. 1.4.
etc
The Apostle therefore says very well to the Ephesians: In the first place
(says he) we are elected in Christ, namly as in the head, to be his members.
Secondly, he writes that we are predestinate to adoption by Christ, namely to
obtain it: for we are adopted into the sons of God in Christ, the first
begotten son of God, and by making us partakers of his son^hip, we are really
made the sons of God, yea, and we are also endued with his spirit too, that
we might be borne anew. Thirdly, Gal. 4^6.
(says he) we are made acceptable and beloved unto the father, and his beloved
son, namely, Christ. Fou^thly, that we have our redemption in the same
Christ, by his blood, and have obtained remission of sins, and all wisdom
and understanding, as well in heaven, as in earth. In a word, the Apostle
shows there (as also else where) that whatsoever benefits we do, or shall
hereafter obtain, counting from our eternal election, even unto our
glorification: all those we now do, and shall obtain hereafter, in Christ,
and by Christ. Therefore, whosoever are elected to eternal life, besides this
that they are elected in Christ, they are also predestinate to Christ, that is,
to have fellowship with him, that they may by him enjoy all other benefits. 2.
Tim. 1.9. Romans 8. 30.
The second ben^fit of God and effect of our predestination, is our effectual
calling to Christ, and to his Gospel, in which the elect are only called:
because it is by the purpose and grace of God, which is given us in Christ. And
an effectual calling is known by the effects, two of which proceed directly
from ^t: a hearty kind of hearing the word, and the conceiving of it with a
very great, constant, and continual delight, and a true and sure belief of
the word of the Gospel. Thence it is that Christ says, Ioh. 8.47.
Who is of God (says he) namely, by election and effectual calling, hears
the word of God, very willingly, and from his heart, and that continually: but
ye hear not, because ye are not of God. And this calling is wrought not only
of the preaching of the word (as it is in all that be of years) but also (and
that chiefly) with the inward inspiration of the holy Ghost, whiles that the
Father draws them by his spirit, whom he will have to come to Christ: Which
also was said to be done in infants. For this calling is the beginning of
salvation even in this life: and therefore it is the Apostles manner, in the
beginning of his Epistles, to make mention of this calling, naming all the
faithful, Romans 1.7. 1. Cor. ^.^^ Tit. 1.1.
The saints called: Therefore it must needs be, that all they which are
elected in Christ, must also at length effectually be called and drawn to
Christ. After an effectual calling follows Faith, the effect of
predestination, which is said to be peculiar unto ^he elect: And without which
(as the Apostle says) it is not possible to please God. Heb. 11.6.
For by it we are ingrafted into Christ, and are made the members of Christ,
and without faith no man can be sau^d.

And that this is an effect of Predestination the Apostle plainly shows, 1.
Cor. 7.25.
when he says, that he had obtained mercy, (namely in Gods eternal
predestination) that he might believe. Wherefore, whosoever are predestinate to
obtain eternal life in Christ and by Christ, they are also elect to have the
very gift of faith. Therefore it must needs be, that at length they shall
believe in Christ. The fourth benefit is Justification, that is, a free
pardoning of our sins, and the imputation of the righteousness of Christ, for
it follows Faith: because whosoever are endued with true faith in Christ, are
also justified. Romans 8.^0. Ephesians. 1.4.
And that justification is an effect of predestination; the Apostle shows
when he putt^th it after calling, before which he sets predestination. And
when he says, that we are elect in Christ, that we might be holy and without
spot or blame in the presence of God: and that this is not done while we are in
this world, but by the pardoning of all our faults, and by the imputation of
his perfect obedience. Wherefore it must needs be, that all the elect shall be
justified, and be taken for most pure and without blame in Gods presence. With
justification is joined regeneration, and sanctification by the holy Ghost:
namely, whiles we are made new creatures by him, and the sons of God too: not
only by adoption, but also by regeneration. For when Christ justifies us, he
does not only forgive us our unrighteousness, and impute his righteousness to
us, but also he takes from us our stony heart, and gives us a fleshie heart
of his own: and he strips us of our old man, and puts on his new man. Lastly,
he takes away the corruption of our nature, and makes us partakers of his
divine nature: Ephesians. 1.4,5. Ioh. 3.6.
and so indeed of the sons of men, he makes us the sons of God, and his
brethren too. Therefore it is said, that we are predestined to adoption by
Jesus Christ and elect, that we may be holy without blame, and that which is
borne of the spirit is called spirit. Therefore the elected to eternal life,
must needs be begotten anew to be the sons of God, and be made partakers of
the divine nature, and be a new creature in Christ. Hence issues the sixth
effect of predestination, which is heedfully to be regarded: the love of
righteo^unesse, and the detestation of sin. For in regeneration, the
affections are principally changed. Namely, the affections of the corrupt
nature and flesh, into the affections of the divine nature and spirit. Hence it
is, that the Apostle says, Romans 8.1. and 5.
that they which are borne anew, do walk according to the spirit, and not
after the flesh: and not to savor the things of the flesh, but the things of
the spirit. And the chief affections of the flesh, are the love of sin, that
is, the concupiscence of the flesh: and contrariwise the hatred of
righteousness, and the law of God, which are not of the Father, but of the
world. Therefore the chief affections of regeneration and the spirit, are the
love of righteousness and of the law of God, and the hatred of sin. For that
which is spoken chiefly of Christ: Thou have loved righteousness and hated
iniquity; Psalm. 45. 8.
is to be understood of all the members of Christ, endued with his spirit,
because it is truly accomplished in them. Hence it is, that David who in
himself did represent the disposition of all the regenerate, said of
himself, Psalm. 119. 113. and 40. 5. and 101.3. and 26.5. Romans 7.22.
I have loved thy law, thy law is in the middle of my heart, I have hated all
the workers of iniquity, I will not sit with the wicked. Also Paul, I am
delighted, says he, in the law of God, according to the inner man: that is, in
as much as I am borne anewe. And no man doubts, but that both these
affections are the effects of predestination, except he be ignorant that all
these are the gifts of God: which as in time he bestows on his, so also he
has decreed to bestow them on them before the foundation of the world. And
from these two affections, being the first fruits of regenerati^n, arises a
care and endeavor to do good works, that is, to fly sin, and to fulfill
the law of God: which is the seventh effect of predestination. For he which
hates any thing from his heart, he takes heed of it as much as he can, and
he flees from it, and escheweth it: and on the contrary, he which loves any
thing from his heart, that also he seeks after, and endeavors himself to
the compassing of it. Therefore the Apostle John, 1. Ioh. 3.7.
makes this a chief difference between the sons of God, and the children
of the devil, that is, between them that are borne anew, and them that are
not borne anew: that the children of God both love and do righteousness, and
the children of the devil love sin, and do it: as also the devil sinned
from the beginning: and Christ came to dissolve the works of the devil,
namely, in his elect; for in the reprobate he leaves them untouched, because
they are not given him of the father to be purged, borne anew, and saved.
Therefore seeing Christ was before ordained and predestinate to the doing of
all these works, and that there is no good wrought in us, which was not
provided for us in Christ from all eternity: it is a clear case, that the
care also of doing good works, is an effect of predestination. And the Apostle
plainly teaches it when he says, Ephesians. 2.10.
that we were created in Christ to good works, which God has prepared that we
might walk in them. To this purpose serves that which the Apostle delivers
of love unfeigned, Ephesians. 1.4. 1. Ti. 1. 19. Tit. 1.15.
to which he shows, that we were elect; and of a good conscience: which he
makes the inseparable companion of the faith of the elect. Lastly, of a pure
heart, which he ascribes to the elect, considering the unfaithful have nothing
clean in them, and that their mind and conscience is defiled. Now that this
care to do good works, 2. Pet. 1.10.
is necessary in all the elect, Peter shows it, when he bids us endeavor to
make our election and calling sure by good works, as some copies have it. But
to whom shall we make it sure? not unto God, (for it was sure unto him before
the foundation of the world) but unto our selves, and to our neighbors. And
this is one of the chiefest uses of good works, that by them, not as by
causes, but as by effects of predestination and faith, both we, and also our
neighbors are certified of our election, and of our salvation too.
Furthermore, considering whiles we have a care to glorify God, to do good
works, and we will not be conformable to the world in the wickedness of it,
neither submit our selves to our flesh and Satan: the flesh, the world, and
Satan, do perpetually war against us; and therewithal it comes to pass,
they being most valiant enemies, that either we are overcome, or at the least
in fight are foiled.

And therefore we are constrained to fly unto the Lord, and to crave his
assistance: therefore the eight effect of our predestination is the calling
upon God, that in this fight he would give us aid against the Devil, the
world, and the flesh. For this is the property of the spirit, which the elect
have to stir them up to prayer: for the spirit it self makes request for us,
with gronings that cannot be uttered, that is to say, it moves us to make
request. And because we are sons, Romans 8.20. Gal. 4.6. Psalm. 50.15.
God has sent the Spirit of his son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father.
And God bids us call upon him in the day of tribulation, promising to hear
us. From these proceeds the ninth effect of predestination, namely, a
perpetual repentance for our daily slippes, and a continual desire to be
bettered in godliness. So that also, for this cause chiefly, we heartily
desire to be dissolved out of this world, and to be with Christ for this end,
that we might sin no more. For this is a thing proper to the elect of God
even now borne anew: as we may see in the Apostle, who speaks thus in the
name of all the regenerate: O miserable man that I am, Romans 7.27. Phil. 1. 23.
10.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? And again, I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. From this ninth effect proceeds the tenth,
namely, a desire that Christ may come, and make an end of all our miseries and
2. Tim. 4^1^.
That this is proper to the elect, the Apostle shows, when he says, that
they love the coming of the Lord: and John brings in the spouse of Christ,
crying, Apoc. 22. 17,20. Mat. 6.10. Ps. 50.15.
Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Yea, and Christ himself has taught us to
pray: Let thy kingdom come. And because that they which pray on this wise, are
also heard according to Gods promise: In the day of tribulation call upon me,
and I will hear thee: hence appears: Romans 3.5. and 8.28.
as the Apostle describes it. And therefore a certain taking up of courage
and recovery of strength against his enemies: whereby it comes to pass,
that all things turn to the salvation of the elect. For the elect, albeit they
be often beaten down in fight, yet because Christ speedily sends aid from
heaven unto them, they rise up courageously, and begin again the fight against
sin and the devil, and all other the enemies of Christ: and they fight so
long, till they be made conquerours, and are assured of the victory, and of
the crown: which assurance also is an effect of Predestination given to all
the elect. For what (says the Apostle) shall we say to these things? If God be
on our side, who can be against us? Romans 8. 31. Mat. 24.24.
Therefore our Lord Jesus teaches, that the elect can not be seduced, and so
perish, no not by the cunning of Antichrist, and his miracles. lastly, hence,
appears that last effect of Predestination, which we can obtain in this
life, the gift of perseverance, unto the end, in faith and a true confession
of Christ, joined with a manifest care to live a godly life, and a desire to
glorify him. For this gift is bestowed upon all the elect, as the Lord
promises by Jeremy: Ier. 23.40.
I will put my fear into their hearts, that they may not depart from me. And
when they shall come to the end of their lives, they shall be received into the
heavenly glory, until such time, as their bodies also being raised up, they
may take full possession of eternal life. Thus we see that it is very
certain, that those which are elected to eternal life, are also predestinate
to use those means, by which, as by certain steps and stairs, they climb
into that heavenly dwelling place. And therefore that we were predestinate to
these means, namely Faith, Justification, and good works, because we were
elected to eternal life, according to the purpose and grace of God.

The use of this doctrine.
by our faith and works, which God foresaw we should do. Whereas on the
contrary, therefore God did predestinate us to faith and good works, because
he did choose us to eternal life. For the Apostle says not, I obtained
mercy, because I was faithful, or because I should be faithful, 1. Cor.
7.25. Ephesians. 1.4. and 2.
but that I might be faithful. Neither, says he, that we are elected in
Christ, because we should be holy and without blame, but that we might be holy
and without blame. Neither does he say, that we were created in Christ, because
we did or should do good works: but we were created to good works: Tit. ^.11.
which God prepared that we might walk in them. Lastly, he says not, that the
grace of Christ appeared, because we were to live soberly, justly, and godly,
but that it therefore appeared, that we denying all ungodliness, and the lusts
of this world, might live soberly, justly, and godly i^ this present world. We
see therefore, that by this doctrine, that wicked opinion is overthrown, which
teaches, that we do prevent the grace of God by our merits which God foresaw.
And on the contrary, here we see, how foully the bellygods of this world are
deceived, which reason thus: if we be predestinate to eternal life, and our
predestination be certain and unchangeable, what need we endeavor our
selves, believe or do good works? for howsoever it fall out, and howesoeuer
the elect do live, undoubtedly they cannot perish, because they are
predestinate to eternal life. Alas poor wretches, they see not, that they
sever those things that are to be conjoined, namely the end and the means of
the end: and that they break the chain, which in no wise either can or must
be loosed, whilst that they sever their calling and justification: yea and
Faith too and good works, from predestination and glorification. As though God
did glorify them whom he did predestinate, before he called and justified
them: yea and before they can believe, and show their quick and lively faith
by works. Contrariwise, let us learn what our duty is. If any be elect to
eternal life, they also are predestinate to the means by which they come unto
it. And we believe (as we are bound to do) that we are predestinate to
eternal life: and therefore we must also believe, that we have been elected
to faith and good works: that by them, as by certain steps, we might be
brought to eternal life. And therefore so far must we be from neglecting
Faith, and the means of good works, and of a holy life; that contrariwise, it
is rather our duty, to keep Faith in a good conscience, and to be conversant
in good works, which God has prepared, that we might walk in them. And
because we can neither attain to the end, nor the means that bring us
thereunto of our selves: Therefore it is our part to crave them at Gods hands by
prayer, that he would give us faith, and a care to do good works, and
increase them in us. Neither must we only ask them, but also certainly trust
that we shall obtain them for Christ his cause. For, if for all them which
are predestined to eternal life, God has prepared faith, by which they may
believe, and good works to walk in: therefore if we believe (as by Gods
commandment we are bound) that we are in Christ elected to eternal glory:
we must also be persuaded, that before we depart hence, he will give us true
repentance, increase true faith, inflame us with love: lastly, that he will
minister unto us abundantly all things in Christ, to obtain the end. Yea
this confidence also and prayer, it is one effect of predestination, by which
we get the rest. Therefore this doctrine we must hold, that predestination to
eternal life does not take away the means of obtaining it, but rather
establish them. And therefore both these principles are true, namely, that the
elect to life cannot perish: and unless a man believe in Christ, and persevere
unto the end in this faith working by love, Ioh. 3.36.
he shall perish. The reason is, because in predestination, the means and the
end of it are so joined together, that the one can not be severed from the
other. Wherefore whosoever holds not the means unto the end (amongst which
faith is one) it is manifest, that he was never predestinate, and therefore
must needs perish: as on the contrary, he which holds faith, must needs be
saved. So the truth of these propositions is evident: He which believes in the
Son has eternal life: contrariwise, he which believes not in the son, the
anger of God remains upon him, because as a constant faith is a sign of
election: so obstinate infidelity is a token of reprobation.

FINIS.
Bradfords answer to Careless.
Careless. I Am troubled with fear that my sins are not pardoned.


Bradford. They are: for God has given thee a penitent and believing heart:
that is an heart, which desires to repent and believe. For such an one is
taken of him (he accepting the will for the deed) for a penitent and believing
heart indeed.


Trin-vni Deo gloria.
A DIRECTION FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE TONGVE according to Gods word.

Printed by John Legate, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1600.

To the reader.
CHristian Reader,
lamentable and fe^^efull is the abuse of the tongue among all sorts and
degrees of men euer^ where. Hence daily arise manifold sins against God and
^nnu^erable scandals and grieuances to our brethren. It would make a man's heart
to bleed, to hear and consider how Swearing, Blaspheming, Cursed speaking,
Ra^ling, Backbiting, Slandering, Chiding, Quarrelling, Co^tending, Jesting,
Mocking, Flattering, Lying, Dissembling, Vain and idle talking ouerflow in all
place^, so as men which fear God had better be any where then in the company
of most men. Well thou; art thou a man which have made little conscience of thy
speech and talk? repent seriously of this sin, and amend thy life, least for
the abusing of thy tongue thou cry with Dives in hell. Send Lazarus that he
may dippe the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue. Luke 16. 14.
And if thou be one which have care to order thy self in speech and silence
according to gods word, oh, do it more. For what a shame is it, that men with
the same tongue wherewith they confess the faith and religion of Christ,
should by vain and ungodly speech utterly deny the power thereof? And for thy
better help herein, I have penned these few lines following, concerning the
Government of the tongue. Use them for thy benefit, and finding profit thereby,
give glory to God.

M. D. XCII, December. 12. W. Perkins.

OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE TONGVE.
CHAP. I. Of the general means of ruling the Tongue.
THE government of the tongue is a virtue pertaining to the holy usage of the
tongue according to GODS word.

And for the well-ordering of it, two things are requisite: a pure heart, and
skill in the language of Canaan.

The pure heart is most necessary, because it is the fountain of speech, and
if the fountain be defiled, Mat. 15.19.
the streams that issue thence can not be clean.

And because the heart of man by nature is a bottomless gulf of iniquity,
two things are to be known: first, how it must be made pure: and then how it
is always afterward to be kept pure.

The way to get a pure heart is this. First, thou must seriously examine thy
life and thy conscience, for all thy sins past: then with a heavy and
bleeding heart confess them to God, utterly condemning thy self. Thirdly,
with deep sighs and groans of spirit cry unto heaven to God the father, in
the name of Christ for pardon, I say, for pardon of the same sins, as it were
for life and death, and that, day and night, till the Lord send down from
heaven a sweet certificate into thy perplexed conscience by his holy spirit,
that all thy sins are done away. Now at the same instant in which pardon
shall be granted, God likewise will once again stretch forth that mighty
hand of his, whereby he made thee when thou wast not, to make thee a new
creature, to create a new heart in thee, to renew a right spirit in thee, and
to stablish thee by his free spirit. For whom he justifies, them also at the
same time he sanctifies.

The purified heart appears by these signs. I. If thou feel thy self to be
displeased at thine own infirmities and corruptions, and to droope under them
as men do under bodily sickness. II. If thou begin to hate and to fly thine
own personal sins. III. If thou feel a grief and sorrow after thou have
offended God. IV. If thou heartily desire to abstain from all manner of sin.
V. If thou be careful to avoid all occasions and entisements to evil. VI. If
thou travel and do thine endeavor in every good thing. VII. If thou desire
and pray to God to wash and rinse thine heart in the blood of Christ.

When the heart is pure, to keep it so is the special work of faith, Act.
19. 15.
which purifieth the heart.

Faith purifieth the heart by a particular applying of Christ crucified with
all his merits. Elisha when he went up and lay upon the dead child, and put his
mouth on his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands,
2. king. 4.24.
and stretched himself upon him, the flesh of the child waxed warm. Afterward
Elisha rose and spread himself upon him the second time: verse. 35.
then the child neezed seven times and opened his eyes. So must a man by faith
even spread himself upon the cross of Christ, applying hands and feet to
his pierced hands and feet, and his wretched heart to Christ's bleeding heart,
and then he shall feel himself warmed by the heat of Gods spirit, and sin
from day to day crucified with Christ, and his dead heart quickened and
revived. And this applying which faith makes, is done by a kind of reasoning,
which faith makes thus. Has god of his mercy given his own son to be my
Savior, to shed his blood for me? and has he of his mercy granted unto me
the pardon of all my sins? I will therefore endeavor to keep my heart and my
life unblameable that I do not offend him hereafter in word or deed, as I
have done heretofore.

Isa. 19.18. Romans 15.6.
The language of Canaan is, whereby a man endued with the spirit of adoption,
unfeignedly calls upon the name of God in Christ, and so consequently does as
it were, familiarly talk and speak with God. This language must needs be
learned, that the tongue may be well governed. For man must first be able to
talk with God, before he can be able wisely to talk with man. For this cause
when men are to have communication one with another, they are first of all to
be careful that they often make their prayers to God that he would guide and
bless them in their speeches, as David did, Set a watch, O Lord, before my
mouth, and keep the door of my lips. And again, O Lord open thou my
lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. Psalm. 141.3. Psalm. 51. 17.
Where we may see, that the mouth is, as it were locked up from speaking any
good thing, until the Lord open it. And Paul having the gift of ordering his
tongue in wonderful measure, Ephesians. 6.19. Prou. 16. 1.
yet desires the Ephesians to pray for him, that utterance might be given him,
and good reason, because God rules the tongue.

CHAP. II. Of the matter of our speech.
THe government of the tongue contains two parts: holy speech, and holy
silence. In holy speech must be considered the matter of our speech, and the
manner.

The matter is commonly one of these three: either God, our neighbor, or our
selves.

As concerning God, this caveat must be remembered, that the honorable titles
of his glorious Majesty be never taken into our mouths, unless it be upon a
weighty and just occasion, so as we may plainly see that glory will redound
to him thereby: and for this cause the third commandment was given, that men
might not take up the name of God in vain, Exodus 20.7.
that is, rashly and lightly.

And therefore lamentable and fearful is the practice every where. For it is
a common thing with men to begin their speech, and to place titles of Gods
most high Majesty in the forefront almost of every sentence, by saying, O
Lord! O God! O good God! O merciful God! O Jesus! O Christ, etc. If a man be to
say any thing, he will not say, Yea, or Nay: but, O Lord yea: or, O Lord nay.
If a man be to reprove his inferior, he will presently say, O Lord have mercy
on us, what a slowbacke art thou, what a lie is this, etc. An earthly Prince,
if he should have his name so tossed in our mouths at every word, would
never bear it, and how shall the everliving God suffer it? nay how can he
suffer it? I say no more, but thou with thy self think how: for in the third
commandment the punishment is set down, That he will not hold him guiltless
that takes his name in vain. And the Angels in reverence to Gods Majesty
cover their faces, Isai. 6.2.

Concerning our neighbor, we are to consider whether the thing which we are
about to speak be good or evil.

This being weighed, if it be good, and so commendable, then we are readily and
cheerfully, and that upon every occasion to utter it, especially in his
absence, whether he be a friend or a foe: as Saint John writes of Demetrius.
Demetrius (says he) has good report of all men, and of the truth it self:
yea, 3. Ioh. 12.
and we our selves bear record, and ye know that our testimony is true.

As for the evil which any shall know by his neighbor, he is in no wise to
speak of it, whether it be an infirmity or a gross sin, unless in his
conscience he shall find himself called of God to speak.

A man is called to speak in three cases: First, when he is called before a
magistrate, and is lawfully required to testify the evil which he knows by
another. II. When any is to admonish his brother of any fault for his
amendment. III. When the hurt or danger that may arise of the evil is to be
prevented in others. As a man may say to one well disposed, Take heed of such a
man's company: for he is given to such or such a vice.

To this end, they of the house of Cloe do certify Paul of the disorders in
Corinth. 1. Cor. 1. 11. Genesis 37.2. 2. King. 6.8.
And Joseph certifieth his father of his brethrens slanders. In this case all
treasons are to be revealed, as tending to the ruin of the whole common
wealth. Thus Elisha reuealeth the secret of the king of Syria.

And if it shall be thought convenient to mention the evil which we know by any
man, it must be done only in general manner: the person and all circumstances
which will descrie the person, concealed.

Concerning things which are secret in our neighbor, we are not to be
suspicious, but to suspe^d both speech and judgment. 2. Cor. 13. 1. Cor. 4.5.
Aug. lib. 10. confess. 23.
Love suspecteth no evil. Judge nothing (says Paul) before the time, until
the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the
counsels of the heart manifest. Augustine has a good and special rule to this
purpose, that there be three things of which we must give no judgment: Gods
predestination, the Scriptures, and the estate of men uncalled.

As touching a man's self, he is neither to praise nor dispraise himself. As
Solomon says, Prou. 27.2.
Let another praise thee, and not thine own mouth: a stranger, and not thine
own lips. Yet otherwhiles the times do fall out that a man may use an holy
kind of boasting, especially when the disgrace of the person is the disgrace
also of the gospel, and of religion, and of God himself: as Paul did. 2. Cor.
11. 21.
But wherein (says he) any will use boldness, (I speak foolishly) I will use
boldness. They are Hebrews, so am I, etc.

CHAP. III. Of the manner of our speech, and what must be done before we speak.
THus much of the matter of our speech. Now follows the manner.

In the manner of our speaking three things are to be pondered: what must be
done before we speak: what in speaking: what after we have spoken.

Before we speak, consideration must be used of the thing to be spoken, and
of the end. James requires that men should be slow to speak, and swift to
hear. Solomon says, Iam. 1.19. Prou. 18.13.
He that answers a matter before he hear it, it is folly and shame to him.
The mind is the guide of the tongue: therefore men must consider before they
speak. The tongue is the messenger of the heart, and therefore as often as we
speak without meditation going before, so often the messenger runs without
his arrand. The tongue is placed in the middle of the mouth, Chrysostom. hom. 22. ad
pop. Antioch.
and it is compassed in with lips and teeth as with a double trench, to show
us, how we are to use heed and preconsideration before we speak: and
therefore it is good advise, to keep the key of the mouth not in the mouth but
in the cupbord of the mouth. Augustine says well, that as in eating and
drinking men make choice of meats: Lib. de not. and great.
so in manifold speeches we should make choice of talk.

Here are condemned idle words, that is, such words as are spoken to little or
no end or purpose. And they are not to be esteemed as little sins, Mat. 12.36.
when as men are to give account of every idle word.

CHAP. IV. What is to be done in speaking; and of wisdom.
When we are in speaking, two things are to be practiced: first, care must be
had of the speech, that it be gracious: secondly, it is to be uttered with
convenient bonds of truth.

The speech is gracious, when it is so uttered, that the graces of god wrought
in the heart by the holy Ghost, Coloss. 4.6.
are as it were pictured and painted forth in the same: for speech is the very
image of the heart.

Ephesians. 4.25. (...).
Contrary to this is rotten speech, that is, all such talk as is void of
grace, which is the heart and pith of our speech.

And by this it appears, that no voice can be named but with disliking: Ephesians.
5.3. Psalm. 16. 4.
and hereupon in Scriptures when by occasion a vice should be named, in token
of a loathing thereof, the name of the vice is omitted, and the name of the
contrary virtue used in the room thereof, as in these words: For Job
thought, It may be that my sons have sinned and blessed, that is, blasphemed
God. Job. 1.5.
This being true, then by proportion the visible representation of the vices of
men in the world, 1. Kin. 21. 10.
which is the substance and matter whereof plays and enterludes are made, is
much more to be avoided.

1,2,3,4,5, 6,7,8,9.
Gods graces, which we are to show forth in our communication are these Wisdom,
Truth, Reverence, Modesty, Meekenes, Sobriety in judgment, Vrbanitie,
Fidelity, Care of others good name: and let us consider of them in order.

Wisdom in our speech is a goodly ornament. The Apostles when they waited for
the holy Ghost in Jerusalem, it descended upon them in the form of fiery
tongues: Act. 24. (...) Prou. 6: 23.
and then it is said that they spoke as the holy Ghost gave them utterance in
Apophthegmes or wise sentences. And he that gouerns his tongue wisely adds
doctrine to the lips, that is, so speaks, as that others be made wise thereby.

This wisdom is then showed, when a man can in judgment apply his talk, and
as it were in good manner make it fit to all the circumstances of persons times,
places, things. Pro. 19.11.
A fool pours out all his mind, but a wise man keeps in till afterward. A
word spoken in his place, is like apples of gold with pictures of silver.

Now he that would have his speech to be wise, must first of al himself become
a wise man. And the wise man of whom the holy scriptures speak, is a godly
man, and such an one as fears God: because this fear of God is the beginning
and head of wisdom: Prou. 1.7. Eccl. 12. 13. Psalm. 14.1. and 38.5. Genesis 34.7.
as on the contrary, the fool, whereof the scripture often speaks, is the
ungodly person, that makes no conscience of any sin. And indeed such an one
is the most sensles fool of all. He that shall ever and anon be casting
himself into the fire and water, and run upon dangerous places to break his
legs, arms, neck: and further shall take pleasure in doing all this, is
either a fool or a mad man. Now the ungodly man as often as he sins, he
endeavors as much as in him lies to pitch his soul into hell, and whereas
he takes pleasure in sin, he sports himself with his own destruction.

Furthermore the man fearing god must have two things in his heart: a
persuasion of Gods presence; and Awe.

The persuasion of Gods presence is, whereby a man is continually resolved,
that whersoeuer he is, he stands before God, who does see eue^ into the
secrets of his heart. This was in Cornelius: Act. 10.3^
Now therefore (says he) we are in gods presence to hear all things that are
commanded thee of God.

Awe in regard of God, is that whereby a man behaueth himself reverently,
because he is in Gods presence.

Awe is either in regard of sin, or of chastisements.

Awe in respect of sin, is when one is afraid to sin, fearing not so much
the punishment, as sin it self, because it is sin. For he fears God
indeed which is of this mind, that if there were no Judge to condemn him; no
hell to torment him; no devil nor conscience to accuse him; yet he would not
sin, because Gods blessed Majesty is by it offended and displeased: and if
he had it in his choice, whether he would sin or loose his life, he had
rather die the^ willingly and wittingly sin against God. This awe being in
Joseph, was the cause that moooued him not to commit folly with Putiphars wife.
Genesis 39.9.
How then (says he) can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?

Awe in chastisements is, when one humbles himself under the mighty hand of
God with all meekenes and patience, when God lays his hand on him more or
less. When Shemi came forth and cursed David, and flung stones at him, what
did he? truly he stood in awe of God, and therefore said, 2. Sa. 16.1^.
What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? for he curses, even
because the Lord has bidden him curse David, who dare then say, Wherefore have
thou done so?

When a man is thus made wise, that is, righteous and fearing God, he is so
guided by the spirit of fear, that he can not but speak wisely. Solomon
says, The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable: but the mouth of
the wicked speaks froward things. Pro. 10.31.
And again, The heart of the wise guides the mouth wisely.

Contrary to this is fond and foolish talk: an example hereof we have in
Luke, where Pilate wanting the fear of God, says, I find no fault in Christ:
let us therefore chastise him, and send him away. Luke 23. 14.
Whereas he ought to have reasoned thus: I find no fault in him: therefore let
us send him away without chastisement.

CHAP. V. Of Truth, and of Reverence in speech.
TRuth of speech is a virtue whereby a man speaks as he thinks: and so
consequently, he speaks as every thing is, so far forth as possibly he can.
It is made a note of a righteous man, Psalm. 16.2. Pro. 12.22.
to speak the truth from the heart: and they that deal truly are Gods delight.

This is always required in all our doctrines, accusations, defenses,
testimonies, promises, bargainings, counsels: Prou. 17.7.
but especially in Judges and Magistrates sitting on judgment seat, because
then they stand in Gods stead, who is truth it self.

To this place belongs Apology, which is, when a Christian called before a
Magistrate, Mat. 10.32.
and straightly examined of his religion, confesses Christ boldly, and denies
not the truth.

Contrary to this, is lying, cogging, glosing, smoothing, dissembling: as for
example, Gehazi, after he had received money and garments of Naaman the Syrian
against Elishas will, 1. king. 5.25.
he went and stood before his master, who said unto him, Whence come thou,
Gehazi? who making it nothing to lie for a vantage, smoothed it over finely,
and said, Thy servant went no whither. To the like effect and purpose, report
is made of a rich man that had two chests: the one whereof he calls all the
world, the other his friend. In the first he puts nothing: in the second he
puts all his substance. When his neighbor came to borrow money, he uses to
answer, truly I have never a penny in all the world, meaning his empty chest,
but I will see (says he) what my friend can do, looking thereby for interest
by the money out of his other chest.

This vice is very common, and it is a rare thing to find a man that makes a
conscience of a lie.

Lying is, when a man speaks otherwise then the truth is, with a purpose to
deceive. Here note that there is great difference between these two speeches,
It is an untruth, and, It is a lie. The first may be used when a man speaks
falsehoods. But in using the second, we must be heedie and sparing: for when a
man is challenged for a lie, three things are laid to his charge. I. That he
speaks falsely. II. That he is willing to do so. III. That he has a desire
and purpose to deceive.

Quest. Whether may not a man lie, if it be for the procuring of some great
good to our neighbor, or to the whole country where we are?

Ans. No: Reasons are these. I. Lying is forbidden, Iam. 3. 12. Pro. 2. 22.
as an abomination to the Lord. II. Romans 3. 8.
We are not to do any evil that good may come thereof. III. He which lies,
in so doing conformeth himself to the devil, who Ioh. 8.44.
is a lier and the father thereof.

Object. I. Such lying is for our neighbors good and not against charity.

Ans. No: for 1. Cor. 13.6
charity rejoices in the truth.

Object. II. The holy Scriptures have mentioned the lies of the Patriarchs.

Ans. We must not live by examples against rules of Gods word.

Object. III. Rahab and the midwiues of Egypt in saving the spies, and in
preserving the Israelites infants used lying, and are commended for their facts.

Ans. They are commended for their faith, not for their lying. The works which
they did, were excellent works of mercy, and therefore to be allowed: and the
doers failed only in the manner of performing them.

As truth is required in speech, so also reverence to God and man.

Reverence to God is, when we so speak of God and use his titles, that we show
reverence our selves, and more reverence in others. Deuteronomy. 28.58
If thou will not keep (says the Lord) and do all the words of this law
(that are written in this book) and fear the glorious and fearful name, THE
LORD THY GOD, then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful.

Here take heed of all manner of blaspheming, which is, when men use such
speeches of God, as do either detract any thing from his Majesty, or ascribe
any thing to him, not beseeming him: a sin of all other to be detested.
Reasons. I. A blasphemer is viler then the rest of the creatures: for they
praise God in their kind, and show forth his power, goodness, and wisdom: but
he dishonors God in his wretched speech. II. He is as the mad dog that
flies in his masters face, who keeps him and gives him bread. III. Custom
in blas^hemies shows a man to be the child of the devil, and no child of God
as yet. A father lying on his death bed, called the three children to him
which he kept, and told them that one only of them was his own son, and that
the rest were only brought up by him: therefore unto him he gave all his
goods: but which of these was his natural son he would not in any wise
declare. When he was dead, every one of the three children pleaded that he was
the son, and therefore that the goods were his. The matter being brought
before a Judge could not be ended: but the Judge was constrained to take this
course: he caused the dead corpse of the father to be set up against a tree,
and commanded the three sons to take bows and arrows, and to shoot
against their father, and to see who could come nearest the heart. The first
and second did shoot at their father and did hi^^e him, the third was angry
with both the other through natural affection of a child to a father, and
refused to shoot. This done, the Judge gave sentence that the two first were
no sons, but the third only, and that he should have the goods. The like
trial may be used to know who be Gods children. Such persons with whom
blaspheming is rife, are very devils incarnate, and the children of the
devil, who rende God in pieces, and shoot him through with their darts, as it
is said of the Egyptian when he blasphemed, that he smote or pierced through
Gods Name. Leuit. 21.11 vaykkobh.
Magistrates and rulers severally punish such as shall abuse their names, and
they do it justly: how much more then should blasphemers of Gods name escape
without great punishment.

Again, here we must be warned to take heed of that customable swearing, and
also of perjury. It is a very strange sin: for the periuried person does
not only sin himself, but withal he endeavors to entangle God in the
same sin with himself.

Further, take heed least thou do either make or recite the jests which are
contrived out of the phrases of Scripture: which are very many and very usually
rehearsed in company. The oil wherewith the tabernacle and the arc of the
Testament and the Priests were anointed, Ex. 30. 31.
was holy: and therefore no man might put it to any other uses, as to anoint
his own flesh therewith, or to make the like unto it. Ioh. 19.8.
Pilate a poor Painym when he heard the name of the Son of God was afraid:
and we much more ought to tremble at the word of God, not to make our selves
merry with it. And therefore the scoffing of Julian the Apostata is very
fearful, who was wont to reach Christians boxes on the ear, and withal, bid
them turn the other, and obey their masters commandment, Mat. 5. 39.
Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.
And he denied pay and like reward to his soldiers that were Christians,
because he said he would make them fit for the kingdom of heaven, considering
that Christ had said, Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven.

Here also men must learn to take heed of all manner of charms and
enchantments, which commonly are nothing else but words of Scripture or such
like, used for the curing of pains and diseases both in men and beasts. As for
example, the first words of S. John's Gospel, In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, etc. are used to be written in a paper and hung about
men's necks to cure agues. But the truth is, such kind of practices are
deuillish. Patrons of charms hold that in such words as are either divine or
barbarous, is much efficacy. But whence is this efficacy? from God? from men?
or from the devil? If it shall be said from God; we must know that the word
used in holy manner, is the instrument of God to convey unto us spiritual
blessings, as faith, regeneration, repentance: but it does not serve to bring
unto us corporal health. Well then, belike words take virtue from the speaker,
and are made powerful by the strength of his imagination. Indeed of this
opinion are some Physicians, as Avicenna and Paracelsus, Parac. lib. de Tartaro.
who think that fantasy is like to the sun, which works on all things to
which his beams do come, and the latter that by imagination miracles may be
wrought. But this opinion is fond, and the reasons alleged for it are without
weight. For imaginations are no things but shadows of things. And as an image
of a man in a glass has no power in it, but only serves to resemble and
represent the body of a man: so it is with the fantasy and conceit of the
mind, and no otherwise. And if imagination have any force, it is only within
the spirits and humors of a man's own body: but to give force to work in the
bodies of others it can not; no more then the shadow of one body can
ordinarily cure the body of another on which it lights. Wherefore words used
in the way of bodily cure, be they in themselves never so good, are no better
then the devils sacraments: and when they are used of blind people, he it is,
that coming under hand, works the cure, and by turning himself into an
angel of light, deludes the^. But it were better for a man to die a thousand
times then to use such remedies, which in curing the body, destroy the soul.

Lastly, avoid all imprecations and cursings, either against men or other
creatures: for God in judgment to punish such cursed speaking, often brings to
pass such imprecations: as may appear in the Jews, who at the arraignment of
Christ, cried, saying, Mat. 27.25.
His blood be upon us and upon our children: which imprecation is verified upon
them till this day. At Newburge in Germany a certain mother cursed her son,
saying, Lonicerus theat. hist. prec. ept. 4. Idem.
Get thee away, I would thou might never come again alive: the very same
day he went into the water and was drowned. Again, a mother brought her child
to the University of Wittenberge, by reason he was possessed with an unclean
spirit: being demanded how it came to pass, she answered in the hearing of
many, that in her anger she said, The devil take thee, and thereupon
presently the child was possessed. And in our country men often wish the
plague, the pox, the pestilence to their children, their servants, their
cattle: and often it falls out accordingly.

In the days of king Edward, certain English soldiers (as I am certainly
informed by a witness then present) being by a tempest cast upon the sands on
the coast of France, gave themselves to prayers, and commended their souls to
God, as in so great danger it was meet: but one among the rest, desperately
minded went apart and cried out, saying, O gallowse claim thy right, gallowse
claim thy right. Now the said party among the rest (as God would have it)
escaped safe to land; and afterward living some space of time in France,
returned again to England, where he was hanged for stealing of horses: and
thus according to his desire the gallow^e claimed her right.

Reverence to man is in two respects, either because he is created after the
image of God, or because he is above us in age, gifts, authority.

In the first consideration, men must have care to give such names to children
as are proper and fit, usual, and known: the signification whereof may
admonish them of the promises of God; of godliness, or of some good duty. And
there be four allowed ends of giving names. I. To preserve the memory of some
thing by the name given, as Adam, Israel, Isaac. II. To signify some thing to
come, as Euah, Abraham, John, Peter. III. To preserve the name and memory of
parents and kindred, which was used in the birth of John Baptist. This custom
may still be retained, if there be any good example in the ancetours that the
child may follow. IV. That the life and profession of good men may be revived
in the renewing of their names.

Here we must take heed, in no wise to give to children, the proper names or
titles of God, as Jesus, Immanuel, etc.

Neither are the professors of the Gospel to be entitled by the names of such
as have been famous instruments in the Church, as to be called Calvinists,
Lutherans, etc. 1. Cor. 12.13
Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am Paul's, and I am Apollos, I
am Cephas, and I am Christ's: Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you?
either were ye baptized in the name of Paul?

And it is a bold part of the pestilent generation of Papists, who take to
themselves the name of Jesuits, Act. 11.26. (...) sic. To. 11.4.
whereas the like name of Christian was given to the disciples at Antioch not
by the devise of man, but by divine oracle.

As the changing off the name given in baptism is not to be allowed: so the
varying of it according to the variety of language, (if neither hurt nor fraud
to any be intended thereby) is not unlawful. Upon this ground Saul is called
Paul: and Christ calls Simon his disciple otherwhiles Cephas, otherwhiles Peter.
And very worthy Divines in this age, that their writings might be read of the
adversaries, have in like sort without offense varied their names. Melancthon
calls himself Dydimus Faventinus, and Melangaeus. Bucer intitles himself
Aretius Felinus: and Theodore Beze once writ himself Nathaniel Nezechius.

Reverence to man as he is superior, is in using fit titles of reverence. Sara
is commended in Scriptures for obeying her husband, and for calling him Sir.
But excess must here be avoided, 1. Pet. 3.6.
when titles of honor proper to God are given to men, as head of the Catholic
church to the Pope, Lady and Queen of heaven to the mother of Christ. This
fault Christ reprooueth in the young man, saying, Mar. 10.18.
Why call thou me good, there is none good but God.

CHAP. VI. Of Modesty and of Meekness.
Modesty in speech has diverse caueats: first, if a man speak any thing of
himself, that is, in his own commendation, let him alter the person and speak
of himself as of another: 2. Cor. 12.2.
I know a man (says Paul, speaking of himself) in Christ above fourteen
years ago, etc. which was taken up into Paradise, and heard words which can
not be spoken. And John says of himself: Ioh. 19.26.
When Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved, standing by, etc.
Here take heed of boasting, whereby men imitate the devil, who said, Luke 4.6.
All this power will I give thee, and the glory of those kingdoms: for that
is delivered unto me, and to whomesoeuer I will give it.

Again, when a man shall have occasion to speak of his own faults and
corruptions, let him speak the uttermost against himself, as Paul called
himself the first of all sinners. 1. Tim. 1.13, 15. 1. Cor. 25.9.
But if he be to mention any thing of himself; that may minister matter of
commendation, let his speech rather incline to the defect, then to the excess:
as Paul says, I am least of the Apostles, which am not meet to be called an
Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God.

Secondly, in the mentioning of things which move blushing, we are to use as
seemly words as may be chosen. Genesis 4.1. Afterward Adam knew Hevah his wife,
which conceived and bare Cain. 1. Sam. 24.4. And when he came to the
sheepcoates by the way where there was a cave, Saul went into to cover his
feet, that is, to do his easement.

Meekenes also is required in communication, which is, when a man uses
courteous and fair speech. Tit. 3.2,^.
Put them in remembrance, etc. that they be courteous, showing all meeknes to
all men, for we our selves also were in times past unwise, disobedient, etc.

Meekenes and gentleness shows it self in Salutations, Answers, and Reproves.

For the first daily experience shows, that it makes much for the
maintaining of love, to call men by their proper names or surnames. And this
was a sign of special favor that God called Moses by his proper name. Yet
more convenient it is to salute our betters by names of honor or office. Thus
the disciples call our Savior Christ Rabbi: and it was the usual manner among
the Jews, to call their betters Adon, that is, Lord, or Sir.

The forms of salutations are to be after the order practiced in Scripture. An
Angel saluted Gedeon thus: Iud. 6.12. Ruth 2.4. mat. 10. 11. 12,13.
The Lord be with thee thou valiant man. And Boaz came to Bethlehem, and said
to the reapers, The Lord be with you: and they answered, The Lord bless thee.
And the Angel saluted Marie, Hayle, freely beloved, the Lord is with thee, etc.
Christ coming among his disciples, said, Peace be among you: and he taught
them coming to any house to say, Peace be to this house.

By this it appears, that our common forms of salutations are commendable:
which are of diverse sorts; as when one meets another, God save you: when one
goes away, God be with you: in the morning, God give you a good morning: after
noone, God give you a good evening: when one is going on his journey, God
speed your journey: when one is working, God speed you: in eating, much good
do it you: when one has a new office, God give you joy of your office: when
one is sick, God comfort you, etc.

And when children salute their fathers and mothers after this manner: I pray
you father bless me. I pray you mother bless me: it is a seemly thing. For
God has made parents to be the instruments of blessing to their children, in
nurturing them and praying for them: as the fifth commandment says, Honor
thy father and thy mother, that they may prolong thy days. Now they prolong
the childrens days by praying to God for blessings on them, and by such like
duties.

It is an use in all places, when a man neeseth to salute him by saying, Christ
help you: But there is no cause why the words should then be used more then at
another time. The reasons are, I. it is an old custom fetched from the
Gentiles before Christ, and has no ground at all: for they used with the like
words to wish men health, Arist. de hist. animal. l. 1. cap. 10. and probl.
sect. 33. Plin. l. 28. cap. 2.
because they thought neesing to be a sacred and holy thing: and because some
take it to be a sign of unhappy and evil success, which indeed is
otherwise. II. If there be any danger in the brain before neesing, when a man
has neesed the danger is past, as learned physicians teach: therefore there is
no cause of the using such words then, more then at coughing.

Against the practice of saluting each other, some things may be objected, 1.
Ioh. epist. 2. verse. 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this
doctrine, receive him not to house, neither bid him, God speed. Answer. This
place does not forbid common civility and courtesy of man to man: but only
familiarity and acquaintance with heretics: yea such acquaintance and
familiarity as may seem to give approbation and applause to their badde
proceedings. II. Elisha sending Gehazi his servant to lay his staff on the
dead child of the Sunamite, bad him if he met any not to salute them, and if
they spoke to him not to answer them. 2. King. 4.29. And when our Savior
Christ sent his Disciples to preach in Judea, he had them to salute no man by
the way. Luke 10.4 Answ. The intent of these two places is not to forbid men to
salute others, but rather to inioyne Gehazi and the Disciples of Christ only
to omit for that time the practice of the duties of common courtesy, so far
forth as they might hinder or delay the performance of weightier affairs.

Our answers must be soft, that anger be neither kindled nor increased. Pro.
15. 23. 1. Sam. 24. 7,8.
A soft answer puts away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger. Nabal by
churlish language provoked David to wrath, but Abigail by the contrary
appeased him. Gedeon spoke gently to the men of Ephraim, when they were angry
against him, and appeased them. For the text says, Judge. 8.3.
When he had thus spoken, then their spirits abated toward him. Therefore
Solomon says well, A joy comes to a man by the answer of his mouth, but how
good is a word in due season.

Now if any shall rail on us, our duty is, not to rail again. Romans 12. 14.
1. Pet. 3.4.
Bless them that persecute you, bless, I say, and curse not. Be courteous,
not rendering evil for evil, neither rebuke for rebuke, but contrariwise
bless, knowing that ye be thereunto called, that you should be heirs of
blessing. This thing was notably practiced by David, Psalm. 109.4. For my
friendship they were mine adversaries, but I gave my self to prayer. And
therefore in this case, either silence is to be used, or at the most, only a
just and manifest defense of our innocence to be made. Ezechias commanded the
people to be silent, 2. King. 18. 36.
and not to say any thing to the speech of Rabsachai now flattering now
threatening. When Eli spoke hardly of Anna, and bad her put away her drunkenness,
she answered, 1. Sam. 1. 15
Nay, my lord, I am a woman troubled in spirit, I have neither drunk wine nor
strong drink, but have powered out my soul before the Lord. Thus Joseph
cleares himself, saying, Genesis 40. 15.
I have done nothing wherefore they should put me in the dungeon. And Daniel to
Nabuchodonosor: Unto thee, O King, have I done no hurt. And our Savior Christ
when the Jews said unto him, Dan. 6.22. Ioh. 8.48,49
Say we not true, that thou art a Samaritane and have a devil? answered, I
have not a devil, but I honor my father, and ye have dishonored me. And Paul
being to make an Apology for himself, begins thus: Act. 23. 1.
Men and brethren, I have in all good conscience served God unto this day.

Now when a man has thus cleared himself, though his own word in his own
behalf take no effect, yet let him patiently commit his cause to God, who in
time will manifest the truth, and bring it to light: as David did, Psalm. 26.
Judge me, O God, (says he,) for I have walked in min^ innocence. And again,
Psalm. 37. 32,33.
The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him: but the Lord will
not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.

Meekenes in reproof is, when any shall admonish his brother of any fault for
his amendment, with the like moderation that Surgeons use, who being to set
the arm or leg that is forth of joint, handle it so tenderly, that the
patient shall skant feel when the bone falls in again. This counsel Paul
gives: Gal. 6.1.
Brethren, if any man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are
spiritual, restore such a one (or set him in joint again,) with the spirit of
meeknes. This was practiced by Abraham toward Lot, when their heardmen were at
variance, saying, Genesis 13.8.9.
Let there be, I pray thee, no strife between thee and me, neither between mine
heardmen and thine: for we are brethren.

And this is done four ways. First, when we reprove a man generally, as
Nathan did David by a parable. Secondly, 2. Sam. 12.
when in the room of a reproof we put an exhortation: in the exhortation
insinuating an oblique reproof, as when a man shall swear in his talk, I
shall not need always to say, Ye do very il to swear, and so to dishonor
God: but I will lap it up in the form of an exhortation, as pills are lapt in
sugar, by saying, Yea and nay, yea and nay shall serve among us. Rebuke not an
elder, but exhort him as a father, and young men as brethren, 1. Tim. 5. 1.
says Paul to Timothy. Thirdly, when the reproof is propounded in a man's own
person, as though he were faulty which reprooueth. Paul practiced this: 1.
Cor. 4.6.
Now these things, brethren (says he) I have figuratively applied to mine own
self and Apollos for your sakes, that ye might learn by us, that no man
presume above that which is written. Fourthly, when the fault is directly
reproved, but yet partly with prefaces, that we do it of love, that we wish
well to the party, Gal. 6.1.
that we speak as considering our selves, that we also are in danger of the
same fault: and partly by framing the reproof out of the word of God, that
the party may see himself, rather to be reproved by God, then by us: after
this manner the inferior may admonish his superior, especially when there is
no other way of redress, and he is to listen, yielding himself tractable.
Naaman is advised by his servant, who said, 1. Kin. 5. 13.
Father, if the Prophet had commanded thee a great thing, would thou not have
done it: how much rather then, when he says to thee, Wash, and be clean?
Then went he down and washed himself seven times in Jordan.

When any shall in this manner be admonished of a fault, they are to yield
themselves tractable and thankful, and heartily glad of so good a friend.
Notable is the speech of the Psalmist: Psalm. 141.5. Pro. 17. 10. Prou. 27.5.
Let the righteous smite me, it is a benefit: and let him reprove me, it is
the chief ointment, let it not be wanting to my head. And Solomon says, A
reproof enters more into him that has understanding, then an hundred stripes
into a fool. And, Open rebuke is better then secret love.

CHAP. VII. Of Sobriety, Vrbanitie, Fidelity, and care of others good name.
Sobriety in judgment is, when a man either suspendeth his opinion of his
neighbors sayings or doings, or else speaks as charitably as he can, by
saying as little as may be, if the thing be evil: or by interpreting all in
better part, if the speech or action be doubtful. Therefore do thus; despise
not thy neighbor, but think thy self as bad a sinner, and that the like
defects may befall thee. If thou can not excuse his doing, excuse his intent,
which may be good: or if the deed be evil, think it was done of ignorance:
if thou can no way excuse him, think some great temptation befell him, and
that thou should be worse, if the like temptation befell thee: and give God
thanks that the like as yet has not befallen thee. Despise not a man being a
sinner, for though he be evil to day, he may turn to morrow.

Here is condemned all headie and rash judgment, Mat. 7.1.
whereby men make things either worse then they are, or else they take and
turn all things to the worse part. Thus the devil dealt with Job, saying, Job.
1.9. 11.
Does Job fear God for naught, etc. but stretch out thine hand now and touch
all that he has, to see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face. Such was
the dealing of Doeg with David, 1. Sam. 22.9
I saw the son of Ishai (says he) when he came to Abimelech the son of
Ahitub, who asked counsel of the Lord for him, and gave him victuals, and he
gave him also the sword of Goliath the Philistim. Here the backebiter concealeth
the necessary circumstances, whereby Abimelech might have been excused, as that
David asked bread being hungry, and that he told not Abimelech that he was
out of Saul's favor: but he turns al his speech to this end, to bring the
priest into suspicion with Saul.

Thus the Pharisees dealt. Mat. 11.19.
John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, he has a devil. The
son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a glutton, and a
drinker of wine, and a friend of Publicans and sinners.

Contrary to this Sobriety is Flattery, whereby for hope either of favor or
gain, men, and especially such as are of dignity and place, are soothed up in
their sins, and extolled about measure, even to their faces. As when Herod
arrayed in royal apparel, and sat on the judgment seat and made an oration,
the people gave a shout, saying, Act. 12.22
The voice of God, and not of man. But mark what Solomon says, Pro. 27. 14.
He that praises his friend with a loud voice rising early in the morning: it
shall be counted to him for a curse. One being asked which was the worst of all
beasts, answered, Of wild beasts, the tyrant: of tame beasts the flatterer. And
another said, that flatterers were worse then crows: for they eat only dead
carrion, these feed on living men.

And of all kinds of Flattery, that is the worst when a man shall speak fair
to his neighbors face and praise him; but behind his back speak his
pleasure, and even cut his throat. David complains of his familiar friend^
Psalm. 54.11.
that the words of his mouth were softer then butter, yet war was in his
heart: that his words were more gentle then oil, yet they were swords. The
Pharisees behind Christ's back took counsel how they might entangle him in
talk; but before his face they say, Mat. 24.16.
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly,
neither carest thou for any man: for thou considerest not the person of men.

Vrbanitie, is a grace of speech, whereby men in seemly manner use
pleasantness in talk for recreation, or for such delight as is joined with
profit to themselves and others. The Preacher says, Eccl. 3.4. Psa. 126.1,2
There is a time to laugh, and a time to weep. When the Lord brought again
the captivity of Sion, we were like them that dream. Then was our mouth
filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy.

Now this mirth must be joined with the fear of God, otherwise Solomon says
well, I have said to laughter, thou art mad: and of joy, what is that tho^
do? And Christ says, Eccl. 2.2. Luke 6.25. Amos 6.6.
Woe to you that now laugh, for ye shall weep. Secondly with compassion and
sorrow for Gods people in affliction and misery. They drink wine in bowls,
and anoint themselves with cheiefe ointments, but no man is sorry for the
affliction of Joseph. Thirdly, it must be sparing and moderate. Paul condemns
such as are lovers of pleasures, more then of God. 2. Tim. 3.
Fourthly, it must be void of the practice of sin. Heb. 11.
Moses is commended that he refused the pleasures of sin.

Judge. 14. 12.
The usual time of mirth is at meats. And here Sampsons practice may be
followed, who at his marriage feast propounded a riddle or hard question to his
friends. And Ambrose thinks that he did this to stop the mouths of
talkers, and to occupy their wits.

With all it must be remembered to be a Christian duty, even at the table to
maintain talk of religion, Luke 11. 37. and 14.1. and 22.15.
and of duties of godliness, after the practice of our Savior Christ: though
many upon little ground think otherwise. Tertullian records of the
Christians of his time, Apol. c. 39.
that they used in their loue-feasts to talk together, as considering with
themselves that they had God himself as an eare-witnesse to them. Chrysostom
of this point says well. Hom. 2. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. cap.
I would to God (says he) that in tauerns and feasts, and at bathes, men would
talk and dispute of hell: for the remembering of hell would hinder a man from
falling to hell. And it was the manner of the primitive Church at Dinner and
supper to use the reading of the Scriptures. August. epist. 109.
When ye come to the table (says Augustine) hear that which is read
according to custom, without any stir or striving: that your mouths may not
only receive the meat, but your ears may hunger after the word of God. And
this ancient custom is to this day retained in the Colleges of the
University of Cambridge.

And this holy rejoicing at meats is specially to be used with such as are
godly. As Solomon says, Prou. 23.8. Act. 2.46.
that he which eats at the covetous man's table, shall vomit his morsells, and
shall loose his sweet words. The faithful at Jerusalem did break bread
together, with gladness and singlenes of heart.

Question. Whether jesting be tolerable in any sort, or not?

Answer. That jesting which stands in quippes, taunts, and girdes, which
serves only for the offense of some, with the delight of others is not
tolerable: because all speech must edify, and minister grace to the hearers:
Ephesians. 4.25.
neither does it agree with Christian gravity and modesty. But two kinds of
jesting are tolerable: the one is moderate and sparing mirth, in the use of
things indifferent, At noone Eliah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud, for he
is a God: 1. Kin. 18.27 2. Kin. 2. 23. Isai. 14. 11.
either he talks or pursues his enemies, or is in his journey, or it may be
he sleeps and must be awaked.

As for laughter, it may be used: otherwise God would never have given that
power and faculty unto man: but the use of it must be both moderate and
seldom, Luke 19. Ioh. 11. Heb. 5.7.
as sorrow for our sins is to be plentiful and often. This we may learn in
Christ's example, of whom we read that he wept three times, at the
destruction of Jerusalem, at the raising of Lazarus, and in his agony: but we
never read that he laughed. And specially remember the saying of Chrysostom.
Si risus in Ecclesia diaboli opus est, that is, to move laughter in the
Church, is the work of the devil.

Fidelity is constancy in all our lawefull sayings and promises.

A promise is to be made with this condition (if God will) and then if a man be
prevented by death, Iam. 1.15. 1. Chr. 13.2. 2. Cor. 1.17. 23.
or by any like means, he is not to blamed: otherwise a man's lawefull word and
promise binds him according to the will and pleasure of him to whom it is
made.

Now if afterward it be hurtful to him that made it, he may crave to be
free from his promise: Psalm. 5. 4.
and liberty being granted, take it. But a promise bound with an oath is to
be kept, though private hindrances follow: yet so, as the Magistrate may
order the matter, and proceed in equity, that the damage may be the less.

The last grace which is to be used in speech, is care of our neighbors good
name, Prou. 22.
which is far better to him then great riches.

Here is condemned the tale bearer, which of an evil mind tells a thing of
an other, to bring him into hatred, or to revenge himself, or to get
something, which otherwise he could not obtain.

This tale bearing is of diverse sorts. One is, when men whisper abroad
secretly the fault of another, Romans 1.30. Genesis 9.
whereas they should rather admonish the party, as Cham when he had seen his
fathers nakedness, ran straight and told his brethren. The second, when they
add to or change the thing said or done, as it serves for their purpose. Some
of the witnesses which came against Christ, charged him to say, I will destroy
this temple which is made with hands, and in three days build another without
hands. Where first they change his meaning; for Christ spoke of the temple of
his body. Secondly, they add to the words, For Christ said not, Mat. 26.60.
61.
I will destroy this temple: but, destroy ye this temple. Therefore the holy
Ghost notes them with the name of false witness bearers. The third, when men
surmisse, and tell that which was never done. When Jeremy was going out of
Jerusalem to the land of Benjamin, and was in the gate of Benjamin, Irijah
took him and said, Thou fliest to Chaldeans. Then said Jeremy, that is false,
I fly not to the Chaldeans, but he would not hear him. Ier. 37.13.
The fourth is the colored tale-bearing, when one speaks evil of another,
with fine prefaces and preamples, faining that he is very sorry that his
neighbor has done such or such a thing: that he speaks it not of malice,
but of a good mind: that he is constrained to speak: that he speaks not all
he could speak: that the party to whom the tale is told must keep it
secret. Luther writes of this fault very well. upon Psalm. 15. 3.
This vice (says he) whereby we tell abroad the things which we hear of
others, and take them in worse part is very rife, and of great force to sow
discords: the rather, because it often shows it self under the pretense and
name of counsel and good advise. And it is a notable vizard for a talebearer
to transform himself into an angel of light, and under zeal for Gods glory
to backbite and accuse his neighbor of heresy, error, and wicked life.

Therefore the Prophets meaning is, that we should conceal the evils that be
in our neighbor, and not speak them to others, though he be an enemy and
deserve it at our hands, and only speak of those good things in him which
seem to preserve concord: for this we would that men should do unto us. Yea,
and let us take heed that we judge not or condemn any man's saying or doing
rashly. Confess. li. 9.
Augustine says, that this was the care which his mother had toward her
enemies. To do this is a notable point of just dealing, but indeed there is
no man utterly without this fault in this life: such is our wretched state in
this world. For though some are of this mind, that they desire not to have
other men's wants told them, and will not take all in worse part, yet if they
be told and taken in worse part of others, they can willingly hear them,
Ierem. 40.
neither will they check the teller, but suffer bad surmises to take place
with them. But Gedaliah the son of Ahicham excelled in the contrary virtue,
who those rather to hazard his life, then to suspect evil by Ismael.

This tale-bearing is the common table talk in England: and it is wonderful
to see, how those who are otherwise godly, are overtaken with it: but men must
learn to stand more in awe of Gods commandment, and also to consider that the
same thing a man speaks of another, comes home again by his own door.
Such as use tale-bearing and backbiting, are by Gods just judgment paid home
in the same kind: and hereupon Christ says, Judge not that ye be not judged,
for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged. Wherefore when men shall
enter any evil communication of others, we are to interrupt it by other talk,
as not regarding it.

Here remember, that when governors and magistrates shall use hard words, not
in the way of defamation, but for the reproouing of a vice, it is not to
slander: Gal. 3. Math. 3.
as, O foolish Galatians: O generation of vipers. And Christ terms Herod,
Fox.

CHAP. VIII. Of the bonds of Truth.
THus much of grace in speech. Now follows bonds of truth, whereby the truth
of our talk is testified and confirmed.

There are three: A simple assertion, an asseueration, an oath.

A simple assertion, is either a simple affirmation, as yea, yea: or a simple
negation, as nay, nay. And they are to be used only in our familiar and common
talk. Math. 5.
Let your communication be yea, yea: nay, nay: and whatsoever is more, comes
of evil.

If the truth which we affirm or deny be doubtful or contingent, then such
clauses as these [ It is so, or, it is not so as I think, as I remember, as I
take it] are to be added. If one shall say, It is so, and afterward it prove
otherwise, he receives discredit, because he spoke an untruth. But if he shall
say, I think it is so, though it fall out otherwise, yet he saves his credit,
because he deceives not, but only is deceived.

An asseueration is a form of speech, whereby one does vehemently affirm or
deny any thing: as when a man shall say, Verily, in truth, in very truth,
without all doubt, etc. These and such like are not to be used at every word:
but then only when a truth of greater importance is to be confirmed. When the
false prophets among the Jews and the Priests would not believe that Jeremy
was sent of God: what says he? not simply, The Lord has sent me: but, In
truth the Lord has sent me. Our Savior Christ, when he used to speak any
weighty matter, used to say, Amen, Amen, Verily, verily, which is a plain
asseueration: for Amen is more then a simple affirmation, and it is less then
an oath, as the very sense of the word does import: which is no more, but
truly, certainly.

The third is an oath, which must not be made by any thing in heaven or earth,
but only by the Name of God alone.

It must be used as the last refuge and remedy of all. For when any truth of
great importance is to be confirmed, and all signs, evidences, proofs,
witnesses, fail among men on earth: then we may lawfully fetch the Lord as a
witness from heaven, who is the knower of all truth.

And in this case an oath may be taken; either publicly before a Magistrate,
or privately among private persons, if it be done with reverence and
consideration, Genesis 31. 53.
as it was between Jacob and Laban.

CHAP. IX. What is to be done when we have spoken.
Prou. 17.25.
AFter a man has spoken his mind, very few words more are to be added. He that
has knowledge spares his words. In many words there can not want iniquity:
but he that refraineth his lips is wise.

He that speaks many words, speaks either false things or superfluous, or
both: as when a river ouerflowes, the water gathers much slime: so many
words, many faults. When a vessel being smitten makes a great noise, it is a
token that it is empty: and so the sound of many words shows a vain heart.
The Gentiles have said; that God gave a man one tongue and two ears, that he
might hear more and speak less. Valerius Maximus reports of Xenocrates,
that being in the company of some that used railing speeches, held his
tongue: and being asked why he did so, answered, That it had repented him
that he had spoken, but it never repented him that he had held his peace. And
the proverb is, He that will speak what he will, shall hear what he would
not. Offic. lib. 1.
To the framing of our speech Ambrose requires three things: a yoke, a
balance, and a metwand: a yoke, to keep it in stayed gravity: a balance to
give it weight of reason: a metwand, to keep it in measure and moderation.

This rule must be practiced carefully, for the avoiding of chiding, brawling,
and contention. Let nothing be done by contention, Phil. 2.3. Let students and
scholars learn to practice this: for what shall an other man's opinion hurt
thee: though in reasoning he be not of thy mind in every point.

Here take heed of the spirit of Contradiction, whereby some by thwarting and
contradicting every man, at length prove either obstinate heretics, or lewd
Atheists, and make no bones to contradict the holy Ghost, and to call the
scriptures in question, and dispute that there is no God.

Act. 20.7.
Now if a man speak necessary things, though he continue his speech till
midnight, as Paul did, it can not be called immoderate or superfluous talk.

CHAP. X. Of writing.
ALL this which is set down concerning speech, must as well be practiced in
writing as in speaking. Whereby are condemned ballads, books of love, all idle
discourses and histories, being nothing else but enticements and baits unto
manifold sins, fitter for Sodom and Gomorrah, then for Gods Church. And it
must be followed as well in speaking of latin or any other tongue, as English,
which students have not marked; for whereas they will not swear in English, yet
in Latin they make no bones of it, saying, Mehercuse, medius, fidius, aedipol,
per deos immortales. And whereas they hold but one God in judgment, yet in
their Latin exercises they speak of Jupiter and of the immortal Gods^ after
the manner of the heathen. What a shame is this, that a Christian, and that in
Christian schools, should either be ashamed or not use to speak as a
Christian, but as Atheists do? If thou have many tongues and know not how
to use them well: he which has but his mother tongue, ordering it aright, is a
better linguist then thou.

CHAP. XI. Of silence.
Wise and godly silence is as excellent a virtue as holy speech: for he
knows not how to speak which knows not how to hold his tongue. The rule
of our silence must be the law of God. By means of which, wise consideration
must be had, whether the thing which we have in mind be for Gods glory, and
our neighbors good: which done, we are answerably to speak or to be silent.

Here must be considered the things of which ^ilence must be used, and the
persons before whom. The things are many. First, if any truth be to the
hinderance of Gods glory, or of the good of our neighbor, it must be
co^cealed.

The concealing of the truth is either in whole or in part. In whole, when the
speaking of the least word is hurtful: Aug. lib. ad Conser.
As for example, the father and the son are both sick at once: the son
dies first, the father asks whether his son be dead or not: if it be said
no, an untruth is told: if yea, then the fathers grief is increased, and his
death hastened: therefore silence is the best. In days of persecution holy
Martyrs have chosen rather to suffer death then to reveal their brethren, that
have been of their private assemblies with them.

The concealing of a thing in part is, when a man speaks a little of the
truth, and concealeth the rest. Which is warranted in all good and lawefull
proceedings, which manifestly tend to the glory of god. When Samuel is sent to
anoint David, he answers the Lord and says, 1. Sam. 16. 1,2,3.
How can I go? for if Saul hear of it he will kill me. Then the Lord
answered, Take an heyfer with thee and say, I am come to do sacrifice to the
Lord: and call for Ishai to sacrifice, and I will show thee what thou shall
do, and thou shall anoint unto me him whom I shall name vnthee. When Jeremy
had showed king Zedekiah how he might escape death, then the king said unto
him, Iere. 38. 24, 25,26.
Let no man know of these words, etc. but if the princes understand that I
have talked with thee, and they come unto thee, and say unto thee, Declare unto
us what the king has said unto thee, etc. then shall thou say unto them, I
humbly besought the king that he would not cause me to return to Iehonathans
house to die there. And afterward he so answered, and the matter was not
perceived. The like practiced by Paul, Acts 23.6.

Secondly thou art to conceal thine own secrets. Sampson revealing his own
secret, Judge. 14. overthrew himself. If thou desire ease by revealing, the^
tell them but to few, and to such as are faithful.

That which thou would not have known, tell no man: for how shall another
keep thy counsel, when thou can not do it. Keep thy friends secret
likewise, if it be not hurtful; and let ministers conceal the sins and
wants that trouble the conscience of such as are dying. Let magistrates conceal
things done in the Senate, especially concerning war, least they be revealed
to the enemy.

If God bring any strange thing to pass, speak not boldly of it, but rather
in silence wonder. Job at the consideration of Gods majesty in his works,
says, Job. 36. 37.
Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my
mouth. Nadab and Abihu for offering incense with strange fire, before the Lord,
were both destroyed with fire, which being done, Moses told Aaron that god
would be sanctified in the^ that come nere him, and be glorified before all the
people: Leut. 10. 3.
and then the text says, but Aaron held his peace. When Peter had taught the
Gentiles, and after returned to Jerusalem, they of the circumcision contended
with him: he then renders a reason of his fact, which being made, they were
silent. For so the text is, When they heard these things, they held their
peace, and glorified God. Act. 11.18
When Gods judgments befall men among us, if we speak any thing we must judge
charitably. Blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor, the Lord shall
deliver him in the day of trouble. Psalm. 41.1.


Thirdly, the infirmities and sins of our neighbor are always to be
concealed, unless it be in the case before named, that we find our selves
called of God to speak. Prou. 17.4.
He that covers a transgression seeks love. If god in mercy cover his
sins, why should thou reveal them? Solomon says, It is the glory of a man
to pass by an infirmity. Prou. 19.11.


Fourthly, all unseemly matters, al things unknown, things which concern us
not, things above our reach are in silence to be buried.

The persons before whom silence must be used, are these. I. Malicious
enemies of religion: Mat. 7.6. Mat. 27.14.
Give not that which is holy unto dogs: neither cast your pearls before swine.
This was among the rest one cause of the silence of Christ before Caiphas and
Pilate. II. Before Magistrates in their open courts: where such as come before
them are not to speak till they be bidden. Then Paul after that the governor
had beckened unto him that he should speak, answered. Act. 24. 10.
III. In the presence of our elders and betters, who must have leave and
liberty to speak first, and must of others be heard with silence. Eccl. 32.8.
Job. 32.6. Eccl. 7.5.11.
The practice of this was in Elihu to Eliphaz and Bildad. A company of men (as
some say) is like to the Alphabet, in which are vowels, half vowels, and
mutes; vowels are old men, learned, wise, expert: half vowels, are young men
and women, who are then only to speak when they are asked: mutes, are the same
parties, who being not occasioned, are in silence to hear their betters. Tit.
2.9.
And here all servants and children must remember when they are justly
reproved, to be silent and not to answer any thing again. IV. Fools and
pratlers are not to be answered, unless it be to let them see their folly.

CHAP. XII. An exhortation to keep the tongue.
THus have I in part set down how the tongue is to be governed: and I
heartily desire, that all Christians would put these rules in practice. Reasons.
I. If any man seem to be religious, and restrain not his tongue, he
deceives himself, and his religion is in vain. Iam. 1.26.
II. The man of an evil tongue, is a beast in the form of a man; for his
tongue is the tongue of a serpent, under which lies nothing but venim and
poison: Psalm. 140.3.
nay he is worse then a serpent: for it cannot hurt, unless it be present to
see a man, or to bite him or to strike him with his tail: but he which has
not the rule of his tongue, hurts men as well absent as present, neither sea
nor land, nor any thing can hinder him. And again, his throat is like a grave
that has a vent in some part, and therefore sends forth nothing but stincke
and corruption. III. As the holy men of God when they preached, Isa. 6.6. Mat.
3.11.
had their tongues, as it were, touched with a cole from the altar of God: and
as godly men when they speak graciously, have their tongues enflamed with the
fire of Gods spirit: so contrariwise, when thou speak evil, thy tongue is
kindled by the fire of hell: Iam. 3.6.
and Satan comes from thence with a cole to touch thy lips, and to set them
on fire to all manner of mischeife. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. hom. 79. in Mat.
that when men speak good things, their tongue is the tongue of Christ: but
all manner of ungodly and cursed speaking is the devils language. IV. The
moderating of the tongue is a matter of great difficulty. S. James says, Iam.
3. 7, 8. Hist. Tripar. l. 8. c. 1.
The whole nature of beasts and of birds, and of creeping things, etc. but the
tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evil. Pambus, one without learning
came to a certain man to be taught a Psalm: who when he had hard the first
verse of the 38. psalm, I said, that I will keep my ways that I offend not
in my tongue, would not suffer the next verse to be read, saying, this verse is
enough, if I could practice it. And when his teacher blamed him, because he saw
him not in six months after, he answered that he had not yet done the verse.
And one that knew him many years after, asked him whether he had yet learned
the verse. I am forty years old (says he) and have not yet learned to fulfill
it. Now the^, the harder it is to rule the tongue, the more care is to be had
therein. V. The strange judgments of God for the abuse of the tongue, Gods
judgment for the abuse of the tongue. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 8.
especially in blasphemies and periuries are many and fearful. Three men
conspired together against Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, a man that led a
godly and blameless life, and they charged him with a most heinous crime: all
three confirm their accusation by oath. The first wishes, if it were not so,
that he were burnt. The second, that he might die of the iaundise. The third,
that he might loose his eyes. Afterward in process of time, the first had his
house set on fire in the night: and he with all his family was burnt. The
second had the iaundise from the head to the sole of the foot, and died
thereof. The third seeing what was befallen these twain, repented, and
confessed the conspiracy against Narcissus, and yet for all that he lost his
eyes.

Again, in the days of Q. Marie, Fox Act. Mon.
as James Abbes was led by the Sheriff to execution, diverse poor people
stood in the way and asked their alms: he then not having any money to give
them, did put off all his apparel save his shirt, and gave it unto them, to
some one thing, to some another: in the giving whereof he exhorted them to be
strong in the Lord, and to stand steadfast in the truth of the gospel. While
he was was thus instructing the people, a servant of the Shiriffes going by,
cried out aloude, and blasphemously said: Believe him not good people, he is an
heretic, and a mad man out of his wit: believe him not, for it is heresy
that he says. And as the other continued in his godly admonitions, so did
this wicked wretch blow forth his blasphemous exclamations, until they came
unto the stake where he should suffer. But immediately after this martyr was
bound to the stake and fire put to him, such was the fearful stroke of Gods
justice upon this blasphemous railer, that he was there presently in the sight
of all the people stricken with a frenzy, wherewith he had before railingly
charged that good martyr of God: who in his furious rage and madness, casting
off his shoes and the rest of his clothes, cried out unto the people, and
said, thus did James Abs the true servant of God, who is saved, but I am
damned: and thus ran he about the town of Bury, still crying, that James
Abbes was a good man and saved, but I am damned.

Again, A^t. Mon. Fox.
children sitting in company together, fell into communication of God, and to
reason what God was. And some said one thing, some another: among the rest, one
said, He is a good old father: to which an other, named Dennis Benfield,
replied with a most outrageous blasphemy: What, he (said she) is an old doting
fool. But shortly after this young gyrle was so stricken, that all the one side
of her was black, and she became speechles^e, and died.

Idem.
Again, one Leaver a ploug-man, railing, said that he saw the evil favored
knave Latimer when he was burned: and also in despite, said, that he had teeth
like an horse. At which time and hour, as near as could be gathered, the
son of the said Leaver most wickedly hanged himself.

Idem.
Again, in the time of K. Edward, a young gentleman of Cornwall being in
company with other more gentlemen together with their servants, being about
the number of twenty horsemen, among whom this lusty younger entered into
talk, and began withal to swear, and use ribauld speech, being gently
reproved, the young gentleman took snuff, and said to the reproouer, Why
take thou thought for me? take thought for thy winding sheet: well, quoth
the other, amend, for death gives no warning: for as soon comes a lambs
skin to the market, as on old sheep skin. Gods wounds (said he) care not
thou for me: raging still in this manner worse and worse in words, till at
length passing on their journey, they came riding over a great bridge, standing
over a piece of an arm of the sea, upon which bridge this gentleman-swearer
spurred his horse in such sort, as he sprang clean over with the man on his
back, who as he was going, cried, saying, Horse and man and all to the devil.

^eter Stubbes book printed 158^.
Again, there was a serving man in Lincolnshire, who had still in his mouth an
use to swear Gods precious blood, and that for very trifles: being often
warned by his friends to leave the taking of the Lords blood in vain, did
notwithstanding still persist in his wickedness, until at the last it pleased
God to acite him first with sickness, and then with death: during which time
of the Lords visitation, no persuasion could move him to repent his foresaid
blaspheming, but hearing the bell to toll, did most hardly in the very anguish
of his death, start up in his bed, and swear by Gods blood this bell tolled
for me. Whereupon immediately the blood abundantly from all the joints of his
body, as it were in streams, did issue out most fearfully from mouth, nose,
wrestes, knees, heels, and toes, with all other joints, not one left free, and
so died.

These and such like judgments must be as warnings from heaven to admonish us,
and to make us afraid of the abuse of the Tongue: especially when it tends to
the dishonor of God. And we are to imitate the example of Policarpe the
Martyr, who when he was bidden to take his oath, and curse Christ, answered,
Fourscore and six years have I been his servant, yet in all this time has
he not so much as once hurt me: how then may I speak evil of my King and
Sovereign Lord, which ^^th thus preserved me? VI. Lastly, God has honored
thy tongue with the gift of speech and utterance: and the great excellency of
this gift thou should perceive, if thou werest stricken dumme for a time.
Therefore let thy tongue be applied to the honoring of God, and to the good of
thy neighbor.

FINIS.
TWO TREATISES: I. Of the nature and practice of Repentance. II. Of the combat
of the flesh and spirit.


A second Edition corrected.

Printed by John Legate, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1600.

To the Reader whosoever.
GOd has bestowed on us great prosperity and peace, with plenty of all
temporal blessings that heart can wish for many years in this land.

Prosperity abused has been the occasion of many grievous sins against the
first and second table: specially of Atheism, neglect of Gods worship,
contempt of the word, profanation of the Sabbath, abuse of the sacraments, etc.

These and such like sins have long called down for judgments from heaven
upon us: and the rather, because the preaching of the word has little
prevailed to bring us to any amendment of life.

Whereupon God has now begun to cause his judgment to seize upon us,
specially by plague and pestilence: and that even in the very principal part
of this land: whereby he himself does (as Job says) round us in the ear,
Job 36.17.
and preach repentance to us.

Wherefore it stands us now in hand if ever, to look about us: and if we have
not repented to begin to repent: if we have in former time repented, to do it
more earnestly.

If so be that we shall harden our hearts both against his word and judgments,
and put far from us the evil day: undoubtedly we must needs look for
judgments far more terrible then ever we felt as yet; if not eternal
destruction. Let us be advised by the old world, who made light of Noah's
warning, and were drowned in the floode: by Lots sons in law, who took their
fathers counsel for mockage, and were burnt with fire and brimstone from
heaven: by the foolish virgins, who were sleeping when they should have been
furnishing their lamps, and were shut from the marriage of the lamb.

And to direct thee somewhat in the practice of repentance, I have penned this
small treatise: use it for thy benefit, and see thou be a doer of it: unless
thou will be a wilful murderer, and shed the blood of thine own soul.

And whereas there have been published heretofore in English two sermons of
Repentance, one by M. Bradford Martyr, the other by M. Arthur Dent: sermons
indeed which have done much good: my meaning is not to add thereunto, or to
teach any other doctrine, but only to renew and revive the memory of that
which they have taught.

Neither let it trouble thee that the principal Divines of this age, whom in
this treatise I follow, may seem to be at diffeeence in treating of
repentance. For some make it a fruit of faith containing two parts,
Mortification and Vivification: Melanct. locis com.
some make faith a part of it, by dividing it into contrition, faith, new
obedience: Calv. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 3. par. 9.
some make it all one with regeneration. The difference is not in the substance
of doctrine, but in the logical manner of handling it. And the difference of
handling arises of the diverse acception of repentance. It is taken two ways,
generally and particularly. Generally for the whole conversion of a sinner, and
so it may contain contrition, faith, new obedience under it, and be confounded
with regeneration. It is taken particularly for the renouation of the life and
behavior: and so it is a fruit of faith. And this only sense do I follow in
this treatise.

I have added hereto a few lines of the combat between the flesh and the
spirit: because repentance and this combat are joined together, and the one is
not practiced without the other, as appears by resolving Psalm 51.

Spirit. Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy loving kindness. verse. 1.



Flesh. Yea, but this thine adultery comprehends infinite sins: therefore
look for no pardon.


Spirit. According to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine
iniquities.


Flesh. This sin has taken such deep place in thee, that it will be hardly
pardoned.


Spirit. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, verse. 2.
and cleanse me from my sin.


Flesh. Thy special trespass is against man.


Spirit. Against thee, verse. 4.
against thee, only have I sinned.


Flesh. Except this one sin thy life is unblameable.


Spirit. Behold I was borne in iniquity, etc. verse. 5.



Yea, the best man that is, in the practice of godliness, often appears to be
unlike himself: and the cause is this spiritual combat. The flesh otherwhiles
makes him wayle and mourn and go drooping: presently after the spirit puts
into him (as we say) the heart of gresse, and makes him triumph against the
flesh, the devil, the world. Moses was courageous at the red sea, Exo. 14.13.
N^m. 2^. 11,12. Job. 1.21. and ^.1. Psalm. 6. 1. and
but he failed at the waters of strife. Job first praises God, and afterward
blasphemeth. David is often fainting in misery, yet by and by revived.
Wherefore there is good cause why the consideration of repentance and the
combat should go together: that no man, after he has begun to repent, might
dream of ease to his flesh: as though we should go to heaven in beds of
down: but rather that we might be resolved, that when we begin to do any
thing pleasing unto God, then we must look for nothing but continual
molestation from our vile and wicked natures.

Written Anno 1593. the 17. of November, which is the Coronation day of (...)
dread Sovereign Queen ELIZABETH: whose reign God long (...). William Perkins.

CHAP. I. What Repentance is.
REpentance is a work of grace, arising of a godly sorrow: whereby a man
turns from all his sins unto God, and brings forth fruits worthy amendment
of life.

I call Repentance a work: because it seems not to be a quality, or virtue,
or habit: but an action of a repentant sinner. Which appears by the sermons of
the Prophets and Apostles, which run in this tenor, Repent, turn to God,
amend your lives, etc. Whereby they intimate, that Repentance is a work to be
done.

Again, Repentance is not every kind of work, but a work of grace; because
it can not be practiced of any, but of such as be in the estate of grace.
Reasons are these. I. No man can repent, unless he first hate sin, and love
righteousness; and none can hate sin, unless he be sanctified; and he that is
sanctified is justified: and he that is justified must needs have that faith
which unites him to Christ, and makes him bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh. Wherefore he that repents is justified and sanctified, and made a member
of Christ by faith. II. He that turns to God, must first of all be turned of
God: and after that we are turned, then we repent. Ier. 31.19.
Surely after I was converted I repented: and after that I was instructed I
smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear
the reproach of my youth.

Some may object, that repentance goes before all grace, because it is first
preached. The first sermon that ever was made, was of repentance, preached by
God himself in Paradise to our first parents. And ever since the sermons of
all the Prophets and Apostles, and of all faithful ministers have had
repentance for their beginning and scope. The answer hereto may be this: If we
respect the order of nature, there be other graces of God which go before
repentance: because a man's conscience must in some sort be settled touching his
reconciliation with God in Christ, before he can begin to repent. Wherefore
justification and sanctification in order of nature go before repentance. But
if we respect time, grace and repentance are both together. So soon as there
is fire, so soon it is hot: and so soon as a man is regenerate, so soon he
repents. If we respect the outward manifestation of these twain, repentance
goes before all other graces: because it first of all appears outwardly.
Regeneration is like the sap of the tree that lies hid within the bark:
repentance is like the budde that speedily shows it self, before either
blossom, leaf, or fruit appear: yea, all other graces of the heart which are
needful to salvation, are made manifest by repentance. And for this cause
Repentance (as I take it) is first preached.

I add further, that repentance rises of a godly sorrow in the heart, as Paul
teaches. 2. Cor. 7.10.
Godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation never to be repented of. It is
called a godly sorrow, or a sorrow according to God, that it may be
distinguished from worldly sorrow: which is a grief arising of the
apprehension of the wrath of God and other miseries; as fear of men, loss of
good name, calamities in goods and other things, which in this life follow as
punishments of sin: whereas the godly sorrow causes grief for sin,
because it is sin. And it makes any man, in whom it is, to be of this
disposition and mind, that if there were no conscience to accuse, no devil to
terrify, no judge to arraigne and condemn, no hell to torment, yet he would be
humbled and brought on his knees for his sins, because he has offended a
loving, merciful, and long suffering God.

Further I say, that repentance stands in turning again to God. Man at the
first was made a goodly creature in the image of God, having fellowship with
him, whereby he dwelt in God, and God in him. By sin there is a partition
made between God and man: Isa. 59.2. Ephesians. 4.18.
who is alienated and estranged from God, and is become the child of wrath, a
firebrand of hell, the prodigal child going from his father into a far
country, the straying, nay the lost sheep. Now when men have grace to repent,
then they begin to renew this fellowship, and turn again to God. And the very
essence or nature of repentance consists in this turning. Which Paul does seem
to intimate, when he says, Act. 16.20.
That he showed both to Jew and Gentile, that they should repent and turn to
God, and do works worthy amendment of life. In which words he sets down unto
us a full description of repentance.

Again I say, that repentance is a turning from sin, because it does not
abolish or change the substance of body or soul, or any of the faculties
thereof either in whole or part: but only rectify and amend them by remoouing
the corruption. It turns the sadness of melancholy to godly sorrow, choler
to good zeal, softness of nature to meekenes of spirit, madness and
lightn^sse to Christian mirth: it reformes every man according to his natural
constitution, not abolishing it, but redressing the fault of it.

Further I put down, that repentance is a turning from all sin to God, that
I may exclude many false turnings. The first, when a man turns from God to
sin: as when one of a Protestant becomes a Papist, an Arrian a ^^milist. The
second, when a man turns from one sin to an other. As when the riotous
person leaves his prodigality, and gives himself to the practice of
covetousness: this can be no repentance: because it is a going from one extreme
to an other, whereas repentance is to leave the extremes and keep the mean.
The third is, not when a man turns from sin, but sin turns from him and
leaves him. As when the drunkard leaves drunkenness, because his stomach is
decayed: the fornicatour his uncleanness, because the strength of nature fails
him: the quarreller his fighting, because he is maimed on leg or arm. The
last is, when men turn from many sins, but will not turn from all. As Herod
did many things at the advertisement of John Baptist, but could not be brought
to leave incest, in having his brother Philips wife; This repentance is
nothing. For as he which is truly regenerate, is wholly in body, soul, and
spirit regenerate: so he which truly repents, turns from all sin, and turns
wholly to God.

Neither is this to trouble any, that they can not know all their sins: for
sound repentance for one special sin, brings with it repentance of all
sin. And as God requires particular repentance for known sins, so he
accepts a general repentance for such as be unknown.

To proceed further, the conversion of a sinner in repentance, has three
parts. The first, a purpose and resolution in the mind: the second, an
inclination in the will and affections: the third, an endeavor in life and
conversation, to abandon and leave all his former sins, and to employ
himself in obedience to Gods commandments.

Lastly, this repentance must bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life:
because it cannot be known to be sincere, unless it bring forth fruit.
Repentant sinners are trees of righteousness of Gods own planting: Isa. 61.3.
and they grow by the waters that flow out of the sanctuary, and therefore
they must bear fruit that may serve for meat, and leaf for medicine: Eze.
47.12. Math. 3.10.
otherwise the axe of Gods judgment is laid to their roots to stock them up.

CHAP. II. Of the causes of Repentance.
THe principal cause of Repentance is the Spirit of God, as Paul says,
Instructing them with meekness that are contrary minded, proouing if God at
any time will give them repentance. 2. Tim. 2. 25 Ier. 31.18.
And Jeremy, Convert thou me, and I shall be converted.

The instrument of the holy Ghost in working repentance, is the ministry of
the Gospel only, and not the law. Reasons hereof are these. I. Faith is
engendered by the preaching not of the Law, but of the Gospel, as Paul says,
The Gospel is the power of God to salvation to all that believe from faith to
faith: Romans 1.18.
therefore repentance which follows faith as a fruit thereof, must needs come
by the preaching of the Gospel only. II. The Law is the ministry of death
and damnation: ^. Cor. 3.7.
because it shows a man his wretched estate; but shows him no remedy:
therefore it can not be an isntrumental cause of that repentance which is
effectual to salvation. III. The doctrine of repentance is a part of the
Gospel: Luke 9.6. cum Mat. 6. 12. Luke 24.4.7.
which appears in this, that the preaching of repentance, and the preaching of
the Gospel are put one for an other. And our Savior Christ deuides the Gospel
into two parts: the preaching of repentance, and remission of sins in his
name. IV. That part of the word which works repentance, must reveal the
nature of it, and set out the promise of life which belongs unto it. But the
Law neither reueales faith nor repentance: this is a proper work of the
Gospel. If it be said, that the Law is a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ,
the answer is, it brings men to Christ not by teaching the way, or by alluring
them; Vrgendo non alliciendo.
but by forcing and urging them.

Neither do we abolish the law, in ascribing the work of repentance to the
Gospel only: for though it be no cause, yet is it an occasion of true
repentance. Because it represents unto the eye of the soul our damnable
estate, and smites the conscience with doleful terrors and fears, which
though they be no tokens of grace (for they are in their own nature the very
gates and the downfall to the pit of hell) yet they are certain occasions of
receiving grace. The physician is otherwhiles constrained to recover the health
of his patient by casting him into some fits of an ague: so man, because he is
deadly sick of the disease of sin, must be cast into some fits of Legal
terrors by the ministry of the law, that he may recover his former estate,
and come to life everlasting.

Repentance also is furthered by calamities, which in this case often come in
the room and stead of the law. Joseph's brethren, when they were in distress
in Egypt, said one to another, Genesis 42.21.
We have verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul when he besought us, and we would not hear him: therefore is this
trouble come upon us. And the Lord says in Oseah, Ose. 5.15.
I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their fault and
seek me; in their affliction will they seek me diligently. And the Israelites
say, Lam. 3. 20. 2. Chr. 33. 12. Psalm. 119.71.
My soul had them (many afflictions) in remembrance, and is humbled in me.
Example of Manasses. And when he was in tribulation, he prayed to the Lord his
God, and humbled himself greatly. And David says, It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.

CHAP. III. How Repentance is wrought.
REpentance is wrought in the heart by certain steps and degrees. First of all
a man must have knowledge of four things, namely of the law of god, of sin
against the law, of the guilt of sin, and of the judgment of God against
sin, which is the eternal wrath of God.

Then in the second place must follow the Application of the former knowledge
to a man's own person, by the work of the conscience assisted by the holy
Ghost, which for that cause is called the spirit of bondage: Romans 8.15.
and this application is made in a form of reasoning, called a practical
syllogism, on this manner:

The breaker of the law is guilty of eternal death, says the mind:

But I am a breaker of the law of God, says the conscience, as a witness and
an accuser:

Therefore I am guilty of eternal death, says the same conscience, as a judge.

Thirdly from this application thus made arises fear and sorrow in respect of
Gods judgments against sin, Act. 2.3^.
commonly called the sting of the conscience, or penitence, and the compunction
of heart.

Now this compunction, unless it be delayed by the comforts of the Gospel,
brings men to desperation, and to eternal damnation. Therefore he that will
repent to life everlasting must go four steps further. First he must have
knowledge of the gospel, and enter into a serious consideration of the mercy of
God therein revealed. Then must follow the application of the former knowledge
by the conscience, renewed and assisted by the spirit of adoption, on this
manner:

He that is guilty of eternal death, if he deny himself, and put his
affiance on the death of Christ, shall have righteousness and life eternal,
says the mind enlightened by the knowledge of the Gospel:

But I being guilty of eternal death, deny my self, and put all my
affiance in the death of Christ, says the conscience renewed by the spirit of
adoption:

Therefore I shall have righteousness and life everlasting by Christ.

Thirdly after this application there follows joy and sorrow: joy, because a
man's sins are pardoned in Christ: sorrow, because a man by his sins has
displeased him which has been so loving and merciful a God unto him.

Lastly, after this godly sorrow ^ollowes Repentance, called a Transmentatation
or turning of the mind, whereby a man determines and r^solues with himself to
sin no more as he has done, but to live in newnes of life.

CHAP. IV. Of the parts of Repentance.
REpentance has two parts: Mortification, and Rising to newnes of life.

Mortificatio^ is the first part of repentance, which co^cerns turning from sin.

Men turn from sin, when they do not only abstain from actual sin, but
also use all means whereby they may both weaken and suppress the corruption of
nature. Chirurgions when they must cut off any part of the body, use to lay
plasters to it, to mortify it; that being without sense and feeling, it may
be cut off with less pain. In the same manner, we are to use all helps and
remedies prescribed in the word, which serve to weake^ or kill sin, that in
death it may be abolished.

And it must not seem strange, that I say we must use means to mortify our
own sins. Acti agimus
For, howesoeuer by nature we can not do anything acceptable to God, yet
being quickened and moved by the holy Ghost, we stir and move our selves
to do that which is truly good. And therefore repentant sinners have grace in
them, whereby they mortify their own sins. Paul says. I beat down my
body, and bring it in subjection. And, they which are Christ's have crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof. 2. Cor. 9.27. Gal. 5.24. Col.
3.5. 2. Tim. 2.21. 1. Ioh. 3.3. cap. 5.18.
And, Mortify therefore your earthly members, fornication, uncleanness, the
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness. And, If any man
purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor. And S. John
says, Every one which has this hope in him, purges himself, even as he is
pure. And, he which is begotten of God preserves himself, and the wicked one
touches him not.

Mortification has three parts. A purpose in mind, an inclination in will, and
an endeavor in life and conversation to leave all sin.

Rising to newness of life, is the second part of repentance concerning
sincere obedience to God.

And it has also three parts. The two first are a resolution in the mind, and
an inclination or lust in the will to obey God in all things. Barnabas exhorts
them of Antiochia, Act. 11. 23
that with purpose of heart they would clean unto the Lord. Examples of both
these are many in Scriptures. Of Joshua, Josh. 24. 15.
If it seem enill unto you to serve the Lord, choose you thi^ day whom you
will serve, whether the gods which your fathers served, or the gods of the
Amorites, etc. but I and my household will serve the Lord. Of David, Psalm. 119.57
verse. 106. Psalm. 27.8. Ps. 119.112.
O Lord, thou art my portion, I have determined to keep thy commandments. And,
I have sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments. And, When thou said, seek my face, mine heart answered unto
thee, O Lord, I will seek thy face. And, I have applied mine heart to fulfill
thy statutes always even to the end.

The third part, is an endeavor in life and conversation to obey God. Example
of Paul. Act. 24. 16. Psalm. 119. 6. verse. 30. 31. 35.
And herein I take pains to have always a clear conscience toward God and
toward men. Of David, I hau^ respect to all thy commandments. And, I have
chosen the way of truth, and thy judgments have I laid before me. And, I
have cleaued to thy testimonies. And, direct me in the path of thy
commandments: for therein is my delight.

No man must here think, that a repentant sinner fullfils the law in his
obedience: for their best works are faulty before God. And whereas the faithful
in scriptures are said to be perfect: we must know that there be two degrees
of perfection: perfection in substance, and perfection in the highest degree.
Perfection is substance is, when a man does sincerely endeavor to perform
perfect obedience to God, not in some but in all his commandments. And this
is the only perfection that any man can have in this life. A Christian man's
perfection is to bewail his imperfection: his obedience more consists in the
good will, then in the work, and is more to be measured by the affection, then
by the effect.

CHAP. V. Of the degrees of Repentance.
REpentance has two degrees. It is either ordinary, or extraordinary.

Ordinary repentance is that which every christian is to perform every day:
for as men fall daily either more or less; so the graces of God are
proportionally weakened day by day. Wherefore the continual reparation thereof
must be made by a daily renewing of repentance. A christian man is the temple
and house of Gods spirit: he must therefore once a day sweep it, that it may be
fit to entertain so worthy a guest.

Extraordinary repentance is the same in nature with the former: it differs
only from it in degree and measure of grace.

And this is to be put in practice, when men fall into any enormous, capital, or
grievous offenses: whereby they do very grievously wound their own
consciences, and give great offense to the Church. Of this sort was the
repentance of Peter, when he went forth and wept bitterly: and David's
repentance, after he had committed adultery and murdered Vriah.

CHAP. VI. Of the persons which must repent.
MEn be of two sorts: the natural man, and the regenerate. Repentance is
needful for both. For the natural man, that he may be brought from his
sins, and the image of God renewed in him. Some may say, that many natural
men live ciuilly, abstaining from all outrageous behavior, and therefore need
no repentance. I grant indeed they do so: yet repentance must go withal.
For civil life without grace in Christ, is nothing else in Gods sight, but a
beutifull abomination. The Pharisees were civil, yet Christ says of them,
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not see the kingdom of heaven. Repentance is also required
in the regenerate: because they have may unknown and hidden corruptions in
them, which must be mortified: and otherwhiles they fall grievously: and
therefore that they may rise again, they must be daily practiced in the
spiritual exercises of repentance.

CHAP. VII. Of the practice of Repentance.
IN the practice of Repentance four special duties are required. The first is
a diligent and serious examination of the conscience by the laws and
commandments of God, for all manner of sins both original and actual.
Example of the children of Israel. Lam. 3. 39. 40. Psa. 119. 59
Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? man suffers for his sin: let us
search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. Of David, I considered
my ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies.

Touching Original sin, this must be well remembered, that one man has not
one part only of original sin, and another man another: one man this
corruption, another that: but every man as he received from Adam the whole
nature of man: so also he received original sin wholly. And therefore every
man, (not one accepted, saving Christ who was extraordinarily sanctified by the
holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin) has in him from his parents the
corruption and seed of all sin, which is a natural disposition and pronenes
to commit any sin whatsoever. Take a view and consider all the horrible
sins that be practiced in any part of the world, either against the first or
second table: whatsoever they are, the spawne and seed of them all is even in
that man that is thought to be best disposed by nature. Some may say, that
experience shows the contrary; because among men that want all manner of
religion some are more civil and orderly; some again more lewdly disposed. I
answer, that this comes to pass, not because some men are by nature less
wicked then others: but because God by his providence does limit and restrain
men's corruption more or less, which he does for the good of mankind. For if
men might be wholly left to themselves, corruption would so exceedingly break
out into all manner of sins, that there should be no living in the world.

In examination of actual sins, three rules must be followed. The first,
that we must search out not only our gross sins, but even the very thoughts
of our hearts. For repentance is not only a change of the speech, apparel, and
outward behavior, but also of the inward and secret thoughts of the heart.
Therefore the prophet Joel bids the Jews rend their hearts and not their
garments: Joel 2. 13.
and Paul tells the Ephesians, that they must be renewed in the spirit of their
minds: Ephesians. 4.23. Act. 8.22.
and Peter bids Simon Magus to repent and pray God that the thought of his
heart may be forgiven him. The second, that the very circumstances of sins
done must be considered: as the time when, the place where, and the manner how;
as namely, whether they were done of ignorance, or knowledge, of weakness, or
presumption, or obstinate malice. Thirdly in examination it is very meet and
convenient, that we pass through all the commandments of the moral law,
laying them as most absolute rules to our hearts and lives: and by this means
we shall be able to make large bills and Catalogues of all our sins, even
from the very cradle to any part of our age following, as the servants of God
have always done. Job. 9.2. Psalm. 19.12.
Thus it will come to pass, that we shall plainly see our wretched estate,
and acknowledge that our sins be in number as the hairs of our head, and as
the sands by the sea shore.

A DIRECTION FOR EXAMINATION of the conscience.
I. COM. Thou shall have none other Gods, etc.
He breaks this commandment, TThat knows not the true God. Ier. 4.22. That
denies God in his heart, by denying his presence, justice, mercy, etc. Psalm.
14.1. That hates God, and shows it by disobedience. Exodus 20.5. Romans 1.30.
That does not fear God and stand in awe of him. That fears men or other
creatures more then God. Math. 10.31. Apoc. 2.8. That lives in open sins
securely, not fearing Gods word or judgments. 1. These. 5.6,7. That is
sorrowful for his sins, only in respect of the punishment. 2. Cor. 7.10.
That fears God by men's traditions. Esa. 29.13. That does not believe Gods
word, but calls the Canonical Scripture in question. That despaires of Gods
mercy. That has a dead faith without works. Iam. 2. That puts his confidence
in the devil and his works, as seekers to wizzards do. That loves the
creatures, as riches and honor, and his own filthy pleasures more then God.
Ephesians. 5.5. That puts confidence in his strength, wisdom, riches, physicians. 2.
Chron. 16.9,11. That is impatient under the cross. Matthew. 10.38. That tempts
God. Math. 4.7. That seeks for the things of this life, more then for Gods
kingdom. Matthew. 6.33. That murmures against God. 1. Cor. 10.10. That disputes
and holds there is no God. That holds and maintains opinions against the
ancient faith set down in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. As did
the Maniches, Donatists, Arrians, Anabaptists, etc. That so holds one religion,
as he is ready to follow an other. 1. King. 18.21. That is full of presumption
of Gods mercy. Esa. 7.12. That falls away from the known truth. 2. Pet. 2.20.
That adds to Canonical Scripture. Deuteronomy. 12. last verse.


II. COM. Thou shall make to thy self no graven Image, etc.
He breaks this commandment, THat represents God in an image. Exodus 32.6,8.
That worships God in or at images, as crucifixes, and such like. 2. King. 18.4.
That kneeles down before an image. That is bodily present at Mass keeping his
heart to God. 1. Cor. 8.9. That retains the monuments of Idolatry. Exodus
23.13. That marries with infidels and such like. Genesis 6.2. That makes leagues
of amity with such. 2. Chron. 19.1. That worships God according to his own
fantasy. Col. 2.23. That worships God with lip-seruice, Isa. 29.13. as our
common people do, which place all the service of God in pattering and mumbling
over the Creed and ten commandments for prayers, and the Lords prayer without
knowledge of the meaning. That has the power of godliness, but denies the
force of it. 2. Tim. 3.5. That gives worship to creatures, as Saints and
angels. Psalm. 115.8. That refuses to hear the preaching of the Gospel. Luke
14.19. That negligently worships God. Rev. 3.16. That omits invocation of Gods
name. Esa. 64.7. That hears sermons, but when he is reproved, railes and
rages, and profits nothing. Amos 5.10. That changes the worship of God in whole
or in part. Deuteronomy. 13.32. That makes either open or secret league with the
devil. Psalm. 58.6. That uses witchcraft, sorcerie, or enchantments. Deuteronomy.
18.11. Levit. 19.26. That consults with wisards. Levit. 20.6. That wears
Amulets or Characters about his neck, and puts confidence in them. That
hinders schools of religion and good learning. Psalm. 74.6,7. That seeks not
(within the compass of his calling) the good estate of Gods Church: but seeks
his own things. P^al. 132.3,4.


III. COM. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord, etc.
He breaks this commandment, THat does vnreuerenly use Gods titles in his
talk. Phil. 2.10. That swears to do a thing lawful and good, and yet does
it not. Math. 5.23. That swears rashly. Ier. 4.2. That uses customable
swearing in his common talk. Mat. 5.37. That blasphemes the name of God.
Leuit. 24.16. That swears falsely. Ioh. 8.44. That swears against piety and
honesty. That uses cursing and banning. That finds fault with the creatures
of god. 1. Co. 10.3. That swears by the creatures. Math. 5.34,35. That uses
lots in sporting. Pro. 16.33. and 18.18. That makes and uses charms of
herbs and other things. Deuteronomy. 18.11. That makes jests of the sentences and
phrases of scripture. Esa. 66.2. That uses figure casting. Esa. 47.13. That
does lightly regard Gods judgments. Heb. 3.16. That living dissolutely in
religion, makes Gods name evil spoken of. 2. Sam. 12.13. 1. Pet. 3.15. That
makes a vow of continency, or of any thing not in his power. That makes a
lawful vow, and keeps it not. Deuteronomy. 22.21. That receives blessings from God,
and is not thankful. Luke 17.8. That teaches the truth, but does not
practice it. Mat. 23.2.


IV. COM. Remember the Sabbath day to, etc.
He breaks this commandment, THat labors in the servile works of his
ordinary calling. Nehem. 13.15. That travails abroad on his ordinary
business. Exodus 16.24. That keeps faires and markets on this day. Nehem.
13.15. That works harvest work on this day. Exodus 34.21. That uses sports
and recreation causing distraction. 1. Cor. 10.7. That spends the day in
idleness. Esa. 58.13. That keeps the Sabbath only in outward fashion. Esa.
1.13. That prophanes it by gluttony and drunkenness. That gives servants
liberty to do what they list. That brings not his family to the congregation
to hear Gods word, and to receive the Sacraments. That sanctifies not the
Sabbath in his family privately, by reading the word, by conference on that
which has been heard in the congregation, and by prayer.


V. COM. Honor thy father, etc.
He breaks this commandment, THat thinks but a thought in his mind tending
to the dishonor and contempt of his neighbor. That mockes or reuiles, or
beats his superiors. Genesis 9.22. That disobeyes their lawful commandments.
Romans 1.30. That is unthankful to parents, and will not relieve them if need
be. 2. Tim. 3.3. That disobeyes God to obey them. Act. 4.19. That exalts
himself above the magistrate. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. That serves his master with eye
service. Coloss. 3.22. That gouerns his family and those which are under him
negligently. 1. Tim. 3.4. That is slack in punishing faults. 1. Sam. 2.22.
That is too rigorous in speeches and punishments. Ephesians. 6.9. That marries
without parents consent. That chooses his calling without parents consent.
Number. 30. That thinks better of himself then of others. Romans 12.10. That
despises aged persons. Lev. 19.23.


VI. COM. Thou shall not kill.
He breaks this commandment, THat thinks but a thought in his heart tending
to the hurt of his neighbors life. That bears malice to another. 1. Ioh.
3.15. That is given to hastiness. Mat. 5.22. That uses inward fretting and
grudging. Iam. 3. 14. That is froward of nature, hard to please. Romans 1.31.
That is full of rancour and bitterness. Ephesians. 4.31. That derides and scorns
others. Genesis 21.9. Gal. 4.29. That uses bitter words and railings. Pro.
12.18. That uses contending by words or deeds. Gal. 5.20. That uses chiding
and crying out. Ephesians. 4.31. That is given to make complaints of his neighbor in
all places. Iam. 5.9. That is a fighter. Iam. 4.1. That hurts or man's his
neighbors body. Exodus 21.24. That will not forgive an offense. Mat. 5.23.
That will forgive, but not forget. That does fare well himself, but gives not
alms to relieve the poor. Luke 16.19. That uses cruelty in punishing
malefactors. Deuteronomy. 22.6. That denies the servants or laborers wages. Iam.
5.24. That holds back the pledge. Ezech. 18.7. That sels by diverse waights and
measures. That remooues the land mark. Pro. 22.18. That gives his goods upon
usury: which is simply to bind a man to return both the principal and the
increase, only for the lone. Ezech. 18.18. That by his looseness of life is
an occasion why others sin. That mooues contention and debate. Romans 1.29.
That being a minister teaches erroniously. That teaches slackly. Ierem.
48.10. That teaches not at all. 1. Tim. 3.2. That hinders men's salvation any
way. Mat. 23.13. That seeks private revenge.


VII. COM. Thou shall not commit, etc.
He breaks this commandment, THat thinks an unchaste thought tending to
adultery, or to any sin of that kind. That looks on a woman to lust after
her. Mat. 5.28. That commits incest. Leuit. 18.22. That commits Sodomie. 1.
Cor. 6.9. That commits fornication with married or single, or contracted
folks. Deuteronomy. 22.22. That uses marriage bed intemperately. That lies with a
menstruous woman. Ezech. 18.6. That uses wantonness. 1. Cor. 6.9. That uses
occasions and prouocations to lust. Gal. 5.9. That is given to idleness. That
wears wanton and light attire. 1. Tim. ^.9. 1. Pet. 3.3. That uses light
talk, and reading of love books. 1. Cor. 15.39. That frequents lascivious
places. Ephesians. 5.3. That delights in wanton pictures. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. That uses
the mixed dancing of men and women. Mark. 6.22. That keeps company with light
and suspected persons. Pro. 7.22. That neglects to dispose his children in
marriage in convenient time. 1. Cor. 7.37. That makes marriages of young
children. That punishes adultery with small punishments. That marieth more
wives then one at once. Genesis 2.24. That loves his pleasure more then God. 2.
Tim. 3.4. That takes care to fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Romans 13.14. That
maintains and frequents stews. Deuteronomy. 23.17. That is given to drunkenness and
surfeiting. Ephesians. 5.18. That gives himself to wine, sleep, and ease. Pro.
20.13. That for the avoiding of fornication marries not. 1. Cor. 7.2. That puts
away his wife for other causes then for fornication. Mat. 19.9.


VIII. COM. Thou shall not steal.
He breaks this commandment, THat thinks but a thought tending to the least
hinderance of his neighbors welfare and good estate. That lives in no calling.
1 Thessalonians. 3.11. That neglects his calling. Ier. 48.10. That spends his wealth
in riot, and prouides not for his family. 1. Tim. 5.8. That is not content with
his estate, but seeks to be rich. 1. Tim. 6.10. That sels the goods of the
Church, or buys them. Mal. 3.8. That sels such things as are means to further
idolatry, or any other sin. That uses powdering, starching, blowing, dark
shops, to set a gloss on his wares, and make them more saleable. That
conceales the fault of his wares. That uses false weights and measures. Lev.
19.35. That uses words of deceit. Pro. 20.14. That takes more for his wares
then the just price. Mat. 7.12. That oppresses his tenants by racking his
rents. Habac. 2.11. That uses engrossing of wares. That raises the price,
only in consideration of a day of payment. That either gives or takes bribes,
Isai. 1. 33. Psalm. 82. That writes letters of affection in wrong suites. That
holds back things borrowed. Ezech. 18.7. That holds back things found or
pawned. Levit. 6.3. That being lusty lives by begging. That releeueth such.
2 Thessalonians. 3.10. That for gain defends bad causes, and delays suites in law.
That lays burdens on the people without measure. Isai. 1.23. Ezech. 22.17.
That spendes the Church goods in riot. 1. Tim. 6.9. That makes merchandise of
Gods word and sacraments. Mich. 3. 11. 2. Cor. 2. last. That gets his living by
casting of figures and by plays. Ephesians. 4.28. That is rash in suretiship. Prove.
11.15. and 17.18. That steals men's children to dispose them in marriage. 1.
Tim. 1.10. That takes by stealth the least pin, though it be for the best
end. That is a receiver of things stolen, and gives consent to the fact any
way. Romans 1.29. That uses deceit in bargaining. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. That restores
not things evil gotten. Ezec. 33.15. That keeps back goods given to the
Church. Act. 5.3. That waits for a death to sell his things dearer. Amos 8.5.


IX. COM. Thou shall not bear, etc.
He breaks this commandment, THat does but conceive a thought of disgrace
against his neighbor. That enuies at the prosperity of his neighbor. 1. Tim.
6.4. That seeks only his own good report. That is suspicious. 1. Cor. 13.5.
That gives hard or rash sentence against others. Math. 7.1. That takes men's
sayings and doings in worse part. Math. 26.60. That accuses one falsely. 1.
King. 21. That makes or reports tales openly or in a whispering manner. Lev.
19.16. That receives tales. Exodus 23.1. That speaks the truth of malice.
Psalm. 52.1,2. That blazeth abroad men's infirmities. Math. 18.17. That uses
quipping and taunting. Ephesians. 5.4. That uses flattery. Prou. 26.19. That lies
though it be for never so good an end. Zach. 13.3. That defends an evil
cause, and impugnes the contrary. That writes or spreads libels.


X. COM. Thou shall not lust.
He breaks this commandment, THat thinks an evil thought against his
neighbor, though he mean not to do it. That conceiues some inward delight in
some evil motion, though he give not consent to practice it.


SINS DIRECTLY AGAINST THE GOSPEL.
He sins against the Gospel, THat denies either directly or by consequent
that Christ is come in the flesh. 1. Ioh. 43.8. That treades under foot the
blood of Christ. Heb. 10.29. That believes not the remission of his own
sins, and acceptance to life everlasting. 1. Ioh. 3.23. That repents not,
but hardens himself in all his badde ways. Romans 2.4,5. Ierem. 8.6.


THus much of examination: now follows the second duty, which is confession
of sin unto God, which is very necessary. For the right way to have our
sins covered before God is, to uncover and acknowledge them unto him. For he
will justify us, if we condemn our selves, he will pardon us, if we, as
being our own enemies, accuse our selves: he forgets our sins if we
remember them: when we are vile in our own eyes, we are precious in his: and
when we are lost to our selves, we are found of him.

That confession may be rightly performed, a notable duty is to be put in
practice in it: namely, the arraignment of a repentant sinner, whereby he
judges himself, that he may not be judged of the Lord.

This arraignment has three special points in it. First of all, he must bring
himself forth to the bar of Gods judgment: which thing he does when he sets
himself in the presence of God, as though even now the day of judgment were.
As S. Hierome did, who always thought with himself that he heard this voice
sounding in his ears, Rise ye dead and come to judgment.

Secondly, he must put up an indictment against himself; by accusing himself
before God, by acknowledging his known sins particularly, and his unknown
generally, without any excuse or extenuation, or defense, or hiding of the
least of them. Example of David. 1. Chr. 21.8.
I know mine iniquity, and my sin is ever before me: against thee, against
thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy ^ight, etc. behold, I was
borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. And, I have
sinned greatly, because I have done this thing: but now, I beseech thee,
remove the iniquity of thy servant: for I have done very foolishly. Of Ezra,
Ezra 9.6.
O my God I am ashamed and confounded to lift up mine eyes unto thee, my God:
for our iniquities are increased over our heads, and our trespass is grown up
unto heaven.

Thirdly, he must with heaviness of heart as a Judge upon the bench give
sentence against himself, acknowledging, that he is worthy of everlasting
hell, death, and damnation. As the prodigal child, Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and against thee, and am not worthy to be called thy child.
And Daniel, Dan. 9.1.
We have sinned and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly: yea, we have
rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts, and from thy judgments, etc. O
Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame. Of Job, Job.
39.36. and 42.6. Luke 18. 13.
Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth.
And, I abhor my self, and I repent in dust and ashes. Of the Publicane, Who
standing a far off, would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven, but
smote his breast, saying, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

As for confession of sin to men, it is not to be used but in two cases.
First, Math. 5. Iam. 5.17.
when some offense is done to our neighbor: secondly, when ease and comfort is
sought for in trouble of conscience.

The third duty in the practice of Repentance is Deprecation, whereby we pray
to God for the pardon of the sins which have been confessed with contrition
of heart, with earnestnes and constancy, as for the weightiest matter in the
world. And here we must remember to behave our selves to God as the poor
prisoner does at the bar, who when the judge is about to give sentence, cries
unto him for favor as for life and death. And we must do as the cripple or
lazar man in the way: sit down, vnlappe our legs and arms, and show the
sores of our sins; crying to God continually as they do ( Look with your
eye, and pity with your heart:) that we may find mercy at Gods hands, as they
get alms at the hands of passengers. Thus Oseah instructs the people, Ose.
14.2.
O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God: for thou have fallen by thine
iniquity: take unto you words, and turn unto the Lord, and say unto him,
Take away all iniquity and receive us graciously: so we will render thee the
calves of our lips. Of Daniel, Dan. 9.18, 19.
We do not present our supplication before thee for our own righteousness, but
for thy great tender mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider and
do it: defer not for thine own names sake, O my God. Of David, Psalm. 53.^.
Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness: according to the
multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities.

The last duty is, to pray to God for grace and strength, whereby we may be
enabled to walk in newness of life. Of David, Behold, I desire thy
commandments, quicken me in thy righteousness. Ps. 119. 40. and 143. 10.
And, Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: let thy good spirit lead
me into the land of righteousness.

CHAP. VIII. Of legal motives to Repentance.
Motives to Repentance are either Legal, or Evangelical. Legal, are such as
are borrowed from the law: and they are three especially.

The first is, the misery and cursed estate of every impenitent sinner in this
life by reason of his sins.

His misery (that I may express it to the conceit of the simplest) is
seuen-fold.

1. within him. 2. before him. 3. behind him. 4. on his right hand. 5. on his
left hand. 6. over his head. 7. under his feet.
His misery within him is twofold. The first is a guilty conscience: which
is a very hell unto the ungodly man. For he is like a silly prisoner, and the
conscience like a gayler which follows him at the heels, and dogs him
whither soever he goes, to the end he may see and observe all his sayings and
doings. It is like a register, that sits always with the pen in his hand, to
record and inroll all his wickedness for everlasting memory. It is a little
judge, that fittes in the middle of a man, even in his very heart, to arraigne
him in this life for his sins, as he shall be arraigned at the last judgment.
Therefore the pangs, terrors, and fears of all impenitent persons, are as it
were, certain flashings of the flames of hell fire. The guilty conscience
makes a man like him which lies on a bed that is too strait, and the covering
too short; Psa. 28.20. Dans. 5.6.
who would with all his heart sleep, but can not. Belshazzar when he was in
the midst of his mirth, seeing the hand writing on the wall, was smitten with
great fear, so as his countenance changed, and his knees smote together.

The second evil within man is the fearful slavery and bondage under the
power of Satan the prince of darkness: in that his mind, will, and
affectictions are so knit and glued to the will of the devil, that he can do
nothing but obey him, and rebel against God. 2. Cor. 4.4.
And hence Satan is called the prince of this world: which keeps the hold of
the heart as an armed captain keeps a skonse or castle with watch and ward.

The misery before man, is a dangerous snare which the devil lays for the
destruction of the soul. I say it is dangerous: because he is in setting of it
twenty or forty years, before he strikes: when as (God knows) men do
little think of it. It is made of three cords: with the first, he brings men
into his snare: and that he does by covering the misery and the poison of
sin: and by painting out to the eye of the mind, the deceitful profits and
pleasures thereof. With the second, he hopples and insnares them: for after
that a man is drawn into this or that sin, the devil has so sugered it
over with fine delights, that he cannot but needs must live and lie in it. By
the third, he draws the snare, and endeavors with all his might to break the
neck of the soul. For when he sees a fit opportunity, especially in
grievous calamities; and in the hour of death, he takes away the vizar of
sin, and shows the face of it in the true form, as ougly as himself: then
withal he begins (as we say) to show his horns; then he rages in terrifying
and accusing, that the soul of man may be swallowed up of the gulf of final
despair.

The misery behind him, is the sins past. The Lord says to Cain, Genesis 4,7.
If thou do not well, sin lies at the door. Where sin is compared to a
wild beast, which follows a man whither soever he goes, and lies lurking at
his heels. And though for a time it may seem to be hurtlesse, because it lies
asleep: yet at length, unless men repent, it will rise up, seize on them,
rende out the very throats of their souls. Job in his affliction says, Job
13. Psalm. 25.
Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me possess the sins of my
youth. And David prays, Forgive me the sins of my youth. If the memory of
sins past be a trouble to the godly man, oh what a rack? what a gybbet will
it be to the heart of him that wants grace?

The misery on the right hand is prosperity and ease: which by reason of man's
sins is an occasion of many judgments. Eze. 16.4^.
In it men practiced the horrible sins of Sodom: it puffes up the heart with
deuillish pride, so as men shall think themselves to be as God himself, as
Senacherib, Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus, Alexander, Herod, Domitian did. It
steals away man's heart from God, and quenches the sparks of grace. As the
Lord complains of the Israelites, Ier. 22.21.
I spoke unto thee when thou wast in prosperity: but thou saidest, I will not
hear: this has been thy manner from thy youth. It is like the Iuie that
embraces the tree, and winds round about it, but yet draws out the juice and
life of it. Hence is it, that many turn it to an occasion of their
destruction. Solomon says, Prou. 1. 31.
Prosperity of fools destroys them. When the milt swells, the rest of the
body pines away: and when the heart is puffed with pride, the whole man is in
danger of destruction. The sheep that goes in the best pasture, soonest comes
to the slaughterhouse: Romans 9. 22.
and the ungodly man fattes himself with continual prosperity, that he may
the sooner come to his own damnation.

The misery on the left hand is adversity, which stands in all manner of
losses and calamities, in goods, friends, good name, and such like. Of this
read at large, Deuteronomy. 28.

The misery over his head, is the wrath of God, which he testifies in all
manner of judgments from heaven, in danger of which every impenitent sinner is
every hour. And the danger is very great. The Scripture says, Heb. 1^. 31.
Deu. 32.34^ Ezec. 7.6.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. He has
storehouses full of all manner of judgments: and they watch for secure
sinners that they can not escape. Gods wrath is as a fire making havoc and
bringing to naught whatsoever it lights on: yea, because he is slow to anger,
therefore more terrible: as a man therefore stays his hand for a time, Nah.
1.4, 5,6.
that he may lift it higher and fetch a deeper blow. When the dumb creatures
melt as wax, and vanish away at his presence, when he is angry; as the hugh
mountains and rocks do; Psalm. 9.7.
frail man must never look to stand. If the roaring of a lion make men
afraid, and the voice of thunder be terrible: oh, how exceedingly should all be
astonished at the threatenings of God!

The misery under his feet, is hell fire: for every man till he repent, is in
as great danger of damnation as the traitor apprehended, of hanging, drawing,
and quartering. A man walking in his way falls into a deep dungeon that is
full of ougly serpents and noisome beasts: in his fall he catches hold of a
twig of a tree that grows at the mouth of the dungeon, and hangs by it:
afterward there comes a beast both lean and hungerbitten, which having cropped
the whole tree, is ever and an on knapping at the twig on which he hangs. Now,
what is the danger of this man? surely he is like to fall into the pit, over
which he hangs. Well, this man is every impenitent sinner: the pit is hell,
prepared for the devil and his angels: the twigge is the brickle and frail
life of man: the hungerbitten beast is death, that is ready every hour to
knappe, our life a sunder: the danger is fearful: for man hanging as it were
over the mouth of hell, when life is ended, unless he use good means before
he die, he then falls to the very bottom of it.

If this be the misery wherewith the careless man is ^ieged and compassed
about every way, and that for his sins, why do men lie in the dead sleep of
security? O! it stands them in hand to take up the voice of bitter
lamentation, and for their offenses to howl after the manner of dragons. If
men could weep nothing but tears of blood for their sins, if they could die
a thousand times in one day for very grief, they could never be grieved enough
for their sins.

The second motive to draw men to repentance is, the consideration of the
wretched estate of an impenitent sinner in his death, which is nothing but the
(...). Romans 6. 23. 1. Cor. 15. 55,56.
wages and allowance that he receives for his sin: and it is the very
suburbs, or rather the gates of hell. S. Paul compares death to a Scorpion,
who caries a sting in his tail, which is sin. Now then when impenitent and
profane persons die, then comes this scorpion and gripes them with her legs,
and stabs the^ at the heart with her sting. Wherefore the best thing is before
death come, to use means to pull out the sting of death. And nothing will do
it, but the blood of Christ: let men therefore break off their sins by
repentance: let them come to the throne of grace, and cry; yea let them fill
heaven and earth with cries for mercy. Oh! pray, pray for the pardon of thine
own personal and particular sins. If thou obtain but one drop of Gods
special mercy in Christ, all danger is past. For death has lost his sting;
and then a man without danger may put an ougly Serpent in his bosom.

The third motive is the consideration of his estate after death. When the day
of the last judgment shall be, he must be brought and set before the tribunal
seat of Christ: he shall not be able to escape or hide himself: then the books
shall he brought out, and all his sins shall be discovered before Gods Saints
and Angels: the devil and his own conscience shall accuse him: none shall be
advocate to plead his cause: he himself shall be speechless; he shall at
length hear that dreadful sentence of damnation, Go ye cursed into hell,
prepared for the devil and his angels. This thing might move the vilest
Atheist in the world to leave his wicked ways, and come to amendment of life.
We see the strongest thief that is, when he is led in the way from the
prison to the bar, leaves his theeuing and behaues himself orderly. And in
deed if he would then cut a purse, it were high time that he were hanged. All
men by nature are traitors and malefactors against God: whiles we live in
this world, we are in the way going to the bar of Gods judgment. The wh^ele
of the heavens turns one bout every day, and winds up somewhat of the thread
of our life: whether we sleep or wake, we are always coming nearer our end:
wherefore let all men daily humble themselves for their sins, and pray unto
God that he would be reconciled unto them in Christ: and let them endeavor
themselves in obedience to all Gods commandments, both in their lives and
callings.

Again, after the last judgment there remains death eternal appointed for
him: which stands in these three things. I. A separation from all joy and
comfort of the presence of God. II. Eternal fellowship with the devil and all
his angels. III. The feeling of the horrible wrath of God, which shall seize
upon body, soul, and conscience, and shall feed on them as fire does on
pitch and brimstone: and torment them as a worm crawling in the body, and
gnawing on the heart: they shall always be dying, and never dead: always in
woe, and never in ease. And this death is the more grievous because it is
everlasting. Suppose the whole world to be a mountain of sand, and that a bird
must carry from it but one mouthfull of sand every thousand years: many
innumerable thousands of years will be expired before she will have carried
away the whole mountain: well, if a man should stay in torment so long, and
then have an end of his woe, it were some comfort: but when the bird shall
have carried away the mountain a thousand times: alas, alas, a man shall be as
far from the end of his anguish and torment as ever he was. This
consideration may serve as an iron scourge to drive men from their wicked
lives. Chrysostom would have men in their meetings in tavernes and feasts, to
talk of hell, that by often thinking on it, they might avoid it. A grave and
chaste matrone, being moved to commit folly with a lewd ruffian; after long
discourse, she called for a pan of coals, requesting him for her sake to
hold his finger in them but one hour; he answered, that it was unkind
request: to whom she replied, that seeing he would not hold so much as one
finger in a few coals for one small hour, she could not yield to do the
thing for which she should be tormented body and soul in hell fire for ever.
And so should all men reason with themselves, when they are about to sin.
None will be brought to do a thing, that may make so much as their finger or
tooth to ache: if a man be but to snuff a candle, he will first spitte on his
finger; because he can not abide the heat of a small and tender flame.
Therefore we ought to have great care to leave our sins, whereby we bring
endless torment to body and soul in hell fire, to which our fire is but ye
in comparison.

CHAP. IX. Of motives Evangelical.
EVangelicall Motives are two especially: The first is taken from the
consideration of man's redemption. He that redeemed mankind is God himself: as
Paul says, 2. Cor. 5.19.
that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. Man's sin is so
vile and heinous in the eyes of God, that no Angel nor creature whatsoever was
able to appease the wrath of God for the least offense. But the son of God
himself must come down from heaven, and take man's nature on him: and not
only that, but he must also suffer the most accused death of the cross, and
shed his most precious heart blood to satisfy the justice of his Father in
our behalf. If a father should be sick of such a disease, that nothing would
heal him but the heart blood of his own child, he would presently judge his
own case to be dangerous; and would also vow if ever he recovered, to use all
means whereby he might avoid that disease. So likewise, seeing nothing could
cure the deadly wound of our sin, but a plaster made of the heart blood of
Christ; it must make us acknowledge our pitiful ^ase, and the haynousnesse of
the least of our sins; and stir us up to newnes of life.

Again, considering the end of the redemption wrought by Christ, was to
deliver us from our evil conversation in sin and unrighteousness, we are not
to continue and as it were lie bathing our selves in sin; for that were, as
if a prisoner, after that he had bin ransomed and had his bolts taken off, and
were put out of the prison to go whither he would, should return again, and
desire to lie in the dungeon still.

The second motive is, that God has made a promise to such as truly repent. I.
Of remission of sins, Isa. 1. 16, 18
Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works from before mine
eyes: cease to do evil, etc. Though your sins were as crimson, they shall
be made as white as snow: though they were red like scarlet, they shall be as
wool. And, Isa. 55. 6, 8.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. Let the
wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, for he is very
plentiful in forgiving. II. Of life everlasting. Ezech. 18.
I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he repent and live. And,
Amos 5. 4.
Thus says the Lord unto the house of Israel, Seek ye me, and ye shall live.
III. Of mitigating or remoouing temporal calamities. Ier. 26.3.
Stand in the court of the Lords house and speak unto all the cities of Judah,
etc. If so be they will hearken and turn every man from his evil way, that I
may repent me of the plague which I have determined to bring upon them, because
of the wickedness of their works. And, 1. cor. 11.31.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged, that is, afflicted with
temporal punishments.

I join with the remoouing of temporal calamities the mitigating of the^:
because they are not always taken away when the party repents. After David's
repentance the child dies, 2. Sam. 12. 14.
and the sword departes not from his house. And the Prophet Micha brings in
the people humbling themselves before God under a temporal punishment, saying,
I will bear thy wrath, because I have sinned against thee. Mich. 7.9.
And it is Gods pleasure that the chastisement shall remain after the party
is reconciled to him, that he may by that mearies be admonished of his sin,
and be an example to others.

As God has made these merciful promises to penitent sinners, so he has
faithfully performed them, so soon as they have but begun to repent. Example
of David. 1. Sam. 12. 12.
Then David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord, And Nathan said
to David, Thy sin is forgiven thee. Of Manasses, 2. Chr. 33. 12.
When he was in tribulation he prayed unto the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly before the Lord God of his fathers, and prayed unto him: and
God was entreated of him, and heard his prayer. Of the Publicane, Luke 18. 13.
The Publicane, etc. smote his breast, saying, O God be merciful to me a
sinner: I tell you, this man departed justified to his house, rather the^ the
other. Of the thief, Luke 23. 42, 43.
He said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me, when thou come to thy kingdom. Then
Jesus said unto him, Verily, I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in
paradise.

Having such notable promises made to Repentance, no man is to draw back from
the practice of it, because of the multitude of his sins, but rather to do
it. The Pharisees said to Christ's disciples, Why eats your master with
Publicans and sinners? When Jesus heard it, he said unto them, The whole need
not the physician, but they that are sick. Mat. 9.12.
And, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. And, Mat.
21.31.
Verily I say unto you, that Publicanes and harlots shall go before you into
the kingdom of God.

CHAP. X. Of the time of Repentance.
THe time of repentance is the time present, without any delay at all: as the
holy Ghost says, Heb. 3.7,13.
To day if ye will hear his voice. And, Exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day: least any of you be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin.
Reasons hereof are these. I. Life is uncertain: for no man knows at what
hour or moment, and after what manner he shall go forth of this world. Luke
12. 40.
Be ye also prepared therefore, for the son of man will come at an hour when
ye think not. This one thing should make a man to hasten his repentance; and
the rather, because many are dead, who purposed with themselves to repent in
time to come; but were prevented by death, and shall never repent. II. The
longer a man lives in any sin, the greater danger: because by practice sin
gets heart and strength. Custom is of such force, that that which men use to
do in their life time, the same they do and speak when they are dying. One
had three pounds owing him to be paid three several years, when he was
dying nothing could be got of him but three years, three pou^ds. Again, Romans
2.5.
by deferring repentance, men treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. If a
malefactor for his punishment, should be appointed every day to carry a
stick of wood to an heap to burn him twenty years after: it must needs be
an exceeding great punishment and misery: and this is the case of every
sinner: who neglecting repentance from day to day, does thereby employ
himself in heaping up the coals of Gods wrath to burn his soul in hell, when
the day of death comes. III. The more the time is prolonged, the harder it is
to repent: the longer a man goes in his sickness without physic, the harder
is the recovery. And where the devil dwells long he will hardly be removed.
The best way to kill a serpent is, to crush it in the head when it is young.
IV. It is as meat and drink to the devil to see men live in their sins,
deferring repentance: as on the contrary, there is great joy among the angels
of God in heaven, when a sinner does repent. V. Late repentance is seldom or
never true repentance. For if a man repent when he can not sin as in former
time, as namely in death: then he leaves not sin, but sin leaves him:
wherefore the repentance which men frame to themselves when they are dying, it
is to be feared least it die with the^. And it is very just, that he should
be contemned of God in his death, who contemned God in his life. Chrysostom
says, that the wicked man has this punishment on him, that in dying he
should forget himself, who when he was living did forget God. VI. We are with
Abel to give unto God in sacrifice even the fat of our flock: now they which
defer repentance to the end do the contrary. Late repenters offer the
slower of their youth to the devil: and they bring the lame and broken
sacrifice of their old age to God.

CHAP. XI. OF CERTAIN CASES IN Repentance.
I. Case of a Revolt.
WHether a man that has professed Christ and his religion, yet afterward in
persecution denies Christ, and forsweares the religion, may repent and be
saved. Answer. It is a grievous estate, yet a man may come to repentance
afterward. Manasses fell away to idolatry and witchcraft; and yet was received
to mercy. 2. Chr. 33.
So did wise Solomon: and yet no doubt recovered, and is received to life
everlasting. My reason is, because God vouchsafed him to be a penman of some
parts of holy Scripture. And the scriptures were written not by such as were
men of God only, 2. Pet. 1.21.
but by such as were holy men of God. Peter denied Christ of knowledge against
his own conscience, and that with cursing and banning: and yet came to
repentance afterward, as appears by the testimony of Christ, I have prayed
for thee, that thy faith fail not; therefore when thou art converted
strengthen thy brethren. Luke 22.32.


Object. I. Mat. 10.33. Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny
before my father which is in heaven. Ans. The place is only to be understood
of such a denial of Christ which is final.

Object. II. Heb. 6.4. It is impossible that they which were once lightened,
and have tasted of the heavenly gift, etc. if they fall away should be renewed by
repentance. And Heb. 10.26. If we sin willingly after that we have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. Ans.
These places must be understood of the sin which is to death: in which me^ of
desperate malice against Christ, universally and wholly fall away from
religion. For the H. Ghost says not, if they fall, but (...). Heb. 6.6. Heb.
10.29.
if they fall away. And it is added, that they crucify the son of God, and
make a mock of him, that they trample under foot the son of God, that they
account the blood of the new testament an unholy thing: that they despise the
spirit of God. And the word translated verse. 26. (...).
willingly, imports somewhat more, namely, to sin because a man will, that
is, wilfully. The like answer is to be given to the question, whereby it is
demanded whether men overtaken with the unnatural sins mentioned, Romans
1.24,25,26. may come to repentance afterward or no; namely, that although the
sins be heinous and capital, yet the grace of repentance is not denied: as
appears in the example of the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 6.9, 10,11.

Whether the child of God after repentance for some grievous sin, do fall
into the same again, and come to repentance the second time. Ans. The case is
dangerous, as we may see by comparison in the body. If one fall into the
relapse of an ague or any other strong disease, it may cost him his life: and
the recovery will be very hard. Christ said to the man that had bin sick
eight and thirty years, after that he had healed him, Behold, thou art whole,
sin no more least a worse thing befall thee. Ioh. 5.14. Luke 11.26.
And the unclean spirit returning takes to him other seven spirits worse then
himself. Indeed we find no particular example of recovery after a relapse,
in the scriptures; yet no doubt a recovery may be. Reasons are these. I.
Promise is made of remission of sins in Christ without any term of time:
without any limitation to any number or kinds of sin: save only the
blasphemy against the H. Ghost. Therefore there may be a repentance and
salvation after a relapse. Act. 10.43.
II. Christ tells Peter that he must forgive, not til seven times only (which
peradventure he thought to be very much) but seventy seven times, Luke 17.4.
and that in one day, if one return seventy times and say, it repents me.
Now if we must do this, which have not so much as a drop of mercy in us in
comparison of God: he will no doubt often forgive, even for one sin, if men
will return and say, it repents me; Psalm. 130.7. Isa. 51.7.
considering that with him is plentiful redemption, and he is much in sparing.

III. Case of Restitution.
Whether he that repents is to make restitution if he have taken any thing
wrongfully from his neighbor? Ans. Yea, Zacheus, when he repented and
received Christ, gave half of his goods to the poor, and if he had taken any
thing by forged cauillation, he restored it four fold. Luke 19.8.
It is but a bad practice when a man on his death bed will very devoutly
bequeath his soul to God, and his goods evil gotten (as his conscience will
often cry in his ear) to his children and friends, without either
restitution or amends making. Quest. But what if a man be not able to restore?
Ans. Let him acknowledge the fault, and God will accept the will for thee
deed. As Paul says in the like case: 2. Cor. 8. 12.
If there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that which a man has,
and not according to that which a man has not. Quest. When a man by restoring
shall discredit himself: how shall he restore and keep his credit? Ans. Let
him (if the thing to be restored be of small moment) make choice of some
faithful or honest friend, who may deliver the thing in the behalf of the
party, concealing his name. Quest. How if the parties be dead? Ans. Let him
restore to the heirs and successors; if there be none, let him restore to God,
that is, the Church and the poor.

IV. Case of tears.
Whether does repentance always go with tears or not? Answer. No: For very
pride and hypocrisy will draw forth tears. And some there are, that can
weep for their sins in the presence of others, whereas being alone, they
neither will nor can. Some again are of that constitution of body, that they
have tears at command. And a godly man with dry cheeks may mourn to God
for his sins, and entreat for pardon, and re^^ue i^ Yet in all occasions of
deeper grief for sin, tears will follow: unless men have stony and flinty
hearts. And yet again though the greatest cause of sorrow be offered, the
softest heart that is sheds not tears at the first, but afterward it will.
When the body receives a deep wound, at the first ye shall see nothing but a
white line or dint made in the flesh, without any blood: stay but a while,
then comes blood from the wound in great abundance. So at the first the mind
is astonished and gives no tears: but after some respite or consideration,
tears follow.

V. Case of death.
Whether the repentant sinner can always show himself comfortable on his
death bed. Ans. Though the comfort of Gods spirit shall never be abolished from
his heart: yet he can not always testify it. For he may die of a burning
ague: and by reason of the extremity of his fits, be troubled with idleness
of head, and break out into raging speeches and blasphemies. Likewise he may
die of a sickness in the brain, and be troubled with grievous convulsions, so
as his mouth shall be writhen to his ears, his neck turned behind him, and
the very place where he lies shall shake through his tre^bling, as daily
experience will testify. Neither is any to think this strange: for Solomon
says, Eccl. 9.2.
All things (in outward matters) come alike to all: and the same condition is
to the just and to the wicked: to the good and to the pure, and to the
polluted, and to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not.

CHAP. XII. Of the contraries to Repentance.
COntrary to repentance is Impenitencie: whereby men continue in one estate,
neither sorrowing for sin, nor turning from it.

It is one of the most grievous judgments that is, if it be final. For as a
sick man, then is most sick, when he feels the least sickness, and says he
is well: so miserable man is in most misery when he feels no misery, and
thinks himself in good estate.

This sin befalls them that judge themselves righteous, needing no repentance.
As the Pharisees in the days of Christ, the Catharists in the primitive Church,
and the Anabaptists in our age. Add unto these such as have hardened their
hearts: so as they can discern between good and evil, nor tremble at Gods
judgments, but rather fret and rage against them: till God in his wrath either
destroy them, or cast them to final despair. As it befell Julian the Apostata,
who died blaspheming and casting his own blood into the air.

Between the two extremes Repentance and Impenitencie, is placed cou^terfeit
repentance. For the wicked nature of man can dissemble and counterfeit Gods
grace, as the Lord complains of the Jews: Her rebellious sister Judah, has
not returned unto me with her whole heart, but fainedly says the Lord, Ier.
3.10.

Counterfeit repentance, is either ceremonial, or desperate.

Ceremonial, when me^ repent in outward show, but not in the truth of heart.
As Saul, 1. Sam. 15. 24.30.
Then said Saul to Samuel. I have sinned: for I have transgressed the
commandments of the Lord, and thy words because I feared the people and obeyed
their voice. Now therefore I pray thee take a way my sin, and turn again with
me, that I may worship the Lord, etc. Again, I have sinned, but honor me, I
pray thee, before the elders of my people. Of Ahab. When Ahab heard these words
he rent his clothes and put on sackcloath, and fasted, and went softly. And
the word of the Lord came to Elijah, saying, See thou how Ahab is humbled
before me? 1. King. 21. 27.29.


Dissembled repentance may be discerned because men after a time return to
their old byas again. Pharao king of Egypt said unto Moses and Aaron, Pray
unto the Lord that he may take away the frogs from me and from my people.
Exodus 8.8. Exodus 9. 27.
And, When Egypt was smitten with hayle; he said, I have now sinned: and the
Lord is righteous: but I and my people are wicked: Pray ye unto the Lord, that
there be no more mighty thunders and hayle. Again, troubled with grasshoppers,
he said, Exo. 10.16.
I have sinned against the Lord your God and against you, and now forgive me my
sin only this once, etc. Now mark the issue of all: Exodus 8. 15.
when Pharao saw that he had rest given him he hardened his heart, and
hearkened not unto them, as the Lord had said. This is the ordinary and common
repentance that most men practice in the world.

Desperate repentance commonly called Penitencie is, when a man having only
Gods judgments before his eyes, is smitten with horror of conscience: and
wanting assurance of Gods mercy despaires finally. This was Judas repentance,
Math. 27.3.
who when he had brought again the thirty pieces of silver, confessed his
fault, and went and hanged himself.

CHAP. XIII. Of corruptions in the doctrine of Repentance.
THe Church of Rome at this day has corrupted the ancient doctrine of
Repentance, being one of the special points of religion. The corruptions are
specially six.

The first, that they make repentance or penance to be a sacrament, which
cannot be: because it wants an outward sign. And though some say, that the
words, which the priest rehearses in absolution, are the sign: yet that can
not be: because the sign must be not only audible, but also visible.

The second, that a sinner has in him a natural disposition, which being
stirred up by Gods preventing grace, he may and can work together with Gods
spirit in his own repentance. But indeed all our repentance is to be ascribed
to Gods grace wholly. Ephesians. 2.1.
The soul of man is not weak, but stark dead in sin: and therefore it can
no more prepare it self to repentance, then the body being dead in the grave
can dispose it self to the last resurrection.

The third corruption, that contrition in repentance must be sufficient. A
thing impossible. For sin does so greatly offend Gods majesty, that no man
can ever mourn enough for it.

The fourth, that contrition does merit remission of sin. An opinion that
does derogate much from the all-sufficient merits of Christ.

The fifth, that he that repents must confess all the sins that he can
remember, with all their circumstances to his own priest, or one in his stead,
if he will receive pardon. This kind of confession is a mere forgerie of man's
brain. I. There is neither precept nor example of it in the Scriptures. Psalm.
32.3. 2. Sa. 12.12.
II. David and others have repented and have received remission of their sins
without confessing of their sins in particular to any man.

The last, that the sinner by his works and sufferings must make satisfaction
to God for the temporal punishment of his sins. 1. Ioh. 1.7. and 2. 1.
A flat blasphemy. The Scriptures mention no other satisfaction but Christ's,
and if his be sufficient, ours is needles: if ours needful, his imperfect.
Papists write that both may stand together. Christ's satisfaction (they say) is
a plaster in a box vnapplied: man's satisfaction as a means to apply it:
because it prepares us to receive it. Ah, good divinity: for even in common
sense the satisfaction of Christ must first be applied to the person of man
that it may please God, before the works (which they term satisfactions) can
any way be acceptable to God.

To conclude, the Romish doctrine of Repentance, is the right way to hell. For
when a sinner shall be taught that he must have sufficient sorrow for his
sins: and withal that he must not believe the remission of his own sins
particularly: when sorrow comes upon him, and he wants sound comfort in Gods
mercy, he must needs fall into desperation without recovery. Therefore the
Papists in the hour of death, (as we have experience) are glad to leave the
trumperie of humane sattsfactions, and to rest only for their justification,
on the obedience of Christ.

LAVS DEO.
THE COMBAT OF THE FLESH AND SPIRIT.
Gal. 5.17. For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh: and these are contrary one to an other, so that ye can not do the
things which ye would.
THe Apostle Paul from the beginning of this chapter to the 13. verse exhorts
the Galathians to maintain their Christian liberty: and from thence to the
end of the chapter he persuades them to other special duties of godliness. In
the 13. verse he stirs them up to be serviceable one to another by love: in
the 15. verse he disswades them from contentions and doing of injuries. In the
16. verse he shows the remedy of the former sins, which is to walk
according to the spirit. In this 17. verse he renders a reason of the remedy,
the force whereof is this. The flesh and the spirit are contrary: wherefore if
ye walk according to the spirit, it will hinder the flesh; that it shall not
carry you forward to do injuries and live in contentions, as otherwise it
would.

In this verse we have to observe five points. The first, that there is a
combat between the flesh and the spirit, in these words, The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. The second is, the matter
of this combat, which stands in the contrary lusting of the flesh and the
spirit. The third, is the cause of the combat, in these words, and those are
contrary. The fourth is the subject or person in whom this combat is, noted
in these words, So that ye the Galathians. The last is the effect of the
combat, in the last words, that they cannot do, etc.

Touching the combat it self diverse points are to be considered. The first,
what these two, which make combat, namely, the flesh, and the spirit, are. They
have diverse significations. First of all, the spirit is taken for the soul,
and the flesh for the body. But so they are not taken in this place. For there
is no such combat between the body and the soul: both which agree together
to make the person of one man. Secondly, the spirit signifies natural reason,
and the flesh the natural appetite or concupiscence. But they cannot be so
understood in this place. For the spirit here mentioned does fight even against
natural reason: which though it serve to make a man without excuse, yet is it
an enemy to the spirit. Thirdly, the spirit signifies the Godhead of Christ,
and the flesh the manhood: but it must not be so taken here. For then every man
regenerate should be deified. Lastly, the spirit signifies a created quality
of holiness, which by the holy Ghost is wrought in the mind, will, and
affections of man: and the flesh, the natural corruption or inclination of the
mind, will, and affections to that which is against the law. In this sense
these twain are taken in this place.

Secondly, it is to be considered how these twain, the flesh and the spirit
can fight together, being but mere qualities. And we must know that they are
not severed asunder, as though the flesh were placed in one part of the soul,
and the spirit in another: but they are joined and mingled together in all the
faculties of the soul: The mind or understanding part, is not one part flesh,
and another spirit, but the whole mind is flesh, and the whole mind is
spirit; partly one and partly the other. The whole will is partly flesh and
partly spirit: the flesh and the spirit, that is, grace and corruption, not
severed in place but only in reason to be distinguished. As the air in the
dawning of the day is not wholly light or wholly dark as at midnight and at
noone day: neither is it in one part light, in another part dark: but the
whole air is partly light, and partly dark throughout. In a vessel of luke
warm water, the water it self is not only hot or only cold; or in one part
hot and in another part cold: but heat and cold are mixed together in every
part of the water. So is the flesh and the spirit mingled together in the soul
of man: and this is the cause why these two contrary qualities fight together.

Thirdly in this combat we are to consider what equality there is between
these two combaters, the flesh and the spirit. And we must know, that the flesh
usually, is more in measure then the spirit. The flesh is like the mighty
giant Goliath, and the spirit is little and small like young David. Hence it is,
that Paul calls the Corinthians which were men justified and sanctified, 1.
Cor. 3.1.
carnal. I could not (says he) brethren speak unto you, as unto spiritual,
but as unto carnal, as unto babes in Christ. And none can come to be tall men
in Christ according to the age of the fullness of Christ, till after this life.
And the speech which is used of some divines, Ephesians. 4.13.
that the man regenerate has but the relics of sin in him, must be
understood warily, else it may admit an untruth. As for the measure of grace
it can be but small in respect, Romans 8.23.
where as we do receive but the first fruits of the spirit in this life: and
must wait for the accomplishment of our redemption till the life to come. For
all this, the power and efficacy of the spirit is such, that it is able to
prevail ordinarily against the flesh. For the flesh receives his deadly wound
at the first instant of a man's conversion, and continually dies after by
little and little: and therefore it fights but as a maimed soldier. And the
spirit is continually confirmed and increased by the holy Ghost: also it is
lively and stirring, and the virtue of it is like musk; one grain whereof
will give a stronger smell, then many ounces of other perfumes. Some may say,
that the godly man does more feel the flesh then the spirit: and therefore
that the flesh is every way more then the spirit. I answer, that we must not
measure our estate by feeling, which may easily deceive us. A man shall feel a
pain which is but in the top of his finger more sensibly then the health of
his whole body: yet the health of the body is more then then the pain of a
finger. Secondly we feel corruption not by corruption, but by grace; and
therefore men, the more they feel their inward corruptions, the more grace they
have.

Thus much of the combat it self: now let us come to the manner of this
fight.

It is fought by Lusting. To lust in this place signifies to bring forth and to
stir up motions and inclinations in the heart, either to good or evil.

Lusting is twofold: the lusting of the flesh, and the lusting of the spirit.

The lusting of the flesh has two actions: the first is, to engender evil
motions and passions of self-love, envy, pride, unbelief, anger, etc. Saint
James ^aith, Iam. 1.14.
that men are enticed and drawn away by their own concupiscence. Now this
enticing is only by the suggestion of bad cogitations and desires. This action
of the flesh made Paul say, Romans 7. 14.
that he was carnal sold under sin.

The second action of the flesh is, to hinder, and quench, and ouerwhelme all
the good motions of the spirit. Paul found this in himself when he said, Romans
7.23.
I see another law in my members rebelling against the law of the mind, and
leading me captive to the law of sin. By reason of this action of the flesh,
the man regenerate is like to one in a slumber troubled with the disease called
Ephialtes or the mare: who thinks that he feels something lying on his breast
as heavy as a mountain: and would feign have it away, whereupon he strives
and labors by hands and voice to remove it, but for his life can not do it.

On the contrary, the lusting of the spirit contains two other actions. The
first is to beget good meditations, motions, inclinations, and desires in the
mind, will, and affections. Of this David speaks. My reins teach me in the
night season: Psalm. 16.8.
that is, my mind, affection, and will, and my whole soul being sanctified
and guided by the spirit of God, do minister unto me co^sideratio^s of the way
in which I ought to walk. Isaias prophesying of the church of the new
testament, says, Isa. 30.22.
When a man goes to the right hand or to the left, he shall hear a voice,
saying: Here is the way walk ye in it. Which voice is not only the outward
preaching of the ministers, but also the inward voice of the spirit.

The second action of the spirit is to hinder and suppress the bad motions and
suggestions of the flesh. S. John says, he that is borne of God sins not,
because his seed remains in him, 1. Ioh. 3.9.
that is, grace wrought in the heart by the holy Ghost, which resists the
rebellious desires of the flesh.

That the manner of this fight may more clearly appear, we must examine it
more particularly. In the soul of man there be to special parts, the mind
and the will.

In the mind there is a double combat. The first is between knowledge of the
word of God, and natural ignorance or blindness. For seeing we do in this
life know but in part; therefore knowledge of the truth must needs be joined
with ignorance in all that are enlightened: and one of these being contrary to
another, they strive to ouershadowe and ouercast each other.

Hence we may learn the cause why excellent divines do vary in diverse points
of religion: and it is, because in this combat, natural blindness yet
remaining, preuailes more or less. Men that are dim sighted and cannot
discern without spectacles, if they be set to discrie a thing a far off, the
most of them would be of diverse opinions of it. And men enlightened and
regenerate in this life, do but see as in a glass darkely. 1. Cor. 13.
Again, this must teach all students of divinity often to suspect themselves
in their opinions and defenses: seeing in them that are of soundest judgment
the light of their understanding is mixed with darkness of ignorance. And they
can in many points see but as the man in the gospel, who when our Savior
Christ had in part opened his eyes, saw me^ walking, not as me^, but in the
form of trees. Also this must teach all that read the scriptures to invoke
and call upon the name of god, that he would enlighten them by his spirit, and
abolish the mist of natural blindness. The Prophet David was worthily
enlightened with the knowledge of Gods word, so as he excelled the ancient and
his own teachers in wisdom: yet being privy to himself touching his own
blindness, often prays in the Psalms, Inlighten mine eyes that I may
understand the wonders of thy law.

By reason of this fight, when natural blindness preuailes, the child of god
truly enlightened with knowledge to life everlasting, may err not only in
lighter points, but even in the very foundation of religion, as the
Corinthians and the Galathians did. And as one man may err, so an hundred men
may also; yea a whole particular Church; and as one Church may err, so an
hundred more may. For in respect of this combat, the estate and condition of
all men is alike. Whence it appears that the Church militant upon earth is
subject to error. But yet as the diseases of the body be of two sorts: some
curable, and some incurable which are to death; so likewise errors are. And
the Church though it be subject to sundry falls, yet it cannot err in
foundation to death: the errors of Gods children be curable. Some may here
say, If all men and Churches be subject to error, then it shall not be good to
join with any of them, but to separate from them all. I answer, though they
may and do err, yet we must not separate from them, so long as they do not
separate from Christ.

The second combat in the mind, is between faith and unbelief. For faith is
imperfect, and mixed with the contrary, unbelief, presuming, doubting, etc. As
the man in the gospel says, Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief.

By reason of this fight, when unbelief preuailes, the very child of God may
fall into fits and pangs of despair: as Job and David in their temptations
did. For David once considering the propseritie of the wicked, brake out into
this speech. Psalm. 73. 13.
Certainly I have cleansed mine heart in vain, and washed mine hands in
innocence. Yea, this despair may be so extreme, that it shall weaken the
body and consume it, more then any sickness. No man is to think this strange
in the child of God. For though he despair of his election and salvation in
Christ yet his desperation is neither total nor final. It is not total,
because he does not despair with his whole heart, faith even at that instant
lusting against despair. It is not final, because he shall recover before the
last end of his life.

To proceed, the combat in the will is this. The will partly wills and
partly nilleth that which is good at the same instant: and so likewise it
wills and nilleth that which is evil: because it is partly regenerate and
partly unregenerate. The affections likewise, which are placed in the will,
partly embrace and partly eschew their objects: as love partly loves, and
partly does not love God and things to be loved: fear is mixed and not pure
(as schoolmen have dreamed) but partly filial, partly seruil, causing the
child of God to stand in awe of God, not only for his mercies, but also for
his judgments and punishments. The will of a man regenerate is like him that
has one leg sound, the other lame: who in every step which he makes, does
not wholly halt, or wholly go upright, but partly go upright and partly halt.
Or like a man in a boat on the water: who goes upward because he is carried
upward by the vessel: and at the same time goes downward, because he walks
downward in the same vessel at the same instant. If any shall say, that
contraries can not be in the same subject: the answer is, they can not, if one
of them be in his full strength In gradibus remissis non in summis.
in the highest degree: but if the force of them both be delaied and weakened,
they may be joined together.

By reason of this combat, when corruption preuailes against grace in the will
and affections, there arises in the godly a certain deadness or hardness of
heart, which is nothing else but a want of sense or feeling. Some may say, that
this is a fearful judgment: but the answer is, that there be two kinds of
hardness of heart: one which possesses the heart, and is never felt: this is
in them, who have their consciences seared with an hot iron; who by reason of
custom in sin are p^st all feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. Zach. 7.11.
who likewise despise the means of softening their hearts. And indeed this is
a fearful judgment. There is an other hardness of heart which is felt: and
this is not so dangerous as the former: for as we feel our sickness by
contrary life and health; so hardness of heart when it is felt, argues
quickness of grace, and softnes of heart. Of this David often complained in
the Psalms: of this the children of Israel speak when they say, Isa. 65.17.
Why have thou hardened our hearts from thy ways?

Thus much of the manner of the combat in particular: before we proceed any
further, let us mark the issue of it, which is to prevail against the flesh.

The spirit preuailes against the flesh at two times: in the course of a man's
life, and at his end; but yet with some foiles received.

I say the spirit preuailes not in one instant, but in the whole course of a
man's life. So S. John says, 1. Ioh. 5.19.
He which is begotten of God sins not: for he preserves himself: the grace
of God in his heart ordinarily prevailing in him. And Paul makes it the
property of the regenerate man to walk according to the spirit, Romans 8.1.
which is not now and then to make a step forward, but to keep his ordinary
course in the way of godliness. As in going from Barwicke to London, it may be
a man now and then will go amiss: but he speedily returns to the way again
and his course generally shall be right.

Again, the spirit preuailes in the end of a man's life. For then the flesh is
utterly abolished, and sanctification accomplished: because no unclean thing
can enter into the kingdom of heaven.

This further must be conceived, that when the spirit preuailes, it is not
without resistance and striving: as Paul testifies, I do not the good which I
would, but the evil which I would not, that do I. Which place is not to be
understood only of thoughts and inward motions (as some would have it) nor of
particular offenses: but of the general practice of his duty or calling,
through the whole course of his life. And it is like the practice of a sick
man, who having recovered of some grievous disease, walks a turn or twain
about his chamber, saying, ah, I would feign walk up and down but I can not:
meaning not that he can not walk at all, but signifying that he can not walk
as he would, being soon wearied through faintness.

I added further, that this prevailing is with foyles. A foil is, when the
flesh ^or the time vanquisheth and subdueth the spirit. In this case, the man
regenerate is like a soldier, that with a blow has his brain-pan cracked, so
as he lies groueling astonished not able to fight: or like him that has a fit
of the falling sickness, who for a time lies like a dead man. Hence the
question may be moved, whether the flesh prevailing does not extinguish the
spirit, and so cut off a man from Christ, till such time as he be ingrafted
again. The answer is this: There be two sorts of Christians: one who does
only in show and name profess Christ: and such an one is no otherwise a
member of Christ's mystical body, then a wooden leg set to the body is a
member of the body. The second is he that in name and deed is a lively part
and member of Christ. If the first fall, he can not be said to be cut off,
because he was never ingrafted. If the second fall, he may be and is cut off
from Christ. But mark how: he is not wholly cut off, but in some part, namely
in respect of the inward fellowshippe and communion with Christ, but not in
respect of conjunction with him. A man's arm taken with the dead palsy, hangs
by and receives no heat, life, or sense from the rest of the members, or from
the head, yet for all this, it remains still united and coupled to the body,
and may again be recovered by plasters and physic: so after a grievous fall
the child of God feels no inward peace and comfort, but is smitten in
conscience with the trembling of a spiritual palsy for his offense: and yet
indeed still remains before God a member of Christ in respect of conjunction
with him, and shall be restored to his former estate after serious repentance.

And God permits these foiles for weighty causes: first that men might be
abashed and confounded in themselves with the consideration of their vile
natures, and learn not to swell with pride; because of Gods grace. Paul ^aith,
that after he had been rapt into the third heaven, 2. Cor. 12.7.
the angel Satan was sent to bu^fet him, and (as we say) to beat him black
and blew, that he might not be exalted out of measure. The second, that we may
learn to deny our selves and cle^ue unto the Lord from the bottom of our
hearts. Paul says that he was sick to death, 2. Cor. 1.9.
that he might not trust in himself, but in God who raises the dead.

Thus much of the manner of the combat: now follows the cause of it.

The cause is the contrariety that is between the flesh and the spirit. As
Paul says, Romans 8.5.
The wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God.

Hence we are taught, that since the fall, there is no free will in man in
spiritual matters, concerning either the worship of God or life everlasting.
For flesh is nothing else but our natural disposition: and man is nothing else
but flesh by nature: for the spirit comes afterward by grace: and the flesh is
flat contrary to the spirit, which makes us do that which is pleasing unto
God. Wherefore the will naturally is a flat bondslaue unto sin.

Again, hence we may learn, that it is not an easy matter to practice
religion: which is to live according to the spirit, to which our natural
disposition is as contrary as fire to water: wherefore if we will obey God, we
must learn to force our natures to the duties of godliness; yea, even sweat
and take pains therein.

Lastly, here we may learn the nature of sin. The spirit is not a substance
but a quality: and therefore the flesh which is nothing else but original
sin, and is contrary to the spirit, must also be a quality: for such as the
nature of one contrary is, such is the other. There is in every man the
substance of body and soul, this can not be sin, for then the spirit also
should be the substance of man. There is also in the substance the faculties of
body and soul: and they can not be sin, for then every man should have lost
the faculties of his soul by Adams fall. Lastly in the faculties there is a
contagion or corruption which carries them against the law: and that is
properly sin and the flesh, which is contrary to the spirit.

The fourth point is, touching the persons in whom this combat is. Paul
shows who they are, when he says, So that ye can not, etc. where it appears,
that such as have this combat in them must be as the Galatians, men justified
and sanctified: and yet not all such, but only they that be of years: for the
infants of the faithful, howsoever we must repute them to belong to the
kingdom of heaven, and therefore to be justified and sanctified: yet because
they do not commit actual sin, they want this combat of the flesh and
spirit, which stands in action. As for those which be unregenerate, they never
felt this fight. If any say that the worst man in the world, when he is about
to commit any sin, has a strife and fight in him. It is true indeed: but
that is an other kind of combat, which is between the conscience and the
heart. The conscience on the one part terrifying the man from sin: the will
and the affections hailing and pulling him thereunto: the will and the
affections wishing and desiring that sin were no sin, and Gods commandment
abolished: whereas contrariwise the conscience with a shrill voice proclaims
sin to be sin. This fight was in Pilate, who by the force of his conscience
feared to condemn Christ; and yet was willing, and yielded to condemn him
that he might please the people.

Furthermore this combat is in the regenerate but during the time of this life.
For they which are perfectly sanctified feel no strife. If any shall say, that
this combat was in Christ, when he said, Father, if it be thy will, let this
cup pass from me, yet not my will but thine be done. Indeed here is a
combat, but of an other sort; namely the fight of two diverse desires: the one
was a desire to do his fathers will in suffering the death of the cross: the
other a natural desire (which was no sin but a mere infirmity of humane
nature) whereby he in his manhood desires (as the manner of nature is to seek
the preservation of it self) to have the cursed death of the cros^e removed
from him.

The fifth point is the effect of this combat, which is to make the man
regenerate, that he can not do the things which he would: and this must be
understood in things both good and evil.

And first he can not do the evil which he would for two causes. First,
because he can not commit sin at what time soever he would. Saint John says,
He that is borne of God sins not, neither can he sin, because he is borne
of God, 1. Ioh. 3.9.
that is, he can not sin at his pleasure or when he will. Joseph when he was
assaulted by Putiphars wife to adultery; because the grace of God abounded in
him, whereby he answered her, saying, Shall I do this, and sin against God,
he could not then sin. Lot because his righteous heart was grieved in seeing
and hearing the abominations of Sodom, could not then sin as they of Sodom
did. Hence it appears, that such persons as live in the daily practice of
sin against their own consciences, (though they be professors of the true
religion of Christ) have no soundnes of grace in them.

Secondly, the man regenerate can not sin in what manner he would: and there
be two reasons thereof. First, he can not sin with full consent of will, or
with all his heart: because the will so far forth as it is regenerate,
resists and and draws back: yea, even then when a man is carried headlong
by the passions of the flesh, he feels some contrary motions of a regenerate
conscience. It is a rule that sin does not reign in the regenerate. For so
much grace as is wrought in the mind, will, affections: so much is abated
proportionally of the strength of the flesh. Wherefore when he commits any
sin, he does it partly willingly, and partly against his will. As the
mariners in the tempest, cast Jonas into the sea willingly: for otherwise they
had not done it: and yet against their wills too: which appears because they
prayed, and cast their goods out of the ship, and labored in the rowing
against the tempest, and that very long before they cast him out. And herein
lies the difference between two men committing one and the same sin, the one
of them being regenerate, the other unregenerate. For the latter sins with
all his heart and with full consent, and so does not the first. Secondly,
though he fall into any sin, yet he does not lie long in it, but speedily
recouers himself, by reason of grace in his heart.

Hence it is manifest, that sins of infirmity are committed only of such as
are regenerate. As for the man unregenerate he can not sin of infirmity
whatsoever some falsely think. For he is not weak but stark dead in sin.
And sins of infirmity are such only as rise of constraint, fear,
hastiness, and such like sudden passions in the regenerate. And though they
sin of weakness often by reason of this spiritual combat, yet they do not
always: for they may sin against knowledge and conscience of presumption.

To come to the second point: the regenerate man can not do the good which he
would: because he can not do it perfitly and soundly according to Gods will as
he would. Paul says, Romans 7. 1^.
To will is present with me, but I find no means ((...)) perfitly to do that
which I would. In this point the godly man is like a prisoner that is gotten
forth of the gayle, and that he might escape the hand of the keeper, desires
and strives with all his heart to run an hundred miles in a day; but because
he has straight and weighty bolts on his legs, cannot for his life creep
past a mile or twain, and that with chasing his flesh and tormenting himself.
So the servants of God do heartily desire, and endeavor to obey God in all
his commandments: as it is said of King Josias, 2. king. 23. 25.
That he turned to God with all his heart, with all his soul, with all his
might, according to all the laws of Moses, etc. yet because they are clogged
with the bolts of the flesh, they perform obedience both slowly and weakly,
with diverse slippes and falls.

Thus much of the combat: now let us see what use may be made of it.

First of all, by it we learn what is the estate of a Christian man in this
life. A Christian is not one that is free from all evil cogitations, from
rebellious inclinations and motions of will and affections, from all manner of
slips in his life and conversation: for such an one is a mere devise of man's
brain, and not to be found upon earth. But indeed he is the sound Christian
that feeling himself laden with the corruptions of his vile and rebellious
nature, bewailes them from his heart, and with might and maine fights against
them by the grace of Gods spirit. Again here is overthrown the Popish opinion
of merit and justification by works of grace, on this manner. Such as the
cause of works is, such are works themselves. The cause of works in man, is
the mind, will, and affections sanctified: in which, the flesh and the spirit
are mixed together, as has been showed before. Therefore works of grace, even
the best of them are mixed works, partly holy and partly sinful. Whereby it
is evident to a man that has but common sense, that they are not answerable to
the righteousness of the law: and that therefore they can neither merit life, or
any way justify a man before God. If any reply, that good works are the works
of Gods spirit, and for that cause perfectly righteous. I answer, it is true
indeed, they come from the H. Ghost that can not sin, but not only or
immediately. For they come also from the corrupt mind and will of man, and in
that respect become sinful, as sweet water issuing out of a pure fountain,
is by a filthy channel made corrupt.

Thirdly, we do hence learn that concupiscence or original sin is properly
and indeed sin after baptism, though it please the Council of Trent to
decree otherwise. For after baptism it is flat contrary to the spirit, and
rebels against it. Papists object that it is taken away by baptism. Answ.
Original sin or the flesh is taken away in the regenerate thus. In it there
be three things; the guilt, the punishment, the corruption: the first two are
quite abolished by the merit of Christ's death in baptism: the third, that is,
the corruption remains still: but mark in what manner: it remains weakened,
it remains not imputed to the person of the believer.

Lastly, hereby we are taught to be watchful in prayer. Watch and pray (says
Christ) etc. for the spirit is ready, but the flesh is weak. Rebecca, when
two twins strove in her womb was troubled and said, Why am I so? wherefore
she went to ask the Lord, namely by some Prophet. So when we feel this
inward fight, the best thing is to have recourse to God by prayer, and to his
word, that the spirit may be strengthened against the flesh. As the children of
Israel by compassing the city of Ierico seven days, and by sounding rams
horns ouerturned the walls thereof: so by serious invocation of Gods name the
spirit is confirmed, and the turrets and towers of the rebellious flesh
battered.

The voice of a man 1. Carnal of Evil. I do that which is evil and I will
do it. Good. I do not that which is good and I will not do it.
2. Regenerate of Evil. I do the evil, which I would not. Good. I do not
do the good which I would.
3. Glorified of Evil. I do not that which is evil, and I will not do it.
Good. I do that which is good, and I will do it.



A salve for a sick man: OR, A TREATISE CONTAINING THE NATVRE, DIFFERENCES,
AND KINDS OF DEATH; AS ALSO THE right manner of dying well.

And It may serve for spiritual instruction to 1. Mariners when they go to
sea. 2. Soldiers when they go to battle. 3. Women when they travel of child.


PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINTER to the University of Cambridge. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS Lady the Lady Lucie, Countess of
Bedford.
THe death of the righteous, that is, of every believing and repentant sinner,
is a most excellent blessing of God, and brings with it many worthy benefits:
which thing I prove on this manner. I. God both in the beginning and in the
continuance of his grace, does greater things unto his servants then they do
commonly ask or think, and because he has promised aid and strength unto
them, therefore in wonderful wisdom he casts upon them this heavy burden
of death, that they might make experience what is the exceeding might and power
of his grace in their weakness. II. Judgment begins at gods house: and the
righteous are laden with afflictions and temptations in this life, and
therefore in this world they have their deaths and hells, that in death they
might not feel the torments of hell and death. III. When Lazarus was dead
Christ said, He is not dead but sleeps: hence it follows that the christian
man can say, My grave is my bed, my death is my sleep: in death I die not,
but only sleep. It is thought that of all terrible things death is most
terrible: but it is false to them that be in Christ, to whom many things
happen far more heavy and bitter then death. IV. Death at the first brought
forth sin, but death in the righteous by means of Christ's death, abolisheth
sin, because it is the accomplishment of mortification. And death is so far
from destroying such as are in Christ, that there can be no better refuge for
them against death: for presently after the death of the body, follows the
perfect freedom of the spirit, and the resurrection of the body. V. Lastly,
death is a means of a Christian man's perfection, as Christ in his own example
shows, saying, Luke 1.31.
Behold, I will cast out devils, and will heal still to day and to morrow,
and the third I will be perfected. Now this perfection in the members of
Christ is nothing else but the blessing of God the author of peace, sanctifying
them throughout, that their whole spirits and souls, and bodies, may be
preserved without blame to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now having often thus considered with my self of the excellency of death, I
thought good to draw the sum and chief heads thereof into this small
Treatise: the protection and consideration whereof, I commend to your Ladyship,
desiring you to accept of it, and read it at your leisure. If I be blamed for
writing unto you of death, whereas by the course of nature you are not yet
near death, Solomon will excuse me, who says that we must remember our
Creator in the days of our youth. Thus hoping of your H. good acceptance, I
pray God to bless this my little labor to your comfort and salvation.

September. 7. 1595. Your H. in the Lord, W. Perkins.

ECCLESIASTES. 7. 3. The day of death is better then the day that one is
borne.
THese words are a rule or precept laid down by Solomon for weighty causes.
For in the chapters going before he sets forth the vanity of all creatures
under heaven; and that at large in the very particulars. Now men hereupon might
take occasion of coffeehouse in respect of their estate in this life:
therefore Solomon in great wisdom here, takes a new course, and in this chapter
begins to lay down certain rules of direction and comfort that men might have
somewhat wherewith to arm themselves against the troubles and the miseries of
this life. The first rule is in this third verse, that a good name is better
then a precious ointment: that is, a name gotten and maintained by godly
conversation, is a special blessing of God, which in the midst of the vanities
of this life, ministers greater matter of rejoicing and comfort to the heart
of man, then the most precious ointment can do to the outward senses. Now some
man having heard this first rule concerning good name, might object and say,
that renown and good report in this life affoards slender comfort: considering
that after it follows death, which is the miserable end of all men. But this
objection the wise man remooueth by a second rule in these words which I have
in hand, saying, that the day of death is better then the day that one is
borne.

That we may come to the true and proper sense of this precept or rule, three
points are to be considered. First, what is death here mentioned: secondly, how
it can be truly said, that the day of death is better then the day of birth:
thirdly in what respect it is better.

For the first, death is a deprivation of life as a punishment ordained of God
and imposed on man for his sin. First, I say, it is a deprivation of life,
because the very nature of death is he absence or defect of that life which
God vouchsafed man by his creation. I add further that death is a punishment,
more especially to intimate the nature and quality of death; and to show,
that it was ordained as a means of execution of Gods justice and judgment.
And that death is a punishment, Paul plainly avouches when he says, that by
one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin. And again, that
death is the stipend, wages, or allowance of sin. Furthermore in every
punishment there be three workers: the ordainer of it, the procurer, and the
executioner. The ordainer of this punishment is God in the estate of man's
innocence, by a solemn law then made in these very words, In the day that
thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death, Genesis 2.^7. But it may be
alleged to the contrary, that the Lord says by the Prophet Ezechiel, that
he will not the death of a sinner, Ezec. 33. 11.
and therefore that he is no ordainer of death. The answer may easily be
made, and that sundry ways. First, the Lord speaks not this to all men or of
all men, but to his own people the church of the Jews, as appears by the
clause perfixed, Verse. 10.
Son of man, say unto the ^ouse of Israel, etc. Again, the words are not
spoken absolutely but only in way of comparison, in that of the twain he
rather wills the conversion and repentance of a sinner, then his death and
destruction. Thirdly the very proper meaning of the words importe thus much,
that God does take no delight or pleasure in the death of a sinner, as it is
the ruin and destruction of the creature. And yet all this hinders not but
that God in a new regard and consideration may both will and ordain death,
namely, as it is a due and deserved punishment, tending to the execution of
justice: in which justice God is as good as in his mercy. Again it may be
objected, that if death indeed had been ordained of God, then Adam should
have been destroyed, and that presently upon his fall. For the very words
are thus, Whenever thou shall eat of the forbidden fruit, thou shall
certainly die. Ausvvere. Sentences of Scripture are either Legal or
Evangelical, the law and the Gospel being two several and distinct parts of
Gods word. Now this former sentence is Legal and must be understood with an
exception borrowed from the Gospel or the covenant of grace made with Adam,
and revealed to him after his fall. The exception is this. Thou shall certainly
die whenever thou eatest the forbidden fruit, except I do further give thee
a means of deliverance from death, namely the seed of the woman to bruise the
serpents head. Secondly it may be answered, that Adam and all his posterity
died, and that presently after his fall, in that his body was made mortal,
and his soul became subject to the curse of the Law. And whereas God would
not utterly destroy Adam at the very first, but only impose on him the
beginnings of the first and second death; he did the same in great wisdom,
that in the midst of his justice he might make a way to mercy: which thing
could not have been if Adam had perished.

The executioner of this punishment is he that does impose and inflict the
same on man, and that also is God himself, as he testifies of himself in
the prophet Esai, Isa. 4^.6.
I make peace and create evil. Now evil is of three sorts: natural,
moral, material. Natural evil, is the destruction of that order which God
set in every creature by the creation. Moral evil, is the want of that
righteousness and virtue which the law requires at man's hand; and that is
called sin. Material evil, is any matter or thing which in it self is a
good creature of God, yet so, as by reason of man's fall it is hurtful to the
health and life of man, as henbane, wolfebane, hemlocke, and all other poisons
are^ Now this saying of Esai must not be understood of moral evils, but of
such as are either material or natural; to the latter of which, death is to be
referred, which is the destruction or abolishment of man's nature created.

The procurer of death is man not God; in that man by his sin and
disobedience did pull upon himself this punishment. Therefore the Lord in
Oseah, Ose. 13.9.
O Israel, one has destroyed thee, but in me is thine help. Against this it
may be objected, that man was mortal in the estate of innocence before the
fall. Answer. The frame and composition of man's body considered in it self
was mortal, because it was made of water and earth and other elements which
are of themselves alterable and changeable: yet if we respect that grace and
blessing which God did vouchsafe man's body in his creation, it was
unchangeable and immortal, and so by the same blessing should have continued,
if man had not fallen: and man by his fall depriving himself of this gift and
blessing, became every way mortal.

Thus it appears in part what death is: yet for the better clearing of this
point, we are to consider the difference of the death of a man and of a beast.
The death of a beast is the total and final abolishment of the whole
creature: for the body is resolved to his first matter, and the soul arising
of the temperature of the body, vanishes to nothing. But in the death of man
it is otherwise. For though the body for a time be resolved to dust, yet must
it rise again in the last judgment and become immortal: and as for the
soul, it subsisteth by it self out of the body and is immortal. And this
being so, it may be demanded, how the soul can die the second death. Answ.
The soul dies, not because it is utterly abolished: but because it is as
though it were not, and it cease to be in respect of righteousness and
fellowship with God. And indeed this is the death of all deaths, when the
creature has subsisting and being, and yet for all that is deprived of all
comfortable fellowship with God.

The reason of this difference is, because the soul of a man is a spirit or
spiritual substance, whereas the soul of a beast is no substance, but a
natural vigor or quality, and has no being in it self without the body
on which it wholly depends. The soul of man contrariwise being created of
nothing, and breathed into the body, and as well subsisting forth of it as in
it.

The kinds of death are two, as the kinds of life are, bodily and spiritual.
Bodily death is nothing else but the separation of the soul from the body, as
bodily life is the conjunction of body and soul: and this death is called the
first, because in respect of time it goes before the second. Spiritual death
is the separation of the whole man both in body and soul from the gracious
fellowship of God. Of these twain, the first is but an entrance to death, and
the second is the accomplishment of it. For as the soul is the life of the
body, so God is the life of the soul, and his spirit is the soul of our
souls, and the want of fellowship with him brings nothing but the endless and
unspeakable horrors and pangs of death.

Again, spiritual death has three distinct and several degrees. The first
is, when a man that is alive in respect of temporal life, lies dead in sin.
Of this degree Paul speaks when he says, 1. Tim. 5. 6.
But she that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives. And this is the
case of all men by nature, who are children of wrath and dead in sins and
trespasses. Ephesians. 2.1.
The second degree is the very end of this life when the body is laid in the
earth, and the soul descends to the place of torment. The third degree is in
the day of judgment, when the body and soul meet again and go both to the
place of the damned, there to be tormented for ever and ever.

Having thus found the nature and differences and kinds of death, it is more
then manifest, that the text in hand is to be understood, not of the spiritual
but of the bodily death: because it is opposed to the birth or nativity of
man. The words then must carry this sense: The time of bodily death in which
the body and soul of man are severed asunder, it is better then the time in
which one is brought into the world.

Thus much of the first point: now follows the second, and that is, how
this can be true which Solomon says, that the day of death is better then the
day of birth. I make not this question to call the Scriptures into
controversy, which are the truth it self, but I do it for this end, that
we might without wavering be resolved of this which Solomon avouches. For
there may be sundry reasons brought to the contrary. Therefore let us handle
the question: the reasons or objections which may be alleged to the
contrary, may all be reduced to six heads. The first is taken from the
opinion of wise men, who think it the best thing of all never to be borne, and
the next best to die quickly. Now if it be the best thing in the world not
to be borne at all, then it is the worst thing that can be to die after a man
is borne. Answer. There be two sorts of men: one, that live and die in their
sins without repentance: the other, which vnfamedly repent and believe in
Christ. Now this sentence may be truly avouched of the first: of whom we
may say as Christ said of Judas, It had been good for him that he had never
been borne. But the saying applied to the second sort of men is false. For to
them that in this life turn to God by repentance, the best thing of all is to
be borne; because their birth is a degree of preparation to happiness: and the
next best is to die quickly; because by death they enter into possession of the
same their happiness. For this cause Balaam desired to die the death of the
righteous: and Solomon in this place preferres the day of death before the day
of birth, understanding that death which is joined with godly life, or the
death of the righteou^.

The second objection is taken from the testimonies of Scripture. Death is the
wages of sin, Romans 6.22. it is an enemy of Christ, 1. Cor. 15. and the curse
of the law. Hence it seems to follow that in and by death, me^ receive their
wages and payment for their sins: that the day of death is the doleful day
in which the enemy preuailes against us: that he which dies is cursed. Ans.
We must distinguish of death: it must be considered two ways: first as it is
by it self in his own nature: secondly, as it is altered and changed by
Christ. Now death by it self considered, is indeed the wages of sin, an
enemy of Christ and of all his members, and the curse of the law, yea the
very suburbs and gates of hell: yet in the second respect, it is not so. For
by the virtue of the death of Christ, it cease to be a plague or punishment,
and of a curse it is made a blessing, and is become unto us a passage or
mid-waie between this life and eternal life, and as it were a little wicket
or door whereby we pass out of this world and enter into heaven. And in
this respect the saying of Solomon is most true. For in the day of birth, men
are borne and brought forth into the vale of misery, but afterward when they
go hence, having death altered unto them by the death of Christ, they enter
into eternal joy and happiness with all the Saints of God for ever.

The third objection is taken from the examples of most worthy men, who have
made their prayers against death. As our Savior Christ, who prayed on this
manner, Father if it be thy will, let this cup pass from me, yet not my
will but thy will be done. Psalm. 6.4.
And David prayed, Return, O Lord, deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies
sake: for in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall
praise thee! Esa. 38.10.
And Ezechiah, when the Prophet Esai bad him set his house in order, and told
him that he must die, wept sore, and that in respect of death. Now by the
examples of these most worthy men, yea by the example of the son of God
himself, it may seem that the day of death is the most terrible and doleful
day of all. Answer. When our Savior Christ prayed thus to his father, he
was in his agony, and he then as our Redeemer stood in our room and stead,
to suffer all things that we should have suffered in our own persons for our
sins: and therefore he prayed not simply against death, but against the
cursed death of the cross, and he feared not death it self, which is the
separation of body and soul, but the curse of the law which went with death,
namely the unspeakable wrath and indignation of God. The first death troubled
him not, but the first and second joined together. Touching David, when he
made the sixth psalm, he was not only sick in body, but also perplexed with
the greatest temptation of all, in that he wrestled in conscience with the
wrath of God, as appears by the words of the text, where he says, Lord,
rebuke me not in thy wrath. And by this we see that he prayed not simply
against death, but against death at that instant when he was in that grievous
temptation. For at other times he had no such fear of death, as he himself
testifies, saying, Psalm. 23.4.
Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
no evil. Therefore he prayed against death only as it was joined with the
apprehension of Gods wrath. Lastly, Ezechiah prayed against death, not only
because he desired to live and do service to God in his kingdom, but upon a
further and more special regard; because when the prophet brought the message
of death, he was without issue, and had none of his own body to succeed him
in his kingdom. It will be said, what warrant had Ezechiah to pray against
death for this cause. Answer. His warrant was good: for God had made a
particular promise to David and his posterity after him, 1. King. 8.25.
that so long as they feared God and walked in his commandments, they should
not want issue to sit upon the throne of the kingdom after them. Now
Ezechiah at the time of the Prophets message remembering what promise God had
made, and how he for his part had kept the condition thereof, in that he had
walked before God with an upright heart, and had done that which was acceptable
in his sight; he prayed against death, not so much because he feared the
danger of it, but because he wanted issue. This prayer God accepted and heard,
and he added fifteen years unto his days, and two years after gave him
Manasses.

The fourth objection is this, that those which have been reputed to be of
the better sort of men oftentimes have miserable ends: for some end their
days despairing, some rauing and blaspheming, some strangely tormented: it may
seem therefore that the day of death is the day of greatest woe and misery.
To this I answer first of all generally, that we must not judge of the estate
of any man before God by outward things, whether they be blessings or
judgments, whether they fall in life or death. For (as Solomon says) all
things come alike to all: and the same condition is to the just and the wicked,
to the good and to the pure and to the polluted, and to him that sacrifices,
and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good so is the sinner, he that
swears as he that fears a^ oath. Secondly I answer the particulars which
be alleged on this manner: And first of all touching despair, it is true
that not only wicked and loose persons despair in death, but also repentant
sinners, who oftentimes in their sickness, testify of themselves, that
being alive and lying in their beds, they feel themselves as it were to be in
hell, and to apprehend the very pangs and torments thereof. And I doubt not
for all this, but that the child of God most dear unto him, may through the
gulf of desperation attain to everlasting happiness. This appears by the
manner of Gods dealing in the matter of our salvation. All the works of God
are done in and by their contraries. In the creation, all things were made, not
of something, but of nothing, clean contrary to the course of nature. In the
work of Redemption, God gives life, not by life, but by death: and if we
consider aright of Christ upon the cross, we shall see our paradise out of
paradise in the midst of hell. For out of his own cursed death, does he bring
us life and eternal happiness. Likewise in effectual vocation, when it
pleases God to convert and turn men unto him, he does it by the means of
the Gospel preached, which in reason should drive all men from God. For it is
as contrary to the nature of man as fire to water, and light to darkness: and
yet for all this, though it be thus against the disposition and heart of man,
it preuailes with him and turns him to God. Furthermore, when God will send
his own servants to heaven, he sends the^ a contrary way, even by the gates
of hell: and when it is his pleasure to make men depend on his favor and
providence, he makes them feel his anger, and to be nothing in themselves,
that they may wholly depend upon him, and be whatsoever they are in him. This
point being well considered, it is manifest that the child of God may pass to
heaven by the very gulfes of hell. The love of God is like a sea, into which
when a man is cast, he neither feels bottom nor sees bank. I conclude
therefore that despair, whether it arise of weakness of nature, or of
conscience of sin; though it fall out about the time of death, can not
prejudice the salvation of them that are effectually called. As for other
strange events which fall out in death, they are the effects of diseases.
Rauings and blasphemings arise of the disease of melancholy and of frensies,
which often happen at the end of burning feauers, the choler shooting up to
the brain. The writhing of the lips, the turning of the neck, the buckling of
the joints and the whole body, proceed of crampes and convulsions, which
follow after much euacuation. And whereas some in sickness are of that
strength that three or four men cannot hold them without bonds, it comes not
of witchcrafts and possessions, as people commonly think, but of choler in
the veins. And whereas some when they are dead, become as black as pitch (as
Bonner was) it may arise by a bruise, or an impostume, or by the black
iaundise, or by the putrefaction of the liver: and it does not always argue
some extraordinary judgment of God. Now these and the like diseases with
their Symptoms and strange effects, though they shall deprive man of his
health, and of the right use of the parts of his body, and of the use of
reason too: yet they cannot deprive his soul of eternal life. And all sins,
procured by violent diseases, and proceeding from repentant sinners are sins of
infirmity: for which, if they know them, and come again to the use of reason,
they will further repent; if not, they are pardoned and buried in the death of
Christ. And we ought not so much to stand upon the strangenes of any man's end,
when we know the goodness of his life: for we must judge a man not by his
death, but by his life. And if this be true, that strange diseases, and
thereupon strange behauiours in death, may befall the best man that is, we
must learn to reform our judgments of such as lie at the point of death. The
common opinion is, that if a man lie quietly and go away like a lamb (which
in some diseases, as consumptions and such like, any man may do) then he goes
straight to heaven: but if the violence of the disease stir up impatience,
and cause in the party frantic behauiours, then men use to say, there is a
judgment of God serving either to discover an hypocrit, or to plague a wicked
man. But the truth is otherwise. For indeed a man may die like a lamb, and
yet go to hell: and one dying in exceeding torments and strange behauiours of
the body, may go to heaven. And by the outward condition of any man, either
in life or death, we are not to judge of his estate before God.

The fifth objection is this. When a man is most near death, then the devil
is most busy in temptation, and the more men are assaulted by Satan, the more
dangerous and troublesome is their case. And therefore it may seem that the
day of death is the worst day of all. Ans. The condition of Gods children in
death is twofold. Some are not tempted, and some are. Some I say are not
tempted, as Simeon, who when he had seen Christ, brake forth and said, Lord,
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. foresignifying no doubt,
that he should end his days in all manner of peace. As for them which are
tempted, though their case be very troublesome and perplexed, yet their
salvation is not further off, by reason of the violence and extremity of
temptation. For God is then present by the unspeakable comfort of his spirit,
and when we are most weak, he is most strong in us: because his manner is to
show his power in weakness. And for this cause, even in the time of death the
devil receives the greatest foil, when he looks for the greatest victory.

The sixth objection is this. Violent and sudden death is a grievous curse, and
of all evils which befall man in this life, none is so terrible: therefore it
may seem, that the day of sudden death is most miserable. Ans. It is true
indeed, that sudden death is a curse and a grievous judgment of God, and
therefore not without cause feared of men in the world: yet all things
considered, we ought more to be afraid of an impenitent and evil life, then
of sudden death. For though it be evil, as death it self in his own nature
is, yet we must not think it to be simply evil: because it is not evil to
all men, nor in all respects evil. I say it is not evil to all men,
considering that no kind of death is evil or a curse unto them that are in
Christ, who are freed from the whole curse of the Law. And therefore the holy
Ghost says, Apoc. 14.13.
Blessed are they that die in the Lord for they rest from their Labor: whereby
is signified that they which depart this life, being members of Christ, enter
into everlasting happiness; of what death soever they die, yea though it be
sudden death. Again I say, that sudden death is not evil in all respects.
For it is not evil, because it is sudden, but because it commonly takes men
unprepared, and by that means makes the day of death a black day, and as it
were a very speedy downfall to the gulf of hell. Otherwise if a man be ready
and prepared to die, sudden death is in effect no death, but a quick and
speedy entrance to eternal life.

These objections being thus answered, it appears to be a manifest truth
which Solomon says, that the day of death is better indeed then the day of
birth. Now I come to the third point, in which the reasons and respects are to
be considered, that make the day of death to surpass the day of a man's birth:
and they may all be reduced to this one, namely that the birth day is an
entrance into all woe and misery; whereas the day of death joined with godly
and reformed life, is an entrance or degree to eternal life. Which I make
manifest thus: Eternal life has three degrees, one in this life, when a man
can truly say that he lives not, but that Christ lives in him: and this all men
can say that repent and believe and are justified and sanctified, and have
peace of conscience with other gifts of Gods spirit, which are the earnest of
their salvation. The second degree is in this life, when the body goes to the
earth, and the soul is carried by the Angels into heaven. The third is in the
end of the world at the last judgment, when body and soul reunited, do
jointly enter into eternal happiness in heaven. Now of these three degrees,
death it self being joined with the fear of God, is the second: which also
contains in it two worthy steps to life. The first, is a freedom from all
miseries, which have their end in death. For though men in this life are
subject to manifold dangers by sea and land, as also to sundry aches, pains,
and diseases, as feauers, and consumptions, etc. yet when death comes there is
an end of all. Again, so long as men live in this world, whatsoever they be,
they do in some part lie in bondage under original corruption and the
re^nants thereof, which are doubtings of Gods providence, unbelief, pride of
heart, ignorance, covetousness, ambition, envy, hatred, lust, and such like
sins, which bring forth fruits unto death. And to be in subjection to sin
on this manner, is a misery of all miseries. Therefore Paul when he was
tempted unto sin by his corruption, 2. Cor. 12.7.
calls the very temptation the buffets of Satan, and as it were a prick or
thorn wounding his flesh, and paining him at the very heart. Again, in
another place wearied with his own corruptions, he complains that he is sold
under sin, and he cries out, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death? Romans 7. 14, 24. Psalm. 119.136
David says, that his eyes gushed out with rivers of tears when other men
sinned against God: how much more then was he grieved for the sins wherewith
he himself was overtaken in this life. And indeed it is a very hell for a man
that has but a spark of grace, to be exercised, turmoiled, and tempted with
the inborne corruptions and rebellions of his own heart: and if a man would
devise a torment for such as fear God and desire to walk in newness of life,
he can not devise a greater then this. For this cause blessed is the day of
death which brings with it a freedom from all sin whatsoever. For when we
die, the corruption of nature is quite abolished, and sanctification is
accomplished. Lastly, it is a great misery that the people of God are
constrained in this world to live and converse in the company of the wicked;
as sheep are mingled with goats which strike them, annoy their pasture, and
muddie their water. Hereupon David cried out, Psalm. 120.5. 1. king. 19.4.
Woe is me that I r^maine in Meshech, and dwell in the tents of Ke^ar. When
Elias saw that Ahab and Iesabel had planted idolatry in Israel, and that they
sought his life also, he went apart into the wilderness and desired to die. But
this misery also is ended in the day of death, in as much as death is as it
were the hand of God to sort and single out those that be the servants of God
from all ungodly men in this most wretched world.

Furthermore this exceeding benefit comes by death, that it does not only
abolish the miseries which presently are upon us, but also p^euent those which
are to come. Esa. 57. 1.
The righteous (says the Prophet Esaias) perishes, and no man considers it in
his heart: and merciful men are taken away, and no man understands that the
righteous is taken away for the evil to come. Example of this we have in
Josias. 2. King. 22. 20.
Because (says the Lord) thine heart did melt, and thou have humbled thy self
before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spoke against this place, etc.
behold therefore I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be put in
thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will
bring upon this place. And Paul says, that among the Corinthians some were
asleep, 1. cor. 11.23.
that is, dead, that they might not be condemned with the world.

Thus much of freedom from misery, which is the first benefit that comes by
death, and the first step to life: now follows the second, which is, that
death gives an entrance to the soul, that it may come into the presence of the
everliving God, of Christ, and of all the Angels and Saints in heaven. The
worthiness of this benefit makes the death of the righteous to be no death, but
rather a blessing to be wished of all men. The consideration of this made Paul
to say, Phil. 1.
I desire to be dissolved: but what is the cause of this desire? that follows
in the next words, namely, that by this dissolution he might come to be with
Christ. When the Queen of Sheba saw all Salomons wisdom, and the house that
he had built, and the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and
the order of his ministers, and their apparel, etc. she said, 1. king. 10.8.
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants which stand ever before thee
and hear thy wisdom: much more then may we say, that they are ten thousand
fold happy which stand not in the presence of an earthly King, but before the
King of kings, the Lord of heaven and earth; and at his right hand enjoy
pleasures for evermore. Moses has been renowned in all ages for this, that
God vouchsafed him but so much favor as to see his hinder parts at his
request: O then, what happiness is this, to see the glory and majesty of God
face to face, and to have eternal fellowship with God our father, Christ our
Redeemer, and the holy Ghost our comforter, and to live with the blessed Saints
and Angels in heaven for ever.

Thus now the third point is manifest, namely in what respects death is more
excellent then life. It may be here the mind of man unsatisfied will yet
further reply and say, that howsoever in death the souls of men enter into
heaven, yet their bodies, though they have bin tenderly kept for meat, drink,
and apparel; and have slept many a night in beds of down, must lie in
dark and loathsome graves, and there be wasted and consumed by worms. Answ.
All this is true indeed, but all is nothing; if so be it we will but consider
aright of our graves as we ought. We must not judge of our graves, as they
appear to the bodily eye, but we must look upon them by the eye of faith, and
consider them as they are altered and changed by the death and burial of
Christ, who having vanquished death upon the cross, pursued him afterward to
his own den, and foiled him there, and deprived him of his power. And by this
means Christ in his own death has buried our death, and by the virtue of his
burial, as sweet incense, has sweetened and perfumed our graves, and made
them of stinking and loathsome cabbines, Isa. 52.2.
to become princely palaces, and beds of most sweet and happy rest, far
more excellent then beds of down.

And though the body rotte in the grave, or be eaten of worms, or of fishes
in the sea, or burnt to ashes, yet that will not be unto us a matter of
discomfort, if we do well consider the ground of all grace, namely, our
conjunction with Christ. It is indeed a spiritual and yet a most real
conjunction. And we must not imagine that our souls alone are joined to the
body or soul of Christ, but the whole person of man both in body and soul
is joined and united to whole Christ. And when we are once joined to Christ in
this mortal life by the bond of the spirit, we shall remain and continue
eternally joined with him: and this union once truly made shall never be
dissolved. Hence it follows, that although the body be severed from the soul
in death, yet neither body nor soul are severed from Christ, but the very
body rotting in the grave, drowned in the sea, burned to ashes, abides still
united to him, and is as truly a member of Christ then as before. This point we
must remember as the foundation of all our comfort, and hold it for ever as a
truth. For look what was the condition of Christ in death, the same or the
like is the condition of al his members. Now the co^ditio^ of Christ was this,
though his body and soul were severed each from other as far as heaven and the
grave, yet neither of them were severed from the godhead of the Son, but both
did in death subsist in his person. And therefore though our bodies and souls
be pulled asunder by natural or violent death, yet neither of them no not the
body it self shall be severed and disioyned from Christ. It will be
alleged, that if the body were then united to Christ, it should live and be
quickened in the grave. Ans. Not so: when a man's arm or leg is taken with the
dead palsy, it receives little or no heat, life, sense, or motion from the
body: and yet notwithstanding it remains still a membrr of the body, because
the flesh and the bone of it remain joined to the flesh and the bone of the
body: even so may the body remain a member of Christ, though for some space
of time it receive neither sense nor motion nor life from the soul or from the
spirit of Christ.

Furthermore, we must remember that by the virtue of this conjunction, shall
the dead body be it rotten, burned, devoured, or howsoever consumed, at the
day of judgment rise to eternal glory. In the winter season trees remain
without fruit or leaves, and being beaten with wind and weather appear to
the eye as if they were rotten trees; yet when the spring time comes again,
they bring forth as before, buddes and blossoms, leaves and fruit: the reason
is, because the body, grains, and arms of trees are all joined to the root,
where lies the sap in the winter season, and whence by means of this
conjunction it is derived to all the parts of the tree in the spring time. Even
so the bodies of men have their winter also, in which they are turned to dust,
and so remain for the space of many thousand years, yet in the day of
judgment by means of that mystical conjunction with Christ, shall divine and
quickening virtue stream thence to all the bodies of the Elect to cause them to
live again, and that to life eternal. But some will say, that the wicked also
rise again. Answ. They do so indeed; but not by the same cause: for they
rise by the power of Christ as he is a judge to condemn them: whereas the
godly rise again by the virtue of Christ's resurrection, whereof they are
partakers by means of that blessed and indissoluble conjunction which they
have with Christ. And the bodies of the Elect though they putrify and consume
never so much in the grave, yet are they still in the favor of God and in the
covenant of grace: to which, because they have right and title being dead,
they shall not remain so for ever, but shall rise to glory at the last
judgment. Therefore the rotting of the body is nothing in respect, and the
death of the body is no death. And therefore also death in the old and new
Testament is made but a sleep, and the grave a bed, whereof the like was never
seen; wherein a man may rest, nothing at all troubled with dreams or
fantasies, and whence he shall rise no more subject to weakness or sickness,
but presently be translated to eternal glory. By this then which has bin
said, it appears that the death of the righteous is a second degree to
everlasting happiness.

Now then considering our conjunction with Christ is the foundation of all our
joy and comfort in life and death, we are in the fear of God to learn this
one lesson, namely, that while we have time in this world, we must labor to be
united unto Christ, that we may be bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh.
This very point is as it were a flaggon of wine to revive our souls when they
be in a sown at any instant. And that we may be assured that we are certainly
joined to Christ, we must show our selves to be members of his mystical body
by the daily fruits of righteousness and true repentance. And being once
certainly assured in conscience of our being in Christ, let death come when it
will, and let it cruelly part asunder both body and soul, yet shall they both
remain in the covenant, and by means thereof be reunited and taken up to life
eternal. Whereas on the contrary, if men be out of the covenant and die out
of Christ, their souls go to hell, and their bodies rotte for a time in the
grave, but afterward they rise to endless perdition. Wherefore I say again
and again, labor that your consciences by the holy Ghost may testify that ye
are huing stones in the Temple of God, and branches bearing fruit in the true
vine: and then ye shall feel by experience, that the pangs of death shall be a
further degree of happiness then ever ye found in your lives, even then when ye
are gasping and panting for breath.

Thus much of the meaning of the text, now follows the uses, and they are
manifold. The first and principal is this. In that Solomon preferres the day
of death before the day of birth, he does therein give us to understand, that
there is a direct and certain way whereby a man may die well; if it had been
otherwise, he could not have said that the day of death is better. And whereas
he avouches this, he shows withal that there is an infallible way whereby a
man may make a blessed end. Therefore let us now come to search out this way;
the knowledge and true understanding whereof must not be fetched from the
writings of men, but from the word of God, who has the power of life and death
in his own hand.

Now that a man may die well, Gods word requires two things: a preparation
before death, and a right behavior and disposition in death.

The preparation unto death is an action of a repentant sinner, whereby he
makes himself fit and ready to die, and is a duty very necessary, to
which we are bound by Gods commandment. For there be sundry places of
Scripture which do straightly inioyne us to watch and pray, and to make our
selves ready every way against the second coming of Christ to judgment. Now
the same places do withal bind us to make preparation against death, at
which time God comes to judgment unto us particularly. Again, look as death
leaves a man, so shall the last judgment find him, and so shall he abide
eternally: there may be changes and conuersions from evil to good in this
life, but after death there is no change at all. Therefore a preparation to
death can in no wise be omitted of him that desires to make an happy and
blessed end.

This preparation is twofold: general, and particular. General preparation is
that whereby a man prepares himself to die through the whole course of his
life. A duty most needful which must in no wise be omitted. The reasons are
these. First of all death which is certain is most uncertain. I say it is
certain, because no man can eschew death. And it is uncertain three ways:
first, in regard of time: for no man knows when he shall die: secondly, in
regard of place: for no man knows where he shall die, whether in his bed or in
the field, whether by sea or by land: thirdly, in respect of the kind of death:
for no man knows whether he shall die of a lingering or sudden, of a violent or
natural death. Hence it follows, that men should every day prepare themselves
to death. Indeed if we could know when, where, and how we should die, the case
were otherwise, but seeing we know none of these, it stands us in hand to look
about us. A second reason serving further to persuade us is this. The most
dangerous thing of all in this world, is to neglect all preparation. To make
this point more manifest, I will use this comparison. A certain man, pursued
by an Unicorn, in his flight falls into a dungeon, and in his fall takes hold
and hangs by the arm of a tree: now as he thus hangs looking downward, he
sees two worms gnawing at the root of the tree, and as he looks upward he
sees and hiue of most sweet honey, whereupon he climes up unto it, and sitting
by it feeds thereon. In the mean season while he is thus sitting, the two
worms gnawe in pieces the root of the tree: which done, tree and man and all
fall into the bottom of the dungeon. Now this Unicorn is death; the man that
flies is every one of us, and every living man: the pit over which he hangs,
is hell: the arm of the tree is life it self: the two worms are day and
night, the continuance whereof is the whole life of man: the hiue of honey is
the pleasures and profits and honors of this world, to which when men wholly
give themselves not considering their ends, till the t^ee root, that is, this
temporal life be cut off: which being once done, they plunge themselves quite
into the gulf of hell. By this we see, that there is good cause that men
should not defer their preparation till the time of sickness, but rather every
day make themselves ready against the day of death. But some will say, it
shall suffice if I prepare my self to pray when I begin to be sick. Ans.
These men greatly deceive themselves, for the time then is most unfit to begin
a preparation, because all the senses and powers of the body are occupied
about the pains and troubles of the disease: and the sick party is ex^rcised
partly in conference with the Physician, partly with the Minister about his
souls health and matters of conscience, and partly with friends that come to
visit. Therefore there must some preparation go before in the time of health,
when the whole man with all the powers of body and soul are at liberty.
Again, there be some others which imagine and say, that a man may repent when
he will, even in the time of death: and that such repentance is sufficient.
Ans. It is false which say they: For it is not in the power of man to repent
when he himself will; when God will he may. It is not in him that wills or
runs, but in God that has mercy. And Christ says, that many shall seek
to enter into heaven and shall not be able. But why so? because they seek when
it is too late, namely when the time of grace is past. Therefore it is
exceeding folly for men so much as once to dream that they may have
repentance at command: nay it is a just judgment that they should be condemned
of God in death, that did contemn God in their life: and that they should
quite be forgotten of God in sickness, that did forget God in their health.
Again I answer, that this late repentance is seldom or never true repentance.
It is sick like the party himself, commonly languishing and dying together
with him. Repentance should be voluntary (as all obedience to God ought) but
repentance taken up in sickness, is usually constrained and extorted by the
fear of hell, and other judgments of God: for crosses, afflictions, and
sickness will cause the grossest hypocrite that ever was to stoop and buckle
under the hand of God, and to dissemble faith and repentance and every grace of
God, as though he had them as fully as any of the true servants of God: whereas
indeed he wants them altogether. Wherefore such repentance commonly is but
counterfeit. For in true and sound repentance men must forsake their sins; but
in this, the sin forsakes the man; who leaves all his evil ways only upon
this that he is const^ained to l^aue the world. Wherefore it is a thing greatly
to be wished, that men would repent and prepare themselves to die in the time
of health before the day of death or sickness come. Lastly it is alleged
that one of the thieves repented upon the cross. Answ. The thief was called
after the eleventh hour at the point of the twelfth, when he was now dying and
drawing on. Therefore his conversion was altogether miraculous and
extraordinary: and there was a special reason why Christ would have him to be
called then, that while he was in suffering he might show forth the virtue of
his passion; that all which saw the one, might also acknowledge the other. Now
it is not good for men to make an ordinary rule of an extraordinary example.

Thus then this point being manifest that a general preparation must be made,
let us now see in what manner it must be done. And for the right doing of it,
^u^e duties must be practiced in the ^ourse of our lives. The first i^ the
meditation of death in the life time. For the life of a Christian is nothing
else but a meditation of death. A notable practice hereof we have in the
example of Joseph of Arimathea, who made his tomb in his life time in the
midst of his garden: no doubt for this end, to put himself in mind of death,
and that in the midst of his delight and pleasures. Heathen Philosophers that
never knew Christ, had many excellent meditations of death, though not
comfortable in regard of life everlasting. Now we that have known and believed
in Christ, must go beyond them in this point, considering with our selves such
things as they never thought of, namely, the cause of death, our sin: the
remedy thereof, the cursed death of Christ, cursed I say in regard of the kind
of death and punishment laid upon him, but blessed in regard of us. Thirdly, we
must often meditate on the presence of death, which we do, when by Gods grace
we make an account of every present day as if it were the present day of our
death, and reckon with our selves when we go to bed as though we should
never rise again; and when we rise, as though we should never lie down again.

This meditation of death is of special use and brings forth many fruits in
the life of man. And first of all it serves to humble us under the hand of God.
Example we have of Abraham, who said, Behold, I have begun now to speak to
my Lord, and I am but dust and ashes. Genesis 18. 27.
Mark here, how the consideration of his mortality made him to abase and cast
down himself in the sight of God: and thus if we could reckon of every day as
of the last day, it would straightway pull down our peacocks feathers, and
make us with Job to abhor our selves in dust and ashes.

Secondly, this meditation is a means to further repentance. When Jonas came
to Ninive and cried, Yet forty days and Ninive shall be destroyed, the whole
city repented in sack^loath and ashes. When Elias came to Ahab and told him
that the dogs should eat Iesabel by the wall of Iesreel, and him also of
Ahabs stock that died in the city, etc. it made him to humble himself so, as
the Lord says to Elias, See thou how Ahab is humbled before me. Now if the
remembrance of death was of such force in him that was but an hypocrite, how
excellent a means of grace will it be in them that truly repent.

Thirdly, this meditation seems to stir up contentation in every estate and
condition of life that shall befall us. Righteous Job in the very midst of his
afflictions, comforts himself with this consideration, Naked (says he) came I
forth of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again, etc. blessed be the
name of the Lord. And surely the often meditation of this, that a man of all
his abundance can carry nothing with him but either a coffin or a winding
sheet or both, should be a forcible means to repress the insatiable desire of
riches and the love of this world.

Thus we see what an effectual means this meditation is to increase and
further the grace of God in the hearts of men. Now I commend this first duty
to your Christian considerations, desiring the practice of it in your lives:
which practice that it may take place, two things must be performed. First,
labor to pluck out of your hearts a wicked and erroneous imagination, whereby
every man naturally blesses himself and thinks highly of himself: and
though he had one foot in the grave, yet he persuades himself that he shall
not die yet. There is no man almost so old but by the corruption of his heart
he thinks that he shall live one year longer. Cruel and unmerciful death
makes league with no man: and yet the Prophet Esaias says, Esa. 28.
that the wicked man makes a league with death. How can this be? there is no
league made indeed, but only in the wicked imagination of man, who falsely
thinks that death will not come near him, though all the world should be
destroyed. See an example in the parable of the rich man, that having stored up
abundance of wealth for many years, said unto his own soul, Soul, thou have
much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy
pastime: Luke 11.17.
whereas his soul was fetched away presently. And seeing this natural
corruption is in every man's heart, we must daily fight against it, and labor
by all might and maine that it take no place in us: for so long as it shall
prevail, we shall be utterly unfit to make any preparation to death. We
ought rather to endeavor to attain to the mind and meditation of S. Hierome,
who testifies of himself on this manner, In epist.
Whether I wake or sleep, or whatsoever I do, me thinks I hear the sound of
the trumpet, Rise ye dead, and come to judgment.

The second thing which we are to practice that we may come to a serious
meditation of our own ends, is, to make prayer unto God that we might be
enabled to resolve our selves of death continually. Thus David prayed, Psalm.
39.4.
Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, let me know how
long I have to live. And Moses, Psalm. 90.1^.
Lord teach me to number my days, that I may apply mine heart unto wisdom. I
may be said, What need men pray to God that they might be able to number
their days? cannot they of themselves reckon a few years and days that are
able by art to measure the globe of the earth, and the spheres of heaven, and
the quantities of the stars, with their longitudes, latitudes, altitudes,
motions, and distances from the earth? No verily. For howsoever by a general
speculation we think something of our ends, yet unless the spirit of God be
our schoolmaster to teach us our duty, we shall never be able soundly to
resolve our selves of the presence and speedines of death. And therefore let us
pray with David and Moses that God would inlighten our minds with knowledge,
and fill our hearts with his grace, that we might rightly consider of death, and
esteem of it every day and hour as if it were the day and hour of death.

The second duty in this general preparation is, that every man must daily
endeavor to take away from his own death the power and strength thereof. And I
pray you mark this point. The Philistims saw by experience that Sampson was
of great strength, and therefore they used means to know in what part of his
body it lay: and when they found it to be in the hair of his head, they
ceased not until it was cut off. In like manner the time will come when we
must encounter hand to hand with tyranous and cruel death: the best therefore
is, before hand now while we have time to search where the strength of death
lies, which being once known, we must with speed cut off his Sampsons
locks, and bereave him of his power, disarme him, and make him altogether
unable to prevail against us. Now to find out this matter, we need not to
use the counsel of any Delilah: for we have the word of God which teaches
us plainly where the strength of death consists, namely in our sins, as Paul
says, The sting of death is sin. Well then, we knowing certainly that the
power and force of every man's particular death lies in his own sins, must
spend our time and study in using good means that our sins may be removed
and pardoned. And therefore we must daily inure our selves in the practice of
two duties. One is to humble our selves for all our sins past, partly
confessing them against our selves, partly in prayer crying to heaven for the
pardon of them. The other is for time to come to turn unto god, and to carry
a purpose, resolution, and endeavor in all things to reform both heart and
life according to Gods word. These are the very principal and proper duties,
whereby the strength of death is much rebated, and he is made of a mighty and
bloody enemy so far forth friendly and tractable, that we may with comfort
encounter with him and prevail too. Therefore I commend these duties to your
Christian considerations, and careful practice, desiring that ye would spend
your days ever hereafter in doing of them. If a man were to deal with a
mighty dragon or serpent hand to hand, in such wise as he must either kill or
be killed, the best thing were to bereave him of his sting or of that part of
his body where his poison lies: now death it self is a serpent, dragon, or
scorpion, and sin is the sting or poison whereby he wounds and kills us.
Wherefore without any more delay, see that ye pull out his sting: the practice
of the foresaid duties is as it were a fit and worthy instrument to do the
deed. Have thou been a person ignorant of Gods will, a contemner of his word
and worship, a blasphemer of his name, a breaker of his sabbaths, disobedient
to parents and magistrates, a murderer, a fornicator, a railer, a slanderer, a
covetous person, etc. reform these thy sins and all other like unto them,
pull them out by the roots from thy heart, and cast them off. So many sins
as be in thee, so many stings of death be also in thee to wound thy soul to
eternal death. Therefore let no one sin remain for which thou have not
humbled thy self and repented seriously. When death hurts any man, it takes
the weapons whereby he is hurt, from his own hand. It cannot do us the least
hurt but by the force of our own sins. Wherefore I say again and again, lay
this point to your hearts, and spend our strength, life, and health, that ye
may before ye die, abolish the strength of death. A man may put a serpent in
his bosom when the sting is out: and we may let death creep into our bosoms,
and gripe us with his legs, and stab us at the heart, so long as he brings not
his venime and poison with him.

And because the former duties are so necessary, as none can be more, I will
use some reasons yet further to enforce them. Whatsoever a man would do when
he is dying, the ^ame he ought to do every day while he is living: now the
most notorious and wicked person that ever was, when he is dying will pray
and desire others to pray for him, and promise amendment of life, protesting
that if he might live, he would become a practitioner in all the good duties of
faith, repentance, and reformation of life. Oh therefore be careful to do
this every day. Again, the saying is true, he that would live when he is
dead, must die while he is alive, namely to his sins. Would thou then live
eternally? sue to heaven for thy pardon, and see that now in thy life time thou
die to thine own sins. Lastly wicked Balaam would feign die the death of the
righteous: but, alas, it was to small purpose: for he would by no means live
the life of the righteous. For his continual purpose and meaning was to
follow his old ways in sorceries and covetousness. Now the life of a
righteous man stands in the humbling of himself for his sins past, and in a
careful reformation of life to come. Would thou then die the death of the
righteous, then look unto it, that thy life be the life of the righteous: if ye
will needs live the life of the unrighteous, ye must look to die the death of
the unrighteous. Remember this, Ephesians. 4.21, 22.
and content not your selves to hear the word, but be doers of it: for ye
learn no more indeed, what measure of knowledge soever ye have, then ye
practice.

The third duty in our general preparation, is in this life to enter into the
first degree of life eternal. For as I have said, there be three degrees of
life everlasting, and the first of them is in this present life. For he that
would live in eternal happiness for ever, must begin in this world to rise
out of the grave of his own sins, in which by nature he lies buried, and
live in newness of life, as it is said in the Revelation, Reu. 20.6.
He that will escape the second death, must be made partaker of the first
resurrection. And Paul says to the Colossians, that they were in this life
delivered from the power of darkness, Col. 1.13.
and translated into the kingdom of Christ. And Christ says to the Church of
the Jews, the kingdom of heaven is amongst you. Now this first degree of
life is, when a man can say with Paul, I live not, but Christ lives in me: that
is, I find partly by the testimony of my sanctified conscience, and partly by
experience, that Christ my redeemer by his spirit guides and governs my
thoughts, will, affections^ and all the powers of body and soul, according to
the blessed direction of his holy will. Now that we might be able to say this,
we must have three gifts and graces of God, wherein especially this first
degree of life consists. The first is, saving knowledge, whereb^ we do truly
resolve our selves that God the father of Christ is our father^ Christ his
son our redeemer, and the holy ghost our comforter. That this knowledge is
one part of life eternal, it appears by the saying of Christ in John. Ioh. 17.
This is life eternal, that is, the beginning and entrance into life eternal,
to know thee the only God and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. The second
grace, is peace of conscience which passes al understanding: and therefore
Paul says, Phil. 2. Romans 4.
that the kingdom of heaven is righteousness, peace of conscience, and joy in
the holy Ghost. The horror of a guilty conscience is the beginning of death
and destruction: therefore peace of conscience derived from the death of
Christ, is life and happiness. The third is the regiment of the spirit,
whereby the heart and life of man is ordered according to the word of God. For
Paul says, that they that are the children of god are led by the spirit of
Christ. Romans 8. 14.
Now seeing this is so, that if we would live eternally, we must begin to
live that blessed and eternal life before we die, here we must be careful to
reform two common errors. The first is, that a man enters into eternal life
when he dies and not before; which is a flat untruth. Our Savior Christ said
to Zacheus, This day is salvation come to thy house^ giving us to understand,
that a man then begins to be saved, when God does effectually call him by the
ministry of his Gospel. Whosoever then will be saved when he is dying and
dead, must begin to be saved while he is now living. His salvation must
begin in this life, that would come to salvation after this life: Verily,
verily, says Christ, Ioh. 5.24.
he that hears my word, and ^eleeueth in him that sent me, has eternal
life, namly in this present life. The second error is, that howsoever a man
live, if when he is dying he can lift up his eyes, and say, Lord have mercy
upon me, he is certainly saved. Behold a very dangerous and foolish conceit,
that deceiues many a man. It is all one as if an arrant theife should thus
reason with himself, and say; I will spend my days in robbing and stealing, I
fear neither arraignment, nor exequution. For at the very time when I am to
be turned off the ladder, if I do but call upon the judge I know I shall
have my pardon. Behold a most dangerous and desperate course: and the very
same is the practice of careless men in the matter of their salvation. For a
man may di^ with Lord have mercy in his mouth, and perish eternally; except in
this world he enter into the first degree of eternal life. Mat. 7.21.
For not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into heaven: but he
that does the will of the father which is in heaven.

The fourth duty, is to exercise and inure our selves in dying by little and
little so long as we live here upon earth, before we come to die indeed. And
as men that are appointed to run a race, exercise themselves in running that
they may get the victory: so should we begin to die now while we are living,
that we might die well in the end. But some may say, how should this be done?
Paul gives us direction in his own example when he says, by the rejoicing
which I have in Christ I die daily. 1 Cor. 15. 31.
And he died daily not only because he was often in danger of death by reason
of his calling: but also because in all his dangers and troubles, he inured
himself to die. For when men do make the right use of their afflictions,
whether they be in body or mind, or both, and do with all their might
endeavor to bear them patiently; humbling themselves as under the correction
of God, then they begin to die well. And to do this indeed is to take an
excellent course. He that would mortify his greatest sins, must begin to do
it with small sins; which, when they are once reformed, a man shall be able
more easily to overcome his master-sinnes. So likewise he that would be able to
bear the cross of all crosses, namely death it self, must first of all
learn to bear small crosses, as sicknesses in body, and troubles in mind,
with losses of goods and of friends, and of good name: which I may fitly
term little deaths, and the beginnings of death it self: Mors post crucem
minor est.
and we must first of all acquaint our selves with these little deaths, before
we can well be able to bear the great death of al. Again, the afflictions and
calamities of this life are as it were the harbingers and puruiers of death:
and we are first to learn how to entertain these messengers, that when death
the lord himself shall come, we may in better manner entertain him. This
point Bilney the martyr well considered, who oftentimes before he was burned,
put his finger into the flame of the candle, not only to make trial of his
ability in suffering, but also to arm and strengthen himself against greater
torments in death. Thus ye see the fourth duty, which ye must in any wise
learn and remember, because we cannot be able to bear the pangs of death
well, unless we be first well schooled and nurtered by sundry trials in this
life.

Eccl. 9.10.
The fifth and last duty is set down by Solomon. All that thine hand shall find
to do, do it with all thy power. And mark the reason. Eccl. 9.10.
For there is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the
grave whither thou go. To the same purpose Paul says, Gal. 6.10.
Do good to all men while ye have time. Therefore if any man be able to do
any good service either to Gods church, or to the common wealth, or to any
private man, let him do it with all speed and with all might, least death it
self prevent him. He that has care thus to spend his days, shall with much
comfort and peace of conscience end his life.

Thus much of general preparation. Now follows the particular, which is in
the time of sickness. And here first of all I will show what is the doctrine of
the Papists, and then afterward the truth. By the popish order and practice,
when a man is about to die, he is enjoined three things. First to make
sacramental confession, specially if it be in any mortal sin; secondly to
receive the Eucharist; thirdly to require his annoyling, that is, the sacrament
(as they call it) of extreme unction.

Sacramental confession, they term a rehearsal or enumeration of all man's
sins to a priest, that he may receive absolution. But against this kind of
confession, sundry reasons may be alleged. First of all, it has no warrant
either by commandment or example in the whole word of God. They say yes; and
they endeavor to prove it thus: He which lies in any mortal sin, is by
Gods law bound to do penance and to seek reconciliation with God; now the
necessary means after baptism to obtain reconciliation, is the confession
of all our sins to a priest. Because Christ has appointed priests to be
judges upon earth, with such measure of authority, that no man falling after
baptism can without their sentence and determination be reconciled; and they
can not rightly judge, unless they know all a man's sins: therefore all that
fall after baptism are bound by Gods word to open all their sins to a
priest. Ans. It is false which they say that priests are judges, having power
to examine and take knowledge of men's sins, and jurisdiction whereby they can
properly absolve and pardon or retain them. For Gods word has given no more
to man, but a ministry of reconciliation, whereby in the name of God, and
according to his word, he does preach, declare, and pronounce, that God does
pardon or not pardon his sins. Again, pardon may truly be pronounced, and
right judgment of the estate of any man, without a particular rehearsal of
his sins. For he which soundly and truly repents of one or some few sins,
repents of all. Secondly, this confession is ouerturned by the practice of the
Prophets and Apostles, who not only absolved particular persons, but also whole
churches without exaction of auricular confession. When Nathan the Prophet had
rebuked David for his two great and horrible crimes, David touched with remorse
said, 2. Sam. 1^. 12.
I have sinned, and Nathan presently without further examination declared unto
him in the name of God, that his sins were forgiven him. Thirdly, it can not be
proved by any good and sufficient proofs, that this confession was used in
the Church of God till after five or six hundred years were expired. For the
confession which was then in use, was either public before the Church, or the
opening of a public fault to some private person in secret. Therefore to urge
sick men unto it lying at the point of death, is to lay more burdens on them,
then ever God appointed.

And whereas they make it a necessary thing to receive the Eucharist in the
time of sickness toward death, and that privately of the sick party alone,
they have no warrant for their practice and opinion. For in the want of the
sacrament there is no danger, but in the contempt: and the very contempt it
self is a sin which may be pardoned, if we repent. And there is no reason
why we should think that sick men should be deprived of the comfort of the
Lords supper, if they receive it not in death; because the fruit and efficacy
of the Sacrament once received, is not to be restrained to the time of
receiving, but it extends it self to the whole time of man's life afterward.
Again the supper of the Lord is no private action, but merely
Ecclesiastical: and therefore to be celebrated in the meeting and assembly of
Gods people; as our Savior Christ prescribes, when he says, Luke 22.19. 1.
Cor. 11.20.
Do ye this: and Paul in saying, When ye come together. But it is alleged
that the Israelites did eat the Paschal lamb in their houses when they were
in Egypt. Answ. The Israelites had then no liberty to make any public meeting
for that end: and god commanded that the Paschal lamb should be eaten in all
the houses of the Isaraelites at one and the same instant; and that in effect
was as much as if it had been public. Again, they allege a Canon of the
Council of Nice; which decrees that men being about to die, must receive the
Eucharist, and not be fraudari viatico.
deprived of the provision of food necessary for their journey. Ans. The
Council made no decree touching the administration of the Sacrament to all them
that die, but to such only as fall away from the faith in persecution, or fell
into any other notorious crime, and were thereupon excommunicate, and so
remained till death: and either then or somewhat before testified their
repentance for their offenses. And the Canon was made for this end, that such
persons might be assured that they were again received into the Church, and
by this means depart with more comfort. Thirdly, it is objected, that in the
primitive Church, part of the Eucharist was carried by a ladde to Serapion an
aged man, Eus. l. 6. c. 36.
lying sick in his bed. Ansvv. It was indeed the custom of the ancient
Church from the very beginning, that the elements of bread and wine should be
sent by some of the Deacons to the sick, which were absent from the assembly.
And yet nevertheless here is no footing for private communions. For the
Eucharist was only then sent when the rest of the Church did openly
communicate; and such as were then absent only by reason of sickness, and
desired to be partakers of that blessed com^union, were to be reputed as
pre^ent. Lastly it is objected, Basil. epist. ad Caes. Tertul. l. 2. ad vxorum.
Hieron. in Apol. pro lib. in Job. C^n^. Carth. 3. can. 6.
that it was the manner of men and women in former times to carry part of the
Sacrament home to their houses, and to reserve it till the time of necessity,
as the time of sickness and such like. Ans. The reseruatio^ of the sacrament was
but a superstitious practice, though it be ancient. For out of the
administration, that is, before it begin, and after it is ended, the sacrament
cease to be a sacrament, and the elements to be elements. As for the practice
of them that used to cramme the Eucharist into the mouth of them that were
deceased, it is not only superstitious but also very absurd.

As for the Annoiling of the sick, that is, the anointing of the body,
specially the organes or instruments of the senses, that the party may obtain
the remission of his sins, and comfort against all temptations of the devil
in the hour of death; and strength more easily to bear the pangs of
sickness and the pangs of death, and be again restored to his corporal
health, if it be expedient for the salvation of his soul; it is but a dotage
of man's brain, and has not so much as a show of reason to justify it. The
fifth of James is commonly alleged to this purpose, but the anointing there
mentioned is not of the same kind with this greasy sacrament of the Papists.
For that anointing of the body was a ceremony used by the Apostles and
others, when they put in practice this miraculous gift of healing, which gift
is now ceased. Secondly, Iam. 5.16.
that anointing had a promise that the party should recover his health: but
this popish anointing has no such promise, because for the most part the
persons thus anointed die afterward without recovery; whereas those which were
anointed in the primitive Church always recovered. Thirdly, the ancient
anointing served only for the procuring of health, but this tendes further to
the procuring of remission of sins, and strength in temptation.

Thus having seen the doctrine of the Papists; I come now to speak of the
true and right manner of making particular preparation before death, which
contains three sorts of duties: one concerning God, the other concerning a
man's own self, the third concerning our neighbor. The first concerning God,
is to seek to be reconciled unto him in Christ, though we have been long
assured of his favor. All other duties must come after in the second place,
and they are of little or no effect without this. Now this reconciliation must
be sought for and is obtained by a renewing of our former faith and
repentance: and they must be renewed on this manner. So soon as a man shall
feel any manner of sickness to seize upon his body, he must consider with
himself whence it arises: and after serious consideration, he shall find that
it comes not by chance or fortune, but by the special providence of God. This
done, he m^st go yet further and consider for what cause the Lord should
afflict his body with any sickness or disease. And he shall find by Gods
word, that sickness comes ordinarily and usually of sin. Lam. 3.36.
Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? man suffers for his sin. It is
true indeed, there be other causes of the wantes of the body, and of
sickness, beside sin; and though they be not known to us: yet they are
known to the Lord. Hereupon Christ when he saw a certain blind man, and was
demanded what was the cause of the blindness, answered, Ioh. 9.2.
neither has this man sinned nor his parents, but that the work of God should
be showed on him. Yet we for our parts, who are to go not by the secret, but
by the revealed will of God, must make this use of our sickness, that it is
sent unto us for our sins. When Christ healed the man sick of the palsy, he
says, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee: and when he had
healed the man by the poole of Bethesda, Mat. 9.2. Ioh. 5.14.
that had bin sick thirty eight years, he bids him sin no more least a
worst thing happen unto him: giving them both to understand that their
sickness came by reason of their sins. And thus should every sick man
resolve himself. Now when we have proceeded thus far, and have as it were
laid our finger upon the right and proper cause of our sickness, three things
concerning our sins must be performed of us in sickness. First we must
make a new examination of our hearts and lives, and say as the Israelites said
in affliction, Lam. 3.40.
Let us search and ^ry our ways, and turn again to the Lord. Secondly we
must make a new confession to God of our new and particular sins, as God
sends new corrections and chastisements. Psalm. 32.5.
When David had the hand of God very heavy upon him for his sins, so as his
very bones and moisture consumed within him, he made confession of them unto
God, and thereupon obtained his pardon, and was healed. The third thing is to
make new prayer and more earnest the ever before, with sighs and groans of
the spirit, and that for pardon of the same sins, and for reconciliation with
God in Christ. In the exercise of these three duties stands the renouation of
our faith and repentance whereby they are increased, quickened, and revived.
And the more sickness preuailes and takes place in the body, the more should
we be careful to put them in ure: that spiritual life might increase as
temporal life is decayed. When King Ezechias lay sick, as he thought upon his
deathbed, he wept as for some other causes so also for his sins, and
withal he prayed God to cast them behind his back. David made certain
Psalms when he was sick, or at the least upon the occasion of his sickness,
as namely the 6. the 32. the 38. the 39, etc. and they all are psalms of
repentance: in which we may see how in distress of body and mind he renewed
his faith and repentance, heartely bewailing his sins, and entreating the
Lord for the pardon of them. Manasses, one that fell from God, and gave
himself to many horrible sins, when he was taken captive and imprisoned in
Babylon, 2. Chr. 33. 12,13.
he prayed to the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of
his fathers, and prayed unto him: and God was entreated of him, and heard his
prayer, and brought him again into Jerusalem into his kingdom, and then
Manasses knew that the Lord was God. Now look what Manasses did in this
tribulation, the same thing must we do in the time of our bodily sickness.

Here I have occasion to mention a notorious fault that is very common in this
age, even among such as have long lived in the bosom of the Church: and that
is this. Men now a days are so far from renewing their faith and repentance,
that when they lie sick and are drawing toward death, they must be Catechized
in the doctrine of faith and repentance, as if they had been but of late
received into the Church. Whosoever will, but as occasion is offered visit the
sick, shall find this to be true which I say. What a shame is this, that
when a man has spent his life and days in the Church for the space of twenty
or thirty, or forty years, he should at the very end of all and not
before, begin to inquire, what faith, and what repentance is, and how his
soul might be saved. This one sin argues the great security of this age,
and the great contempt of God and his word. Well, let all men hereafter in
time to come, be warned to take heed of this exceeding negligence in matters
of salvation, and to use all good means before hand, that they may be able in
sickness and in the time of death to put in practice the spiritual exercises
of invocation and repentance.

Now if so be it fall out that the sick party cannot of himself renew his
own faith and repentance, Mar. 2.
he must seek the help of others. When the man that was sick of the dead
palsy could not go to Christ himself, he got others to bear him in his
bed; and when they could not come nere for the multitude they uncovered the
roof of the house and let the bed down before Christ: even so, when sick men
can not alone by themselves do the good duties to which they are bound, they
must borrowe help from their fellow members; who are partly by their counsel
to put to their helping hand, and partly by their prayers to present them unto
God, and to bring them into the presence of God.

And touching help in this case, sundry duties are to be performed. Saint
James sets down four, two whereof concern the sick patient, and other two
such as be helpers. The first duty of the sick man is to send for help:
where two circumstances must be considered: who must be sent for, and when. For
the first Saint James says, Iam. 5.14.
Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the Church. Whereby are
meant not only Apostles and all ministers of the gospel, but others also (as
I take it) which were men ancient for years endued with the spirit of
understanding and prayer, and had withal, the gift of working miracles and of
healing the sick. Tertul. de corona milit. c. 11. and de Idol. c. 11.
For in the primitive Church this gift was for a time so plentifully bestowed
on them that believed in Christ, that soldiers cast out devils, and parents
wrought miracles on their children. Hence we may learn, that howesoeuer it be
the duty of the ministers of the word principally to visit and comfort the
sick, yet is it not their duty alone, for it belongs to them also which have
knowledge of Gods word, and the gift of prayer. Exhort one another (says the
holy Ghost) while it is called to day. And again, Heb. 3.13. 1. These. 5.^^ 14.
Admonish them that are disordered, and comfort those that are weak. And
indeed in equity it should be the duty of every Christian man to comfort his
brother in sickness. Here we must needs take knowledge of the common fault
of men and women when they come to visit their neighbors and friends they can
not speak a work of instruction and comfort, but spend the time in silence,
gazing, and looking on: or in uttering words to little or no purpose, saying
to the sick party, that they are very sorry to see him in that case, that
they would have him to be of good comfort, but wherein and by what means they
cannot tell; that they doubt not but that he shall recover his health and live
with them still, and be merry as in former time: that they will pray for him;
whereas all their prayers are nothing else but the Apostles creed, or the ten
commandments, and the Lords prayer uttered without understanding. And this is
the common comfort that sick men get at the hands of their neighbors when
they come unto them: and all his comes either because me^ live in ignorance of
Gods word, or because they falsely think that the whole burden of this duty
lies upon the shoulders of the minister.

The second circumstance is, when the sick party must send for the elders to
i^struct him and pray for him. And that is in the very first place of all
before any other help be sought for. Where the Divine ends, there the
physician must begin: and it is a very preposterous course that the Divine
should there begin where the physician makes an end. For till help be had for
the soul, and sin which is the root of sickness be cured, physic for the
body is nothing. Therefore it is a thing much to be disliked, that in all
places almost, the physician is first sent for, and comes in the beginning of
the sickness, and the Minister comes when a man is half dead, and is then sent
for oftententimes, when the sick party lies drawing on and gasping for
breath, as though Ministers of the Gospel in these days were able to work
miracles.

The second duty of the sick party is to confess his sins, as James says,
Iam. 5.16.
Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for another. It will be
said, that this is to bring in again Popish shrift. Ans. Confession of our
sins, and that unto men was never denied of any: the question only is of the
manner and order of making confession. And for this cause we must put a great
difference between Popish shrift, and the confession of which S. James
speaks. For he requires only a confession of that or those sins which lie
upon a man's conscience when he is sick: but the Popish doctrine requires a
particular enumeration of all man's sins. Again, S. James enioynes confession
only as a thing necessary, meet, and convenient, but the Papists as a thing
necessary to the remission of sins. Thirdly, S. James permits that
confession be made to any man, and by one man to an other mutually; whereas
Popish shrift is made only to the priest. The second duty then is, that the
sick party troubled in mind with the memory and consideration of any of his
sins past, or any manner of way tempted by the devil, shall freely of his
own accord open his case to such as are both able and willing to help him,
that he may receive comfort and die in peace of conscience.

Thus much of the sick man's duty: now follow the duties of helpers. The first
is, to pray over him, that is, in his presence to pray with him and for him,
and by prayer to present his very person and his whole estate unto God. The
Prophet Elizeus, 2. King. 4. 32. Act. 20. 10. Ioh. 11. 41.
the Apostle Paul, and our Savior Christ used this manner of praying, when
they would miraculously restore temporal life: and therefore it is very meet
that the same should be used also of us, that we might the better stir up our
affections in prayer, and our compassion to the sick when we are about to
entreat the Lord for the remission of their sins, and for the salvation of
their souls.

The second duty of him that comes as an helper, is to anoint the sick
party with oil. Now this anointing was an outward ceremony which was used
with the gift of healing, which is now ceased: and therefore I omit to speak
further of it.

Thus much of the duty which the sick man owes to God: now follow the duties
which he is to perform unto himself, and they are twofold: one concerns his
soul, the other his body. The duty concerning his soul is, that he must
arm and furnish himself against the immoderate fear of present death. And
the reason hereof is plain: because howsoever naturally men fear thorough the
course of their lives more or less; yet in the time of sickness when death
approaches, this natural fear bred in the bone will most of all show it
self, even in such sort, as it will astonish the senses of the sick party,
and sometime cause desperation. Therefore it is necessary that we use means to
strengthen our selves against the fear of death. The means are of two sorts:
practices, and meditations. Practices are two especially. The first is, that
the sick man must not so much regard death it self as the benefits of God
which are obtained after death. He must fix his mind upon the consideration of
the pangs and torments of death; but all his thoughts and affections must be
set upon that blessed estate that is enjoyed after death. He that is to pass
over some great and deep river, must not look downward to the stream of the
water: but if he would prevent fear, he must set his foot sure and cast his
eye to the bank on the further side: and so must he that draws near death,
as it were, look over the waves of death and directly fix the eye of his
faith upon eternal life. The second practice is to look upon death in the
glass of the Gospel, and not in the glass of the law: that is, we must
consider death not as it is propounded in the law, and look upon that terrible
face which the law gives unto it; but as it is set forth in the Gospel. Death
in the law is a curse and the downfall to the pit of destruction: in the Gospel
it is the entrance to heaven: the law sets forth death as death, the Gospel
sets death as no death, but as a sleep only: because it speaks of death as
it is altered and changed by the death of Christ; by the virtue whereof death
is properly no death to the servants of God. When men shall have care on this
manner to consider of death, it will be a notable means to strengthen and
stablish them against all immoderate fears and terrors that usually rise in
sickness.

The meditations which serve for this purpose are innumerable, but I will touch
only those which are the most principal and the grounds of the rest: and they
are four in number. The first is borrowed from the special providence of God;
namely that the death of every man, much more of every child of god, is not
only foreseen, but also foreappointed of God: yea the death of every man
deserved and procured by his sins, is laid upon him by God, who in that
respect may be said to be the cause of every man's death. So says Anna, 1.
Sam. 2. 6.
The Lord kills and makes alive. The Church of Jerusalem confessed that
nothing came to pass in the death of Christ, Act. 4.28.
but that which the foreknowledge and eternal counsel of God had appointed.
And therefore the death also of every member of Christ is foreseen and
ordained by the special decree and providence of God. I add further, that the
very circumstances of death, as the time when, the place where, the manner how,
the beginnings of sickness, the continuance, and the end, every fit in the
sickness and the pangs of death, are particularly set down in the counsel of
God. The very hayres of our heads are numbered (as our Savior Christ says)
and a sparrow lights not on the ground without the will of our heavenly father.
David says excellently, Psalm. 139. 15, 16.
My bones are not hid from thee, though I was made in a secret place, and
fashioned beneath in the earth: thine eyes did see me when I was without form,
for in thy book were all things written, which in continuance were fashioned,
when there was none of them before. And he prays to God to put his tears into
his bottle. Now if this be true, Psalm. 56. 8.
that God has bottles for the very tears of his servants, much more has he
bottles for their blood, and much more does he respect and regard their pains
and miseries with all the circumstances of sickness and death. The careful
meditation of this one point is a notable means to arm us against fear and
distrust, and impatience in the time of death; as some examples in this case
will easily manifest, I held my tongue and said nothing, says David: but what
was it that caused this patience in him? Psalm. 35. 10. Genesis 4^.
the cause follows in the next words: because thou Lord did it. And Joseph
says to his brethren: Fear not, for it was the Lord that sent you before me.
Mark here how Joseph is arrived against impatience and grief and
coffeehouse by the very consideration of Gods providence: and so in the same
manner shall we be confirmed against all fears and sorrows, and say with
David, Psalm. 116.13
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints: if this
persuasion be once settled in our hearts, that all things in sickness and death
come to pass unto us by the providence of God, who turns all things to the
good of them that love him.

The second meditation is to be borrowed from the excellent promise that God
made to the death of the righteous: which is, Apoc. 14.13.
Blessed are they that die in the Lord: for they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them. The author of truth that can not lie has spoken it.
Now then let a man but thoroughly consider this, that death joined with reformed
life has a promise of blessedness adjoined unto it, and it alone will be a
sufficient means to stay the rage of our affections, and all inordinate fear
of death: and the rather, if we mark^ wherein this blessedness consists. In
death we are indeed thrust out of our old dwelling places, namely these houses
of clay and earthly tabernacles of our bodies, wherein we have made long abode:
but what is the end? surely that living and dying in Christ, we might have a
building given of God, that is, an house not made with hands, 2. Cor. 5.1.
but eternal in heavens, which is unspeakable and immortal glory. If a poor
man should be commanded by a Prince to put off his torn and beggarly
garments, and in stead thereof to put on royal and costly robes, it would be a
great rejoicing to his heart: oh then what joyful news must this he unto all
repentant and sorrowful sinners, when the King of heaven and earth comes unto
them by death and biddes them lay down their bodies as ragged and patched
garments, and prepare themselves to put on the princely robe if immortality?
No tongue can be able to express the excellency of this most blessed and
happy estate.

The third meditation is borrowed from the estate of all them that are in
Christ, whether living or dying. He that dies believing in Christ, dies not
forth of Christ but in him, having both his body and soul really coupled to
Christ according to the tenor of the covenant of grace: and though after death
body and soul be severed one from an other, yet neither of them are severed
or disioyned from Christ. The conjunction which is once begun in this life
remains eternally. And therefore though the soul go from the body, and the
body it self rotte in the grave, yet both are still in Christ, both in the
covenant, both in the favor of God as before death, and both shall again be
joined together; the body by the virtue of the former conjunction being
raised to eternal life. Indeed if this union with Christ were dissolved as
the conjunction of body and soul is, it might be some matter of discomfort
and fear, but the foundation and substance of our mystical conjunction with
Christ both in respect of our bodies and souls enduring for ever, must needs
be a matter of exceeding joy and comfort.

The fourth meditation is, that God has promised by his special, blessed, and
comfortable presence unto his servants when they are sick of dying, or any way
distressed. When thou passest through the water, I will be with thee (says the
Lord) and through the floods that they do not ouerflow thee: Esa. 43. 3.
when thou walk through the very fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall
the flame kindle upon thee. Now the Lord does manifest his presence three
ways: the first is by moderating and lessening the pains and torments of
sickness and death, as the very words of the former promise does plainly
import. Hence it comes to pass that to many men the sorrows and pangs of
death, are nothing so grievous and troublesome, as the afflictions and crosses
which are laid on them in the course of their lives. The second way of Gods
presence is by an inward and unspeakable comfort of the spirit, as Paul says,
Romans 5. 3,5.
We rejoice in tribulation, knowing that tribulation brings forth patience,
etc. but why is this rejoicing? because (says he in the next words) the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost. Again, 2. Cor. 1.5.
Paul having in some grievous sickness received the sentence of death, says of
himself, that, as the sufferings of Christ did abound in him, so his
consolation did abound through Christ. Here then we see, that when earthly
comforts fail, the Lord himself draws near the bed of the sick, as it
were, visiting them in his own person, and ministering unto them refreshing for
their souls: Cant. 2.6.
With his right hand he holds up their heads, and with his left hand he
embraces them. The third means of Gods presence is the ministry of his good
Angels, whom the Lord has appointed as keepers and nources unto his servants
to hold them up and to bear them in their arms as nources do young children,
and to be as a guard unto them against the devil and his angels. Psalm. 93.
And all this is verified specially in sickness, at which time the holy Angels
are not only present with such as fear God, but ready also to receive and to
carry their souls into heaven, as appears by the example of Lazarus.

And thus much of the first duty which a sick man is to perform unto
himself, namely that he must by all means possible arm and strengthen
himself against the fear of death: now follows the second duty which is
concerning the body: and that is that all sick persons must be careful to
preserve health and life till God do wholly take it away. For Paul says, To.
14.7,8.
None of us lives to himself, neither does any die to himself: for whether
we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die unto the Lord:
whether we live therefore or die we are the Lords. For this cause we may not
do with our lives as we will, but we must reserve the whole disposition
thereof unto God, for whose glory we are to live and die. And this temporal
life is a most precious jewel, and as the common saying is, life is very
sweet; because it is given man for this end, that he might have some space of
time wherein he might use all good means to attain to life everlasting. Life
is not bestowed on us, that we should spend our days in our lusts and vain
pleasures, but that we might have liberty to come out of the kingdom of
darkness into the kingdom of grace, and from the bondage of sin into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God: and in this respect special care must
be had of preservation of life, till God do call us hence.

In the preserving of life, two things must be considered: the means, and the
right use of the means. The means is good and wholesome physic: which, though
it be despised of many as a thing unprofitable and needles, yet must it be
esteemed as an ordinance and blessing of God. This appears, because the spirit
of God has given approuation unto it in the Scriptures. When it was the good
pleasure of God to restore life unto king Ezekias, 2. king. 20.7.
a lump of dry figs by the prophets appointment was laid to his boil and he
was healed. Indeed this cure was in some sort miraculous, because he was made
whole in the space of two or three days, and the third day he went up to the
temple: yet the bunch of figs was a natural and ordinary medicine or
plaster serving to soften and ripen tumors or swellings in the flesh. Gal. l.
2. de art. curat. cap. 7.
And the Samaritane is commended for the binding up and for the pouring in of
wine and oil into the wounds of the man that lay wounded between Jerusalem
and Ierico. Now this dealing of his was a right practice of physic: Luke 10.
34. Valles. de sacra philos. c. 88.
for the wine served to cleanse the wound and to ease the pain within: and the
oil served to supple the flesh and to assuage the pain without. And the
prophet Esai seems to commend this physic, when he says, Esa. 1.6.
From the soole of the foot there is nothing whole therein, but wounds and
swellings; and sores full of corruption: they have not bin wrapped nor bound
up, nor mollified with oil. And whereas God did not command circumcision of
children before the eight day, he followed a rule of physic observed in all
ages, that the life of the child is very uncertain till the first seven days be
expired, as we may see by the example of the child which David had by Bathsabe
which died the seventh day. And upon the very same ground heathen men used not
to name their children before the eight day. Arist. de hist. animal. l. 7. cap.
1.
Thus then it is manifest that the use of physic is lawful and commendable.

Furthermore, that physic may be well applied to the maintenance of health,
special care must be had to make choice of such physitia^s as are known to be
well learned, and men of experience, as also of good conscience and good
religion. For as in other callings, so in this also, there be sundry abuses
which may endanger the lives and the health of men. Some venture upon the bare
inspection of the urine, without further direction or knowledge of the estate
of the sick, to prescribe and minister as shall seem best unto them. But the
learned in this faculty do plainly avouch, Forest. de vrin. indicys lib. 3.
that this kind of dealing tendes rather to kill then to cure; and that sundry
men are indeed killed thereby. For judgment by the urine is most deceitful:
the water of him that is sick of a pestilent fever even unto death, looks
for substance and color as the water of a whole man: Lang. l. 2. ep. 41.
and so does the water of them that are sick of a quartane or of any other
intermitting fever; specially if they have used good diet from the beginning:
as also of them that have the pleuresie, or the inflammation of the lungs, or
the Squinancie, oftentimes when they are near death. Now then considering the
waters of such as are at the point of death, appears as the vrines of hail
and sound men, one and the same urine may foresignifie both life and death, and
be a sign of diverse, nay of contrary diseases. A thin, crude, and pale urine
in them that be in health, is a token of want of digestion; but in the^ that
are sick of a sharp or burning ague, it betokens the frenzy, and is a certain
sign of death. Again, others there be that think it a small matter to make
experiments of their devised medicines upon the bodies of their patients,
whereby the health which they hoped for is either much hindered or much
decayed. Thirdly, there be others which minister no physic at any time, or
use phlebotomie without the direction of judicial Astrology: but if they
shall follow this course always, they must needs kill many a man. Put the
case that a man full bodied is taken with a pleuresie, the moon being in
Leone, what must be done? The learned in this art say, he must presently be let
blood: but by Astrology a stay must be made, till the moon be removed from
Leo the house of the sun: but by that time the impostume will be so much
increased by the gathering together of the humors, that it can neither be
dissolved nor ripened: and by this means the sick party wanting help in
time, shall die either by inflammation, or by the consumption of the lungs.
Again, Lang. l. 1. ep. 25.
when a man is sick of the Squinancie, or of the fever called Synachus, See
Ganivettus called Amicus medic.
the moon then being in the malignant aspects with any of the unfortunate
planets (as Astrologers use to speak) if letting of blood be deferred till the
moon be freed from the foresaid aspects, the party dies in the mean season.
Therefore they are far wide that minister purgations and let blood no
otherwise then they are counseled by the constitution of the stars, whereas
it is a far better course to consider the matter of the disease, with the
disposition and ripening of it; as also the courses and symptoms and crisis
thereof. This being so, there is good cause that sick men should as well be
careful to make choice of meet Physicians to whom they might commend the
care of their health, as they are careful to make choice of lawyers for their
worldly suits, and Divines for cases of conscience.

Furthermore, all men must here be warned to take heed, that they use not such
means as have no warrant. Of this kind are all charms or spells, of what
words soever they consist: characters and figures either in paper, wood, or
wax: all amulets and ligatures, which serve to hang about the neck or other
parts of the body, except they be grounded upon some good natural reason;
Gal. l. 6. and 10. de simp. medic.
as white peonie hung about the neck, is good against the falling sickness: and
woolfe-dung tied to the body is good against the collicke, not by any
enchantment, but by inward virtue. Otherwise they are all vain and
superstitious: because neither by creation, nor by any ordinance in Gods word,
have they any power to cure a bodily disease. For words can do no more but
signify, and figures can do no more but represent. And yet nevertheless,
these unlawful and absurd means are more used and sought for of common
people, then good physic. But it stands all men greatly in hand in no wise
to seek forth to inchanters, and sorcerers, which in deed are but witches and
wizzards, though they are commonly called cunning men and women. It were better
for a man to die of his sickness, then to seek recovery by such wicked persons.
For if any turn after such as work with spirits, and after soothsaiers, to
go an whoring after them, the Lord will set his face against them, and cut
them off from among his people. Leu. 20.6.
When Achazia was sick, he sent to Baalzebub to the god of Ekron to know
whether he should recover or no: as the messengers were going, the Prophet
Elias met them, and said, 1. King. 1.6.
Go and return to the King which sent you, and say unto him, Thus says the
Lord, Is it not because there is no God in Israel, that thou sendest to inquire
of Baalzebub the god of Ekron? therefore thou shall not come down from thy bed
on which thou art gone up, but shall di^ the death. Therefore such kind of
help is so far from curing any pain of sickness, that it rather doubleth
them and fasteneth them upon us.

Thus much of the means of health: now follows the manner of using the
means; concerning which, three rules must be followed. First of all, he that
is to take physic, must not only prepare his body, as physicians do
prescribe; but he must also prepare his soul by humbling himself under the
hand of God in his sickness for his sins, and make earnest prayer to God for
the pardon of them before any medicine come in his body. Now that this order
ought to be used appears plainly in this, that sickness springs from our
sins as from a root; which should first of all be stocked up, that the
branches might more easily die. ^. Chr. 16. 26.
And therefore Asa commended for many other things, is blamed for this by the
holy Ghost, that he sought not the Lord, but to the physicians, and put his
trust in them. Oftentimes it comes to pass, that diseases curable in
themselves, are made incurable by the sins and the impenitencie of the
party: and therefore the best way is for them that would have ease, when God
begins to correct them by sickness, then also to begin to humble themselves for
all their sins, and turn unto God.

The second rule is, that when we have prepared our selves, and are about to
use physic, we must sanctify it by the word of God and prayer, as we do our
meat and drink. For by the word we must have our warrant, that the medicines
prescribed are lawful and good; and by prayer we must entreat the Lord for a
blessing upon them, 1. Tim. 4. 3.
in restoring of health, if it be the good will of God.

The third rule is, that we must carry in mind the right and proper end of
physic, least we deceive our selves. We must not therefore think that
physic serves to prevent old age or death it self. For that is not possible,
because God has set down that all men shall die and be changed. And life
consists in a temperature and proportion of natural heat and radical moisture;
which moisture being once consumed by the former heat, is by art
vnrepairable; and therefore death must needs follow. But the true end of
physic is to continue and lengthen the life of man to his natural period;
which is when nature, that has been long preserved by all possible means, is
now wholly spent. Now this period, though it can not be lengthened by any skill
of man, yet may it easily be shortened, by intemperance in diet, by
Intercu^aneus car^ifex.
drunkenness, and by violent diseases. But care must be had to avoid all such
evils, that the little lamp of corporal life may burn till it go out of it
self. For this very space of time is the very day of grace and salvation: and
whereas God in justice might have cut us off and have utterly destroyed us, yet
in great mercy he gives us thus much time, that we might prepare our selves to
his kingdom: which time when it is once spent, if a man would redeem it with
the price of ten thousand worlds, he can not have it.

And to conclude this point touching physic, I will here set down two
especial duties of the Physician himself. The first is, that in the want and
defect of such as are to put sick men in mind of their sins, it is a duty
specially concerning him, he being a member of Christ, to advertise his
patients that they must truly humble themselves, and pray fervently to God for
the pardon of all their sins: and surely this duty would be more commonly
practiced then it is, if all physicians did consider that oftentimes they want
good success in their dealings, not because there is any want in art or good
will, but because the party with whom they deal is impenitent. The second
duty is, when he sees manifest signs of death in his patient, not to depart
concealing them, but first of all to certify the patient thereof. There may be
and is too much niceness in such concealements, and the plain truth in this
case known, is very profitable. For when the party is certain of his end,
it bereaues him of all confidence in earthly things, and makes him put all his
affiance in the mere mercy of God. When Ezechias was sick, the prophet
speaks plainly unto him and says, Set thine house in order: for thou must
die. And what good we may reap by knowing certainly that we have received the
sentence of death, Paul shows when he says, 2. Cor. 1.9.
We received the sentence of death in our selves, because we should not trust
in our selves, but in God which raises the dead.

Having thus seen what be the duties of the sick man to himself, let us
now see what be the duties which he owes to his neighbor; and they are
two. The first is the duty of reconciliation, whereby he is freely to forgive
all men, and to desire to be forgiven of all. In the old testament when a man
was to offer a bullock or lamb in sacrifice to God, he must leave his
offering at the altar, and first go and be reconciled to his brethren, if they
had ought against him: much more then must this be done, when we are in death
to offer up our selves, our bodies, and souls, as an acceptable sacrifice unto
god. Quest. What if a man cannot come to the speech of them with whom he would
be reconciled; or if he do, what if they will not be reconciled? Ansvv. When
any shall in their sickness seek and desire reconciliation, and can not
obtain it, either because the parties are absent, or because they will not
relent, they have discharged their conscience, and God will accept their will
for their deed. As put case, a man lying sick on his death bed, is at
enmity with one that is then beyond the sea; so as he can not possibly have
any speech with him, if he would never so feign, how shall he stay his mind?
why, he must remember that in this case, a will and desire to be reconciled is
reconciliation it self.

The second duty is, that those which are rulers and governors of others,
must have care and take order that their charges committed to them by God, be
left in good estate after their death: and here come three duties to be
handled; the first of the Magistrate, the second of the Minister, the third of
the master of the family. The Magistrates duty is, before he die to provide
as much as he can, for the godly and peaceable estate of the town, city, or
commonwealth: and that is done partly by procuring the maintenance of sound
religion and virtue, and partly by establishing of the execution of civil
justice and outward peace. Examples of this practice in Gods word are these.
Deuteronomy. 31. 1.
When Moses was an hundred and twenty year old, and was no more able to go
in and out before the people of Israel, he called them before him, and
signified that the time of his departure was at hand, and thereupon took order
for their welfare after his death. And first of all he placed Joshua over them
in his stead, to be their guide to the promised land: Ios. 23.
secondly he gives special charge to all the people, to be valiant and
courageous against their enemies, and to obey the commandments of God And
Joshua follows the same course. For he calls the people together, and shows
the^ that the time of his death is at hand, and gives them a charge to be
courageous, and to worship the true God: which done, he ends his days as a
worthy captain. When king David was to go the way of al flesh, 1. King. 2.
1,2,3, etc.
and lay sick on his death bed; he placed his own son Solomon upon his
throne, and gives him charge, both for maintenance of region, and exequution of
justice.

The duty of ministers when they are dying is, as much as they can, to cast
and provide for the continuance of the good estate of the Church over which
they are placed. Consider the example of Peter: 2. Pet. 1. 15.
I will (says he) endeavor always, that ye also may be able to have
remembrance of these things after my departure. If this had been well
observed, there could not have bin such abundance of schisms, errors, and
heresies as has been, and the Church of God could not have suffered so great
havoc. But because men have had more care to maintain personal succession,
then the right succession, which stands in the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles; therefore wolves have come into the rooms of faithful teachers, Act.
20. 28. 2. Th. 2.2.
and the Apostasy of which Paul speaks, has ouerspread the face of the
Church.

Thirdly, householders must set their families in order before they die, as the
Prophet Esai says to Ezechiah, Esa. 38.1.
Set thine house in order: for thou must die. For the procuring of good order
in the family after death, two things are to be done. The first concerns this
life, and that is to dispose of lands and goods. And that this may be well and
wisely done; if the Will be unmade, it is with godly advise and counsel to be
made in the time of sickness; according to the practice of ancient and worthy
men. Abraham before his death makes his Will, Genesis 17. and 25. and 49.
and gives legacies: so did Isaac; and Jacob, in whose last will and testament
are contained many worthy blessings and prophesies of the estate of his
children. And Christ our Savior when he was upon the cross provided for his
mother, specially commending her to his disciple John whom he loved. And
indeed this duty of making a will, is a matter of great weight and
importance: for it cuts off much hatred and contention in families, and stays
many suites in law. It is not therefore always a matter of indifferency,
which may be done or not done, as many falsely think, who upon blind and
sinister respects abstain from making wills, either because their wealth
should not be known, or because they would have their decayed estate to be
concealed; or because they fear they shall die the sooner if the will be once
made.

Now though the making of wills belong to another place and profession, yet so
much may be spoken here as the holy ghost has uttered in the word: and that I
will reduce to certain rules. The first is, that the will must be made
according to the law of nature, and the written word of God, and the good and
wholesome positive laws of that kingdom or country whereof a man is a member.
The will of God must be the rule of man's will. And therefore the will that is
made against any of these, is faulty. The second is, that if goods evil
gotten be not restored before, they must even then be restored by will, or by
some other way. It is the practice of covetous men to bequeath their souls
when they die to God, and their goods evil gotten to their children and
friends; which in all equity should be restored to them to whom they belong.
Quest. How if a man's conscience tell him that his goods be evil gotten, and
he knows not where, or to whom to make restitution. Ansvv. The case is
common, and the answer is this. When the party is known whom thou have
wronged, restore to him particularly: if the party be unknown or dead,
restore to his executors or assigns, or to his next kin; if there be none,
yet keep not goods evil gotten to thy self, but restore to God, that is, in
way of recompense and civil satisfaction, bestow them on the Church or
commonwealth. The third rule is, that heads of families must principally
bestow their goods upon their own children, and them that be of their own
kindred. Genesis 15.4.
This man (says God to Abraham of Eleazar a stranger) shall not be thine
heir, but the son which shall come of thy loins. And this was Gods
commandment to the Israelites, that when any man dies, his son should be
his heir, and if he had no son, Number. 27. 8. 11. Romans 8.17. 1. Tim. 5.8.
Plato de Rep. l. 2. Arist. pol. l. 5. c. 8.
then his daughter: and if he have no daughter, then his brethren: and if he
have no brethren, then his fathers brethren: and if there be none, then the
next of his kin whosoever. And Paul says, If ye be sons, then also heirs:
And again, He that prouides not for his own, and namly for them of his
household, is worse then an infidel. Therefore it is a fault for any man to
alienate his goods or lands, wholly and finally from his blood and posterity.
It is a thing which the very law of nature it self has condemned. Again,
it is a fault to give all to the eldest, and nothing in respect to the rest; as
though the eldest were born to be gentlemen, and younger brethren borne to bear
the wallet. Yet in equity the eldest must have more then any; even because he
is the eldest, and because stocks and families in their persons are to be
maintained; and because there must always be some that must be fit to do
special service in the peace of the commonweal, or in the time of war:
which could not be, if goods should be equally parted to all. The fourth and
last rule is, that no Will is of force till the testatour be dead, Heb. 9.15.
for so long as he is alive he may alter and change it. These rules must be
remembered, because they are recorded in Scripture; the opening of other points
and circumstances belongs to the profession of the law.

The second duty of the master of the family concerns the souls of such as
be under his government: and that is to give charge to them, that they learn,
believe, and obey the true religion, that is, the doctrine of salvation set
down in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Genesis 18. 19.
The Lord himself commends Abraham for this: I know Abraham, says he, that he
will command his sons, and his household after him, that they keep the way
of the Lord to do righteousness and judgment. 1. King. 2. read all.
And David gives Solomon on his death bed a most notable and solemn charge,
the sum and substance whereof is, to know the God of his fathers, and to
serve him: which being done, he further commends him to God by prayer: for
which purpose the 72. psalm was made. This practice of his is to be followed
of all. Thus governors, when they shall carefully dispose of their goods, and
give charge to their posterity touching the worship of God, shall greatly
honor God dying as well as living.

Hitherto I have entreated of the two-folde preparation which is to go before
death: now follows the second part of Dying-wel, namely the disposition in
death. This disposition is nothing else but a religious and holy behavior
specially toward God, when we are in or near the agony or pang of death.
This behavior contains three special duties. The first is to die in or by
faith. To die by faith is, when a man in the time of death, does with all his
heart rely himself wholly on Gods special love and favor and mercy in
Christ, as it is revealed in the word. And though their be no part of man's
life void of just occasions whereby we may put faith in practice, yet the
special time of all is the pang of death, when friends, and riches, and
pleasures, and the outward senses, and temporal life, and all earthly helps
forsake us. For the^ true faith makes us to go wholly out of our selves, and
to despair of comfort and salvation in respect of any earthly thing; and with
all the power and strength of the heart to rest on the pure mercy of God. This
made Luther both think and say, that men were best Christians in death. An
example of this faith we have in David, who when he saw nothing before his
eyes but present death, 1. Sam. 30. 6
the people intending to stone him, comforted him at that very instant (as the
text says) in the Lord his God. And this comfort he reaped, in that by faith
he applied unto his own soul the merciful promises of God; as he testifies
of himself: Psalm. 119. 49,50. Psalm. 73.26.
Remember (says he) the promise made to thy servant, wherein thou have caused
me to trust. It is my comfort in trouble: for thy promise has quickened me.
Again, My flesh failed and my heart also, but God is the strength of my heart,
and my portion for ever. Now look what David here did, the same must every one
of us do in the like case. When the Israelites in the wilderness were stung
with fiery serpents, and lay at the point of death, they looked up to the
brazen serpent which was erected by the appointment of God, and were presently
healed: Ioh. 3.14.
even so when any man feels death to draw near, and his fiery sting to
pierce the heart, he must fix the eye of a true and lively faith upon Christ,
exalted and crucified on the cross, which being done, he shall by death enter
into eternal life.

Now because true faith is no dead thing, it must be expressed by special
actions; the principal whereof is Invocation, whereby either prayer or
thanksgiving is directed unto God. When death had seized upon the body of
Jacob, he raised up himself, and turning his face toward the beds head,
leaned on the top of his staff by reason of his feebleness, and prayed unto
God: which prayer of his was an excellent fruit of his faith. Jobs wife in the
midst of his affliction said unto him to very good purpose, Bless God and
die. I know and grant that the words are commonly translated otherwise, Heb.
11. 22. Job. 2.9.
Curse god and die: but (as I take it) the former is the best. For it is not
like that in so excellent a family, any one person, much less a matrone and
principal governor thereof would give such lewd and wretched counsel: which
the most wicked man upon earth having no more but the light of nature would not
once give, but rather much abhor and condemn. And though Job call her a
foolish woman, yet he does it not because she went about to persuade him to
blaspheme God; but because she was of the mind of Jobs friends, and ^ost thou
cont^^^e ^et i^ thine ^prigh^es. v. 9.
thought that he stood too much in a conceit of his own righteousness. Now
the effect and meaning of her counsel is this: Bless God, that is, husband,
no doubt thou art by the extremity of thine affliction at deaths door:
therefore begin now at length to lay aside the great ouerweening which thou
have of thine own righteousness, acknowledge the hand of God upon thee for thy
sins, confess them unto him giving him the glory, pray for the pardon of
them and end thy days. This counsel is very good and to be followed of all:
though it may be the applying of it (as Job well perceived) is mixed with
folly.

Here it may be alleged, that in the pangs of death men want their senses and
convenient utterance, and that therefore they are unable to pray. Ans. The very
sighs, sobbes, and g^ones of a repentant and believing heart are prayers
before God, even as effectual as if they were uttered by the best voice in the
world. Prayer stands in the affection of the heart, the voice is but an outward
messenger thereof. God looks not upon the speech but upon the heart. David
says, Psalm. 10.17. and 145. 19.
God hears the desires of the poor: again, that he will fulfill the desires
of the^ that fear him: yea their very tears are loud and sounding prayers in
his ears.

Again, faith may otherwise be expressed by the Last words, which for the most
part in the^ that have truly served God, are very excellent and comfortable and
full of grace: some choice examples whereof I will rehearse for instructions
sake and for imitation. The last words of Jacob were those whereby as a
prophet he foretold blessings and curses upon his children: Genesis 49.
and the principal among the rest were these, The scepter shall not depart
from Judah, and the lawgiuer from between his feet till Shilo come: verse. 10.
verse. 18.
and, O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation. The last words of Moses are his
most excellent song set down Deuteronomy. 32. and the last words of David were these,
The spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue: the God of
Israel spoke to me, the strength of Israel, said, Bear rule over men, etc. 2.
Sam. 23.
The words of Zacharias the son of Iehoida, when he was stoned were, 2. Chr.
24. 22.
The Lord look upon it and require it. The last words of our Savior Christ
when he was dying upon the cross, are most admirable, and stored with
abundance of spiritual grace. 1. To his father he says, Father, forgive them,
they know not what they do. Luke 23.24. verse. 43. Ioh. 19.26, 27. Mat. 27.46.
Ioh. 19.20. verse. 30. Luke 23.48. Act. 9. 56. 59,60. Eusebius. l. 3. cap. 30.
2. to the thief, Verily I say unto thee, this night shall thou be with me in
Paradise. 3. to his mother, Mother, behold thy son: and to John, behold thy
mother. 4. and in his agony, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. 5. and
earnestly desiring our salvation, I thirst. 6. and when he had made perfect
satisfaction, It is finished. 7. and when body and soul were parting, Father,
into thy hands I commend my spirit. The last words of Steven were, 1. Behold I
see the heavens open and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God. 2.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. 3. Lord lay not this sin^e to their charge. Of
Polycarpe, Thou art a true God without lying, therefore in all things I praise
thee, and bless thee, and glorify thee by the eternal God and high Priest
Jesus Christ thine only beloved son, by whom and with whom to thee and the
holy Spirit, be all glory now and for ever. Of Ignatius, I care not what kind
of death I die: I am the bread of the Lord and must be ground with the teeth of
lions, that I may be clean bread for Christ who is the bread of life for me.
Of Ambrose, I have not so led my life among you as if I were ashamed to live:
neither do I fear death, because we have a good Lord. Paulinus in vita eius.
Of Augustine, 1. He is no great man that thinks it a great matter that trees
and stones fall and mortal men die. 2. Just art thou, O Lord, and righteous is
thy judgment. Of Bernard, 1. An admonition to his brethren that they would
ground the anchor of their faith and hope in the safe and sure port of Gods
mercy. Possid. in vita Aug. c. 8.
2. Because (says he) as I suppose I can not leave unto you any choice example
of religion, I commend three things to be imitated of you, which I remember
that I have observed in the race which I have run as much as possibly I
could. 1. I gave l^sse heed to mine own sense and reason then to the sense
and reason of other men. 2. When I was hurt, I sought not revenge on him that
did the hurt. 3. I had care to give offense to no man, and if it fell out
otherwise, I took it away as I could. Of Zuinglius, when in the field he was
wounded under the chinne with a spear: Oswold. Mycon.
O what hap is this? go to, they may kill my body but my soul they cannot.
Of Oecolampadius, 1. An exhortation to the ministers of the Church to maintain
the purity of doctrine, to show forth an example of honest and godly
conversation, to be constant and patient under the cross. 2. Of himself,
Whereas I am charged to be a corrupter of the truth, I weigh it not; now I am
going to the tribunal of Christ and that with good conscience by the grace of
god, and there it shall be manifest that I have not seduced the Church. Of this
my saying and contestation, I leave you as witnesses, and I confirm it with
this my last breath. 3. To his children, love God the father: and turning
himself to his kinsfolks: I have bound you (says he) with this contestation:
you (which they hear and I have desired) shall do your endeavor, that these
my children may be godly, and peaceable, and true. 4. To his friend coming
unto him, What shall I say unto you? News, I shall be shortly with Christ my
Lord. 5. being asked whether the light did not trouble him, touching his
breast, there is light enough, says he. 6. he rehearsed the whole 51. psalm
with deep sighs from the bottom of his breast. 7. a little after, Save me
Lord Jesus. Of Luther, My heavenly father, God and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ and God of all comfort, I give thee thank^s that thou have revealed unto
me thy son Jesus Christ, whom I have believed, whom I have professed, whom
I have loved, whom I have praised, whom the Bishop of Rome and the whole
company of the wicked persecuteth and reuileth. I pray thee my Lord Jesus
Christ receive my poor soul: my heavenly father, though I be taken from this
life, and this body of mine is to he laid down, yet I know certainly that I
shall remain with thee for ever, neither shall any be able to pull me out of
thy hand. Of Hooper, O Lord Jesus son of David have mercy on me and receive
my soul. Of Annas Burgius, Forsake me not O Lord, least I forsake thee. Of
Mela^cthon, If it be the will of God, I am willing to die, and I beseech him
that he will grant me a joyful departure. Of Calvin, 1. I held my tongue,
because thou Lord have done it. 2. I mourned as a dove. 3. Lord thou grindest
me to powder, but (...) suffices me because it is thine hand. Of Peter Martyr,
that his body was weak, but his mind was well: that he acknowledged no life
or salvation but only in Christ who was given of the father to be a redeemer
of mankind: and when he had confirmed this by testimony of Scripture, he
added: This is my faith in which I will die: and God will destroy them that
teach otherwise. This done, he shook hands with all and said, Farewell my
brethren and dear friends. It were easy to quote more examples, but these few
may be in stead of many: and the sum of all that godly men speak, is this.
Some enlightened with a prophetical spirit foretell things to come, as the
Patriarchs Jacob and Joseph did: and there have bin some which by name have
testified who should very shortly come after them, Genesis 50. 24, 25.
and who should remain alive, and what should be their condition: some have
showed a wonderful memory of things past, as of their former life, and of the
benefits of God; and no doubt it was given them to stir up holy affections
and thanksgiving to God; some again rightly judging of the change of their
present estate for a better, do rejoice exceedingly that they must be
translated from earth to paradise: as Babylas Martyr of Antioch when his head
was to be chopped off, Return (says he) O my soul unto thy rest: because the
Lord has blessed thee: because thou have delivered my soul from death, mine
eyes from tears, and my foot from falling, Psa. 116.7,8
I shall walk before thee Iehoua in the land of the living. And some others
speak of the vanity of this life, of the imagination of the sorrows of
death, of the beginnings of eternal life, of the comfort of the holy Ghost
which they feel, of their departure unto Christ.

Quest. What must we think if in the time of death such speeches be wanting;
and in the stead thereof idle talk be used. Ans. We must consider the kind of
sickness whereof men die, whether it be more easy or violent: for violent
sickness is usually accompanied with frensies, and with unseemly motions and
gestures, which we are to take in good part even in this regard, because we
our selves may be in the like case.

Thus much of the first duty which is to die in faith: the second is to die in
obedience: otherwise our death cannot be aceeptable to God, because we seem
to come unto God of fear and constraint as slaves to a master, and not of love
as children to a father. Now to die in obedience is, when a man willing and
ready and desirous to go out of this world whenever God shall call him,
and that without murmuring or repining, at what time, where, and when it shall
please god. To. 14.7,8.
Whether we live or die, says Paul, we do it not to our selves but unto God;
and therefore man's duty is to be obedient to God in death as in life. Christ
is our example in this case, who in his agony prayed, Father, let this cup
pass from me, yet with a submission, not my will but thy will be done:
teaching us in the very pangs of death to resign our selves to the good
pleasure of God. When the prophet told king Ezechiah of death, presently
without all manner of grudging or repining he addressed himself to prayer. We
are commanded to present our selves unto God as free will offerings, without
any limitation of time, and therefore as well in death as in life. I conclude
then that we are to make as much conscience in performing obedience to God in
suffering death, as we do of any conscience in the course of our lives.

The third duty is to render up our souls into the hands of God, as the most
faithful keeper of all. This is the last duty of a Christian, and it is
prescribed unto us in the example of Christ upon the cross, who in the very
pangs of death when the dissolution of body and soul drew on said, Luke 23.
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, and so gave up the ghost. The like
was done by Steven, who when he was stoned to death, said, Act. 7. Psalm. 31.5.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And David in his life time being in danger of
death used the very same words that Christ uttered.

Thus we see what be the duties which we are to perform in the very pa^gs of
death, that we may come to eternal life. Some man will happily say, if this be
all to die in faith and obedience and to surrender our souls into Gods hand,
we will not greatly care for any preparation before hand, nor trouble our
selves much about the right manner of dying well: for we doubt not, but that
when death shall come, we shall be able to perform all the former duties with
ease. Ans. Let no man deceive himself by any false persuasion, thinking with
himself that the practice of the foresaid duties is a matter of ease: for
ordinarily they are not, neither can they be performed in death, unless there
be much preparation in the life before. He that will die in faith must first
of all live by faith: and there is but one example in all the bible of a man
dying in faith that lived without faith; namely, the theife upon the cross.
The servants of God that are endued with great measure of grace do very hardly
believe in the time of affliction. Indeed when Job was afflicted he said,
Though the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him: yet afterward, his faith
being ouercast with a cloud, he says, that God was become his enemy, and that
he had set him as a mark to shoot at: and sundry times his faith was oppressed
with doubting and distrust. How then shall they that never lived by faith nor
inured themselves to believe, be able in the pang of death to rest upon the
mercy of God. Again, he that would die in obedience, must first of all lead
his life in obedience: he that has lived in disobedience can not willingly and
in obedience appear before the judge when he is cited by death the sergeant of
the Lord: he dies indeed, but that is upon neces^itie, because he must yield
to the order and course of nature as other creatures do. Thirdly, he that would
surrender his soul into the hands of God must be resolved of two things; the
one is that God can; the other is, that God will receive his soul into heaven
and there preserve it till the last judgment. And none can be resolved of
this, except he have the spirit of God to certify his conscience that he is
redeemed, justified, sanctified by Christ, and shall be glorified. He that is
not thus persuaded, dare not render up and present his soul unto God. When
David said, Lord into thy hands I commend my spirit; Psalm. 31.5.
what was the reason of this boldness in him? surely nothing else but the
persuasion of faith, as the next words import: for thou have redeemed me, O
Lord God of truth. And thus it is manifest, that no man ordinarily can
perform these duties dying, that has not performed them living.

This being so, I do again renew my former exhortation, beseeching you that
ye would practice the duties of preparation in the course of your lives,
leading them daily in faith and obedience, and from time to time commending our
souls into the hand of God, and casting all our works upon his providence.
They which have done this, have made most happy and blessed ends. Enoch by
faith walked walked with God, as one that was always in his presence, leading
an upright and godly life, and the Lord tooke^ him away that he should not see
death. Heb. 11.5.
And this which befell Enoch, shall after a sort befall them also that live in
faith and obedience: because death shall be no death but a sleep unto them,
and no enemy but a friend to body and soul. On the contrary let us
consider the wretched and miserable ends of them that have spent their days
in their sins without keeping faith and good conscience. The people of the
old world were drowned in the floode: the filthy Sodomites and Gomorrheans
were destroyed with fire from heaven: Dathan and Abiram with the company of
Core swallowed up of the earth, Core himself (as it seems Number. 16. 32.
by the text) being burnt with fire: wicked Saul and Achitophel and Judas
destroy themselves. Herod is eaten up of worms and gave up the ghost: Psa.
1^6. 17.
Julian the Apostata smitten with a dart in the field, died casting up his
blood into the air and blaspheming the name of Christ. Arius the heretic
died upon the stool scouring forth his very entralls. And this veri^ age
affoards store of like examples. Hof^meister a great Papist, as he was going to
the council of Ralisbone to dispute against the defenders of the gospel,
Il^yric. de fide.
was suddenly in his journey prevented by the hand of God, and miserably died
with horrible roaring, and crying out in the university of Louaine. Guarlacus a
learned Papist falling sick, Fox bocke of Acts and Mon.
when he perceived no way with him but death, he sell into a miserable agony and
perturbation of spirit, crying out of his sins^ how miserably he had lived,
and that he was not able to abide the judgment of God, and so casting out
words of miserable desperation said, his sins were greater then they could
be pardoned, and in that desperation ended his days. Iacobus Latromus of the
same University of Louaine after that he had been at Bruxels, and there
thinking to do a great act against Luther and his fellows, made an oration
before the Emperor so foolishly and ridiculously that he was laughed to scorn
almost of the whole court: then returning from thence to Louaine again, in his
public lecture he fell into open madness, uttering such words of desperation
and blasphemous impiety, that other divines which were present, were feign to
carry him away as he was rauing, and to shut him into a close chamber. From
that time to his very last breath, he had never any thing else in his mouth,
but that he was damned and rejected of god, and that there was no hope of
salvation for him, because that wittingly and against his knowledge he
withstood the maniest truth of Gods word. Sl^id. lib. 23.
Crescentius the Popes Legate and vicegerent in the Council of Trent was
^itting all the day long until dark night in writing of letters to the Pope:
after his labor when night was come, thinking to refresh himself, he began to
rise, and at his rising, behold there appeared to him a mighty black dog of
an huge bigness, his eyes flaming with fire, and his ears hanging low down
well near to the ground, which began to enter in and straight to come toward
him, and so to couch under the board. The Cardinal not a little amassed at the
sight thereof, somewhat recovering himself called to his servants which were
in the outward chamber next by, to bring in a candle and to seek for the dog.
But when the dog could not be found there, nor in any other chamber about,
the Cardinal thereupon stricken with a sudden conceit of mind immediately
fell into such a sickness whereof his Physicians which he had about him could
not with all their industry and cunning cure him: and thereupon he died.
Steven Gardener, when a certain bishop came unto him and put him in mind of
Peter denying his master, answered again that he had denied with Peter, but
never repented with Peter, and so (to use M. Foxes words) stinkingly and
vnrepentantly died. More examples might be added but these shall suffice.

Again, that we may be further induced to the practice of these duties, let
us call to mind the uncertainty of our days: though we now live, yet who can
say that he shall be alive the next daie^ or the next hour. No man has a
lease of his life. Now mark, as death leaves a man, so shall the last
judgment find him: and therefore if death take him away unprepared, eternal
damnation follows without recovery. If a theife be brought from prison
either to the bar to be arraigned before the judge, or to the place of
exequ^tion, he will bewail his misdeameanour past, and promise all reformation
of life; so be it, he might be delivered, though he be the most arrant thief
that ever was. In this case we are as fellons or thieves: for we are every day
going to the bar of Gods judgment, there is no stay nor standing in the way,
even as the ship in the sea continues on his course day and night whether the
mariners be sleeping or waking: therefore let us all prepare our selves and
amend our lives betime, that in death we may make a blessed end. Ministers of
the Gospel do daily call for the performance of this duty: but where almost
shall we find the practice and obedience of it in men's lives and
conuersations? Alas, alas, to lend our ears for the space of an hour to hear
the will of God is common: but to give heart and hand to do the same, is rare.
And the reason hereof is at hand: we are all most grievous sinners, and every
sinner in the terms of Scripture is a fool: and a principal part of this
folly is to care for the things of this world, and to neglect the kingdom of
heaven, to provide for the body and not for the soul, Luke 12.
to cast and forecast how we may live in wealth and honor and ease, and not to
use the last forecast to die well. This folly our Savior Christ noted in the
rich man that was careful to enlarge his barnes, but had no care at all for
his end or for the salvation of his soul. Such an one was Achitophel, who (as
the Scripture terms him) was as the very oracle of God for counsel, being a
man of great wisdom and forecast in the matters of the commonwealth, and in
his own private worldly affairs: and yet for all this he had not so much as
common sense and reason, to consider how he might die the death of the
righteous, and come to life everlasting. And this folly the holy Ghost has
noted in him. For the text says, when he saw that his counsel was despised, ^
^am. 17. 23.
he sadled his ass, and arose and went home into his city, and put his
household in order, and went and hanged himself. And the five foolish virgins
contented themselves with the blasing lamps of a bare profession, never seeking
for the horn of lasting oil of true and lively faith, that might furnish and
trim that lamp both in life and death. But let us in the fear of God, cast
off this damnable folly, first of all seeking the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and leading our lives in faith and obedience, that we may die
accordingly.

And thus much of the first point of doctrine, namely that there is a certain
way whereby a man may die well: now I come to the second. Whereas therefore
Solomon says that the day of death is better then the day of birth, we are
further taught that such as truly believe themselves to be the children of God,
are not to fear death overmuch. I say overmuch; because they must partly fear
it, and partly not. Fear it they must for two causes: the first, because death
is the destruction of humane nature in a man's own self and others: and in
this respect Christ feared it without sin: and we must not fear it otherwise
then we fear sickness and poverty, and famine, with other sorrows of body
and mind, which god will not have us to despise or lightly regard, but to feel
with some pain, because they are corrections and punishments for sin. And he
does therefore lay upon us pains and torments, that they may be feared and
eschewed: and that by eschewing them we might further learn to eschew the
cause of them, which is sin; and by experience in feeling of pain,
acknowledge that God is a judge and enemy of sin, and is exceeding angry
with it. The second cause of the fear of death, is the loss of the Church or
Commonwealth, when we or others are deprived of them which were indeed or
might have bin an help, stay, and comfort to either of them, and whose death
has procured some public or private loss.

Again, we are not to fear death, but to be glad of it, and that for many
causes. First of all, in it we have occasion to show our subjection and
obedience which we owe unto God, when he calls us out of this world, as Christ
said, Father, not my will but thy will be done. Secondly, all sin is
abolished by death, and we then cease to offend God any more as we have done.
Thirdly, the dead body is brought into a better condition then ever it was in
this life, for by death it is made insensible, and by that means it is freed
from all the miseries and calamities of this life; and it cease to be either
an active or passive instrument of sin, whereas in the life time it is both.
Fourthly, it gives the soul passage to rest, life, and celestial glory, in
which we shall see God as he is, perfectly know him, and praise his name for
ever, keeping without intermission an eternal sabbath, therefore Paul says, I
desire to be dissolved and be with Christ, for that is best of all. Fifthly,
God exequutes his judgments upon the wicked, and purges his Church by death.
Now in all these respects godly men have cause not to fear and sorrow, but to
rejoice in their own death, and the death of others.

Thirdly, if the day of death be so excellent, yea a day of happiness, then it
is lawful to desire death, and men do not always sin in wishing for death.
Paul says, I desire to be dissolved: and again, O miserable man, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? Yet this desire must not be simple, but
restrained with certain respects; which are these. First death must be desired
so far forth as it is a means to free us from the corruption of our nature;
secondly as it is a means to bring us to the immediate fellowship of Christ
and God himself in heaven: thirdly death may be lawfully desired in respect of
the troubles and miseries of this life, two caueats being observed; the first,
that this desire must not be immoderate: the second, it must be joined with
submission and subjection to the good pleasure of God. If either of these be
wanting, the desire is faulty; and therefore Job, and Jeremy, and Jonas
failed herein, because they desired death being carried away with impatience.

On the contrary also a man may desire a continuance of life. Ezechias prayed
and desired to live, Isa. 38. 18. Ph^l. 1. 24, 25.
when he heard the message of present death, that he might do service to God.
And Paul desired to live in regard of the Philippians, that he might further
their faith^ though in regard of himself to die was advantage to him.

Lastly, if death joined with reformation of life be so blessed, then the death
of the unbelieving and unrepentant sinner is every way cursed and most
horrible. Reasons are these. First, it is the destruction of nature, and the
wages of sin. Secondly, in it there is no comfort of the spirit to be found,
no mitigation of pain, and no good thing that may counter^aile the miseries
thereof. Thirdly, that which is the most fe^reful thing of all, bodily death is
the beginning os eternal death, desperation, and infernal torment, without
hope of deliverance. Therefore as I began so I end, have care to live well, and
die well.

FINIS.
An addition, of things that come to my mind afterward.


M. John Knox in the time of his death is worth the marking. Lib. de obita
Knoxi.
He lay on his death-bedde silent for the space of four hours, very often
giving great sighs, sobbes, and groans, so as the standers by well perceived
that he was troubled with some grievous temptation: and when at length he was
raised in his bed, they asked him how he did, to whom he answered thus: that
in his life time he had endured many combats and conflicts with Satan, but
that now most mightily the roaring lion had assaulted him often (said he)
before he set my sins before mine eyes; often he urged me to desperation,
often he labored to entangle me with the delights of the world, but being
vanquished by the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, he could not
prevail. But now he assaults me another way: for the wily serpent would
persuade me that I shall merit eternal life for my fidelity in my ministry.
But blessed be God which brought to my mind such Scriptures whereby I might
quench the fiery darts of the devil, which were, What have thou that thou
have not received: and, By the grace of God, I am that I am: and, not I but the
grace of God in me: and thus being vanquished he departed.



Lord Jesus into thy hands I commend my spirit, and then certainly Christ will
come unto thee with all his Angels and be the guider of thy way. Luther.

A DECLARATION OF THE TRVE MANNER OF KNOVVING Christ crucified.

Galat. 6.14. God forbid that I should rejoice but in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINTER to the University of
Cambridge. 1600.

To the Reader.
IT is the common sin of men at this day, and that in the very places of
learning, that Christ crucified is not known as he ought. The right knowledge
of whom, is not to make often mention of his death and passion, and to call
him our Savior, or to handle the whole mystery of God incarnate soundly and
learnedly, though that be a worthy gift of God: but first of all, by the
consideration of the passion to be touched with an inward and a lively feeling
of our sins, for which our Redeemer suffered the pangs of hell, and to grow
to a through dislike of our selves and our lives past for them, and from the
ground of the heart to purpose a reformation and a conformity with Christ in
all good duties that concern man: secondly in the Passion, as in a myrrour, to
behold and in beholding to labor to comprehend the length, the breadth, the
height, the depth of the love of the Father that gave his own dear Son to
death, and the goodness of the Son that loved his enemies more then himself,
that our hearts might be rooted and grounded in the same love, and be further
inflamed to love God again.

To further this true manner of knowing Christ crucified, I have penned these
few lines, read them at thy leisure, and have care to put them in practice:
otherwise, thou art but an enemy of the cross of Christ, though thou profess
his name never so much.

Ian. 3. 1596. W. Perkins.

Of the right knowledge of Christ crucified.
IT is the most excellent and worthy part of divine wisdom to know Christ
crucified. The Prophet Esai says, The knowledge of thy righteous servant, Esa.
53. 1^^
that is, Christ crucified, shall justify many. And Christ himself says,
This is life eternal to know thee the only God, Ioh. 17.2.
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 2.2.
And Paul says, I have decreeed to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ and
him crucified. Again, Gal. 6.14.
God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing but in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Again, Phil. 3.5.
I think all things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus
my Lord, and do judge them but dung that I might win Christ.

In the right way of knowing Christ crucified, two points must be considered:
one, how Man for his part is to know Christ; the other, how he is to be known
of man.

Touching the first: Man must know Christ not generally and confusedly, but by
a lively, powerful, and operative knowledge: for otherwise the devils
themselves know Christ.

In this knowledge three things are required. The first is notice or
consideration, whereby thou must conceive in mind, understand, and seriously
bethink thy self of Christ as he is revealed in the history of the Gospel,
and as he is offered to thy particular person in the ministry of the word and
Sacraments. And that this consideration may not be dead and idle in thee, two
things must be done: first thou must labor to feel thy self to stand in
need of Christ crucified, yea to stand in excessive need even of the very
least drop of his blood, for the washing away of thy sins. And unless tho^
thoroughly feel thy self to want all that goodness and grace that is in
Christ, and that thou even stand in extreme need of his passion, thou
shall never learn or teach Christ in deed and truth. The second thing is,
with the understanding of the doctrine of Christ to join thirsting, whereby
man in his very soul and spirit longs after the participation of Christ, and
says in this case as Sampson said, Judge. 15.19.
Give me water, I die for thirst.

The second part of knowledge is application, whereby thou must know and
believe not only that Christ was crucified, but that he was crucified for
thee, for thee, I say, in particular. Here two rules must be remembered and
practiced. One, that Christ on the cross was thy pledge and surety in
particular, that he then stood in thy very room and place in which thou thy
self in thine own person should have stood: that thy very personal and
particular sins were imputed and applied to him; that he stood guilty as a
malefactor for them, and suffered the very pangs of hell, and that his
sufferings are as much in acceptance with God, as if thou had borne the
curse of the law in thine own person eternally. The holding and believing of
this point is the very foundation of religion as also of the Church of God.
Therefore in any wise be careful to apply Christ crucified to thy self: and
as Elizeus when he would revive the child of the Shunamite, 2. King. 4. 34.
went up and lay upon him, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his hands upon
his hands, and his eyes upon his eyes, and stretched himself upon him: even
so, if thou would be revived to everlasting life, thou must by faith as it
were set thy self upon the cross of Christ, and apply thy hands to his
hands, thy feet to his feet, and thy sinful heart to his bleeding heart,
and content not thy self with Thomas to put thy finger into his side, but even
diue and plunge thy self wholly both body and soul into the wounds and
blood of Christ. This will make thee to cry with Thomas, and say, My Lord, my
God; and this is to be crucified with Christ. And yet do not content thy self
with this, but by faith also descend with Christ from the cross to the grave,
and bury thy self in the very burial of Christ: and then look as the dead
soldier tumbled into the grave of Elizeus was made alive at the very touching
of his body; 2. King. 13. 21.
so shall thou by a spiritual touching of Christ dead and buried; be quickened
to life everlasting. The second rule is, that Christ crucified is thine, being
really given thee of God the father, even as truly as houses and land are given
of earthly fathers to their children: this thou must firmly hold and believe;
and hence is it that the benefits of Christ are before God ours indeed for our
justification and salvation.

The third point in lively knowledge is, that by all the affections of our
hearts we must be carried to Christ, and as it were transformed into him.
Whereas he gave himself wholly for us, we can do no less then bestow our
hearts upon him. We must therefore labor above all, following the Martyr
Ignatius, who said that Christ his love was crucified. We must value him at so
high a price, that he must be unto us better then ten thousand worlds: yea all
things which we enjoy must be but as dross and dung unto us in respect of him.
Lastly, all our joy, rejoicing, comfort, and confidence must be placed in him.
And that thus much is requisite in knowledge, it appears by the common rule of
expounding Scripture, that words of knowledge implie affection. And indeed it
is but a knowledge swimming in the brain, which does not alter and dispose the
affections and the whole man.

Thus much of our knowledge. Now follows the second point, how Christ is to be
known. He must not be known barely as God, or as man, or as a Jew borne in
the tribe of Judah, or as a terrible and just judge, but as he is our Redeemer
and the very price of our redemption: and in this respect he must be considered
as the common Treasury and storehouse of Gods Church, as Paul testifies when
he says, Coloss. 13.
In him are all the treasures of knowledge and wisdom hid: and again, Ephesians.
1.4.
Blessed be God, which has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ.
And S. John says, that of his fullness we receive grace for grace. Here then
let us mark that all the blessings of God, whether spiritual or temporal,
all I say without exception are conuaied unto us from the Father by Christ: and
so they must be received of us and no otherwise. That this point may be further
cleared, the benefits which we receive from Christ are to be handled, and the
manner of knowing of them. The benefits of Christ are three, his Merit, his
Virtue, his Example.

The merit of Christ, is the value and price of his death and Passion, whereby
any man is perfectly reconciled to god. This reco^ciliation has two parts,
Remission of sins, and acceptance to life everlasting. Remission of sins,
is the remoouing, or the abolishing both of the guilt and punishment of man's
sins. By guilt I understand a subjection or obligation to punishment,
according to the order of divine justice. And the punishment of sin is the
malediction or curse of the whole law, which is the suffering of the first and
second death. Acceptance to life everlasting, is a giving of right and title
to the kingdom of heaven, and that for the merit of Christ's obedience imputed.
Now this benefit of reconciliation must be known not by conceit and
imagination, nor by carnal presumption; but by the inward testimony of Gods
spirit certifying our consciences thereof, Ephesians. 1.7.
which for this cause is called the spirit of Revelation. And that we may
attain to infallible assurance of this benefit, we must call to mind the
promises of the gospel touching remission of sins and life everlasting: this
being done, we must further strive and endeavor by the assurance of Gods
spirit to apply them to our selves, and to believe that they belong unto us;
and we must also put our selves often to all the exercises of invocation and
true repentance. For in and by our crying unto heaven to God for
reco^ciliation, comes the assurance thereof, as Scriptures and Christian
experience makes manifest. And if it so fall out, that any man in temptation
apprehend and feel nothing but the furious indignation and wrath of God,
against all reason and feeling he must hold to the merit of Christ, and know a
point of religion hard to be learned, that God is a most loving father to the^
that have care to serve him even at that instant when he shows himself a most
fierce and terrible enemy.

From the benefit of reconciliation proceed four benefits. First, that
excellent peace of God that passes all understanding, which has six parts.
The first is, peace with God and the blessed Trinity. Romans 5.1. Being
justified we have peace with God. The second, peace with the good angels, Ioh.
1. 51. Ye shall see the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the son
of man. And that Angels like armies of soldiers in camp about the servants of
God, and as nources bear them in their arms that they be neither hurt by the
devil and his angels, nor by his instruments, it proceeds of this that they
being in Christ are partakers of his merits. The third is, peace with all such
as fear God and believe in Christ. This Esai foretold when he said, that the
woolfe shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard with the kidde, and the
calfe and the lion and a fat beast together, and that a little child should
lead them, etc. 11. v. 6. The fourth is, peace with a man's own self, when the
conscience washed in the blood of Christ, cease to accuse, and terrify: and
when the will, affections, and inclinations of the whole man are obedient to
the mind enlightened by the spirit and word of God, Coloss. 3. Let the peace of
God rule in your hearts. The fifth is, peace with enemies and that two ways.
First, in that such as believe in Christ, seek to have peace with all men,
hurting none but doing good to all: secondly, in that God restraines the malice
of the enemies, and inclines their hearts to be peaceable. cap. 1.9.
Thus God brought Daniel into love and favor with the chief of the Eunuchs.
The last is, peace with all creatures in heaven and earth, in that they serve
for man's salvation. Psalm. 91.13. Thou shall walk upon the lion and the Aspe:
the young lion and the dragon shall thou tread under foot. Hos. 2.18. And in
that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with
the fowls of heaven. Now this benefit of peace is known partly by the
testimony of the spirit, and partly by a daily experience thereof.

The second benefit is a recovery of that right and title, which man has to
all creatures in heaven and earth, and all temporal blessings; which right
Adam lost to himself and every one of his posterity. 1. Cor. 3.22. Whether it
be the world, or life, or death: whether they be things present, or things to
come, all are yours. Now the right way of knowing this one benefit is this.
When God vouchsafes meat, drink, apparel, houses, lands, etc. we must not
barely consider them as blessings of God, for that very heathen men, which
know not Christ can do: but we must acknowledge and esteem them as blessings
proceeding from the special love of god the father, whereby he loves us in
Christ: and procured unto us by the merit of Christ crucified: and we must
labor in this point to be settled and persuaded: and so often as we see and use
the creatures of God for our own benefit, this point should come to our
minds. Blessings conceived apart from Christ are misconceiued: whatsoever they
are in themselves they are no blessings to us but in and by Christ's merit.
Therefore this order must be observed touching earthly blessings: first we must
have part in the merit of Christ, and then secondly by means of that merit, a
right before God and comfortable use of the things we enjoy. All men that have
and use the creatures of God otherwise, as gifts of God but not by Christ, use
the^ but as flat usurpers and thieves. For this cause it is not sufficient for
us generally and confusedly to know Christ to be our redeemer, but we must
learn to see, know, and acknowledge him in every particular gift and blessing
of God. If men using the creatures of meat and drink; could, when they behold
them, withal by the eye of faith behold in them the merit of Christ's passion,
there would not be so much excess and riot, so much ^urfetting and drunkenness,
as there is: and if men could consider their houses and lands, etc. as
blessings to them and that by the fountain of blessing the merits of Christ,
there should not be so much fraud and deceit, so much injustice and oppression
in bargaining as there is.

That which I have now said of meats, drinks, apparel, must likewise be
understood of gentry and nobility, in as much as noble-birth without new
birth in Christ is but an earthly vanity: the like may be said of physic,
sleep, health, Consider Coloss. 3. 11. and 2.10.
liberty, yea of the very breathing in the air. And to go yet further: in our
Recreations Christ must be known. For all recreation stands in the use of
things indifferent: and the holy use of all things indifferent, is purchased
unto us by the blood of Christ. For this cause it is very meet that Christian
men and women should with their earthly recreations join spiritual meditation
of the death of Christ; and from the one take occasion to bethink themselves
of the other. If this were practiced, there should not be so many unlawful
sports and delights, and so much abuse of lawful recreation as there is.

The third benefit is, that al crosses, afflictions, and judgments whatsoever,
cease to be curses and punishments to them that are in Christ, and are only
means of correction or trial, because his death has taken away not some few
parts, but, all and every part of the curse of the whole law. Now in all
crosses, Christ is to be known of us on this manner. We must judge of our
afflictions as chastisements or trials, proceeding not from a revenging judge,
but from the hand of a bountiful and loving father; and therefore they must be
conceived in and with the merit of Christ; and if we do otherwise regard them,
we take them as curses and punishments of sin. And hence it follows that
subjection to Gods hand in all crosses, is a mark and badge of the true Church.

The last benefit is, that death is properly no death, but a rest or sleep.
Death therefore must be known and considered not as it is set forth in the
law but as it is altered and changed by the death of Christ: and when death
comes, we must then look upon it through Christ's death, as through a glass:
and thus it will appear to be but a passage from this life to everlasting life.

Thus much of the merit of Christ crucified. Now follows his virtue which is
the power of his godhead, whereby he creates new hearts in all them that
believe in him, and makes them new creatures. This virtue is double: the first
is the power of his death, whereby he freed himself from the punishment and
imputation of our sins: and the same virtue serves to mortify and crucify
the corruptions of our minds, wills, affections, even as a corasiue does wast
and consume the rotten and dead flesh in any part of man's body.

The second, is the virtue of Christ's resurrection, which is also the power of
his Godhead, whereby he raised himself from death to life: and the very same
power serves to raise those that belong to Christ, from their sins in this
life, and from the grave in the day of the last judgment. Now the knowledge
of this double virtue must not be only speculatiue, that is, barely conceived
in the brain, but it must be experimental: because we ought to have
experience of it in our hearts and lives, and we should labor by all means
possible to feel the power of Christ's death killing and mortifying our sins,
and the virtue of his resurrection in the putting of spiritual life into us,
that we might be able to say that we live not but that Christ lives in us. This
was one of the most excellent and principal things which Paul sought for, who
says, I have counted all things loss and do judge them to be dung, that I may
know him and the virtue of his resurrection. Phil. 3.10. And he says that
this is the right way to know and learn Christ, to cast off the old man
which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts, and to put on the new man which
is created in righteousness and true holiness. Ephesians. 4.24.

The third benefit is the example of Christ. We deceive our selves, if we
think that he is only to be known of us as a Redeemer, and not as a
spectacle or pattern of al good duties, to which we ought to conform our
selves. Good men indeed, that have been or in present are upon the earth the
servants of God, must be followed of us: but they must be followed no otherwise
then they follow Christ, and Christ must be followed in the practice of every
good duty that may concern us without exception simply and absolutely, 1.
Cor. 11.1.

Our conformity with Christ stands either in the framing of our inward and
spiritual life, or in the practice of outward and moral duties.

Conformity of spiritual life is, not by doing that which Christ did upon the
cross and afterward, but a doing of the like by a certain kind of imitation.
And it has four parts. The first is, a spiritual oblation. For as Christ in
the garden and upon the cross, by prayer made with strong cries and tears,
presented and resigned himself up to be a sacrifice of propitiation to the
justice of his father for man's sin: so must we also in prayer present and
resign our selves, our souls, our bodies, our understanding, will, memory,
affections, and all we have to the service of God, in the general calling of a
Christian, and in the particular callings in which he has placed us. Take an
example in David, Sacrifice and burnt offering (says he) thou would not,
but ears thou have pierced unto men, then said, lo I come: I desire to do
thy will, O God, yea thy law is within my heart, Psalm. 40. 7. The second is,
conformity in the cross two ways. For first, as he bare his own cross to
the place of exequution: so must we as good disciples of Christ deny our
selves, take up all the crosses and afflictions that the hand of God shall lay
upon us. Again, we must become like unto him in the crucifying and mortifying
the mass and body of sin which we carry about us, Gal. 5.24. They which
are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof. We
must do as the Jews did, we must set up the crosses and gybbets whereon we
are to fasten and hang this flesh of ours, that is, the sin and corruption
that cleaues and sticks unto us, and by the sword of the spirit wound it even
to death. This being done, we must yet go further, and labor by experience
to see and feel the very death of it, and to lay it as it were in a grave
never to rise again: and therefore we should daiely cast new moulds upon it.
The third is, a spiritual resurrection, whereby we should by Gods grace use
means that we may every day more and more come out of our sins, as out of a
loathfome grave; to live unto God in newenes of life, as Christ rose from his
grave. And because it is an hard matter for a man to come out of the grave or
rather dungeon of his sins, this work can not be done at once but by
degrees, as God shall give grace. Considering we lie by nature dead in our
sins, and stink in them as loathsome carrion, first we must begin to stir
our selves as a man that comes out of a swowne, awakened by the word and voice
of Christ founding in our deaf ears; secondly, we must raise up our minds to
a better state and condition, as we use to raise up our bodies: after this we
must put out of the grave first one hand, then the other. This done, we must
do our endeavor as it were upon our knees, at the least to put one foot out
of this sepulcher of sin, the rather when we see our selves to have one
foot of the body in the grave of the earth, that in the day of judgment we
may be wholly delivered from all bonds of corruption. The fourth part is, a
spiritual ascension into heaven, by a continual elevation of the heart and
mind to Christ sitting at the right hand of the father, as Paul says, Have
your conversation in heaven: and, If ye be risenwith Christ, seek things that
are above.

Conformity in moral duties, is either general or special. General, is to
be holy as he is holy, Romans 8.29. Those whom he knew before he has
predestinate to be like the image of his son, that is, not only in the cross
but also in holiness and glory. 1. Ioh. 3. He which has this hope purifieth
himself even as he is pure.

Special conformity, is chiefly in four virtues; Faith, Love, Meekenes,
Humility.

We must be like him in faith. For as he, when he apprehended the wrath of God,
and the very pangs of hell were upon him, wholly stayed himself upon the aid,
help, protection, and good pleasure of his father, even to the last: so must
we by a true and lively faith depend wholly on Gods mercy in Christ, as it
were with both our hands, in peace, in trouble, in life, and in the very pang
of death: and we must not in any wise let our hold go; no though we should
feel our selves descend to hell.

We must be like him in meekness, Matthew. 11. v. 28. Learn of me that I am
meek and lowly. His meekness showed it self in the patient bearing of all
injuries and abuses offered by the hands of sinful and wretched men, and in
the suffering of the curse of the law, without grudging or repining, and with
submission to his fathers will in all things. Now the more we follow him
herein, the more shall we be conformable to him in his death and passion.
Philip. 3. 10.

Thirdly, he must be our example in Love: he loved his enemies more then
himself, Ephesians. 5.4. Walk in love even as Christ loved us, and has given
himself for us an oblation and sacrifice of sweet smelling savor unto God.
The like love ought we to show, by doing service to all men in the compass of
our callings, and by being all things to all men (as Paul was) that we might
do them all the good we can both for body and soul. 1. Cor. 9.19.

Lastly, we must follow Christ in humility, whereof he is a wonderful
spectacle, in that being God, he became man for us: and of a man became a
worm that is trodden under foot, that he might save man, Phil. 2.5. Let the
same mind be in you that was in Jesus Christ, who being in the form of God,
humbled himself and became obedient to the death, even to the death of the
cross.

And here we must observe, that the example of Christ has something more in it
then any other example has or can have: for it does not only show us what we
ought to do (as the examples of other men do) but it is a remedy against
many vices, and a motive to many good duties. First of all the serious
consideration of this, that the very son of God himself suffered all the
pains and torments of hell on the cross for our sins, is the proper and
most effectual means to stir up our hearts to a godly sorrow for them. And
that this thing may come to pass, every man must be settled without doubt, that
he was the man that crucified Christ; that he is to be blamed as well as Judas,
Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the Jews: and that his sins should be the nails,
the spears, and the thorns that pierced him. When this meditation begins to
take place, bitterness of spirit with wayling and mourning takes place in like
manner. Zach. 12. 10. And they shall look upon him whom they have pierced,
and they shall lamem for him as one lamenteth for his only son. Peter in his
first sermon struck the Jews as with a thunder clappe from heaven, when he
said unto them, Ye have crucified the Lord of glory, so as the same time three
thousand men were pricked in their hearts, and said, Men and brethren, what
shall we do to be saved. Again, if Christ for our sins shed his heart
blood: and if our sins mad^ him sweat water and blood, oh then why should not
we our selves shed bitter tears, and why would not our hearts bleed for
the^. He that finds himself so dull and hardened that the passion of Christ
does not humble him, is in a lamentable case, for there is no faith in the
death of Christ, effectual in him as yet.

Secondly, the meditation of the passion of Christ is a most notable means to
breed repentance and reformation of life in time to come. For when we begin
to think that Christ crucified, by suffering the first and second death, has
procured unto us remission of all our sins past, and freed us from hell^
death, and damnation: then, if there be but a spark of grace in us, we begin
to be of another mind, and to reason thus with our selves: What? has the Lord
bin thus merciful unto me, that am in my self but a firebrand of hell, as to
free me from deserved destruction and to receive me to favor in Christ? yea,
no doubt he has, his name be blessed therefore: I will not therefore sin any
more as I have done, but rather endeavor hereafter to keep my self from every
evil way. And thus faith purifies both heart and life.

Thirdly, when thou art in any pain of body or sickness, think how light
these are compared to the agony and bloody sweat, to the crown of thorns and
nails of Christ. When thou art wronged in word or deed by any man, turn
thine eye to the cross, consider how meekely he suffered all abuses for the
most part in silence, and prayed for them that crucified him. When thou art
tempted with pride or vainglory, consider how for thy proper sins Christ was
despised and mocked and condemned among thieves. When anger and desire of
revenge inflame thine heart, think how Christ gave himself to death to save his
enemies, even then when they did most cruelly entreat him, and shed his blood:
and by these meditations, specially if they be mingled with faith, thy mind
shall be eased.

Thus we see how Christ crucified is to be known: and hence arises a threefold
knowledge: one of God, the second of our neighbors, the third of our selves.

Touching the first: if we would know the true God aright, and know him to our
sahiation, we must know him only in Christ crucified. God in himself and his
own majesty is invisible, not only to the eyes of the body, but also to the
vere minds of men, and he is revealed to us only in Christ; in whom he is to be
seen as in a glass. For in Christ he sets forth and gives his justice,
goodness, wisdom, and himself wholly unto us. For this cause he is called the
brightness of the glory, and the engraven form of the person of the father.
Heb. 1. 3. and the image of the invisible God. Coloss. 1.15. Therefore we must
not know god and seek him any where else but in Christ: and whatsoever out of
Christ comes unto us in the name of God, is a flat idol of man's brain.

As for our neighbors, those especially that are of Christ's Church, they are
to be known of us on this manner: When we are to do^ any duty unto them, we
must not barely respect their persons, but Christ crucified in them, and them
in Christ. When Paul persecuted such as called on the name of Christ, he the^
from heaven cried, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Here then let this be
marked, that when the poor comes to us for relief, it is Christ that comes to
our doors, and says, I am hungry, I am thirsty, I am naked: and let the
bowels of compassion be in us toward them as toward Christ, unless we will
hear that fearful sentence in the day of judgment, Go ye cursed into hell,
etc. I was hungry, and ye fed me not: I was naked, and ye did not cloth me,
etc.

Thirdly, the right knowledge of our selves arises of the knowledge of Christ
crucified, in whom and by whom we come to know five special things of our
selves. The first, how grievous our sins are, and therefore how miserable we
are in regard of them. If we consider our offenses in themselves, and as they
are in us, we may soon be deceived, because the conscience being corrupted
often erreth in giving testimony, and by that means makes sin to appear
less then it is indeed. But if sin be considered in the death and passion
of Christ, whereof it was the cause, and the vileness thereof measured by the
unspeakable torments endured by the son of God: and if the greatness of the
offense of man be esteemed by the endless satisfaction made to the justice of
God, the least sin that is will appear to be a sin indeed, and that most
grievous and ougly. Therefore Christ crucified must be used of us as a myrrour
or looking glass, in which we may fully take a view of our wretchedness and
misery, and what we are by nature. For such as the passion of Christ was in
the eyes of men, such is our passion or condition in the eyes of God: and that
which wicked men did to Christ, the same does sin and Satan to our very
souls.

The second point is, that men believing in Christ are not their own, or lords
of themselves, but wholly both body and soul belong to Christ, in that they
were given to him of God the father, and he has purchased them with his own
blood, 1. Cor. 3. Ye are Christ's, and Christ's Gods. Hence it comes to pass
(which is not to be forgotten) that Christ esteems all the crosses and
afflictions of his people, as his own proper afflictions. Hence again we must
learn to give up our selves both in body and soul to the honor and service
of Christ, whose we are.

The third is, that every true believer, not as he is a man, but as he is a
new man or a Christian, has his being and subsisting from Christ, We are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bone, Ephesians. 5.30. In which words,
Paul alludes to the speech of Adam, Genesis 3. Thou art bone of my bone, and flesh
of my flesh, and thereby he teaches, that as Eve was made of a ribbe taken out
of the side of Adam, so does the whole church of God, and every man
regenerate, spring and arise out of the blood that streamed from the heart and
side of Christ crucified.

The fourth is, that all good works done of us, proceed from the virtue and
merit of Christ crucified: he is the cause of them in us, and we are the causes
of them in and by him. Without me (says he) ye can do nothing: and, Every
branch that bears no fruit in me, mark well he says, in me, he takes
away, Ioh. 15.2.

The fifth point is, that we owe unto Christ an endless debt. For he was
crucified only as our surety and pledge, and in the spectacle of his passion
we must consider our selves as the chief debtors, and that the very discharge
of our debt, that is, the sins which are inherent in us, were the proper
cause of all the endless pains and torments that Christ endured, that he might
set us most miserable bankrupts at liberty from hell, death, and damnation.
For this his unspeakable goodness, if we do but once think of it seriously, we
must needs confess that we owe our selves, our souls, and bodies, and all
that we have as a debt due unto him. And so soon as any man begins to know
Christ crucified, he knows his own debt, and thinks of the payment of it.

Thus we see how Christ is to be known: now we shall not need to make much
examination whether this manner of knowing and acknowledging of Christ, take
any place in the world or no: for few there be that know him as they ought.
The Turk even at this very day knows him not but as he was a prophet. The
Jew scorneth his cross and passion. The Popish Churches, though in word they
confess him, yet do they not know him as they ought. The Friars and Jesuits
in their sermons at this day, commonly use the Passion as a means to stir
up piety and compassion toward Christ, who being so righteous a man was so
hardly entreated, and to inflame their hearts to an hatred of the Jews, and
Judas, and Pontius Pilate that put our blessed Savior to death; but all this
may be done in any other history. And the service of God which in that Church
stands now in force by the Canons of the Council of Trent, defaceth Christ
crucified, in that the passions of martyrs are made meritorious, and the very
wood of the cross their only help: and the virgin Marie the Queen of heaven,
and a mother of mercy; who in remission of ^innes may command her son: and
they give religious adoration to dumme crucifixes made by the hand and art of
man.

The common protestant likewise comes short herein for three causes. First
whereas in word they acknowledge him to be their Savior, that has redeemed
them from their evil conversation, yet indeed they make him a patron of
their sins. The thief makes him the receiver, the murderer makes him his
refuge, Calvin on Gal. 6.2.
the adulterer (be it spoken with reverence unto his majesty) makes him the
baud. For generally men walk on in their evil ways, some living in this
sin, some in that, and yet for all this they persuade themselves that God is
merciful, and that Christ has freed them from death and damnation. Thus
Christ that came to abolish sin, is made a maintainer thereof, and the common
pack-horse of the world to bear every man's burden. Secondly, men are content
to take knowledge of the merit of Christ's passion for the remission of their
sins, but in the mean season the virtue of Christ's death in the mortifying
of sin, and the blessed example of his passion, which ought to be followed and
expressed in our lives and conuersations, is little or nothing regarded.
Thirdly, men usually content themselves generally and confusedly to know Christ
to be their redeemer, never once seeking in every particular estate and
condition of life, and in every particular blessing of God, to feel the
benefit of his passion. What is the cause that almost all the world live in
security, never almost touched for their horrible sins? surely the reason
is, because they did never yet seriously consider that Christ in the garden lay
groueling upon the earth, sweating water and blood for their offenses. Again,
all such a by fraud and oppression, or any kind of hard dealing suck the blood
of poor men, never yet knew that their sins drew out the heart blood of
Christ. And proud men and women that are puffed up by reason of their attire,
which is the badge of their shame, and never cease hunting after strange
fashions, do not consider that Christ was not crucified in gay attire, but
naked, that he might bear the whole shame and curse of the law for us. These
and such like whatsoever they say in word, if we respect the tenor of their
lives, are flat enemies of the cross of Christ, and tread his precious blood
under their feet.

Now then, considering this so weighty and special a point of religion is so
much neglected, O man or woman, high or low, young or old, if thou have been
wanting this way, begin for very shame to learn and learning truly to know
Christ crucified. And that thou may attain to this, behold him often, not
in the wooden crucifix after the Popish manner, but in the preaching of the
word, and in the Sacraments, in which thou shall see him crucified before thine
eyes, Gal. 3.1. Desire not here upon earth to behold him with the bodily eye,
but look upon him with the eye of true and lively faith, applying him and his
merits to thy self as thine own, and that with broken and bruised heart, as
the poor Israelites stung with fiery serpents even to death, beheld the
brazen serpent. Again, thou must look upon him first of all as a glass or
spectacle, in which thou shall see Gods glory greater in thy redemption, then
in thy creation. In the creation appeared Gods infinite wisdom, power, and
goodness: in thy redemption by the passion of Christ, his endless justice and
mercy. In the creation thou art a member of the first Adam, and bear his
image: in thy redemption thou art a member of the second Adam. In the first
thou art endued with natural life, in the second with spiritual. In the
first, thou have in the person of Eve thy beginning of the rib of Adam: in the
second thou have thy beginning as thou art borne of God out of the blood of
Christ. Lastly, in the first, god gave life in commanding that to be, which was
not: in the second, he gives life not by life, but by death, even of his own
form. This is the mystery unto which the angels themselves desire to look
into. 1. Pet. 1.12. Secondly, thou must behold him as the full price of thy
redemption, and perfect reconciliation with God; and pray earnestly to God,
that he would seal up the same in thy very conscience by his holy spirit.
Thirdly, thon must behold Christ as an example, to whom thou must conform thy
self by regeneration. For this cause give diligence, that thou may by
experience say, that thou art dead, and crucified, and buried with Christ, and
that thou risest again with him to newness of life: that he enlightens thy
mind, and by degrees reforms thy will and affections, and give thee both the
will and the deed in every good thing. And that thou may not fail in this thy
knowledge, read the history of Christ's passion, observe all the parts and
circumstances thereof, and apply them to thy self for thy full conversion.
When thou read that Christ went to the garden; as his custom was, where the
Jews might soonest attach him; consider that he went to the death of the
cross for thy sins willingly, and not of constraint; and that therefore thou
for thy part should do him all service freely and frankely, Psalm. 110. 3.
When thou hear that in his agony his foul was heavy unto death, know it
was for thy sins, and that thou should much more conceive heaviness of
heart for the same: again, that this sorrow of his is joy and rejoicing unto
thee, if thou will believe in him; therefore Paul says, I say again rejoice
in the Lord. When thou read that in the garden he prayed lying groueling on
his face sweating water and blood, begin to think seriously what an
unspeakable measure of Gods wrath was upon thy blessed Savior, that did
prostrate his body upon the earth, and cause the blood to follow: and think
that thy sins must needs be most heinous, that brought such bloody and
grievous pains upon him. Also think it a very shame for thee to carry thy
head to heaven with haughty looks, to wallow in thy pleasures, and to draw
the innocent blood of thy poor brethren by oppression and deceit, for whom
Christ sweat water and blood, and take an occasion from Christ's agony, to lay
aside the pride of thy heart, to be ashamed of thy self, to grieve in heart,
yea even to bleed for thine own offenses, casting down and humbling thy
self with Ezra, Ezra 9.
saying, O my God, I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee,
my God: for mine iniquities are increased, and my trespass is grown up into
heaven. When thou read that Christ was taken and bound, think that thy very
sins brought him into the power of his enemies, and were the very bonds
wherewith he was tied: think that thou should have been bound in the very
same manner unless he had been a surety and pledge for thee: think also
that thou in the self ^ame manner art bound and tied with the chains of thine
own sins, and that by nature thy will, affections, and whole spirit is tied
and chained to the will of the devil, so as thou can do nothing but that
which he wills: lastly, think and believe that the bonds of Christ serve to
purchase thy liberty from hell, death, and damnation. When thou hear that
he was brought before Annas and Caiaphas, think it was meet, that thy surety
and pledge who was to suffer the condemnation due unto thee, should by the high
Priest as by the mouth of God, be condemned: and wonder at this, that the very
coessentiall and eternal Son of God, even the very sovereign Judge of the
world, stands to be judged, and that by wicked men; persuading thy self that
this so great confusion comes of thy sins. Whereupon being further amazed at
thy fearful estate, humble thy self in dust and ashes, and pray God so to
soften thy stony heart, that thou may turn to him, and by true faith lay
hold on Christ, who has thus exceedingly abased himself, that his ignominy
may be thy glory, and his arraignment thy perfect absolution. When thou
read that Barrabas the murderer, was preferred before Christ, though he
exceeded both men and Angels in holiness; think it was to manifest his
innocence, and that thy very sins pulled upon him this shameful reproach;
and in that for thy cause he was esteemed worse then Barrabas, think of thy
self as a most heinous and wretched sinner, and (as Paul says) the head of
all sinners. When thou read that he was openly and iudicially condemned to
the cursed death of the cross, consider what is the wrath and fury of God
against sin, and what is his great and infinite mercy to sinners: and in
this spectacle look upon thy self, and with groans of heart cry out, and
say, O good God, what set thou hear before mine eyes? I, even I have
sinned, I am guilty and worthy of damnation. Whence comes this change, that
thy blessed son is in my room, but of thy unspeakable mercy? Wretch that I
am, how have I forgotten my self, and thee also my God? O son of God, how
long have thou abased thy self for me? Therefore give me grace O God, that
beholding mine own estate in the person of my Savior thus condemned, I may
detest and loath my sins that are the cause thereof, and by a lively faith
embrace that absolution which thou offerest me in him, who was condemned in my
stead and room. O Jesus Christ Savior of the world, give me thy holy and
blessed Spirit that I may judge my self, and be as vile and base in mine own
eyes as thou wast vile before the Jews: also unite me unto thee by the same
spirit, that in thee I may be as worthy to be accepted before God, as I am
worthy in my self to be detested for my sins. When thou read, that he
was clad in purple and crowned with thorns, mocked and spit upon, behold the
everlasting shame that is due unto thee, and be ashamed of thy self, and in
this point conform thy self to Christ, and be content (as he was) to be
reproched, abused, and despised, so it be for a good cause. When thou read,
that before his crucifying, he was stripped of al his clothes, think it was
that he being naked might bear thy shame on the cross, and with his most
precious and rich nakedness cover thy deformity. When thou read the
complaint of Christ, that he was forsaken of his father, consider how he
suffered the pangs and torments of hell as thy pledge and surety. Learn by his
unspeakable torments what a fearful thing it is to sin against God, and
begin to renounce thy self, and detest thy sins, and to walk as a child of
light, according to the measure of grace received. When thou come to die,
set before thine eyes Christ in the midst of all his torments on the cross: in
beholding of which spectacle to thy endless comfort, thou shall see a paradise
in the midst of hell: God the father reconciled unto thee, thy Savior
reaching out his hands unto thee to receive thy soul unto him; and his cross
as a ladder to advance it to eternal glory. Whereas he cried aloud with a
strong voice at the point of death, it was to show that he died willingly
without violence or constraint from any creature, and that if it had so pleased
him, he could have freed himself from death, and have cast his very enemies to
the very bottom of hell. When thou read that he commended his soul into the
hands of his Father, consider that thy soul also (so be it thou will believe
in him) is delivered up into the hands of God, and shall be preserved against
the rage and malice of all thine enemies, and hereupon thou may be bold to
commend thy spirit into the hands of God the father. When thou read of his
death, consider that thy sins were the cause of it, and that thou should
have suffered the same eternally, unless the son of God had come in thy
room: again consider his death as a ransom, and apprehend the same by faith,
as the means of thy life: for by death Christ has wounded both the first and
second death, and has made his cross to be a throne or tribunal seat of
judgment against all his and thine enemies. When thou read of the trembling
of the earth at the death of Christ, think with thy self it did in his kind
as it were groan under the burden of the sins of men in the world: and by his
motion then it signified that even thou and the rest deserved rather to be
swallowed of the earth, and to go down into the pit alive, then to have any
part in the merit of Christ crucified. When thou read of his burial, think
that it was to ratify his death, and to vanquish death even in his own den.
Apply this burial to thy self, and believe that it serves to make thy grave
a bed of down, and to free thy body from corruption. Lastly, pray to God
that thou may feel the power of the spirit of Christ, weakening and consuming
the body of sin, even as a dead corpse rottes in the grave, till it be
resolved to dust.

When thou have thus perused and applied to thy self the history of the
Passion of Christ, go yet further, and labor by faith to see Christ crucified
in all the works of God, either in thee, or upon thee. Behold him at thy table
in meat and drink, which is as it were a lively sermon and a daily pledge of
the mercy of God in Christ. Behold him in all thine afflictions, as thy
partner that pitieth thy case, and has compassion on thee. Behold him in thy
most dangerous temptations, in which the devil thundreth damnation, behold him
I say, as a mighty Sampson bearing away the gates of his enemies upon his own
shoulders: and killing more by death then by life, crucifying the devil, even
then when he is crucified, by death killing death: by entrance into the grave,
opening the grave and giving life to the dead, and in the house of death
spoiling him of all his strength and power. Behold him in all the afflictions
of thy brethren, as though he himself were naked, hungry, sick, harbourles,
and do unto them all the good thou can, as to Christ himself. If thou
would behold God himself, look upon him in Christ crucified, who is the
engraven image of the fathers person; and know it to be a terrible thing in the
time of the trouble of thy conscience to think of God without Christ, in whose
face the glory of God in his endless mercy is to be seen, 2. Cor. 4.6. If
thou would come to God for grace, for comfort, for salvation, for any
blessing, come first to Christ hanging, bleeding, dying upon the cross,
without whom there is no hearing God, no helping God, no saving God, no God to
thee at all. In a word, let Christ be all things without exception unto thee,
Coloss. 3. 11. for when thou praiest for any blessing either temporal or
spiritual, be it whatsoever it will be or can be, thou must ask it at the
hands of God the father by the merit and mediation of Christ crucified: now
look as we ask blessings at Gods hand, so must we receive them of him; and as
they are received, so must we possess and use them daily, namely as gifts of
God procured to us by the merit of Christ: which gifts for this very cause,
must be wholly employed to the honor of Christ.

FINIS.
A DISCOVRSE OF Conscience: Wherein is set down the nature, properties, and
differences thereof: as also the way to Get and keep good Conscience.

The second Edition.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINTER to the University of Cambridge 1600.

The Contents.
Chap. 1. What Conscience is. 2. The actions or duties of conscience. Where
this point is handled, How any thing is said to bind conscience. 3. The kinds
and differences of conscience. Where is handled, Liberty of conscience, and
the question disputed; whether a man may in conscience be infallibly certain of
his salvation. 4. Man's duty touching conscience, which is to get and to keep
it.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVABLE SIR WILLIam Piryam Knight, Lord chief Baron of her
Majesty's Exchequer. Grace and peace.
RIght Honorable, it can not be unknown to your self, or to any man of a
days experience, that it is thought a small matter to commit a sin, or, to
lie in sins against a mans^ own conscience. For many when they are told of
their duty in this point, reply and say, What, tell you me of Conscience?
Conscience was hanged long ago. But unless they take better heed, and
prevent the danger by repentance, Hanged conscience will revive and become both
gibbet and hangman to them either in this life or the life to come. For
Conscience is appointed of God to declare and put in execution his just
judgment against sinners: and as God cannot possibly be overcome of man, so
neither can the judgment of Conscience being the judgment of God, be wholly
extinguished. Indeed Satan for his part goes about by all means he can, to
benumme the conscience: but all is nothing. For as the sick man, when he
seems to sleep and take his rest, is inwardly full of troubles: so the
benumbed and arousie conscience wants not his secret pangs and terrors, and
when it shall be roused by the judgment of God, it waxes cruel and fierce
like a wild beast. Again, when a man sins against his conscience, as much as
in him lies, he plungeth himself into the gulf of desperation: for every
wound of the conscience, though the smart of it be little felt, is a deadly
wound: and he that goes on to sin against his conscience, stabbes and wounds
it often in the same place: and all renewed wounds (as we know) are hardly or
never cured. Thirdly, he that lies in sins against his conscience, can not
call upon the name of God: for guilty conscience makes a man fly from God.
And Christ says, God hears not sinners, understanding by sinners, such as
go on in their own ways against conscience: and what can be more doleful
then to be barred of the invocation of Gods name? Lastly, such persons after
the last judgment, shall have not only their bodies in torment, but the worm
in the soul and conscience shall never die: and what will it profit a man to
gain the whole world by doing things against his own conscience, and loose
his own soul.

Now that ^^en on this manner careless touching conscience, may see their
fo^lie and the great danger thereof and come to amendment, I have penned this
small treatise: and according to the ancient and laudable custom, as also
according to my long intended purpose, I now dedicate and present the same to
your Lordship. The reasons which have imboldened me to this enterprise (all
by-respects excluded) are these. General doctrine in points of religion is
dark and obscure, and very hardly practiced without the light of particular
examples: and therefore the doctrine of conscience, by due right pertaines to a
man of conscience; such an one as your Lordship is, who (others of like place
not excepted) have obtained this mercy at Gods hand to keep faith and good
conscience. Again, considering that justice and conscience have always bin
friends; I am induced to think that your Lordship being publicly set apart
for the execution and maintenance of civil justice, will approve and accept a
Treatise propounding rules and pr^cepts of conscience. Thus therefore craving
pardon for my boldness, and hoping of your Lordships good acceptance, I commend
you to God and to the word of his grace.

1596. June 14. Your L. to command, William Perkins.

OF CONSCIENCE.
CHAP. I. What Conscience is.
COnscience is a part of the understanding in all reasonable creatures,
determining of their particular actions either with them or against them.

I say conscience is a part of the understanding, and I show it thus: God in
framing of the soul placed in it two principal faculties, Understanding and
Will. Understanding is that faculty in the soul, whereby we use reason: and it
is the more principal part, serving to rule and order the whole man; and
therefore it is placed in the soul to be as the wagginer in the waggin. The
Will is another faculty, whereby we do will or nill any things that is,
choose or refuse it. With the will is joined sundry affections, as joy,
sorrow, love, hatred, etc. whereby we embrace or eschew that which is good or
evil. Now, conscience is not placed in the affections nor will, but in the
understanding; because the actions thereof stand in the use of reason.
Understanding again has two parts. The first is that which stands in the
view and contemplation of truth and falsehood, and goes no further. The second
is that which stands in the view and consideration of every particular action,
to search whether it be good or badde. The first is called the Theoricall, the
second the practical understanding. And under this latter is conscience to be
comprehended: because his property is to judge of the goodness or badnes of
things or actions done.

Again I say that conscience is a Understanding has no parts properly but by
anologie in respect of di^ers objects and ac^ions.
part of the mind or understanding, to show that conscience is not a bare
knowledge or judgment of the understanding (as Th. Aquin. part. 1. q. 79. art.
13. Dominic. Bannes on this place, Antoninus, etc.
men commonly write) but a natural power, faculty, or created quality from
whence knowledge and judgment proceed as effects. This the Scriptures
confirm, in that they ascribe sundry works and actions to conscience, as
accusing, excusing, comforting, terrifying: which actions could not thence
proceed, if conscience were no more but an action or act of the mind. Indeed
I grant, it may be taken for a kind of actual knowledge, in the mind of man:
but to speak properly, this knowledge must proceed of a power in the soul,
the property whereof is to take the principles and conclusions of the mind and
apply them, and by applying either to accuse or excuse. This is the ground of
all, and this I take to be conscience. If it be objected that conscience cannot
be a natural power, because it may be lost: I answer if conscience be lost, it
is only in respect of the use thereof, as reason is lost in the drunken man
and not otherwise.

I add, that the proper subjects of conscience are reasonable creatures, that
is, men and Angels. Hereby conscience is excluded, first of all from brute
beasts; for though they have life and sense, and in many things some shadows of
reason, yet because they want true reason, they want conscience also. Secondly
from God the creator, who being righteousness it self, needs not conscience
to order and govern his actions. And whereas Peter says, 1. Pet. 2. 19. that
men must endure grief wrongfully for conscience of god, his meaning is not to
show that God has conscience, but that men are to suffer many wrongs because
their conscience do bind them, in so doing to obey Gods will, which conscience
directly respects.

And I say that conscience is in all reasonable creatures, that none might
imagine that some men by nature have conscience in them, some none at all. For
as many men as there are, so many consciences there be: and every particular
man has his own particular conscience.

The proper end of conscience is, to determine of things done. And by this
conscience is distinguished from all other gifts of the mind, as intelligence,
opinion, science, faith, prudence. Intelligence simply conceiues a thing to be
or not to be: opinion judges a thing to be probable or contingent: science,
judges to be certain and sure: faith is a persuasion, whereby we believe things
that are not: prudence discerns what is meet to be done, what to be left
undone; but conscience goes further yet then all these: for it determines or
gives sentence of things done, by saying unto us, this was done, this was not
done, this may be done, this may not be done: this was well done, this was ill
done.

The things that conscience determines of, are a man's own actions: his own
actions, I say. To be certain what an other man has said or done, it is
commonly called knowledge: but for a man to be certain what he himself has
done or said, that is conscience. Again conscience meddles not with generals,
only it deals in particular actions: and that not in some few but in all.

The manner of consciences determination, is to set down his judgment either
with the creature or against it: I add this clause, because conscience is of a
divine nature, and is a thing placed of God in the midst between him and
man, as an arbitratour to give sentence and to pronounce either with man or
against man unto God. For otherwhiles, it consents and speaks with God against
the man in whom it is placed: otherwhiles again it consents with him and
speaks for him before the Lord. And hence comes one reason of the name of
conscience. Scire, to know, is of one man alone by himself: and conscire is,
when two at the least know some one secret thing; either of them knowing it
together with the other. Therefore the name (...), or conscientia Conscience,
is that thing that combines two together, and makes the^ partners in the
knowledge of one and the same secret. Now man and man, or man and Angel cannot
be combined; because they cannot know the secret of any man unless it be
revealed to them: it remains therefore that this combinatio^ is only between
man and God. God knows perfectly all the doings of man, though they be never
so hid and concealed: and man by a gift given him of God, knows together with
God, the same things of himself: and this gift is named Conscience.

CHAP. II. Of the duties of Conscience.
1. Of the testimony of con^ci^^ce.
THe proper actions or duties of conscience are twofold, to give testimony or to
give judgment. Romans 2.15.

Conscience gives testimony by determining that a thing was done or it was not
done, Romans 2.15. Their conscience also bearing witness. 2. Cor. 1.12. Our
rejoicing is the testimony of our conscience, that in, etc.

Here we must consider three things: I. of what things conscience bears
witness: II. in what manner: III. how long.

For the first, conscience bears witness of our thoughts, of our affections,
of our outward actions.

That it bears witness of our secret thoughts, it appears by the solemn
protestation which at some time men use; In my conscience I never thought it:
whereby they signify that they think something, or they think it not, and
that their consciences can tell what they think. Neither must this seem
strange. For there be two actions of the understanding, the one is simple,
which barely conceiueth or thinks this or that: the other is a reflecting or
doubling of the former, whereby a man conceiues or thinks with himself what he
thinks. And this action properly pertaines to the conscience. The mind thinks
a thought, now conscience goes beyond the mind, and knows what the mind
thinks; so as if a man would go about to hide his sinful thoughts from God,
his conscience as it were another person within him, shall discover all. By
means of this second action conscience may bear witness even of thoughts, and
from hence also it seems to borrow his name, Conscientia i. scientia cu^ alia
scientia.
because conscience is a science or knowledge joined with an other knowledge:
for by it I conceive and know what I know.

Again, conscience bears witness what the wills an affections of men be in
every matter, Romans 9.1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience
bearing me witness by the holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness and
continual sorrow in my heart: for I could wish my self to be separate from
Christ for my brethren.

Lastly, it witnesses what be men's actions. Eccl. 7.24. Oftentimes also thine
heart knows, (that is, conscience witnesses) that thou likewise have cursed
others.

The manner that conscience uses in giving testimony, stands in two things.
First, it observes and takes notice of all things that we do: secondly, it
does inwardly and secretly within the heart, tell us of them al. In this
respect it may fitly be compared to a Notarie, or a Register that has always
the pen in his hand, to note and record whatsoever is said or done: who also
because he keeps the rolls and records of the court, can tell what has
been said or done many hundred years past.

Touching the third point. Howelong conscience bears witness, it does it
continually; not for a minut, or a day, or a month, or a year, but for ever:
when a man dies, conscience dies not; when the body is rotting in the grave,
conscience lives and is safe and sound; and when we shall rise again,
conscience shall come with us to the bar of Gods judgment, either to accuse
or excuse us before God, Romans 2.15,16. Their conscience bearing witness at the
day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ.

By this first duty of conscience, we are to learn three things. The first,
that there is a god: and we may be led to the sight of this even by common
reason. For conscience bears witness; Of what? Of thy particular doings. But
against whom or with whom does it give testimony? thou may feel in thy
heart that it does it either with thee or against thee. And to whom is it a
witness? to men or angels? that cannot be, for they cannot hear the voice of
conscience, they cannot receive consciences testimony, nay they cannot see
what is in the heart of man. It remains therefore that there is a spiritual
substance, most wise, most holy, most mighty, that sees all things to whom
conscience bears record; and that is God himself. Let Atheists bark against
this as long as they will: they have that in them that will convince them of
the truth of the godhead, will they nill they, either in life or death.

Secondly we learn, that God does watch over all men by a special providence.
The master of a prison is known by this to have care over his prisoners, if he
send keepers with them to watch them and to bring them home again in time
convenient: and so Gods care to man is manifest in this, that when he created
man and placed him in the world, he gave him conscience to be his keeper to
follow him always at his heels, and to dog him (as we say) and to pry into
his actions, and to bear witness of them all.

Thirdly, hence we may observe Gods goodness and love to man. If he do any
thing amiss, he sets his conscience first of all to tell him of it secretly:
if then he amend, God forgiues it: if not, then afterward conscience must
openly accuse him for it at the bar of Gods judgment before all the Saints
and angels in heaven.

The second work of conscience is to give judgment of things done.

2. Of consciences judgment.
To give judgment is to determine, that a thing is well done or ill done.
Herein conscience is like to a Judge that holds an assise, and takes notice
of inditements, and causes the most notorious malefactor that is, to hold up
his hand at the bar of his judgment. Nay it is (as it were) a little God
sitting in the middle of men's hearts, arraigning them in this life as they
shall be arraigned for their offenses at the tribunal seat of the everliving
God in the day of judgment. Wherefore the temporary judgment that is given
by the conscience is nothing else but a beginning or a forerunner of the last
judgment.

Hence we are admonished to take special heed that nothing past lie heavy
upon us, and that we charge not our conscience in time to come with any matter.
For if our conscience accuse us, God will much more condemn us, says S. John.
1. Ioh. 3. 18. because he sees all our actions more clearly, and judges them
more severely then conscience can. It shall be good therefore for all men to
labor that they may say with Paul, 2. Cor. 4. I know nothing by my self,
that they may stand before God without blame for ever.

Here we must consider two things: first, the cause that makes conscience give
judgment: secondly, the manner how.

3. Of the Binding of the conscience.
The cause is the Binder of the conscience. The binder is that thing whatsoever,
which has power and authority over conscience to order it.

To bind, is to urge, cause, and constrain it in every action either to accuse
for sin, or to excuse for well doing: or to say, this may be done, or it may
not be done.

That we may know what this phrase means ( to be bound in conscience) we
must in mind consider conscience a part by it self from the binding power
power of Gods commandment. For then it has liberty and is not bound either
to accuse or excuse, but is apt to do either of them indifferently: but when
the binding power is set once over the conscience, then in every action it must
needs either accuse or excuse: even as a man in a city or town having his
liberty, may go up and down or not go, where and when he will: but if his
body be attached by the magistrate and imprisoned, then his former liberty is
restrained, he is bound and can go up and down but within the prison, or some
other allowed place.

The binder of conscience, is either proper or improper. Proper is that thing,
which has absolute and sovereign power in it self to bind the conscience.
And that is the word of God, written in the book of the old and new Testament.
Reason I. He which is the Lord of conscience, by his word and laws binds
conscience: but God is the only Lord of conscience; because he once created
it, and he alone gouernes it: and none but he knows it: therefore his word and
laws only bind conscience properly. II. He which has power to save or
destroy the soul for the keeping or breaking of his laws, has absolute power
to bind the soul and conscience by the same laws: but the first is true of
God alone, Iam. 3. 12. There is one Lawgiuer which is able to save and destroy.
Esa. 33.22. The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiuer, the Lord is our
King, and he will save us. Therefore the word of God alone by an absolute and
sovereign power binds conscience. Because this point is clear of it self,
further proof is needless.

Hence we are taught sundry points of instruction. I. Such as are ignorant
among us must labor to get knowledge of Gods word, because it binds
conscience. Neither will the plea of ignorance serve for excuse: because,
whether we know Gods laws or know them not, they still bind us, And we are
bound not only to do them, but when we know them not, we are further bound
not to be ignorant of them, but to seek to know them. If we had no more
sins, our ignorance were sufficient to condemn us. II. Gods word is to be
obeyed, though we should offend all men, yea loose all men's favor, and suffer
the greatest damage that may be, even the loss of our lives. And the reason is
at hand; because Gods word has this prerogative to bridle, bind, and
restrain the conscience. III. Whatsoever we enterprise or take in hand, we
must first search whether God give us liberty in conscience, and warrant to
do it. For if we do otherwise, conscience is bound presently to charge us of
sin before God. Lastly, we do here see how dangerous the case is of all
Time-seruers that will live as they list, and be of no certain religion till
differences and dissentions therein be ended, and they have the determination
of a general Council: for whether these things compass or no, certain it is
that they are bound in conscience to receive and believe the ancient,
Prophetical, and Apostolical doctrine touching the true worship of God and
the way to life everlasting, which is the true religion. The same is to be said
of all drowsy Protestants, and lukewarm gospellers, that use religion not
with that care and conscience they ought, but only then and so far forth as
it serves for their turns, commonly neglecting or despising the assemblies
where the word is preached: and seldom frequenting the Lords table unless it
be at Easter. Like silly wretches they neither see nor feel the constraining
power, that Gods word has in their consciences.

Gods word is either Law, or Gospel. The Law is a part of Gods word of things
to be done, or to be left undone. And it is threefolde: Moral, Judicial,
Ceremonial.

4. Of the moral law binding.
Moral law concerns duties of love, partly to God and partly toward our
neighbor: it is contained in the Decalogue or ten commandments: and it is the
very law of nature written in all men's hearts (for substance though not for the
manner of propounding) in the creation of man: and therefore it binds the
consciences of all men at all times, even of blind and ignorant persons that
neither know the most of it nor care to know it. Yet here must be remembered
three exceptions or cautions. I. When two commandments of the moral law are
opposite in respect of us; so as we cannot do them both at the same time: then
the lesser commandment gives place to the greater, and does not bind or
constrain for The moral law i. unchangeable in respect of that eternal
justice which it prescribes, yet it is changeable as it is applied to some
particular actions and cases, and in that respect it admits a dispensation, and
no otherwise.
that instant. Example. I. God commands one thing, and the magistrate commands
the flat contrary; in this case which of these two commandments is to be
obeyed, 1. Com.
Honor God, or, 5. Com.
Honor the Magistrate? the answer is, that the latter must give place to the
former, and the former alone in this case must be obeyed. Act. 4.19. Whether it
be right in the sight of God to obey you rather then God, judge ye. II. The
fourth commandment prescribes rest on the Sabbath day: now it falls out that
at the same time a whole town is set on fire, and the sixth commandment
requires our help in saving our neighbors life and goods. Now of these two
commandments which must be obeyed? for both cannot. The answer is, that the
fourth commandment at this time is to give place, and the sixth commandment
alone binds the conscience: so as then (if need should require) a man might
labor all the day without offense to God. Math. 9.13. I will have mercy and
not sacrifice. And the rule must not be omitted, That charity toward our
neighbor is subordinate to the Love of God, and therefore must give place to
it. For this cause the commandment concerning charity must give place to the
commandment concerning love to God: and when the case so falls out, that we
must either offend our neighbor or God, we must rather offend our neighbor
then God.

II. Caution. When God gives some particular commandment to his people,
therein dispensing with some other commandment of the moral law: for that time
it binds not. For even the moral commandments must be conceived with this
condition, Except God command otherwise. Example. I. The sixth commandment is,
Thou shall not kill: but God gives a particular commandment to Abraham.
Abraham offer thy son Isaac in sacrifice to me. And this latter commandment
at that instant did bind Abraham: and he is therefore commended for his
obedience to it. II. And when God commanded the children of Israel to compass
Ierico seven days and therefore on the Sabbath, the fourth commandment
prescribing the sanctifying of rest on the Sabbath, for that instant and in
that action did not bind conscience.

III. Caution. One and the same commandment in some things binds the
conscience more straightly, and in doing some other things less, Gal. 6.10. Do
good to all men, but specially to them which are of the household of faith.
Hence it arises, that though all sins be mortal and deserve eternal death,
yet all are not equal, but some more grievous then others.

Judicial laws of Moses are all such as prescribe order for the execution of
justice and judgment in the common wealth. 5. Of Iudicialls binding.
They were specially given by God, and directed to the Jews: who for this very
cause were bound in conscience to keep them all: and if the common wealth of
the Jews were now standing in the old estate, no doubt they should continue
still to bind as before.

But touching other nations and specially Christian common wealths in these
days, the case is otherwise. Some are of opinion, that the whole judicial
law is wholly abolished: and some again run to the other extreme, holding
that judicial laws bind Christians as straightly as Jews: but no doubt they
are both wide: and the safest course is to keep the mean between both.
Therefore the judicial laws of Moses according to the substance and scope
thereof must be distinguished; in which respect they Iuris particularis.
are of two sorts. Some of them are laws of particular equity, some of Iuris
communis.
common equity. Laws of particular equity, are such as prescribe justice
according to the particular estate and condition of the Jews common wealth and
to the circumstances thereof: time, place, persons, things, actions. Of this
kind was the law, that the brother should raise up seed to his brother, and
many such like: and none of them bind us, because they were framed and tempered
to a particular people.

Iudicialls of common equity are such as are made according to the law or
instinct of nature common to all men: and these, in respect of their substance,
bind the consciences not only of the Jews but also of the Gentiles: for they
were not given to the Jews as they are Jews, that is, a people received into
the Covenant above all other nations, brought from Egypt to the land of Canaan,
of whom the Messiah according to the flesh was to come: but they were given to
them as they were mortal men subject to the order and laws of nature as all
other nations are. Again judicial laws, so far forth as they have in them
the general or common equity of the law of nature are moral; and therefore
binding in conscience, as the moral law.

A judicial law may be known to be a law of common equity, if either of
these two things be found in it. First, if wise men not only among the Jews,
but also in other nations have by natural reason and conscience judged the
same to be equal, just, and necessary: and withal, have justified their
judgment by enacting laws for their common wealths, the same in substance with
sundry of the judicial laws given to the Jews: and the Roman Emperors
among the rest, have done this most excellently, as will appear by conferring
their laws with the laws of God. Secondly a Judicial has common equity, if
it serve directly to explane and confirm any of the ten precepts of the
Decalogue: or, if it serve directly to maintain and uphold any of the three
estates of the family, the common wealth, the Church. And whether this be so or
no, it will appear, if we do but consider the matter of the law, and the
reasons or considerations upon which the Lord was moved to give the same unto
the Jews. Now to make the point in hand more plain, take an example or two.
It is a judicial law of God that murderers must be put to death: now the
question is, whether this law for substance be the common equity of nature
binding consciences of Christians or no? and the answer is, that without
further doubting it is so. For first of all, this law has been by common
consent of wise law-giuers enacted in many countries and kingdoms beside the
Jews. It was the law of the Egyptians and Eurip. in Hecuba. Theodos. and
Arcad l. 3. c. de Epis^. audien.
old Grecians, of Draco, of Numa, and of many of the Roman Emperors.
Secondly this law serves directly to maintain obedience to the sixth
commandment: and the consideration upon which the law was made is so
weighty, that without it a commonwealth cannot stand. The murderers blood must
be shed (says the Lord, Number. 35.33.34.) because the whole land is defiled
with blood, and remains vncle^sed till his blood be shed. Again it was a
judicial law among the Jews, that the adulterer and adulteress should die
the death; now let the question be whether this law concern other nations as
being derived from the common law of nature: and it seems to be so. For
first wise men by the light of reason and natural conscience have judged this
punishment equal and just. Judah before this judicial law was given by
Moses, Genesis ^4. 28.
appointed Tamar his daughter in law to be burnt to death for playing the
whore. Nabuchadnezar burnt Echad and Zedechias because they committed adultery
with their neighbors wives. Ier. 29. 23. Inst. ss. Item lex Julian. publ.
iudic.
By Dracoes law among the Grecians this sin was death, and also by the law of
the Romans. Again, this law serves directly to maintain necessary obedience
to the seventh commandment: and the considerations upon which this law was
given are perpetual, and serve to uphold the common wealth. Lev. 20.22. Ye
(says the Lord) shall keep all mine ordinances and my judgments (the law of
adultery being one of them.) Now mark the reasons. 1. Least the la^d spue
you out. 2. for the same sins I have abhorred the nations.

^^. Of the ceremonial l^w bin^ing.
The Ceremonial law is that which prescribes rites and orders in the outward
worship of God.

August. epist. 19. ad Hier.
It must be considered in three times. The first is time before the coming and
death of Christ: the second, the time of publishing the gospel by the
Apostles: the third, the time after the publishing of the gospel.

In the first, it did bind the conscience of the Jews, and the obedience of
it was the true worship of God. But it did not then bind the consciences of the
Gentiles: for it was the partition wall between them and the Jews. And it did
continue to bind the Jews till the very death and ascension of Christ. For
the^ the hand writing of ordinances which was against us was nailed on the
cross and cancelled. And when Christ says that the law and the Prophett
endured til John, Luke 16.16. his meaning is not, that the ceremonial law
ended then: but that things foretold by the Prophets, and obscurely prefigured
by the ceremonial law, began then more plainly to be preached and made
manifest.

The second time was from the ascension of Christ, til about the time of the
destruction of the Temple and the City; in which, ceremonies ceased to bind
conscience and remained indifferent. Hereupon Paul circumcised Timothy: the
Apostles after Christ's ascension, as occasion was offered were present in the
Temple, Act. 3.1. And the Council of Jerusalem tendering the weakness of some
believers, decreed that the Church for a time should abstain from strangled
and blood. And there was good reason of this, because the Church of the Jews
was not yet sufficiently convicted that an end was put to the ceremonial law
by the death of Christ.

In the third time, which was after the publishing of the gospel, ceremonies of
the Jews Church became unlawful, and so shall continue to the worlds end.

By this it appears, what a monstrous and miserable religion the church of
Rome teaches and maintains; which stands wholly in ceremonies, partly
heathenish and partly Jewish.

As for the Gospel, I take it for the part of the word of God which promises
righteousness and life everlasting to all that believe in Christ, 7. Of the
gospel binding.
and withal commands this faith.

That we may the better know, how the gospel binds conscience, two points
must be considered; one touching the persons bound, the other touching the
manner of binding.

Persons are of two sorts; some be called, some be uncalled. Persons called are
all such to whom God in mercy has offered the means of salvation, and has
revealed the doctrine of the Gospel in some measure more or less by means
either ordinary or extraordinary. All such I think are straightly bound in
conscience to believe and obey the gospel. For that word of God whereby men
shall be judged in the day of judgment, must first of all bind their
consciences in this life, considering absolution and condemnation is according
to that which is done in this life: but by the gospel, all men that have been
called, shall be judged as Paul says, Romans 2.16. God shall judge the secrets
of men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel. And our Savior Christ says,
He that believes has life everlasting, he which believes not is already
condemned. It remains therefore, that the gospel binds the consciences of
such men in this life. By this very point we are all put in mind not to
content our selves with this, that we have a liking to the gospel, and do
believe it to be true (though many protestants in these our days think it
sufficient both in life and death, if they hold that they are to be saved by
faith alone in Christ without the merit of man's works) but we must go yet
further, and enter into a practice of the doctrine of the Gospel as well as of
the precepts of the moral law; knowing that the gospel does as well bind
conscience as the law, and if it be not obeyed will as well condemn.

Men uncalled, are such as never heard of Christ by reason the gospel was
never revealed unto them, nor means of revelation offered. That there have bin
such in former ages, I make manifest thus. The world since the creation may be
distinguished into four ages. The first, from the creation to the flood; the
second, from the flood to the giving of the Law: the third, from the giving of
the Law to the death of Christ: the fourth, from the death of Christ to the
last judgment. Now in the three former ages, there was a distinction of the
world into two sorts of men, whereof one was a people of God, the other
no-people. In the first age in the families of Seth, Noe, etc. were the sons
of God; in all other families the sons of men, Genesis 6.2. In the second age
were the sons of the flesh and the sons of the promise, Romans 9.7. In the
third, Jews and Gentiles; the Jews being the Church of God, all nations
beside no-church. But in the last age this distinction was taken away when the
Apostles had a commission given them that was never given before to any,
namely, to go teach not only the Jews, but all nations. Now this distinction
arose of this, that the Gospel was not revealed to the world before the coming
of Christ, as the Scriptures witness. The prophet Esai says, 52.14. that kings
shall shut their mouths at Christ, because that which had not bin told them
they shall see, and that which they had not heard shall they understand. And 55.
5. that a nation that knew him not shall run unto him. Paul says to the
Ephesians that in former times they were without God, and without Christ,
strangers from the covenant, Ephesians. 2.12. And to the Athenians he says, that the
times before the coming of Christ were times of ignorance, Act. 17.30. And
that it may not be thought that this ignorance was affected, Paul says further
that God in times past suffered the Gentiles to walk in their own ways, Act.
14. 16. and that the mystery of the Gospel was kept secret from the beginning
of the world, and is now in the last age revealed to the whole world, Romans
16.25. Some allege that the Jews being the church of God, had traffic
with all nations, and by this means spread some little knowledge of the Messiah
through the whole world: I answer again that the conference and speech of
Jewish merchants with forrainers was no sufficient means to publish the promise
of salvation by Christ to the whole world: first because the Jews for the most
part have always bin more ready to receive any new and false religion, then
to teach their own: secondly, because the very Jews themselves, though they
were well acquainted with the ceremonies of their religion, yet the substance
thereof which was Christ figured by external ceremonies, they knew not: and
hereupon the Pharisees when they made a Proselyte, they made him ten times
more the child of the devil then themselves. Thirdly, because men are seldom
or never suffered to profess or make any speech of their religion in foreign
countries. Again, if it be alleged that the doctrine is set down in the
books of the old Testament, which men through the whole world might have read,
searched, and known if they would; I answer that the keeping of the books of
the old Testament, was committed to the Jews alone, Romans 3.2. and therefore
they were not given to the whole world, as also the Psalmist testifies, He
shows his word unto Jacob, Psalm. 147.8.
his statutes and his judgments unto Israel: he has not dealt so with every
nation, neither have they known his judgments.

Now touching such persons as have not so much as heard of Christ, though they
are apt and fit to be bound in conscience by the Gospel in as much as they
are the creatures of God, yet are they not indeed actually bound till such time
as the Gospel be revealed or at the least means of revelation offered. Reasons
hereof may be these: I. Whatsoever doctrine or law does bind conscience, must
in some part be known by nature or by grace or by both: the understanding must
first of all conceive, or at the least have means of conceiving, before
conscience can constrain: because it binds by virtue of known co^clusions in
the mind. Therefore things that are altogether unknown and vnconceiued of the
understanding, do not bind in conscience: now, the Gospel is altogether
unknown and vnconceiued of many, as I have already proved, and therefore it
binds not them in conscience. II. Paul says, Romans 2.12. They which sin
without the law [written] shall be condemned without the law: therefore they
which sin without the Gospel, shall be condemned without the Gospel: and such
as shall be condemned without the Gospel after this life, were not bound by it in
this life. Augustine the most judicial Divine of all the ancient fathers upon
these words of Christ, Ioh. 15.20. Aug. tract. 89. in Ioh.
but now they have no excuse for their sin, says on this manner: A doubt may
be moved whether they to whom Christ has not come, neither has spoken unto
them, have an excuse for their sin. For if they have it not, why is it said
that these (namely the Jews) have no excuse because he came and spoke to them?
and if they have it, whether it be that their punishment may be taken away
quite, or in part lessened. To these demands to my capacity as the Lord shall
enable me I answer, that they to whom Christ came not, neither has spoken
unto them, have an excuse not of every sin but of this sin, that they have
not believed in Christ. Again, It remains to inquire whether those, who
before Christ came in his Church to the Gentiles, and before they heard his
Gospel, have bin or are prevented by death, may use this excuse? Doubtless they
may, but they shall not therefore escape damnation. For whosoever have sinned
without the law, shall perish without the law.

As for the reasons which some of the schoolmen have alleged to the
contrary, they are answered all by Tho. 22. q. 10. art. 1.
men of the same order, and I will briefly touch the principal. First it is
objected, that the holy Gho^t shall judge the world of sin, because they have
not believed in Christ, Ioh. 16.9. I answer, that by the world we must not
understand all and every man since the creation, but all nations and kingdoms
in the last age of the world, to whom the Gospel was revealed. Thus has Paul
expounded this word, Romans 11.12. The fall of them is the riches of the world,
and the diminishing of them is the riches of the Gentiles. v. 15. The casting
of them away is the reconciling of the world. Secondly it is objected, that the
law binds all men in conscience, though the greatest part of it be unknown to
them. Answ. The law was once given to Adam and imprinted in his heart in his
first creation, and in him as being the root of all mankind, it was given to
all men: and as when he sinned all men sinned in him, so when he was
enlightened all were enlightened in him, and consequently when his conscience
was bound by the law, all were bound in him. And though this knowledge be lost
by man's default, yet the bond remains still on Gods part. Now the case is
otherwise with the Gospel, which was never written in man's nature, but was
given after the fall, and is above nature. Here a further reply is, made, that
the covenant made with Adam, The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents
head, was also made with his seed which is all mankind, and was afterward
continued with Abraham to all nations. I answer again, that Adam was a root of
mankind only in respect of man's nature with the gifts and sins thereof: he
was no root in respect of grace which is above nature, but Christ the second
Adam. And therefore when God gave the promise unto him and faith to believe the
promise, he did not in him give them both to all mankind: neither, if Adam had
afterward fallen from faith in the Messiah, should all mankind again have
fallen in him. Moreover that the promise of grace was not made to Adams seed
universally but indefinitely it appears; because when God did afterward renew
the covenant, he restrained it to the family of Noe and Abraham^ and in
Abraham's family it was restrained to Isaac, In Isaac (says the Lord) shall
thy seed be called: yea in the very tenor of the covenant there is a
distinction made of the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent; which
seed of the serpent is a 1. Ioh. 3.8.
part of mankind, and it is excluded from the covenant. And whereas the Lord
promised to Abraham that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be
blessed, the promise must not be understood of all men in every age, but of all
nations in the last age of the world. And thus Paul has cleared the text, Gal.
3. 8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles through
faith (which was done after Christ's ascension) he preached before the Gospel to
Abraham, In thee shall nations be blessed. Lastly, it may be objected, that if
any man be ignorant of the doctrine of salvation by Christ, it is through his
own fault: it is true indeed that all ignorance of the doctrine of salvation
comes through man's fault and sin: but sin must be distinguished; it is
either personal, or the sin of man's nature. Now in them that never heard of
Christ, their ignorance in this point proceeds not of any personal sin in
them, but only from the sin of man's nature, that is, the first sin of Adam
common to all mankind, which sin is punished when God leaves men wholly to
themselves. Now many things there be in men proceeding from this sin, which
nevertheless are no sins, as the manifold miseries of this life: and so I
take the ignorance of things above man's nature altogether unrevealed, to be no
sin but a punishment of original sin.

Thus much of the persons which are bound by the Gospel: now let us see how
far forth they are bound by it.

God in the Gospel generally reueales two points unto us: the first, that
there is perfect righteousness and life everlasting to be obtained by Christ:
the second, that the instrument to obtain righteousness and life eternal is
faith in Christ. Moreover when this Gospel is dispensed and preached unto us,
God reueales unto us two points more: the first, that he will make us
particularly to be partakers of true righteousness and life everlasting by
Christ: the second, that he will have us without doubting to believe thus much
of our selves. And for this cause every man to whom the Gospel is revealed, is
bound to believe his own election, justification, sanctification, and
glorification in and by Christ. The reasons and grounds of this point out of
the word of God are these: I. 1. Ioh. 3.23. This is his commandment that we
believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave
us commandment. Now to believe in Christ, is not confusedly to believe, that
he is a Redeemer of mankind, but withal to believe that he is my Savior, and
that I am elected, justified, sanctified, and shall be glorified by him. This
is granted of all men, yea of the Papists themselves, which otherwise are
enemies of this doctrine. For Lumberd says, Lumb. lib. 3. did. 23.
To believe in God is by believing to love, and as it were to go into God: by
believing to cleave unto him, and as it were to be incorporate into his
members. II. Paul, Gal. 2. 16. first of all propounds a general sentence, That
a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Christ.
Afterward he adds a special application, Even we (namely Jews) have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Jesus Christ: and
in v. 20. he descends more specially to apply the Gospel to himself, I live
(says he) by the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me and given
himself for me. And in this kind of application there is nothing peculiar to
Paul, for in this very action of his, he avouches himself to be an example
unto us, 1. Tim. 1. 16. For this cause (says he) was I received to mercy,
that Jesus Christ should show first on me all long suffering unto the ensample
of them which shall in time to come believe in him to eternal life. Again,
Philip. 3.8. he says, I think all things but loss, that I might win
Christ, and might be found in him not having mine own righteousness, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, that I may know him and the virtue of his
resurrection: and afterward he adds, v. 15. Let us as many as be perfect be
thus minded. III. Whatsoever we pray for according to Gods will, we are bound
to believe that it shall be given unto us, Mark. 11. 24. Whatsoever ye desire
when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you. But
we pray for the pardon of our sins, and for life everlasting by Christ; and
that according to the will of God. Therefore we are bound in conscience to
believe the pardon of our sins and life everlasting. IV. If God should speak
particularly to any man, and say unto him, Cornelius, or Peter, believe thou in
Christ, and thou shall be saved; this commandment should bind him
particularly. Now when the Minister lawfully called, in the name and stead of
God publishes the Gospel to the congregation, that is as much as if God
himself had spoken to them particularly, calling each of them by their names
and promising unto them life everlasting in Christ. 2. Cor. 5.20. We as
ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you through us, pray you in
Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled to God.

It may be and is objected, that if every man be bound in conscience to believe
his own Election and salvation by Christ, then some men are bound to believe
that which is false, because some there be even in the midst of the Church,
which in the counsel of God were never chosen to salvation. I answer, that
this reason were good, if men were bound absolutely to believe their salvation
without further respect or condition: but the bond is conditional, according
to the tenor of the covenant of grace: for we are bound to believe in Christ,
if we would come to life everlasting, or if we would be in the favor of God,
or if we would be good disciples and members of Christ. I answer again, that
whatsoever a man is bound to believe, is true: yet not always in the event,
but true in the intention of God that binds. Now the commandment of
believing and applying the Gospel is by God given to all within the Church;
but not in the same manner to all. It is given to the Elect, that by believing
they might indeed be saved; God inabling them to do that which he commands.
To the rest, whom God in justice will refuse, the same commandment is given
not for the same cause, but to another end, that they might see how they could
not believe, and by this means be bereft of all excuse in the day of
judgment. God does not always give commandments simply that they might be
done, but sometimes for other respects, that they might be means of trial, as
the commandment given to Abraham of killing Isaac: again that they might
serve to keep men at the least in outward obedience in this life, and stop
their mouths before the tribunal seat of God.

In that we are bound in conscience on this manner to believe the promises of
the Gospel, with an application of the benefits thereof to our selves, sundry
necessary and profitable points of instruction may be learned. The first, that
the Popish Doctors abolish a great part of the Gospel, when they teach that
men are bound to believe the Gospel only by a Catholic faith, which they make
to be nothing else but a gift of God, or illumination of the mind, whereby
assent is given to the word of God that it is true; and more specially that
Jesus is Christ, that is, an all-sufficient Savior of mankind. All which the
damned spirits believe: whereas the Gospel for the comfort and salvation of
men's souls, has a further reach, namely to enjoin men to believe that the
promise of salvation is not only true in it self, but also true in the very
person of the believer, as appears evidently by the Sacraments which are as it
were a visible Gospel, in which Christ with all his benefits is offered and
applied to the particular persons of men: to this end, no doubt, that they
might believe the accomplishment of the promise in themselves.

Secondly, we learn that it is not presumption for any man to believe the
remission of his own sins: for to do the will of God to which we are bound,
is not to presume: now it is the will of God to which he has bound us in
conscience, to believe the remission of our own sins: and therefore rather
not do it, is presumptuous disobedience.

Thirdly, we are here to mark and to remember with care, the foundation of the
infallible certentie of man's salvation. For if man be bound in conscience first
to give assent to the Gospel, and secondly to apply it to himself by true
faith, then without doubt a man by faith may be certainly persuaded of his own
Election and salvation in this life without any extraordinary revelation: Gods
commandments being in this and the like cases possible. For commandments are
either Legal or Euangelical. Legal show us our disease, but give us no
remedy: and the perfect doing of them according to the intent of the Lawgiuer,
by reason of man's weakness and through man's default, is impossible in this
world. As for Euangelical commandments, they have this privilege, that they
may and can be performed according to the intent of the Lawgiuer in this life:
because with the commandment is joined the inward operation of the spirit in
the elect, to enable them to effect the duty commanded: and the will of God
is not to require absolute perfection at our hands in the Gospel as in the law,
but rather to qualify the rigor of the law by the satisfaction of a Mediator
in our stead; and of us (we being in Christ) to accept the upright will and
endeavor for the deed; as the will to repent, and the will to believe, for
repentance and true faith indeed. Now then, if things required in the Gospel,
be both ordinary and possible, then for a man to have an infallible certentie
of his own salvation, is both ordinary and possible. But more of this point
afterward.

Lastly, all such persons as are troubled with doubtings, distrustings,
unbelief, despair of Gods mercy, are to learn and consider that God by his
word binds them in conscience to believe the pardon of their own sins be
they never so grievous or many, and to believe their own election to salvation
whereof they doubt. Men that are but civil have care to avoid robbing and
killing, because God gives commandments against stealing and killing: why then
should not we much more strive against our manifold doubtings and distrustings
of Gods love in Christ, having a commandment of God that calls upon us and
binds us to so.

Thus we see how Gods word binds conscience: now conscience being thus bound,
again binds the man in whom it is.

The bond of conscience is called guiltines. Guiltines is nothing else but a
work of the conscience, binding every sinner to the punishment of everlasting
death, before God for this or that sin.

Thus much of the proper binder of the conscience: now follows the improper.

The improper binder is that which has no power at all or virtue in it self
to bind conscience: but does it only by the authority and virtue of Gods
word or some part thereof. It is threefold, Humane laws, an Oath, a Promise.

Touching humane laws, the special point to be considered is, In what manner
they bind. 8. Of humane laws binding.
That this may in part be cleared, I will stand a while to examine and confute
the opinion, that the very pillars of the Popish Church at this day maintain;
namely, that Civil and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction have a coactiue power in
the conscience, and that the laws made thereby do as truly and properly bind
(as they speak) to mortal and venial sin, as Gods law it self. The
arguments which they commonly use are these.

Argum. 1. Deuteronomy. 17. That man that will do presumptuously, and not obey the
Imperia.
authority of the Priest, or Judge, shall die: and thou shall take away evil
from Israel. Here (say they) the precepts of the high Priest are princely
commandments.
Imperia, not admonitions or exhortations, and they bind in conscience;
otherwise the transgressors thereof should not have bin punished so severely.
Ans. The intent of this law (as a very child may perceive) is to establish the
authority and right of the highest appeals for all matters of controversy in
the Synedrium or great court at Jerusalem. Therefore the words alleged, do
not give unto the Priest a sovereign power of making laws, but a power of
giving judgment of controversies, and that according to laws already made by
God himself: from which judgment there might be no appeal. Now this power of
determining does not co^straine conscience, but the outward man to maintain
order and peace. For what reason is there, that, that sentence, which might be
either a gainsaying of Gods law, or a mistaking of it, should bind the
conscience to a sin Again, not every one that refused to subject themselves
to the sentence of this court, were straightway guilty of sin, Ier. 26.11,
15.
(for this did Jeremy the Prophet, and Christ our Savior, when the Jews
condemned them for wicked persons) but he that presumptuously despised the
sentence, and by consequent the authority it self, which was the ordinance of
God, was guilty. Lastly, the severity of the punishment, which is temporal
death, does not argue any power in the judge of binding conscience: Lib. de
vita Spirit. sect. 4
this they might have learned of their own Doctor Gerson, who holds that
they that bind any man to mortal sin, must be able to punish him with
answerable punishment, which is eternal death.

Arg. 2. Matthew. 16. Whatsoever ye shall bind in earth, shall be bound in
heaven. Here (say they) to bind, is to make laws constraining conscience
according to Matthew. 23.4. They bind heavy burdens, and lay them on men's
shoulders. Ans. The sovereign power of binding and loosing, is not belonging
to any creature, but is proper to Christ, who has the keys of heaven and
hell: he opens and no man shuts, he shuts and no man opens, Revel.
3.5. As for the power of the Church, it is nothing but a ministry or service
whereby men publish and pronounce that Christ binds or loses. Again, this
binding stands not in the power of making laws, but in remitting and retaining
of men's sins, as the words going before declare, v. 18. If thy brother sin
against thee, etc. and Christ shows his own meaning when he says, Whose
sins ye remit they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain they are
retained, Ioh. 20. 23. having before in the person of Peter promised them this
honor, in this form of words, Math. 16. I will give unto thee the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound
in heaven. This which I say, is approved by consent of ancient Divines.
August. Psalm. 101. sermon. 2. Remission of sin (says he) is loosing: therefore
by the law of contraries, binding is to hold sin unpardoned. Hilar. upon
Matthew. cap. 18. Whom they bind on earth, that is (says he) leave untied of
the knottes of their sins. Lumberd the popish master of sentences, (...)
The Lord, says he, has given to Priests power of binding and loosing, that
is, of making manifest that men are bound or loosed. Again both Origin, (...)
18
Augustine, and (...) Ioh.
Theophylact attribute the power of binding to all Christians, and therefore
they for their parts, never dreamed that the power of binding should be an
authority to make laws. Lastly, the place Matthew. 23.4. ouerturnes the
argument, for there the Scribes and Pharisees are condemned, because they laid
upon men's shoulders the burdens of their traditions, as means of Gods worship
and things binding conscience.

Argum. 3. Act. 15. It seems good unto us and the holy Ghost, to lay no more
burden on you then these necessary things, that ye abstain from things
offered to idols, and blood, and that which is strangled, and fornication. Here
(say they) the Apostles by the instinct of the holy Ghost make a new law not
for this or that respect, but simply to bind consciences of the Gentiles, that
they might be exercised in obedience. And this is proved because the Apostles
call this law a burden, and call the things prescribed necessary, and S. Luke
terms them, the commandments of the Apostles: and Chrysostom calls the
Epistle sent to the Church, Imperium, that is, a lordly charge. To this they
add, the testimonies of Tertullian, Origin, Augustine. Ans. Though all be
granted that the law is a burden imposed, a precept of the Apostles, a charge;
again, that things required therein are necessary: yet will it not follow by
good consequent, that the law simply binds conscience; because it was given
with a reservation of Christian liberty, so as out of the case of scandal,
that is, if no offense were given to the weak Jews, it might freely be
omitted. And that will appear by these reasons. First of all Peter says, that
it is a tempting of God, to impose upon the Gentiles the yoke of Jewish
ceremonies: he therefore must needs be contrary to himself, if he intend to
bind men's consciences to abstinence from strangled, blood, and things offered
to idols. A reply is made, that this abstinence is prescribed not by the
ancient law of Moses, but by a new Ecclesiastical or Apostolical authority.
I answer again, that a Mosaicall ceremony is still the same thing, though it
be stablished by a new authority. And whereas Christ by his death put an end
to the ceremonial law, it is absurd to think that the Apostles by their
authority revived some part of it again, and bound men's consciences thereto.
Secondly the Church of God in all places suffered this commandment to cease,
which the faithful servants of God would never have done, if they had been
persuaded that this law had bound conscience simply. It is answered, that this
law ceased not because the giving of offense unto the Jews ceased, but
because it ceased universally: yea but it could not have ceased universally, if
it had bound conscience, specially considering it was propounded to the Church
without any mention or limitation of time. Thirdly Paul was present in this
counsel: and knew the intent of the law very well, and therefore no doubt he
did not in any of his Epistles gainsay the fame. This being granted, it
cannot be, that this law should bind conscience out of the case of offense.
1. Cor. 8.9
For he teaches Corinthians that things offered to idols may be eaten, so be
it the weak brother be not offended. Here it is answered, that when Paul writ
his first Epistle to the Corinthians, this commandment of the Apostles
touching things strangled and blood was not come unto them. Well, to grant all
this, which can not be proved, let it be answered, why Paul did not now
deliver it, and why he delivers a doctrine contrary to that which he had
decreed at Jerusalem, which was that the Gentiles should absolutely abstain
from things offered to idols. As for the testimony of the fathers they are
abused. Apol. c. 9. l. de pudicitia. Contra. Cells. lib. 8.
Indeed Tertullian says plainly, that Christians in his days abstained from
eating of blood, and he persuades men to continue in so doing, because he is of
opinion (being indeed far decei^ued) that this very law of the Apostles
must last to the end of the world: which conceit if the Papists hold not, what
mean they to build upon him. Orige^ Epist. 154. ad Publicolam.
that it is a good thing to abstain from things offered to idols, though it be
in necessity; he must be understood of the first kind of Idolithytes which
are yet remaining in the idol-temples still consecrated unto them, and not of
the second, of which the Apostles law (as I have said) must be understood.

Argum. 4. Ioh. 21. Christ says to Peter, ((...)) feed my sheep: that is, (as
the word imports) feed and rule my sheep. Ans. This feeding and ruling
stands not in making new laws, but in teaching and governing the Church of
god according to the doctrine which they had received from Christ. And this
action of feeding is ascribed to all Christians Revel. 3.27. Who cannot
thereupon challenge a power of making laws to the conscience.

Argum. 5. Ioh. 20. As my father sent me, so I send you: but Christ was sent of
his father not only with power of preaching and ministering the Sacraments, but
also with authority of commanding and giving judgment. Answ. If this kind of
reasoning may stand, all the Apostles shall be made redeemers; for they were
all sent as Christ was: and he was sent not only to preach the redemption of
mankind, but also to effect and work the same. If this be absurd, then it is a
flat abusing of Scripture to gather from this saying of Christ, that the
Apostles had power of binding conscience because he had so. It is true indeed
that there is a similitude or analogy between the calling of Christ and his
Apostles; but it wholly stands in these points. Christ was ordained to his
office before all worlds, and so were the Apostles: Christ was called of his
father immediately, and so were they of Christ: Christ was sent to the whole
world, and so were they: Christ received all power in heaven and earth as
being necessary for a Mediator: and they received an extraordinary
authority from him with such a plentiful measure of the spirit as was
necessary for the Apostilicall function. Lastly Christ was sent even as he was
man to be a teacher of the Jews: and therefore he is called the minister of
circumcision, Romans 15.8. and so the Apostles are sent by him to teach the
Gentiles. Thus far is the comparison to be enlarged, and no further. And
that no man might imagine that some part of this resemblance stands in a power
of binding conscience, Christ has put a special exception, when he says, Go
teach all nations, teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded
you, and not commandments of your own.

Argum. 6. Romans 13. Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of
God: and, they that resist shall receive to themselves judgment: and, ye must
be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Ans. Magistracy
indeed is an ordinance of God to which we owe subjection, but how far
subjection is due there is the question. For body and goods and outward
conversation, I grant all: but a subjection of conscience to men's laws, I
deny. And between these two there is a great difference; to be subject to
authority in conscience, and to be subject to it for conscience, as will be
manifest if we do but consider the phrase of the Apostle, the meaning whereof
is^ that we must perform obedience not only for anger, that is, for the
avoiding of punishment, but also for the avoiding of sin, and so by
consequent for avoiding a breach in conscience. Now this breach is not properly
made because man's law is neglected, but because Gods law is broken which
ordains magistracy, and withal binds men's consciences to obey their
lawefull commandments. And the damnation that is due unto men for resisting
the ordinance of god, comes not by the single breach of magistrates
commandment, but by a transgression of the law of God which appoints
magistrates and their authority. To this answer Papists reply nothing that is
of moment. Therefore I proceed.

Argum. 7.1. Cor. 4. What will you that I come unto you with a rod, or in the
spirit of meekenes? Now this rod is a judicial power of punishing sinners.
Answ. For the regiment and protection of Gods Church, there be two rods
mentioned in Scripture: the rod of Christ, and the Apostolical rod. The rod
of Christ is termed a rod of iron, or, the rod of his mouth; and it signifies
that absolute and sovereign power which Christ has over his creatures,
whereby he is able to convert and save them, or to forsake and destroy them.
And it is a peculiar privilege of this rod, to smite and wound the conscience.
The Apostolical rod was a certain extraordinary power whereby God enabled to
plague and punish rebellious offenders with grievous judgments, not in their
souls but in their bodies alone. With this rod Paul smote Elimas blind, and
Peter smote Ananias and Saphira with bodily death. And it may be that Paul by
his power did give up the incestuous man, when he was excommunicate, to be
vexed in his body and tormented by the devil: but that by this rod the
Apostles could smite conscience, it can not be proved.

Argum. 8.1. Tim. 3. Paul made a law that none having two wives should be
ordained a bishop: now this law is positive and Ecclesiastical and binds
conscience. Answer. Paul is not the maker of this law, but God himself, who
ordained that in marriage not three but two alone should be one flesh: and that
they which serve at the altar of the Lord, should be holy. And to grant that
this law were a new law beside the written word of God, yet does it not follow
that Paul was the maker of it: because he used not to deliver any doctrine to
the Churches but which he received of the Lord.

Argum. 9. Luke 10. He which hears you, hears me. Ans. These words properly
concern the Apostles, and do not in like manner belong to the Pastors and
teachers of the Church. And the end of these words is not to confirm any
Apostolical authority in making laws to the conscience; but to signify the
privilege which he had vouchsafed them above all others, that he would so
far forth assist them with his spirit, that they should not err or be
deceived in teaching and publishing the doctrine of salvation, though otherwise
they were sinful men: according to Math. 10. It is not you that speak, but
the spirit of my father which speaks in you. And the promise to be lead into
all truth, was directed unto them.

Argum. 10.1. Cor. 11. I praise you that you keep my commandments. Answ. Paul
delivered nothing of his own concerning the substance of the doctrine of
salvation and the worship of God, but that which he received from Christ. The
precepts here meant are nothing else but rules of decency and comely order in
the congregation: and though they were not to be obeyed, yet Paul's meaning was
not to bind any man's conscience therewith. For of greater matters he says,
This I speak for your commodity, and not to entangle you in a snare. 1. Cor.
7.35.

Argum. 11. Councels of ancient fathers when they command or forbid any
thing, do it with threatening of a curse to the offenders. Ans. The Church in
former time used to annexe unto her Canons the curse anathema, because things
decreed by them were indeed, or at the le^st thought to be the will and word
of God: and they had respect in the saying of Paul, If any teach otherwise
though he be an angel from heaven, let him be accursed. Therefore Councels
in this action were no more but instruments of God to accurse those, whom he
first had accursed.

Argum. 12. An act indifferent if i^ be commanded, is made necessary: and the
keeping of it is the practice of virtue, therefore every law binds conscience
to a sin. Ans. An act in it self indifferent being commanded by man's law, it
is not made simply necessary, for that is as much as Gods law does or can
do, but only in some part, that is, so far forth as the said act or action
tends to maintain and preserve the good end for which the law is made. And
though the action be in this regard necessary; yet does it still remain
indifferent, as it is considered in it self out of the end of the law: so as
if peace, the common good, and comely order may be maintained and all offense
avoided by any other means, the act may be done or not done without sin
before God. For whereas God himself has given liberty and feedom in the use
of things indif^erent, the law of man does not take away the same but only
moderate and order the ouercommon use of it for the common good.

Argum. 13. The fast of lent stands by a law and commandment of men^ and this
law binds conscience simply: for the ancient fathers have called it a
Tradition Apostolical, and make the keeping of it to be necessary, and the
not keeping of it a sin, and punish the offenders with excommunication. Ans.
It is plain to him that will not be obstinate, that Lent fast was not
commanded in the primitive Church, but was freely at men's pleasures, and in
several Churches diversely both in regard of space of time, as also in respect
of diversity of meats. Ireneus in his epistle to Victor cited by Eusebius
says, Eus. l. 5.26. Sozom. l. 7. cap. 19.
Some have thought that they must fast one day, some two days, some more,
some 40. hours day and night, which diversity of fasting commends the
unity of faith. Spiridion a good man did eat flesh in Lent, and caused his
guest to do the same, and this he did upon judgment, because he was persuaded
out of gods word, that to the clean all things were clean. And Eusebius
records, that Montanus the heretic was the first that prescribed solemn and
set laws of fasting. And whereas this fast is called Apostolical tradition,
it is no great matter, for it was the manner of the ancient Church in former
times to term rites and orders Ecclesi^sticall not set down in Scriptures
Apostolical orders, that by this means they might commend them to the people:
as Jerome testifies, Hier. epist 118. ad Luc. Sermon. de Temp. 62. Epist. ^ 6^
Chrysostom. on Math. hom. 47.
Every province (says he) may think the constitutions of the Ancestors to be
Apostolical laws. And whereas it is said to be a sin not to fast in Lent
(as Augus^ine speaks) it is not by reason of any commandment binding
conscience, for Augustine says plainly, that neither Christ nor his Apostles
appointed any set time of fasting: and Chrysostom, that Christ never commanded
us to follow his fast; but the true reason hereof is borrowed from the end.
For the Primitive Church used not the Popish fast, which is to eat whitmeate
alone, but an abstinence from all meats used specially to mortify the flesh
and to prepare men before hand to a worthy receiving of the Eucharist. And in
regard of this good end was the offense. And whereas it is said that ancient
fathers taught a necessity of keeping this fast, even Hierome whom they
allege to this purpose says the contrary. For confuting the error of
Montanus who had his set time of fast to be kept of necessity, he says,
Hieron. ad Marcel. de ^ror, Mo^
we fast in Lent according to the Apostles tradition as in a time meet for us:
and we do it not, as though it were not lawful for us to fast in the rest of
the year except Pentecost: but it is one thing to do a thing of necessity,
and an other to offer a gift of free will. Lastly, excommunication was for open
contempt of this order taken up in the Church, which was, that men should fast
before Easter for their further humiliation and preparation to the sacrament.
So the 29. canon of the Council of Gangres must be understood. As for the
Canons of the Apostles (so falsely called) and the 8. Council of Toledo, I much
respect not, what they say in this case.

Arg. 14. Gods authority binds conscience: magistrates authority is Gods
authority: therefore magistrates authority binds conscience properly. Ans.
Gods authority may be taken two ways: first for that sovereign and absolute
power which he uses over all his creatures: secondly for that finit and
limited power which he has ordained that men should exercise over men. If the
minor, namely that magistrates authority is Gods authority, be taken in the
first sense, it is false: for the sovereign power of God is incommunicable. If
it be taken in the second sense, the proposition is false. For there be sundry
authorities ordained of God, as the authority of the father over a child, of
the master over the servant, the authority of the master over his scholar,
which do bind in conscience as the authority of Gods laws does.

By these arguments which I have now answered, and by many other being but
lightly skanned, it will appear that necessary obedience is to be performed
both to civil and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: but that they have a
constraining power to bind conscience and that properly as Gods laws do, it is
not yet proved, neither can be; as I will make manifest by other arguments.

Arg. 1. He that makes a law binding conscience to mortal sin, has power,
if not to save, yet to destroy: because by sin; which follows upon the
transgression of his law, comes death and damnation. But God is the only
Lawgiuer that has this privilege; which is, after he has given his law, upon
the breaking or keeping thereof, to save or destroy, Iam. 4. 12. There is one
Lawgiuer that can save or destroy. Therefore God alone makes laws binding
conscience properly, and no creature can do the like. Answer is made that S.
James speaks of the principal Lawgiuer, that by his own proper authority
makes laws, and does in such manner save and destroy, that he need not fear
to be destroyed of any: and that he speaks not of secondarie lawgiuers that
are deputies of God, and make laws in his name. I say again that this answer
stands not with the text^ For S. James speaks simply without distinction,
limitation, or exception: and the effect of his reason is this. No man at all
must slander his brother, because no man must be judge of the law: and no man
can be judge of the law, because no man can be a lawgiuer to save or destroy.
Now then where be those persons that shall make laws to the souls of men, and
bind them unto punishment of mortal sin; considering that God alone is the
saving and destroying Lawgiuer.

Argum. 2. He that can make laws as truly binding conscience as Gods laws,
can also prescribe rules of Gods worship: because to bind the conscience is
nothing else but to cause it to excuse for things that are well done, and
therefore truly please God; and to accuse for sin whereby God is dishonored:
but no man can prescribe rules of Gods worship; and humane laws as they are
humane laws, appoint not the service of God. Esa. 29. 13. Their fear toward
me was taught by the precept of men. Mat. 15.6. They worship me in vain
teaching doctrines which are the commandments of men. Papists here make
answer, that by laws of men we must understand such laws as be unlawful or
unprofitable being made without the authority of God, or instinct of his
spirit. It is true indeed that these commandments of men were unlawful: but
the cause must be considered; they were unlawful not because they commanded
that which was unlawful and against the will of God, but because things in
themselves lawefull were commanded as parts of Gods worship. To wash the
outward part of the cup or platter, and to wash hands before meat, are things
in respect of civil use very lawful, and yet are these blamed by Christ, and
no other reason can be rendered but this; that they were prescribed not as
things indifferent or civil, but as matters pertaining to Gods worship. It is
not against Gods word in some politic regards to make distinction of meats,
and drinks, and times: yet Paul calls these things doctrines of devils,
because they were commanded as things wherein God should be worshipped.

Arg. 3. God has now in the new Testament given a liberty to the conscience,
whereby it is freed from all laws of his own whatsoever, excepting such laws
and doctrines as are necessary to salvation, Col. 2. 10. If ye be dead with
Christ, ye are free from the elements of the world. Gal. 5.1. Stand ye in the
liberty wherewith Christ has freed you, and be not again entangled with the
yoke of bondage. Now, if humane laws made after the grant of this liberty,
bind conscience of themselves, the^ must they either take away the foresaid
liberty, or diminish the same; but that they cannot do: for that which is
granted by an higher authority, namely God himself, cannot be revoked or
repealed by the inferior authority of any man. It is answered, that this
freedom is only from the bondage of sin, from the curse of the moral law,
from the ceremonial and judicial laws of Moses, and not from the laws of
our superiors. And I answer again, that it is absurb to think that God gives
us liberty in conscience from any of his own laws, and yet will have our
consciences still to remain in subjection, to the laws of sinful men.

Argum. 4. Whosoever binds conscience, commandes conscience. For^ the bond is
made by a commandment urging conscience to do his duty, which is to accuse
or excuse for evil or well doing. Now Gods laws command conscience in as much
as they are spiritual, commanding body and spirit, with all the thoughts,
will, affections, desires, and faculties, and requiring obedience of them all
according to their kind. As for the laws of men, they want power to command
conscience. Indeed if it were possible for our governors by law to command
men's thoughts and affections, then also might they command conscience: but the
first is not possible, for their laws can reach no further then the outward
man, that is, to body and goods, with the speeches and deeds thereof: and the
end of them all, is not to maintain spiritual peace of conscience, which is
between man and God, but only that external and civil peace which is
between man and man. And it were not meet that men should command conscience,
which cannot see conscience and judge of all her actions, which appear not
outwardly, and whereof there be no witnesses, but God and the conscience of the
doer. Lastly, men are not fit commanders of conscience, because they are no
Lords of it, but God himself alone.

Argum. 5. Men in making laws are subject to ignorance and error: and
therefore when they have made a law (as near as possibly they can) agreeable
to the equity of Gods law, yet can they not assure themselves and others that
they have failed in no point or circumstance. Therefore it is against reason
that humane laws being subject to defects, faults, errors, and manifold
imperfections, should truly bind conscience, as Gods laws do, which are the
rule of righteousness. All governors in the world, (by reason that to their old
laws, they are constrained to put restrictions, ampliations, and modifications
of all kinds, with new readings and interpretations) upon their daily
experience see and acknowledge this to be true which I say, saving the Bishop
of Rome (so falsely termed) which persuades himself to have when he is in his
consistory, such an infallible assistance of the spirit, that he cannot
possibly err in judgment.

Argum. 6. If men's laws by inward virtue binds conscience properly as Gods
laws, then our duty is to learn, study, and remember them as well as Gods
laws, yea ministers must be diligent to preach them, as they are diligent in
preaching the doctrine of the gospel: because every one of them binds to
mortal sin, as the Papists teach. But that they should be taught and learned
as Gods laws, it is most absurd in the judgment of all men, Papists
themselves not excepted.

Argum. 7. Inferior authority cannot bind the superior: now the courts of
men and their authority are under conscience. For God in the heart of every man
has erected a tribunal seat, and in his stead he has placed neither Saint
nor Angel, nor any other creature whatsoever, but conscience it self, who
therefore is the highest Judge that is or can be under God; by whose direction
also courts are kept, and laws are made.

Thus much of the Popish opinion: by which it appears that one of the
principal notes of Antichrist agrees fittely to the Pope of Rome. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. makes it a special property of Antichrist to exalt himself against
or above all that is called God, or worshipped. Now what does the Pope else,
when he takes upon him authority to make such laws as shall bind the
conscience, as properly and truly as Gods laws? and what does he else when he
ascribes to himself power to free men's consciences from the bond of such laws
of God, as are unchangeable; as may appear in a Canon of the Council of
Trent: the words are these, Sess. 24. can. 3.
If any shall say, that those degrees of consanguinitie that be expressed in
L^uiticus, do only hinder matrimony to be made, and break it being made,
and that the Church cannot dispense with some of them, or appoint that more
degrees may hinder or break marriage, let him be accursed. O sacrilegious
impiety! considering the laws of affinity and consanguinitie, Leuiticus 18.
are not ceremonial, or judicial laws peculiar to the Jews, but the very
laws of nature. What is this Canon else, but a public proclamation to the
world, that the pope and church of Rome do sit as lords, or rather idols in the
hearts and consciences of men. This will yet more fully appear to any man, if
we read popish books of practical or Case-diuinitie, in which the common
manner is, to bind conscience where God loses it, and to loose where he
binds: but a declaration of this, requires long time.

Now I come (as near as possibly I can) to set down the true manner, how men's
laws by the common judgment of Divines may be said to bind conscience. That
this point may be cleared, two things must be handled. By what means they
bind, and How far forth.

Touching the means, I set down this rule. Wholesome laws of men, made of
things indifferent, so far forth bind conscience by vertne of the general
commandment of God, which ordains the Magistrates authority: that whoso^uer
shall wittingly and willingly, with a disloyal mind, either break or omit
such laws, is guilty of sin before.

By wholesome laws, I understand such positive constitutions, as are not
against the law of God, and withal tend to maintain the peaceable estate and
common good of men.

Furthermore I add this clause, made of things indifferent, to note the
peculiar matter whereof humane laws properly entreat: namely such things as
are neither expressly commanded or forbidden by God.

Now such kind of laws have no virtue or power in themselves to constrain
conscience, but they bind only by virtue of an higher commandment. Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.1. or, Honor father and mother,
Exodus 20. which commandments binds us in conscience to perform obedience to
the goodlawes of men. As S. Peter says, Submit your selves to every humane
ordinance for the Lord. 1. Pet. 2.13. that is, for conscience of God, as he
says afterward, v. 19. whereby he signifies two things: first that God has
ordained the authority of governors, secondly that he has appointed in his
word, and thereby bound men in conscience to obey their governors lawful
commandments.

If the case fall out otherwise, as commonly it does, that humane laws be
not inacted of things indifferent, but of things that be good in themselves,
that is, commanded by God, then are they not humane properly but divine laws.
Men's laws entreating of things that are morally good, and the parts of Gods
worship, are the same with Gods laws: and therefore bind conscience, not
because they were inacted by men, but because they were first made by God: me^
being no more but instruments and ministers in his name to revive, renew, and
to put in exequution such precepts and laws as prescribe the worship of God,
standing in the practice of true religion and virtue. Of this kind are all
positive laws touching articles of faith, and the duties of the moral law.
And the man that breaks such laws sins two ways, first because he breaks
that which is in conscience a law of God, secondly because in disobeying his
lawful Magistrate, he disobeyes the general commandment of God touching
magistracy.

But if it shall fall out that men's laws be made of things that are evil and
forbidden by God, then is there no bond of conscience at al; but contrariwise
men are bound in conscience not to obey, Act. 4.19. And hereupon the three
children are commended for not obeying Nabuchadnezzar, when he gave a
particular commandment unto them to fall down and worship the golden image,
Dan. 3.

Moreover, in that man's law binds not but by the authority of Gods law, hence
it follows, that Gods law alone has this privilege, that the breach of it
should be a sin. S. John says 1. epist. 3. Sin is the anomie, or,
transgression of the law, understanding Gods law. When David by adultery and
murder had offended many men, and that many ways, he says Psalm. 51. Against
thee, against thee have I sinned. And Augustine defined sin to be some thing
said, done, or desired against the law of God. Some man may say, if this be
so, belike then we may break men's laws without sin. I answer, that men in
breaking humane laws, both may and do sin; but yet not simply, because they
break them, but because in breaking them, they do also break the law of God.
The breach of a law must be considered two ways. Frst as it is a trespass,
hinderance, injury, damage; and in this respect it is committed against men's
laws: secondly the breach of a law must be considered as it is finne, and so
it is only against Gods law, which appoints obedience to the Magistrate.

The second point, namely, How far forth men's laws bind conscience, I
explane on this manner. It is all that the laws of God do or can do, to bind
conscience simply and absolutely. Therefore humane laws bind not simply of
themselves, but so farreforth as they are agreeable to Gods word, serve for the
common good, stand with good order, and hinder not the liberty of conscience.
The necessity of the law arises of the necessity of the good end thereof. And
as the end is good and profitable more or less, so is the law it self
necessary more or less. Men's laws are like their testimonies, which neither
prove nor disprooue of themselves, but borrow all the strength which they have
to constrain, from the truth, wisdom, and fidelity of them that bear
witness.

Hence it follows that a man may do any thing beside humane laws and
constitutions without breach of conscience. For if we shall omit the doing of
any law, I. without hinderence of the end and particular considerations, for
which the law was made: II. without offense giving, as much as in us lies:
III. without contempt of him that made the law, we are not to be accused of
sin. Example. In time of war, the magistrate of a city commands that no
man shall open the gates: the end is, that the city and every member thereof
may be in safety. Now it falls out that certain citizens, being upon
occasion without the city, are pursued by the enemy and in danger of their
lives. Hereupon some man without any more ado opens the gate to reskue the^.
The question is, whether he have sinned or no. And the truth is, he has not:
because he did not hinder the end of the law, but rather further it, and that
without scandal to men, or contempt to the magistrate.

And this stands even by the equity of Gods word. God made a law, that the
priests only should eat of the shewbread: now David being no priest, did
upon urgent occasion eat of it without sin. If this be true in Gods law,
then it may also be true in the laws of men, that they may in some cases be
omitted without sin against God.

Neither must this seem strange. For as there is a keeping of a law, and a
breaking of the same; so there is a middle or mean action between them both,
which is, to do a thing Facere aliquid praeter legem, non contratame^.
beside the law, and that without sin.

To proceed further, men's laws be either Civil or Ecclesiastical. Civil
laws are for their substance determinations of necessary and profitable
circumstances, tending to uphold and maintain the commandments of the second
table. More specially they prescribe what is to be done, and what is to be left
undone, touching actions both civil and criminal, touching offices and
bargains of all sorts, etc. yea they conclude, inioyne, and command not only
such affairs as be of small importance; but also things and actions of great
weight, tending to maintain common peace, civil society, and the very state
of the common wealth. Now such laws bind so far forth, that, albeit they be
omitted without any apparent scandal or contempt, yet the breach of them is a
sin before God. Take this example. A subject in this land upon poverty, or
upon a covetous mind, against the good law of the land, coins money, which
afterward by a sleight of his wit, is cunningly conveyed abroad into the
hands of men, and is not espied. Here is no evident offense given to any man,
nor open contempt showed to the lawgiuer: and yet in this action he has
sinned, in that closely otherwise then he ought to have done, he has hindered
the good of the commonwealth; and robbed the sovereign Prince of her right.

Ecclesiastical laws, are certain necessary and profitable determinations
of circumstances of the commandments of the first table. I say here
circumstances, because all doctrines pertaining to the foundation and good
estate of the Church, as also the whole worship of God, are set down and
commanded in the written word of God, and can not be prescribed and concluded
otherwise by all the Churches in the world. As for the Creedes and Conf^ssions
of particular Churches, they are in substance Gods word, and they bind not in
conscience by any power the Church has, but because they are the word of God.

The laws then which the Church in proper speech is said to make, are decrees
concerning outward order and comelines in the administration of the word and
Sacraments, in the meetings of the congregation, etc. and such laws made
according to the general rules of Gods word, (which requires that all things
be done to edification, in comelines, for the avoiding of offense) are
necessary to be observed, and the word of God binds all men to them so far
forth as the keeping of them maintains decent order, and preuents open
offense. Yet if a law concerning some external ri^e or thing indifferent, be
at sometime or upon some occasion omitted; no offense given, nor contempt
showed to Ecclesiastical authority, there is no breach made in the conscience:
and that appears by the example before handled. The Apostles guided by the
holy Ghost, made a decree for the avoiding of offense, necessary to be
observed, namely that the Gentiles should abstain from strangled and blood and
Idolithytes: and yet Paul out of the case of scandal and contempt, permits the
Corinthians to do otherwise, 1. Cor. 8. and 9. which he would not have done,
if to do otherwise out of the case of scandal and contempt, had bin sin.

Again, laws are either mixed or merely penal. Mixed, are such laws as are of
weighty matters, and are propounded in commanding or forbidding terms: and
they according to the good intention of the Lawgiuer, bind men first of all to
obedience, for the necessary good of humane societies; and secondly to a
punishment, if they obey not, that a supply may be made of the hindrance of
the common good. In the breach of this kind of laws, though a man be never so
willing to suffer the punishment, yet that will not discharge his conscience
before God, when he offends. If a man coin money with this mind to be willing
to die when he is convicted, yet that will not free him from a sin in the
action, because Gods law binds us not only to subjection in bearing of
punishments, but also to obedience of his bare commandment, it being lawful;
though he should set down no punishment.

A law merely penal is that, which being made of matters of less
importance, and not uttered precisely in commanding terms, does only declare
and show what is to be done, or conditionally require this or that with respect
to the punishment, on this manner. If any person do this or that, then he
shall forfeit thus or thus. This kind of law binds especially to the
punishment, and that in the very intent of the lawgiuer, and he that is ready
in omitting the law to pay the fine or punishment, is not to be charged with
sin before God: the penalty being answerable to the loss that comes by the
neglect of the law. Here a question may be demanded; whether a man that has
taken his oath to keep all the laws or orders of any town or corporation, and
yet afterward omits the doing of some of them, be perjured or no. The answer
may be this, that the laws of every society and corporation must be
distinguished. Some are very weighty (as I have said) being of the very
foundation and state of a body; so as it can not well stand without them: and
whosoever wittingly and willingly breaks any of these (they being good and
lawful,) can not be freed from perjury. Again there be laws of lesser
importance, that tend only to maintain decent order and comelines in the
societies of men; and they are of that nature that the estate of the
corporation or town may stand without them: and whosoever upon occasion omits
the doing of any of these, is not therefore perjured, so be it he carry a
loyal mind and be content to pay the fine or penalty. For such kind of orders
and constitutions, require first of all obedience; and if that be omitted, they
require a mulct or fine; which, if it be willingly paid, the law is satisfied.

Thus we see how far forth men's laws bind conscience. The use of this point
is this: I. Hence we learn that the immunitie of the Popish clergy, whereby
they take themselves exempted from civil courts and from civil authority in
criminal causes, has no warrant: because Gods commandments binds every man
whatsoever, to be subject to the magistrate, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers. II. Hence we see also, what notorious rebels
those are, that being borne subjects of this land, yet choose rather to die
then to acknowledge (as they are bound in conscience) the Queens; Majesty to
be supreme governor under God in all causes and over all persons. III. Lastly
we are taught hereby to be willing to give subjection, obedience, reverence,
and all other duties to Magistrates, whether they be superior or inferior:
yea with chearefulnes to pay taxes and subsidies, and all such lawful charges
as are appointed by them. Give to Caesar that which is Cesars, and to God that
which is Gods. Give to all men their duties: tribute to whom tribute: custom
to whom custom. Romans 13.7.

9. Of an oath binding.
Now follows the Oath, which is either assertorie, or promissorie. Assertorie,
by which a man avouches that a thing was done or not done. Promissorie, by
which a man promises to do a thing or not to do it. Of both these I mean to
speak, but specially of the second. And here two points must be considered,
the first by wha^t means an oath binds, the second when it binds.

An oath binds by virtue of such particular commandments, as require the
keeping of oaths lawfully taken. Number. 30.3. Whosoever swears an oath to bind
his soul by a bond, he shall not break his word, but shall do according to
all that proceed out of his mouth.

This being so, a question may be made, whether the oaths of Infidels bind
conscience, and by what virtue, considering they neither know the Scriptures
nor the true God. Ans. They Thus says August. epist. 154. ad Publicolam. and
Lumb. sent. l. 3. did. 93.
do bind in conscience. For example: Jacob and Laban make a covenant confirmed
by oath. Jacob swears by the true God, Laban by the gods of Nachor, that is,
by his idols. Now Jacob, though he approve not the form of this oath, yet he
accepts it for a civil bond of the covenant: and no doubt, though Laban
believed not Gods word revealed to the Patriarchs, yet he was bound in
conscience to keep this oath even by the law of nature: and though he knew not
the true God, yet he reputed the false god of Nachor to be the true God. Genesis
31.53.

Again, if a lawful oath by virtue of Gods commandments bind conscience,
then it must needs be that the Roman Church has long erred, in that she
teaches and maintains that governors, Tho. 2.2. q. 89.
as namely the Pope and other inferior Bishops, have power to give relaxations
and dispensations, not only for oaths unlawful (from which the word of God
does sufficiently free us, though they should never give absolution) but from a
true and lawful oath made wittingly and willingly without error or deceit, of
a thing honest and possible; as when the Pope frees the subjects of this land,
as occasion is offered, from their sworn allegiance and loyalty to which they
are bound, not only by the law of nature, but also by a solemn and particular
oath to the Supremacy, which none ever deemed unlawful but such as carry
traitors hearts. Now this erroneous divinity would easily be revoked, if men
did but consider the nature of an oath, one part whereof is Invocation, in
which we pray unto God, first that he would become a witness unto us that we
speak the truth and purpose not to deceive: secondly if we fail and break
our promise, that he would take revenge upon us: and in both these petitions we
bind our selves immediately to God himself: and God again who is the ordainer
of the oath, accepts this bond and knits it by his commandment, till it be
accomplished. Hence it follows, that no creature can have power to untie the
bond of an oath that is truly and lawfully an oath, unless we will exalt the
creatures above God himself. And the Jewish teachers gave better counsel when
they commanded the people to perform their oaths to the Lord, for the
preventing of perjury, and our Savior Christ in that gainesaies them not.
Math. 5.33.

Next let us consider the time when an oath binds or binds not.

An oath binds then, when it is made of things certain and possible, in truth,
justice, judgment, for the glory of God and the good of our neighbor.

Quest. I. Whether does an oath bind conscience if by the keeping of it there
follow losses and hindrances? Ans. If it be of a thing that is lawful, and the
damages be private to him that swears, then does it bind conscience. For
example: A man makes a purchase of land at the sea side: his bargain is
confirmed only by oath: and it falls out that before he do enter possession,
the sea breaks in and drownes a part of that purchase. Now he is in conscience
to stand to his bargain, because the thing is lawful, and the damage is
private, and great reverence must be had of the name of God, which has bin
used in the bargain making. David makes it the property of a good man, to
swear to his own hindrance and not to change, Psalm. 15.4.

Quest. II. Whether the oath which a man has taken, being induced thereto by
fraud and guile, does bind conscience. Ans. If it be still of a thing lawful,
and bring nothing but private losses, it is to be kept. When the Gibeonites had
by a fraud brought Joshua to make a league with them, and to bind it with an
oath; he and the Princes of the people answer them thus: We have sworn unto
them by the Lord God of Israel, now therefore we may not touch them, Ios. 9.
19. And 300. years after, when Saul slew certain of the Gibeonites against
this oath, the plague was upon the people of Israel three years, and was not
stayed till certain persons of Saul's family for a recompense were put to
death. 2. Sam. 21.7.

Quest. III. Whether an oath made by fear or compulsion bind in conscience.
For example: A thief disappointed of the booty which he looked for, binds
the true man by solemn oath upon pain of present death to fetch and deliver
unto him some portion of money, as one 100. or 200. crowns for the redeeming
of his life. Well, the oath is taken, and the question is; whether it bind him
or not to perform his promise. An answer may be this: some P. Mart. class. 2.
loc. 13. n. 21. Melanct. in E^h. quaest. de iuram.
Protestant divines think it does bind: some again think Calv. upon Psalm. 15.
no: but I take it the safest course to hold the mean between both, on this
manner. The oath seems to bind, and is to be performed: neither is it against
the good of the commonwealth (for then it were unlawful) but it is rather a
furtherance in that a member thereof is preserved: and the losses which follow
are only private to the man, rather to be endured then loss of life. Yet that
a remedy may be had of this private injury, and that a public mischief may
be prevented, the party is to reveal the matter to the Magistrate, whose
office it is to punish robbers and to order all things according to equity for
the common good. But if the case fall out, that the man through exceeding fear
do further swear to keep silence, I see not how his oath may be kept, except
he be sure that nothing will ensue thereof, but a private damage to himself.
For otherwise perpetual silence seems to be a secret consenting to the
robber, and an occasion that others fall into the like danger and hazard of
their lives.

Again, in six cases an oath binds nothing at all. I. If it be made of a
thing that is flat against the word of God. For all the power of binding which
it has is by the word of God: and therefore when it is against Gods will, it
has no power to constrain. And it is an old received rule, that an oath must
not be a bond of iniquity. Hereupon David when he made a rash oath to kill
Nabal and all his household, rejoiced when he had occasion offered by Abigail to
break the same, 1. Sam. 23.32. And though he swear to Shemi, that he would
save his life, 2. Sam. 19. 23. yet afterward upon better consideration (as it
may seem) he commanded his son Solomon to put him to death, as one that had
long ago deserved the same. 1. King. 2.9. And Herod was far deceived, that
thought he was bound by his oath to give to the damsel John Baptists head in a
platter, Matthew. 14.7. II. If it be against the good and wholesome laws of any
kingdom or country, whereof a man is a member, it binds not at all: because
on the contrary Gods commandment binds us to keep the good laws of men.
III. If it be made by such persons as want sufficient reason and discretion, as
young children, fools, mad men. For the conscience can not indeed be bound
where the understanding can not discern what is done. IV. If it be made of
such as have no power to bind themselves, it binds not: because it is made
against the law of nature, which is, that Qui sui iuris n^ est obligare se non
potest.
he which is not in his own power can not bind himself. Hence it follows,
that Papists err grossly when they teach, that a child Bellar. lib. 2. de
Mon. cap. 36.
may enter into any rule or order of religion, yea bind himself thereto by
oath, and the oath to be good, flat against his parents consent. Number. 30.4. If
a woman vow unto the Lord, and bind her self by a hond, being in her fathers
house in the time of her youth, etc. v. 6. If her father disallow her the same
day that he hears all her vows and bonds, they shall not be of value. And an
ancient Council decreed that all children that upon pretense of Gods worship
should depart from their parents, Conci. Gang. cap. 16.
and not do them due reverence, should be accursed. Secondly they err in that
they teach that the promise made privately by a child in way of marriage,
without and against consent of wise and careful parents, binds them: whereas
indeed if this promise were further bound by an oath, it could not stand:
because children under government and tuition of parents, can not give
themselves. V. It binds not if it be made of a thing that is out of a man's
power, as if a man swear to his friend to give him an other man's goods. VI. If
at the first it were lawful, and afterward by some means become either
impossible or unlawful, it binds not conscience. For when it becomes
impossible, then we may safely think that God from heaven frees a man from his
oath. And when it begins to be unlawful, then it cease to bind, because the
binding virtue is only in and from the word of God. For example: A king binds
himself by oath to a foreign Christian Prince to find him men and money to
defend his people against all enemies. This oath is lawful. Well, afterward
the Prince becomes a professed enemy to him, his religion, and people: and
then the kings oath becomes unlawful and binds him not: because the word
forbids that there should be any league of amity with Gods enemies: though
there may be leagues of concord with the^.

Seeing a lawful oath must bind conscience, though a man be deceived and great
losses follow, it shows in how great reverence we should have Gods name, and
with what care and consideration take an oath. And by this we must be
advertised to take heed of customable swearing in our common talk, whether
our oaths be great or small. We must think of an oath as a part of Gods
worship: nay the holy Ghost often puts it for the whole worship of God. Esa.
19.18. In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of
Canaan, and shall swear by the Lord of hosts, that is, acknowledge and
worship him. Ierem. 12.16. If they will learn the ways of my people, to
swear by my name, The Lord lives, then shall they be built in the midst of
my people. This serves to show unto us, that such as give themselves to
swearing, want religion and good conscience: and that those families in which
there is rifenesse of oaths, abandon all care of religion, and banish God out
of their houses. And indeed it is a very hard thing for the common swearer to
avoid common perjury. If we see a man hold up his hand at the bar of an
earthly judge, we pity him and are sorry for him: oh then why do we not
pity blasphemers and common swearers. For with God they are no better then
rebels, that hold up their hands at the bar of his judgment seat as guilty
malefactors. Exodus 20.7. Augustine says well, They that worship stocks and
stones fear to swear fasly by stones, Sermon. 30. de verbis Apost
and do thou not fear God that is present, God that lives, God that
knows, God that takes revenge of contemners? but of bad custom when thou
art believed, thou swearest: when none requires it, thou swearest: and when men
cannot abide it, thou swearest.

Thus much of an Oath: now follows a promise, which is either to God, or man:
the first is called a vow, the second a single promise.

A vow is taken three ways. First generally for a promise of moral
obedience; and this vow is first made in Baptism and continued in the Lords
supper, 10. Of a vow binding.
as also in the spiritual exercises of invocation and repentance. It is called
of Peter 1. epist. 3.21. the stipulation which a good conscience makes to God.

This kind of vow binds all and every member of the Church of God. And the
not keeping of it is the common sin of the world: for most men make not
conscience to perform that which they have promised to God in Baptism: and
therefore their Baptism is become unto them the sacrifice of fools, Eccl.
4.17. But considering we are bound in conscience by this vow, let us hereafter
endeavor to be as good as our word; and that shall be, when we begin to die
to our sins and rise to newness of life. There is no man almost but will
seem to have care to keep touch with men; what a shame is it then for us not
to keep covenant with God.

Again, a vow is taken for a promise of ceremonial obedience, whereof read
Number. 6. and 30. and Leuit. 27. This vow is peculiar to the old testament, and
did not bind all men, but only such as had peculiar occasion to vow, and
thereupon bound themselves: as the Nazarites, and others.

Thirdly, a vow is taken for the performance of some outward and bodily
exercises taken up of a man's own accord, as being things in a man's own
liberty, without any commandment of god: as the keeping of set times of fast,
of praying or reading, the performance of set taskes, alms giving, abstinence
from certain meats and drinks, in the use whereof through our own weakness,
we fear any occasion of sin. And this kind of vow is more peculiar to the
new testament.

(...) dies, but always lies gnawing and grabbling, and pulling at the heart
of man, Mark. 9.24. and causes more pain and anguish, then any disease in the
world can do.

The time when conscience performs these actions, is not before the sin or
in the act of sinning, but especially after the sin is done and past. Reason
I. Before a man sins, the devil does extenuate the fault and make sin to
be no sin. II. Corrupt affections do for a time so blind and ouercast
judgment, that it does not see or at the least consider what is good or badde,
till afterward.

Neither does conscience accuse and condemn only for time present, but also
long after a thing is done. The consciences of Joseph's brethren accused them
2^. years after they had sold him into Egypt, Genesis 42.21.

The effect of the accusing and condemning conscience, is to stir up sundry
passions and motions in the heart, but specially these five.

The first is shame, which is an affection of the heart, whereby a man is
grieved and displeased with himself, that he has done any evil: and this
shame shows it self by the rising of the blood from the heart to the face.

Yet we must here remember that even such as have the pardon of their sins,
and are not guilty, may be ashamed and blush, Romans 6. 21. What fruit had ye
in those things, whereat ye now blush, or, he ashamed. Yet for all this,
even those which are most guilty, may be without all shame, Ier. 6.15. Were
they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, nay; (they were not
ashamed, neither could they have any shame: because they are grown to some
great height in sin. Ephesians 4.18.

The second passion is sadness and sorrow: which is commonly thought to be
nothing else but melancholy: but between them twain, there is great
difference. Sorrow, that comes by melancholy, arises only of that humor
annoying the body: but this other sorrow arises of a man's sins, for which
his conscience accuses him. Melancholy may be cured by physic: this sorrow
can not be cured by any thing but by the blood of Christ.

The third is fear: in causing whereof conscience is very forcible. If a man
had all the delights and pleasures that heart can wish, they can not do him
any good, if conscience be guilty. Belshazzar when he was in the midst of
all his delights, and saw the hand writing upon the wall, his countenance
changed, his thoughts troubled him, his joints loosed, and his knees smote
together, Dan. 5.9. Yea the guilty conscience will make a man afraid, if he
see but a worm peep out of the ground: or a silly creature to go cross his
way: or if he see but his own shadow on a sudden: or if he do but forecast
an evil with himself. Prou. 28.1. The wicked flies when no man pursues him.

Terrors of conscience, when they are more vehement cause other passions in
the body, as exceeding heat, like that which is in the fit of an ague, the
rising of the entralls toward the mouth: and souning: as experience has
often showed. And the writer of the book of wisdom says truly, cap. 17.10.
It is a fearful thing when malice is condemned by her own testimony: and a
conscience that is touched, does ever forecast cruel things. For fear ^^
nothing else, but the betraying of the succors, that reason offers, etc.
they that did endure the the darkness of Egypt.
might that was intolerable, etc. sometimes were troubled with monstrous
visions, and sometimes they swouned, as though their own souls should betray
them: for a sudden fear not looked for, came upon them.

The fourth is desperation, whereby a man through the vehement and constant
accusation of his conscience, comes to be out of all hope of the pardon of his
sins. This made Saul, Achitophel, and Judas, to hang themselves: this makes
many in these days to do the like: as appears by the declarations of such
as have been prevented, when they were about to hang or drown themselves, or
to cut their own throats.

The last is a perturbation or disquietnesse of the whole man: whereby all the
powers and faculties of the whole man are forth of order. Esa. 57.20. The
wicked are like the raging of the sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt.

Thus much of the two first actions of conscience, which are to accuse and
condemn: the second follows to excuse and absolve.

To excuse, is an action of the conscience giving judgment that the thing is
well done.

To absolve, is an action of the conscience giving judgment that a man is free
and clear from fault and so from punishment.

From these two actions arise some special affections: I. boldness and
confidence, Prou. 28.1. The righteous are bold as a lion. II. Joy and
rejoicing, 2. Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is the testimony of my conscience,
that in all simplicity and godly pureness I have had my conversation in the
world. Hence it is said, that a good conscience is a continual feast.

Hitherto I have spoken how conscience gives judgment of things done and past:
now follows her judgment of things to be done.

Conscience gives judgment of things to come, by foretelling, and (as it were)
saying inwardly in the heart, that the thing may be well done. Of this kind of
judgment every man may have experience in himself, when he is about to
enterprise any business either good or bad.

By this we may see the goodness of God to all men. If a man being to make an
unknown journey, should find one that would go with him and show him the
way, and all the turnings thereof, he could not but take it for a point of
courtesy. Well, we are pilgrims in this world, our life is our journey: God
also has appointed our conscience to be our companion and guide, to show us
what course we may take and what we may not.

And here it must be noted, that in all things to be done, conscience is of
great force and bears a great stroke. For, this is the beginning of a good
work, that the conscience first of all give her judgment truly, that the
thing may be done, and is acceptable to God. Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of
faith, that is, whatsoever is not done of a settled persuasion in judgment and
conscience out of Gods word, howsoever men judge of it, is sin. Again, God
regards not the outward pomp of the action of the doer, but obedience and
especially the obedience of the heart: therefore unless the conscience first of
all approve the thing to be good and agreeable to Gods will, Well inso^^ed.
it can be nothing else but a sin. And he that shall do a thing, because it
is good in his own eyes, not knowing that God does allow of it, preferres
himself before God, and disobeies as the servant that in his masters house
will not do his masters will but his own will.

From this former rule arise three other: the first, whatsoever is done with a
doubting conscience is a sin. For example: some believers in the Primitive
Church held, that still after the ascension of Christ there remained a
difference between meat and meat, and therefore it was a scruple to them to
eat of sundry kind of meats: now put the case, that by example they are
drawn on to eat swines flesh, or some other thing which they think is
forbidden; this done, there is no question but they have sinned, as Paul
proves, Romans 14. 14. I know and am persuaded through the Lord Jesus, that
there is nothing unclean of it self: but unto him that judges any thing
unclean, it is unclean: and v. 23. He that doubts, is condemned, if he
eat, because he eats not of faith.

The second, whatsoever thing is done in, or with an erroneous conscience, it
is a sin. For example: in the Primitive Church diverse of the gentiles held
this error, that fornication was a thing indifferent, and therefore conscience
told them that they might do it: and yet nevertheless fornication in them
was a sin, because conscience erred in her judgment. And evil remains
evil, though conscience say the contrary a thousand times.

The third, what is done Erroneous cons^ience bin. ^eth so far forth, that if a
m^n judge a thing to be evil, though falsely, and yet afterward do it, he
has sinned and dishonored God as ma^h as in him lies.
against conscience though it err and be deceived, it is sin in the doer.
Example. An Anabaptist holding it utterly unlawful to swear, is brought before
a magistrate; and urged either through fear or some like cause, takes an oath
and that against his own conscience: now the question is, whether he has
sinned or no? Ans. He has indeed sinned; not so much because he has taken
an oath, for that is the ordinance of God: but because he has taken an oath
in a bad manner, that is, against his conscience, and therefore not in faith.

Thus it is manifest that conscience bears a great stroke in all things that
are to be said or done. And hereby we are advertised of many things. First, if
a thing done without good direction of conscience be a sin, then much more
that which is done without good direction of Gods word is a flat sin: for
without direction of Gods word, conscience can give no good direction. And if
God will hold that for a sin which is done without direction of his word,
then no doubt Gods word ministers sufficient direction for all actions
whatsoever: so as if a man be but to receive a morsel of bread into his mouth,
it can so far forth direct him, that in doing of it, he shall be able to
please God. If this were not true, ma^s case were most miserable. For then we
should sin in manifold actions, and that without remedy. And hereby the
Word, I mean nothing but the Scriptures of the old and new testament, which
contain in themselves sufficient direction for all actions. As for the law of
nature, though it affoard indeed some direction; yet is it corrupt, imperfect,
uncertain: and whatsoever is right and good therein, is contained in the written
word of god. And as for the best unwritten traditions, let all the Papists in
the world answer if they can, how I may in conscience be persuaded that they
are the word of God. If they say that the ancient fathers of the Primitive
Church avouch in their writings that they are Apostolical traditions, I
answer again, how shall I know and be certain in conscience that the
fathers subject to error, in saying so, have not erred.

Again we learn hence, that a good intention is not sufficient to make a good
work, unless withal conscience give judgment that God does approve the action.
This shows the ignorance of our people, that when as, in their dealings they
run upon a good meaning, then always they think they do well and please God.

Thirdly, hence it appears that all things devised by man for the worship of
God, are flat sins; because conscience cannot say of them that they please
God, Esaias 29.13. Mar. 7.7.

Lastly we learn here that ignorance of Gods will and word, is a dangerous
thing, and makes the life of man to abound, yea to flow with a sea of offenses
against God. Men commonly think that if they keep themselves from perjury,
blasphemy, murder, theft, whoredom, all is well with them: but the truth is,
that so long as they live in ignorance, they want right and true direction of
conscience out of Gods word, and therefore their best actions are sins, even
their eating and drinking, their sleeping and waking, their buying and selling,
their speech and silence, yea their praying and serving of god. For they do
these actions either of custom, or example, or necessity, as beasts do, and
not of faith: because they know not Gods will touching things to be done or
left undone. The consideration of this point should make every man most
careful to seek for knowledge of Gods word, and daily to increase in it, that
he may in all his affairs have Gods laws to be the men of his counsel,
Psalm. 116. 24. that he may give heed to them as to the light shining in a
dark place, 2. Pet. 1.19. that he may say with Peter, when Christ commanded
him to launch forth into the deep, and to cast forth his net: Lord we have
bin all night, and have catched nothing: yet in thy word will I let down my
net, Luke 5.5.

CHAP. III. Of the kinds of conscience: and of conscience regenerate.
COnscience is either good or badde.

Good conscience is that which rightly according to Gods word, excuses and
comfort. For the excellency, goodness, and dignity of conscience, stands
not in accusing, but in excusing. And by doing any sin whatsoever to give an
occasion to the conscience to accuse and condemn, is to wound it and to offend
it. Thus Paul says that the Corinthians wounded the consciences of their weak
breathren, when they used their liberty as an occasion of offense to them, 1.
Cor. 8,9, 12. Again, he calls a good conscience, a conscience without
offense, that is, which has no stop or impediment to hinder it from excusing.
Act. 24. 19.

Good conscience, is either good by creation or regeneration.

Good by creation was the conscience of Adam, which in the estate of innocence
did only excuse and could not accuse him for any thing: though it may be, an
aptnes to accuse was not wanting, if afterward an occasion should be offered.
And hence we have further direction to consider what a good conscience is,
namely such an one as by the order set down in the creation, excuses only
without accusing. Yea to accuse is a In respect of that excellent ^^l ^^e in
which man was created.
defect in true conscience, following after the first creation. For naturally
there is an agreement and harmony between the parts and the whole: but if the
conscience should naturally accuse there should be a dissent and disagreement
and division between the conscience and the man himself.

Regenerate conscience is that which being corrupt by nature, is renewed and
purged by faith in the blood of Christ. For to the regenerating of the
conscience, there is required a conversion or change; because by nature all
men's consciences since the fall are evil, and none are good but by grace. The
instrument serving to make this change is faith, Act. 15.19. Faith purifieth
the heart. The meritorious cause is the blood of Christ. Heb. 9.14. How much
more shall the blood of Christ, etc. purge your conscience from dead works to
serve the living God.

The property of regenerate conscience is twofold: Christian liberty, and
Certentie of salvation. Because both these have their place, not in the outward
man, but in the spirit and conscience.

Christian liberty, is a spiritual and holy freedom purchased by Christ.

1. Of Christian liberty.
I say, it is spiritual, first to put a difference between it and civil
liberty, which stands in outward and bodily freedoms and privileges,
secondly, to confute the Jews, that look for earthly liberty by Christ: and
the Anabaptists, who imagine a freedom from all authority of Magistrates in
the kingdom of Christ.

Again, I say it is an holy freedom, to confute the Libertines, who think
that by the death of Christ they have liberty to live as they list.

Lastly, I say it is purchased by Christ, to show the authority thereof. Gal.
5. 1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. And to
confute the Papists, whose doctrine in effect is thus much, that this liberty
is procured indeed by Christ, but is continued partly by Christ, and partly by
the man himself.

Christian liberty has three parts.

The first, is a freedom from the justification of the moral law. For he that
is a member of Christ, is not bound in conscience to bring the perfect
righteousness of the law in his own person for his justification before God,
Gal. 5. 1. with v. 3.

Hence it follows, that he that is a Christian, is likewise freed from the
curse and condemnation of the law, Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to the^
that are in Christ. Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
law, when he was made a curse for us.

By this first part of Christian liberty, it appears that there cannot be any
justification of a sinner by works of grace before God. For he that will be
justified but by one work, is debtor to the whole law, Gal. 3.3. but no man
that is a member of Christ is debtor to the whole law; for his liberty is to
be free in that point: therefore no man is justified so much as by one work of
his own.

The second part, is freedom from the rigor of the law, which exacteth
perfect obedience and condemns all imperfection, Romans 6. 14. Sin has no
more dominion over you: for ye are not under the law, but under grace. 1. Ioh.
5.3. This is the love of God, that ye keep his commandments: and his
commandments are not grievous:

Hence it follows, that God will accept of our imperfect obedience, if it be
sincere: yea he accepts the will, desire, and endeavor to obey for obedience
it self, Malach. 3.17. And I will spare them as a man spares his own son
that serves him.

The third part is, that the conscience is freed from the bond of the
ceremonial law, Gal. 3.25. But after that faith is come we are no more under
a schoolmaster. Ephesians. 2. 15. And has broken the stop of the partition wall,
in abrogating through his flesh, the law of commandments which stands in
ordinances. Coloss. 2.14. And has put out the hand writing of ordinances which
was against us. v. 26. Let no man therefore condemn you in meat and drink, or
in respect of any holy day, or of the new moon, etc.

Hence it follows, that all Christians may freely without scruple of
conscience, use all things indifferent, so be it the manner of using them be
good.

And first, when I say that all may use them, I understand a two-folde use;
natural, or spiritual.

The natural use, is either to relieve our necessities, or for honest delight.
Thus the Psalmist says, that God gives not only bread to strengthen the heart
of man, but also wine to make glad the heart, and oil to make the face to
shine, Psalm. 104.15. and God has: put into his creatures infinite varieties of
colors, savors, tastes, and forms, to this end that men might take delight
in them. Hence it follows, that Recreation is lawefull, and a part of
Christian liberty, if it be well used. By recreation, I understand exercises
and sports, serving to refresh either the body or the mind: and that they may
be well used, two rules especially must be remembered. The first, that lawful
recreation stands only in the use of things indifferent. For if the things be
commanded by god, there is no sporting in them; or if they be forbidden, there
is no using of the^ at all. Upon this ground, sundry kinds of recreation are
to be neglected. As I. the dancing commonly used in these days, in which men
and women, young men and maids, all mixed together, dance to the sound of the
instrument or voice in time and measure, with many wanton gestures, and that in
solemn meetings after great feasts. This exercise cannot be numbered among
things indifferent: for experience shows, that it has been usually either a
fruit or a follower of great wickedness, as idolatry, fornication,
drunkennes^e; hereupon, one well compared it to a Tripudiu^ est circulus cuius
centru^ Diabolus.
circle, whose center was the devil. Again, if we must give an acount of every
idle word, then also of every idle gesture and pace: and what account can be
given of these paces backward and forward, of caprings, iumps, gambols,
turnings, with many other frisks of lightness and vanity, more beseeming goats
and apes, of whom they are commonly used, then men. Whereas Solomon esteemed
laughter as madness, he would (no doubt) have condemned our common lascivious
dancing much more for madness, laughter being but the least part of it. II.
Dicing, which is precisely the casting of a lotte, not to be used at our
pleasures, but in matters of weight and importance. And of this kind are all
gains, the ground whereof are not the sleight of man's wit, but lotte alone.
III. Plays and enterludes, that stand in the representation of the vices and
misdemeanour of the world. For if it be not lawful to name vices, unless it
be in the way of dislike, Ephesians. 5.3. much less is it warrantable to gesture and
represent vice in the way of recreation and delight. The second rule is, that
recreation must be sparing, moderate, and lawful use of things indifferent,
according to the rules Page 571.
following.

The spiritual use is, when we take occasion by the creatures to meditate and
speak of heavenly things: as, upon the sight of the vine and the branches
thereof, to consider the mystical conjunction between Christ and his church:
by the sight of the rainebow to think of the promise of God of not drowning
the world by waters: and by any thing that befalls, to take occasion to
consider in it the wisdom, goodness, justice, mercy, providence of God, etc.

I add further, that things indifferent; as bondage, outward liberty, riches,
poverty, single estate, marriage, meat, drink, apparel, buildings, may be
used freely, because they are neither commanded by God nor forbidden: and in
themselves considered, they may be used or not used without breach of
conscience.

The right manner of using them, is to sanctify them by the word and prayer,
1. Tim. 4.3,4. and not only some of them, but the use of them all. Meat,
drink, and marriage are thus to be sanctified, as the place before noted
declares. Paul sanctified his journey on this manner, Act. 21.5. And the Jews
were commanded to dedicate their houses at the first entrance, Deuteronomy. 20.5. By
this dedication we may well understand not only the letting of the house, or
the providing of a tenant, but also the sanctifying of it by invocation of Gods
name, that by his blessing the place with the rooms thereof might serve for
their benefit and comfort. And on this manner to bless our dwelling places.
when we first enter into them, is the best way that can be to preserve them
from the casualties of fire within, and lightning from heaven, and from the
annoyance and molestation of evil spirits, and other judgments of God.

Things indifferent are sanctified by Gods word, because it shows what things
we may use, and what things we may not: and if we may use them, in what manner
it is to be done. And to this purpose the Scripture afford four rules.

The first, that all things must be done to Gods glory, 1. Cor. 10.31. Whether
ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And that
this may be performed, things indifferent must be used as signs and tables, in
which we may show forth the graces and virtues that God has wrought in the
heart. For example: we must so make our apparel both for matter and fashion,
and so wear it, that it may in some sort set forth to the beholder our
modesty, sobriety, frugalitie, humility, etc. that hereby he may be
occasioned to say, behold a grave, sober, modest person: and so of the rest.
And the common sin of this time is, that meat, drink, apparel, buildings,
are used as banners displaied to set forth to the world, man's riot, excess,
and pride of heart.

The second. We must suffer our selves lawfully to be limited and restrained in
the overmuch or ouerco^mon use of things indifferent. I say the ouercommo^ use,
because it is not Gods will utterly and absolutely to bar us of the use of
such things. Now the restrainers of our use, are two; the first is the law of
charity. For as charity gives place to piety; so Christian liberty in the
use of outward things, gives place to charity. And the law of charity is,
that we should not use things indifferent to the hurt or offense of our
brother. 1. Cor. 8.13.

Quest. Whether may a man use his liberty before such as are weak, and not
yet persuaded of their liberty. Ans. Some are weak of simple ignorance, or
because they have bin deceived by the abuse of long custom: and yet are
willing to be reformed. And before such we must abstain, least by example we
draw them to sin by giving occasion to them of doing that whereof they doubt.
Again some are weak upon affected ignorance or of malice, and in the presence
of such we need not abstain. Upon this ground Paul who circumcised Timothy
would not circumcise Titus.

The second restrainer, is the wholesome laws of men, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical. For howsoever things indifferent, after the law is once made
of them, remain still indifferent in themselves: yet obedience to the law is
necessary, and that for conscience sake. Act. 15.28.

The third. We must use things indifferent so far forth as they shall further
us in godliness. For we ought to do all things not only to the edification of
others, but also of our own selves. And therefore it is a flat abuse of
Christian liberty, for men so to pamper their bodies with meat and drink,
that thereby they disable themselves to hear Gods word, to pray, to give good
counsel, to do the ordinary works of their callings.

The fourth. Things indifferent must be used within compass of our callings,
that is, according to our ability, degree, state, and condition of life. And
it is a common abuse of this liberty in our days, that the mean man will be
in meat, drink, apparel, building, as the gentleman; the gentleman as the
knight; the knight as the lord or Earl.

Now then things indifferent are sanctified to us by the word, when our
consciences are resolved out of the word that we may use them, so it be in the
manner before named, and according to the rules here set down.

They are sanctified by prayer, when we crave at Gods hands the right use of
them, and having obtained the same, give him thanks therefore. Coloss. 3. 17.
Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of our Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God the father by him.

Thus much of Christian liberty, by which we are admonished of sundry duties:
I. to labor to become good members of Christ, of what estate or condition so
ever we be. The liberty of the city of Rome, made not only Romans borne but
even the men of other countries seek to be citizens thereof. Act. 22.28. The
privileges of the Jews in Persia made many become Jews. Hest. 8.17. O then,
much more should the spiritual liberty of conscience purchased by the blood
of Christ, move us to seek for the kingdom of heaven, and that we might
become good members thereof. II. Again by this we are taught to study,
learn, and love the Scriptures, in which our liberties are recorded. We make
account of our charters whereby we hold our earthly liberties, yea we gladly
read them and acquaint our selves with them: what a shame then will it be for
us, to make no more account of the word of God that is the law of spiritual
liberty. Iam. 2. 16. III. Lastly we are advertised most heartily to obey and
serve God according to his word, for that is the end of our liberty: the
servant does all his business more chearefully, in the hope and expectation he
has of liberty. Again our liberty most of all appears in our service and
obedience; because the service of God is perfect freedom: as on the contrary
in the disobedience of Gods commandments, stands our spiritual bondage.

2. Of certentie of salvation.
The second property of conscience is an infallible certentie of the pardon of
sin and life everlasting. That this point may be cleared, I will handle the
question between us and Papists touching the certentie of salvation. And that
I may proceed in order we must distinguish the kinds of certentie. First of
all, Certentie is either Infallible or Coniecturall. Infallible, wherein a man
is never disappointed. Coniecturall, which is not so evident, because it is
grounded only upon likelihoods. The second all Papists grant, but the first
they deny in the matter of salvation. Again certentie is either of faith, or
experimental, which Papists call moral. Certentie of faith is, whereby any
thing is certainly believed: and it is either general or special. General
certentie, is to believe assuredly that the word of God is truth it self, and
this both we and Papists allow. Special certentie is by faith to apply the
promise of salvation to our selves, and to believe without doubt, that
remission of sins by Christ and life everlasting belongs unto us. This kind
of certentie we hold and maintain, and Papists with one consent deny it;
acknowledging no assurance but by hope. Moral certentie is that which
proceeds from sanctification and good works, as signs and tokens of true
faith. This we both allow, yet with some difference. For they esteem all
certentie that comes by works to be uncertain and often to deceive: but we do
otherwise, if the works be done in vprightnes of heart.

The question then is, whether a man in this life may ordinarily without
revelation, be infallibly certain of his own salvation, first of all and
principally by faith, and then secondly by such works as are inseperable
companions of faith. We hold this for a clear and evident principle of the
word of God, and contrariwise the Papists deny it wholly. I will therefore
prove the truth by some few arguments, and then answer the common objections.

Arg. 1. That which the spirit of God does first of all testify in the heart
and conscience of any man, and then afterward fully confirm; is to be believed
of the same man as infallibly certain: but the spirit of God first of all does
testify to some men, namely true believers, that they are the sons of God:
and afterward confirms the same unto them. Therefore men are infallibly to
believe their own adoption. Now that the Spirit of God does give this
testimony to the conscience of man, the Scripture is more then plain, Romans 8.
15. Ye have received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The
same Spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the sons of God.
Answer is made, that this testimony of the Spirit is given only by an
experiment or feeling of an inward delight or peace, which breeds in us not an
infallible but a coniecturall certentie. And I answer again that this
exposition is flat against the text. For the Spirit of adoption is said here
not to make us to think or speak, but to cry Abba, Father: and crying to God
as to a father argues courage, confidence, and boldness. Again the same Spirit
of adoption is opposed to the spirit of bondage causing fear: and therefore it
must needs be a Spirit giving assurance of liberty, and by that means driving
away distrustful fears. And the end, no doubt, why the holy Ghost comes into
the heart as a witness of adoption is, that the truth in this case hidden and
therefore doubtful, might be cleared and made manifest. If God himself have
appointed that a doubtful truth among men, shall be confirmed and put out of
doubt by the mouth of two or three witnesses, it is absurd to think that the
testimony of God himself knowing all things and taking upon him to be a
witness, should be coniecturall. Saint Bernard had learned better divinity,
when he said, Bernard. epist. 107.
Who is just, but he that being loved of God, returns love to him again?
which is not done but by the Spirit of God mark it well.
revealing by faith unto man the eternal purpose of God concerning his
salvation in time to come: which revelation undoubtedly is nothing else but an
infusion of spiritual grace: by which, whilst the deeds of the flesh are
mortified, the man is prepared to the kingdom of God, receiving withal that
whereby he may presume that he is loved, and love again.

Furthermore that the Spirit of God does not only persuade men of their
adoption, but also confirm the same unto them, it is most manifest. Ephesians. 4.
30. Grieve not the Spirit whereby ye are sealed up to the day of redemption.
and 1. v. 13. After ye believed, ye were sealed with the Spirit of promise
which is the earnest of our inheritance. 2. Cor. 1.21. It is God that has
sealed us and given us the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts. Here the words
of sealing and earnest, are to be considered. For things that pass too and fro
among men, though they be in question, yet when the seal is put too, they are
made out of doubt: and therefore when God by his spirit is said to seal the
promise in the heart of every particular believer, it signifies that he gives
unto them evident assurance that the promise of life belongs unto them. And the
giving of earnest is an infallible token unto him that receives it, that the
bargain is ratified, and that he shall receive the things agreed upon. And it
were a great dishonor unto God, to think that the earnest of his own Spirit
given unto us, should be an evidence of eternal life, not infallible but
coniecturall.

Arg. 2. The faith of the Elect or saving faith, is a certain persuasion and a
particular persuasion of remission of sin and life everlasting. Touching the
first of these twain, namely that faith is a certain persuasion, yea that
certentie is of the nature of faith; it appears by express testimony of
Scripture. Mat. 14.31. O thou of little faith, why have thou doubted? and ^ 1.
v. 21. If ye have faith and doubt not. Iam. 1.6. Let him ask in faith, and
waver not: for he that wauereth is like a wave of the sea, ^ust of the wind,
and carried away. Romans 4.20. Neither did be doubt of the promise of God through
unbelief, but was strengthened in faith. I will not stand longer on this point
which is not denied of any.

Touching the second part of my reason, that faith is a particular persuasion
applying things believed: I prove it thus. The property of faith is to receive
the promise, Gal. 3.14. and the thing promised which is Christ with his spirit,
Joh. 1.12. Now Christ is received by a particular application, as will appear
if we do but mark the end and use of the ministry of the word, and of the
Sacraments, For when God gives any blessing to man, it is to be received by man
as God gives it. Now God gives Christ or at the least offers him not
generally to mankind, but to the several and particular members of the Church.
In the Lords Supper, as in every sacrament, there is a relation or analogy
between the outward signs and the things signified. The action of the
minister giving the bread and wine to the hands of particular communicants,
represents Gods action in giving Christ with his benefits to the same
particular communicants. Again the action of receiving the bread and wine
particularly, represents an other spiritual action of the believing heart
which applies Christ unto it self for the pardon of sin and life
everlasting. Papists yield not to this: yet if they refuse to maintain this
analogy, they ouerturne the sacrament and dissent from antiquity. Augustine
says, Aug. tract. 50. on Ioh.
The body of Christ is ascended into heaven: some may answer and say, How
shall I hold him being absent? how shall I reach up mine hand to heaven that I
may lay hold of him sitting there? Send up thy faith, and thou have laid hold
of him. And what is more common then an other saying of his: What meanest thou
to prepare thy belly and teeth, Believe and thou have eaten. Again Ephesians. 3.12.
Paul says, By Christ we have boldness and entrance with confidence by faith in
him. In which words are set down two notable effects and fruits of faith:
boldness and confidence. Boldness is, when a poor sinner dare come into the
presence of God, not being terrified with the threatenings of the law, nor with
the consideration of his own unworthiness, nor with the manifold assaults of
the devil: and it is more then certentie of Gods favor. Now whereas Papists
answer that this liberty or boldness in coming unto God, proceeds of a
general faith, they are far wide. It is not possible that a general
persuasion of the goodness and truth of God, and of his mercy in Christ, should
breed confidence and boldness in the heart of a guilty sinner, and no example
can be brought thereof. This general faith concerning the articles of our
belief, was no doubt in Caine, Saul, Achitophel, Judas, yea in the devil
himself: and yet they despaired and some of them made away themselves: and the
devil for all his faith, trembles before God. Wherefore that faith which is
the root of these excellent virtues of boldness and confidence, must needs be
a special faith, that is, a large and plentiful persuasion of the pardon of a
man's own sins and of life everlasting. Again Heb. 11. 1. faith is called
hypostasis, that is, a substance or subsistence of things hoped for: where
faith, in the matter of our salvation and other like things, is made to go
beyond hope: for hope waits for things to come till they have a being in the
person hoping, but faith in present gives a subsisting or being unto them.
This can not be that general faith (of Papists termed Catholic) for it
comes short of hope, but it must needs be a special faith that makes us
undoubtedly believe our own election, adoption, justification and salvation by
Christ. And to this purpose have some of the fathers said excellent well.
Augustine says, Aug. de verbis dom. ser. 7. Ambr. on 1. Cor. 1. Hesich. on
Levit.
I demand of thee, O sinner, do thou believe Christ or no? thou say, I
believe. What beleeuest thou? that he can freely forgive thee all thy sins.
Thou have that which thou have believed. Ambrose says, This is a thing
ordained of God, that he which believes in Christ should be saved without any
work, by faith alone freely receiving remission of sins. And with Ambrose I
join the testimony of Hesichius upon Leuiticus, who says, God pitying
mankind, when he saw it disabled for the fulfilling of the works of the law,
willed that man should be saved by grace without the works of the law. And
grace proceeding of mercy is apprehended by faith alone without works.
Whereas in the two last testimonies, faith is opposed generally to all works,
and is withal said to apprehend and receive, yea alone to apprehend and
receive grace and remission of sins, they can not be understood of a general
but of a special applying faith. Bernard has these words, Bernard. ser. 1. de
Annunc. Mariae.
If thou beleeuest that thy sins can not be blotted out but by him against
whom thou have sinned, thou do well: but go yet further, and believe that
he pardons thy sins. This is the testimony which the holy Ghost gives in
our hearts, saying, Thy sins are forgiven thee. For so the Apostle thinks
that a man is justified freely by faith. Papists being much choked with this
place, make answer that S. Bernard does not say that we must believe the pardon
of our sins absolutely without respect of works, but that he requires the
condition of our conversation and repentance, as signs whereby this persuasion
is wrought. I answer again that he avouches plainly, the general faith
whereby the points of religion are believed, to be but a beginning or rudiment
of faith, and therefore not sufficient unless we go further and apply the
grace of God to our selves by faith simply without respect of any condition
performed on man's part. Indeed I grant that the truth of conversion and other
works are by him mentioned afterward, but that was for this end to show how
any man may have a sensible and evident experience by works, as fruits of the
pardon of his own sins and life everlasting, which he believes.

Arg. 3. S. John penned his first epi^tle that he might show unto the church of
God a way how they might ordinarily and fully be assured of the love of God and
of eternal life: and therefore he affoardeth us many pregnant testimonies for
this purpose. 1. Ioh. 2.3. And by this we know that we have known him, if we
keep his commandments. And v. 5. He which keeps his word, in him is the
word of God truly accomplished: by this we know that we are in him. chap. 3.
10. By this are manifest the children of God and the children of the devil.
and v. 19. By this we know that we are of the truth, and before him we shall
make our hearts confident. chap. 4. 13. By this we know that we dwell in him
and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. chap. 5.2. By this we
know that we love the sons of God, when we love God and keep his
commandments. v. 13. I have written these things unto you which believe in the
name of the Son of God, that ye may know that you have life eternal. To
these testimonies, first of all answer is made, that none of them do
necessarily implie a certentie of divine faith; because we are said to know the
things which we learn by conjectures. Behold a silly and poor shift. Saint
John says, chap. 1.4. These things we write unto you that your joy may be
full. Now it is but an uncertain joy that rises by coniecturall knowledge.
Again this knowledge brings forth confidence and boldness even before God, c.
3. v. 19,21. and therefore it can not but include an infalible certentie: and
to put it out of question that the knowledge here mentioned is the knowledge of
divine faith, or as infallible as it is or can be, it is added, chap. 4.16. And
we have known and believed the love which God has toward us. Secondly it is
answered, that all these speeches are general and not concerning particular
men: but it is false: for when Saint John says [ we know] he speaks of
himself and includes the rest of the Church in the same condition with
himself. Now he himself was fully assured of his own salvation. For Christ a
little before his departure out of the world, did comfort all his disciples
partly by renewing the promise of life everlasting and of the presence of his
Spirit unto them; and partly by praying unto the father for their final
preservation: so as they could not be fully resolved of their happy estate
both in this life and in the life to come.

Arg. 4. Abraham's faith was a full persuasion whereby he applied the promise
unto himself, Romans 4.21. And this faith of his is an example propounded unto
us according to which we are to believe: and therefore h^ is called the father
of the faithful, v. 16. and Paul having set down the nature and effects of
his faith, says, It was written not only for him but also for us which
believe. v. 22. It is objected that Abraham's faith was not of salvation but it
concerned his ishue in his old age; as Paul says, Romans 4. 18. Abraham above
hope believed that he should be the father of many nations: according to that
which was spoken, So shall thy seed be. Ans. We must distinguish the object of
faith, which is either principal or less principal. Principal, is always
Christ with his benefits: less principal, are other less and particular
benefits obtained by Christ. As of Abraham's faith the object less principal
was a carnal seed or ishue: and the principal object most of all respected
as the foundation of all other blessings, was the blessed seed Christ Jesus.
Gal. 3.16. To Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He says not, And
to the seeds, as of many^ but, and to thy seed, as of one, which is Christ.
And v^. 29. If ye be Christ's, then Abraham's seed. Thus it is plain that ishue
was neither promised nor desired but with respect to Christ, who could not have
descended of Abraham, if he had been wholly without seed.

Having thus alleged some arguments for the truth, I come now to consider the
objections of the Papists. Object. I. Job being a righteous man wanted
certentie of grace in himself, Job. 9.20. If I would justify my self, mine
own mouth shall condemn me: if I would be perfect, he shall judge me wicked:
though I were perfect, yet my soul shall not know it. Again v. 25. I am afraid
of all my works, knowing that thou will not judge me innocent. Ans. Bildad in
the former chapter extolled the justice of God: and Job in this chapter gives
assent thereto, saying v. 2. I know verily it is so: and he likewise spends the
whole chapter in magnifying the justice of God: and having propounded this end
of his speech, he does not speak of himself and his own estate Thus Hierome
understands the chapter.
simply, as it is considered in it self: but as he esteemed himself being
compared with God, specially then, when he enters into a straight examination
of his creature. And so must the speech be understood. If I were perfect, my
soul should not know it, that is, I will not acknowledge or stand upon any
righteousness of mine own, when God shall enter into judgment with me. And
thus much the very Elect angels being in possession of heaven, and therefore
having more then assurance thereof, can not but say, when they are compared
with God. Again, the words according to the original, are commonly of all
and so may well be translated thus, Am I perfect: I know not my soul, I
abhor my life; that is, if I think my self perfect, I have no respect of
mine own soul: or thus, I am perfect in respect of you, and I know not my
soul, and I abhor my life, namely in respect of mine own vprightnes. And
the other place is thus to be translated, ^ fear all my sorrows, and not all
my works: for this is flat against the Hebrew text, and Popish translatours
themselves follow it not.

Object. 2. Eccles. 9. Man knows not whether he be worthy of love or
hatred. For all things are kept uncertain till the time to come. Ans. First I
say, the translation is not right; the words are thus in the Hebrew and in the
Seventie. No man knows love or hatred, all things are before them. As for
these words ( all things are kept uncertain till the time to come) are thrust
into the text by head and shoulders; and Hierome has them not. Secondly I
answer, that the holy Ghost does not deny simply the knowledge of gods love
or hatred, as though there could be no certain assurance of it in this life.
If we understand the words thus, then the argument of the holy Ghost must be
framed on this manner. If love or hatred were to be known, then it must be
known by the outward blessings of God: but it cannot be known by the outward
blessings of God, for all things come alike to all: therefore love and hatred
cannot be known. The proposition is false. For love may be known other ways
then by outward benefits: and therefore the reason is not meet to be ascribed
to the spirit of truth. Wherefore the true and proper sense of the words, is,
that love or hatred can not be judged or discerned by outward blessings of God.
Saint Bernard speaks of this text on this manner, Bern. sermon. de octau. passae.
that no man knows love or hatred, namely by him: yet that God gives most
certain testimonies thereof to men upon earth. And sermon. 5. de Dedi^. his
words are these: Who knows if he be worthy love or hatred? who knows the
mind of the Lord? Here both faith and truth must needs help us, that, that
which is hidden in the heart of the father, may be revealed unto us by the
spirit: and his spirit giving testimony persuades our spirit, that we are the
sons of God: and this persuasion is caused by his calling, and justifying us
freely by faith. Hierome on this place.
And S. Hierome (though commonly abused to the contrary) says no more but
that men cannot know love or hatred by the present afflictions which they
suffer, because they know not whether they suffer them for trial or punishment.

Object. 3.1. Cor. 4. I judge not my self, I know nothing by my self. Here
Paul as not being privy to his own estate, re^useth to give any judgment of
his righteousness. Ans. It is manifest by the words of this epistle, that
certain in Corinth, boldly more then wisely, censured the Apostles ministry,
and withal disgraced it in respect of the ministry of other teachers.
Therefore Paul in this chapter goes about to make an Apology for himself,
speaking nothing of his own person and the estate thereof before God, but
only of his ministry and the excellency thereof. And this is the judgment
of Theodoret, Aquinas, and Lira upon this text. And when he says, I judge not
my self, his meaning is, I take not upon me to judge of what value and price
my ministry is before God in respect of the ministry of this or that man:
but I leave al to God. Here then Paul refuses only to give judgment of the
excellency of his own ministry, and in other causes he refuses not to
judge himself, as when he said, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the
says, hence sorth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness which the
Lord the righteous judge shall give me, 2. Tim. 4.8. And Chrysostom on this
place says, that Paul refused to judge himself not simply, but only for this
end, that he might restrain others, and teach them modesty. And where Paul
says, I know nothing by my self, the speech is not general, but must be
understood of the negligences and offenses in the compass of his ministry.
For he was privy to himself that in simplicity and godly pureness, he had
his conversation in the world, 2. Cor. 1.12. and he knew this by himself,
that nothing should sever him from the love of God in Christ. Romans 8.38.

Object. 4. That we may be justified there is somewhat required in us, namely
faith and repentnnce: and where these are wanting, a man cannot be justified.
Now no man can be certain by the certainty of faith, that he repents of his
sins with all his heart, and that he has such a faith, as God requires at
our hands, considering there is no testimony in the word, of our faith and
repentance in particular. Therefore no man can be certain by certainty of
faith, that his sins are pardoned. Ans. It is not necessary that any man
should be certain by faith of his faith and repentance; because faith is only
of such things as are present, whereas faith and repentance are truly pre^ent
in all that truly believe and repent, it shall be sufficient if a man may any
way be infallibly certain that he has them. And though some men falsely
persuade themselves that they believe, yet he that has true faith indeed
knows that he has true faith; even as certainly as he that understands, that
he understands. Paul says to the Corinthians, Prove your selves whether ye
be in the faith or no, 2.13.5. hereby giving them to understand that all which
believe, have the spirit of discerning to know certainly that they do
believe. Again, he says of himself, 2. Tim. 1.12. I know whom I have
believed. And S. John says, 1. epist. 3. 24. By this we know that he dwells in
us by the spirit which he has given us; making no question of it, but that he
which has the spirit knows that he has the same. And testimonies of men are
not wanting in this case. August. Aug. lib. de Trin. 13. c. 1.
Every one sees faith to be in his own heart, if he believe, if not, he
sees it to be wanting. Again, Epist. 112.
A believer sees his own faith, by which he answers that he believes
without doubt. and, Lib. 8. de Trin. c. 8.
He which loves his brother, more knows the love whereby he loves, then
his brother whom he loves. Again whereas it is said that having faith, yet
we know not whether it be sufficient or no: I answer that faith being without
hypocrisy, is sufficient to salvation though it be imperfect. God more
respects the truth of our faith then the perfection thereof. And as the hand
of the child or of the palsy man though it be feeble, is able to reach out it
self and receive an alms of a Prince, so the faith that is but weak, is able
to apprehend and receive Christ with all his benefits.

Object. 5. Prove. 28. Blessed is the man that fears always. Phil. 2. Work
your salvation with fear and trembling. Ans. There is threefold fear, one of
nature, the second of grace, the third of distrust. Fear of nature is that
whereby the nature of man is troubled with any thing that is hurtful unto it,
and therefore auoideth it. Fear of grace, is that excellent gift which is
called the beginning of wisdom, and it is a certain awe or reverence unto
God, in whose presence we do whatsoever we do. Fear of distrust is, when
men tremble at the judgments of God for their sins, because they have no
hope of mercy. Of these three, the first was good by creation, and therefore
it was in our Savior Christ, but since the fall it is defective. The third is
a vice called slavish fear. And the second is that which is commanded in these
and the like places of Scripture; the intent whereof is to make us circumspect
and fearful, least we should offend God by any sin, our own weakness
considered, and the imminent judgments of God. And this kind of fear, as all
the first, may stand with certainty of faith. Romans 11. Thou stand by faith,
be not high minded but fear. Psa. 2. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in
trembling.

Object. 6. Where there is no word, there is no faith. For faith and the word
of God be relatiues. But there is no word of God that says to particular men;
Cornelius, or Peter, or John, thy sins are pardoned, excepting a few
persons, as Marie Magdalen, and the palsy man, etc. Therefore there is no
particular faith. Ans. Though there be no word set down in Scripture touching
the salvation of this or that particular man, yet there is set down that which
is equiuolent to a particular word, and as much in effect. For the promise of
remission of sins and life everlasting, is given with a commandment that
every man Read Bernard. sermon. de Annunc.
apply the promise to himself, as I have before proved: and this is
altogether as much as if every man's particular name had been put in the
promise. I add further that the promises of the gospel must be considered two
ways, first as they are generally set down in Scripture without application
to any person: secondly as they are taught and published in the ministry of
the word, the end whereof is to apply them to the persons of men, partly by
preaching and partly by administering the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords
supper, which are seals of righteousness of faith. Now the promise applied and
(as I may say) particularized to the members of the Church, is by the virtue of
Gods ordinance as much as if God himself had given the promise particularly,
and annexed men's names unto it. It is further answered that the promise of
remission of sin, is preached not simply but upon condition of men's faith and
repentance, which indeed cannot be certainly known. I answer again, (as I
have already proved) that he which truly believes and repents, knows
that he does certainly believe and repent.

Object. 7. To believe the pardon of a man own sins, is none of the articles
of faith, propounded in any Creed either of the Apostles, or the Nicene
fathers, or Athanasius, or any other creed. Answ. This faith is contained under
these words: I believe remission of sins: and I prove it thus. These words
are an article of Christian faith, and therefore they must in sense contain
more then the devil does or can believe; now the devil believes thus much,
that God gives remission of sins to his Church. Christian men therefore must
go one step further, and believe particularly the remission of their own
sins. Otherwise if the Papists will have the Catholic faith to believe no
more in this point, then the damned spirits believe, let them take it to
themselves. But they reply further, that if there were any such article of
faith, then some persons must believe, that they are just, though they
willingly commit mortal sin, which is an evident falsehood. Ans. He that
believes the pardon of his own sins by true faith, has the spirit of God in
him, and a constant purpose not to sin against God; and therefore if he
sin, it is against his purpose, and without any full consent of will: and it
is not he that does, it but the sin that dwells in him. But if it so fall
out, that the child of God be overtaken with any actual sin, then his case
stands thus: He has by his fall wounded his conscience, weakened his faith,
bereaved himself of Gods favor, as much as in him lies; made himself
guilty of a sin and worthy of damnation: and God for his part accordingly
turns the wonted signs of his favor into signs of anger and displeasure:
and though it be pardoned in the purpose of God, yet is it not actually
pardoned, till the party repent. Things standing thus, we teach not that men
must believe the pardon of their sins while they live and lie in them; for
that were flatly to teach falsehood for truth: but our doctrine is, that such
persons must first of al humble themselves, and say with the prodigal child,
that they have sinned against God, and are not worthy to be called his
children any more: and again renew their decayed faith and repentance^ that
they may believe (as before) their perfect reconciliation with God.

Object. 8. In respect of God, who is truth it self, we are to believe the
promise in particular: yet if we respect our own unworthiness and
indisposition, we are to fear and in some part to doubt. For the promise of
remission of sins is not absolute, but depends upon the condition of our
works. Therefore our certentie is only coniecturall. Ans. I answer, first
that in respect of our own unworthiness, we are not to doubt of our salvation,
but to be out of all doubt, yea to despair before the judgment seat of God.
For they which are of the works of the law, are under the curse, Gal. 3.10. and
Paul says of his own works of grace, In this I am not justified, 1. Cor. 4.4.
And David being out of al doubt of his own deserved damnation in regard of his
own unworthiness, says freely, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O
Lord, for no flesh shall be justified in thy sight. Again the consideration
of any unworthiness in our selves does not hinder a resolution concerning Gods
mercy in Christ. For true faith makes an entrance unto God with boldness, (I
say with boldness) even for those persons that are unworthy in themselves, Ephesians.
4. 12. And Abraham (whose faith is to be followed of us) did not upon the
consideration of his old decayed body, rest himself with bare hope upon a
likelihood of the accomplishment of gods promise, but he believed under hope
even against hope. Romans 4.18. Lastly I answer that the ground of the former
objection is erroneous, namely that the promise of salvation depends on the
condition of our works: because the Scripture says, it is made and
accomplished on man's part freely. I grant indeed that to the promise there is
annexed a condition of faith: yet faith must not here be considered as a work,
but as an instrument apprehending Christ with his benefits: and withal,
repentance with the fruits thereof, are on our part required; yet no otherwise,
but as they are necessary consequents of faith, and the signs and documents
thereof.

Obie^t. 9. No man knows all his sins: no man therefore can certainly know
that all his sins are pardoned, and that he is accepted of God. Ans. The
ground of this argument is false: namely that a man cannot be assured of the
pardon of his sins, if some of them be unknown. And to make this manifest, I
will lay down a more certain ground, which shall be this. As the case is in
Repentance, so it is also in faith: but there may be true and su^ficient
repentance of unknown sins. God indeed requires a particular repentance for
particular known sins; but if they be hidden and unknown, he accepts a
general repentance. An example whereof we have in David, Who knows, says he,
the errors of this life? then purge me from my secret sins. If it were not
as I have said, neither David nor any man else could be ^aued. For when David
^epented greatly of his murder and adultery, yet we find not that he repented
particularly of his polygamie: which in all likelihoode, through the swinge and
custom of those times, was not then reputed to be any sin; specially in the
person of a king: and yet because (as we know) he is certainly saved, this very
sin is pardoned. Therefore when God pardons the known sins of men, whereof
they do in particular repent, he does withal pardon the rest that are
unknown. And by this it appears, that the ignorance of some hidden sins,
after a man with diligence has searched himself, cannot prejudice an
infallible assurance of the pardon of them all and of his own salvation.

Object. 10. We pray for the pardon of our own sins, and therefore we are
uncertain of pardon: the man which knows that he has pardon, need not pray
for it. I answer first, when we are taught by Christ to pray for the forgiveness
of our debts, we are put in mind not to seek the pardon of all our sins,
whether past or present; but specially of our present and daily offenses,
whereby we make our selves day by day guilty, till such time as we humble our
selves and repent of them. Secondly by this petition we are taught to ask the
increase of our assurance; because though God bestow endless mercy on us, yet
we are skant in receiving of it: our hearts being like a narrow necked
vessel, which being cast even into the Ocean sea, receives in water only
drop by drop.

Object. 11. No man can believe his own salvation, as he believes the articles
of faith: therefore no man can believe the pardon of his sins and his
salvation by an infallible certentie. I answer, first that every one that
looks for salvation by Christ, is bound in conscience as certainly to believe
his own salvation and adoption by Christ, as he believes the articles of
faith. Because to the promise of life there is annexed a commandment to
believe and apply it. Secondly this faith whereby we are to believe our own
salvation, if we respect the true and proper nature thereof, is as certain as
that faith, whereby we believe the articles of faith. Thirdly, as there be
diverse ages in the life of man, so there be diverse degrees and measures of
true faith. There is first of all a beginning or rudiment of faith, like the
smoking flax and bruised reed, which Christ will neither quench nor bruise.
Again there is weak faith, which believes the promise truly, but yet is
perplexed with many doubtings. Lastly, there is strong faith, which has
overcome all doubtings, and is not only for nature certain (as the former is,)
but also a large and plentiful persuasion of Gods mercy in Christ. Examples
of this we have in Abraham, David, the Martyrs and such like worthy men. Now
by the second faith, men do as certainly believe their adoption as the
articles, but not so firmly and fully. But by the last, remission of sins is
not only as certainly but also as fully believed as any article of faith.

Object. 12. Ancient fathers the lights of Gods Church, have always condemned
this infallible and special certentie of faith, which the Protestants hold and
maintain. Ans. Though we build not the doctrine of our religion upon the
judgments of men, yet we refuse not in this and other points to be tried by
the fathers, whose writings well understood, make more for us, then for the
Popish religion. And their testimonies commonly alleged to confute the
certentie of special faith, are much abused. I. Many of them serve to prove
that a man cannot judge and discern of every particular motion and grace of
his heart, of the increase of these graces, and the contrary disease: of
special vices and wants, many whereof are hidden from the understanding.
Theodoret in his comment. 1. Cor. 4. I will not (says he) free my self from
sin, but wait the sentence of God: for it often falls out that men sin of
ignorance, and think that to be equal and just which the God of all sees to
be otherwise. August. de verbis dei^ sermon. 23. Peradventure thou finds nothing
in thy conscience: but he finds something that sees better. And upon Psalm.
41. I know that the justice of my God shall abide, but whether mine shall or
no, I know not: for the saying of the Apostle terrifieth me, He which thinks
he stands, let him take heed least he fall. Here he speaks of his inward
righteousness, and that, as it is considered in it self without the assistance
of God. For he adds afterward, Therefore because there is no stabilitie in me
for my self, hereupon my soul is troubled for my self. Chrysostom. homil.
87. on John. I am grieved, least peradventure supposing my self to love, do
not love as before: when I seemed constant and courageous unto my self, I was
found but a dastard. These and a thousand like testimonies prove nothing. For
though a man cannot fully discern his heart, either in respect of every one of
his own sins, or in respect of every grace; yet this hinders not but that he
may have an infallible certentie of his salvation, and also a sufficient gift
to discern his own faith and repentance. II. Other places must be understood
of proud presumption, and of a kind of security, in which men dream of ease
and liberty without trouble or temptation. August. de corrept. and great. cap.
13. Who of all the company of the faithful, as long as he lives in this
mortal condition, can presume, that he is of the number of the predestinate?
And, de bona persever. cap. 22. No man can be secure touching eternal life,
^ill this life be ended. Bernard. epist. 107. Having now received the knowledge
of himself in part, he may rejoice in hope, but not in security as yet.
Hieron. Dan. 4. Let no man boldly promise to another the pardon of sins. III.
Some places avouch that a man cannot be sure of perseverance to the end without
falls and decaies in grace: all which we grant. August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 11.
cap. 12. Although the Saints be Mark it well.
certain of the reward of their perseverance, yet they are found to be
uncertain of the perseverance it self: for what man can know that he shall
persevere in the practice and increase of righteousness unto the end, except he
be assured of it by some revelation. IV. Some places must be understood of
experimental certentie, when the event is accomplished. Hieron^ book 2.
against Pelagians. Call no man blessed before his end, for as long as we live
here we are in the fight, and as long as we are in the fight, we have no
certain victory. V. Some places speaks of the uncertainty of other men's
salvation, which we grant. The author of the book de vocat. Gent. 1. clast.
says, We can pronounce of no man before his end that he shall be in the
glory of the elect. August. lib. de persevere. cap. 13. Men are not with any
certain asseueration to avouch that others belong to this calling. VI. Some
speak of that certainty which comes by revelation without the word. Greg.
lib. 6. epist. 22. to Gregoria. Whereas you add in your epistles that you will
be earnest with me till I write, that it has been made known unto me that
your sins are forgiven: you have required a hard and unprofitable thing.
Hard, because I am unworthy to whom a releuation should be made.
Unprofitable, because you must not be made sure touching your sins, unless
it be in the last day of your life, for then you should not be able to bewail
the same sins. VII. Some places deny unto man that certentie which is proper
to God, which is, to discern in himself all things to come plainly, as they
shall come to pass without help of testimony and outward signs. Bernard.
^erm. 1. de Septuages. Who can say, I am of the Elect? I am of the predestinate
to life: certainly we have none as yet, but the affiance of our hope comfort
us. Confer these words with those that follow. For this cause certain signs
and manifest tokens of salvation are given, that it may be a thing out of
doubt that he is in the number of the elect in whom these signs are.

Thus I have in some part made manifest, that an infallible certentie of pardon
of sin and life everlasting is the property of every renewed conscience. Now
therefore I will proceed further to consider how this certentie is caused and
imprinted in the conscience. The principal agent and beginner thereof, is the
holy Ghost, inlightning the mind and conscience with spiritual and divine
light: and the instrument in this action, is the ministry of the Gospel
whereby the word of life is applied in the name of God to the person of every
hearer. And this certainty is by little and little conceived in a form of
reasoning or practical syllogism framed in the mind by the holy Ghost, on
this manner: Every one that believes is the child of God:

But I do believe:

Therefore I am the child of God.



The proposition is made by the minister of the word in the public
congregation: and it is nothing else but the promise of eternal life applied
to the particular hearers. The second part or the assumption is the voice of
conscience regenerate or the voice of Gods spirit in the same. Now Papists
write and avouch that the assumption is false: but the reasons which they use
to prove the same, are of small moment. First they allege, that many are
deceived in their persuasions, thinking they have that which they have not: I
answer again that many do falsely presume of Gods mercy, and imagine they
have that faith which they have not: and in all such the assumption is false:
yet in all them that are chosen to salvation and truly called, it is
infallibly true. For such as have received the gift of true faith, have also
another gift of discerning whereby they see and know their own faith. It is
further objected that Jeremy says, 17.9. The heart is deceitful and wicked
above all things, who ca^ know it? But the intent of this place is only to
show, that no man can search his heart to the very bottom, to see all and
every want, infirmity and wicked inclination that is therein. For original
sin wherewith the heart of man is tainted, is a pronnes or disposition to all
the sins that are or may be. And though men can not discern all their
sins, yet many of them are certainly known^^ why may not then many of the
graces of God be certainly known, especially those which be of the principal,
as faith, sanctification, repentance. Again it is alleged, that Peter
believed that he was able to lay down his life for Christ's sake, and yet
indeed was not as the event declared: for when the time came, he denied
Christ. Ans. Peter at that time was but weak in faith, and he was much
carried away with a confidence of his own strength, which made him speak
those words of presumption: and though he failed in this one particular
action, yet failed he not in the principal, that is, in the persuasion of the
pardon of his own sins and of life everlasting. In a word, it is certain
that many persuade themselves of Gods mercy, and yet are deceived:
nevertheless all such as do truly believe are not deceived. The holy Ghost
making them to see that in them^elues which by nature they cannot discern, as
Paul signified, when he said, I speak the truth, I lie not, my conscience
bearing me witness by the holy Ghost, Romans 9.1.

Again the same testimony is given otherwise thus: Every child of God has
the pardon of his sins, says Gods word:

But I am Gods child: and therefore have the pardon of my sins, says the
renewed conscience, by the direction of Gods spirit, Romans 8.16. Gal. 4.6.



After that this testimony is once begun, it is confirmed by the same means, as
also by prayer and the Sacraments. But it may be demanded, how a bodily
element, as bread, wine, water, should be able to confirm a persuasion of our
adoption that is in the conscience. Answ. The element in the sacrament is an
outward seal or instrument to confirm faith, not as a medicine restores and
confirms health, whether we think on it or not, whether we sleep or wake,
and that by his own inherent virtue: but by reasoning in a syllogism made by
the good conscience: that Reason.
medium thereof being the outward sign in the Sacrament. By means of which
syllogism the holy Ghost mooues and stirs the mind, yea cherishes and
increases faith on this manner: He which uses the elements aright shall
receive the promises:

But I do, or I have used the elements aright:

Therefore I shall receive the promises.



Whereas presumption and the illusion of Satan use as well to tell a man, that he
is the child of God, as the true testimony of regenerate conscience, the way
to put difference between them is this. I. Presumption is natural and from the
very womb, but this testimony of conscience is supernatural. II. Presumption
is in them that make no account of the ordinary means of salvation. This
testimony comes by the reverent and careful hearing of Gods word. III.
Presumption is in them that use not to call on the name of God: but this
testimony of conscience is joined with the spirit of adoption which is the
spirit of prayer. IV. Presumption is joined with loosenes of life, this
testimony brings with it always an happy change and alteration. For he which
has a good conscience has also care to keep good conscience in all things.
V. Presumption is peremptory without doubting: whereas the testimony of
conscience is mingled with manifold doubtings, Mark. 9.24. Luke 17. 5. yea
otherwhiles ouercharged with them, Psalm. 77.7,8. VI. Presumption will give a
man the slip in the time of sickness, and in the hour of death; and the
testimony of good conscience sticks by him to the end, and even makes him
say, Lord remember now ^owe I have walked before thee in truth, and have done
that which is acceptable in thy sight. Isa. 38.2.

The duties of conscience regenerate are two: 3. Of the duties of regenerate
conscience.
in special manner to give testimony, and to excuse.

The special thing of which conscience gives testimony is, that we are the
children of God predestinate to life everlasting. And that appears by these
reasons. I. Romans 8.16. The spirit of God witnesses together with our spirit
that we are the sons of God. Now the spirit of man here mentioned is the
mind or conscience renewed and sanctified. To this purpose says John, He that
believes has a witness in himself, 1. Ioh. 5.10. II. That which Gods spirit
does testify to the conscience, the conscience can again testify to us: but
Gods spirit does testify to the conscience of a man regenerate that he is the
child of God, 1. Cor. 2.12. Therefore the conscience also does the same. III.
He that is justified has peace of conscience, Romans 5.1. Now there can be no
peace in conscience till conscience tell the man which is justified that he is
indeed justified. IV. That which the conscience may know certainly, it may
testify: but conscience may know certainly without revelation, the man's
election, and adoption, as I have before proved: therefore it is able to give
testimony of these.

Again, the regenerate conscience gives testimony of a certain kind of
righteousness, being an inseperable companion thereof: and for this cause, it
is called of some the righteousness of a good conscience. Now this
righteousness is nothing else, but an unfeigned, earnest, and constant purpose
with endeavor answerable thereto not to sin in any thing, but in all things
whatsoever to please God and do his will. Hebr. 13.18. Pray for us: for we
are assured that we have good conscience in all things desiring to live
honestly. 2. Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this the testimony of our conscience,
that in simplicity and godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom we have
had our conversation in the world. 1. Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self.
Esa. 38.2. Lord remember now how I have walked before thee with an upright
heart, and have done that which is acceptable in thy sight.

I add this clause, in all things, because that obedience which is the sign
or fruit of good conscience, of which also it gives testimony is general,
showing it self in all and every commandment of God. Philosophers have said
that Justice is universal, because he which has it has all virtues. But it
is more truly said of this Christian righteousness or new obedience, that it is
universal, and that he which can perform true obedience in one commandment
can do the same in all. Act. 23.1. Men and brethren I have in all good
conscience served God till this day. Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be
confounded when I shall have respect to all thy commandments. Act. 24.16. In
the mean season I endea^our my self, or, take pains to have a conscience
without offense toward God and toward men.

This shows that there is a great number of men professing the Gospel that
want good conscience. For though they show themselves very forward and willing
to obey God in many things, yet in some one thing or other, they use to follow
the swinge of their own wills. Many are diligent to frequent the place of Gods
worship, to hear the word preached with liking, to receive the Sacraments at
times appointed, and to approve of any good thing: all this is very
commendable; yet these men often, when they depart home from the congregation,
say in effect on this manner; Religion stay thou here at the Church door till
the next Sabbath. For if we look into their private conuersations, the
government of their families, or their dealings in their particular callings,
we shall with grief see much disorder, and little conscience. It is a common
practice with sick men when they make their wills on their death beds, in the
very first place to commend their bodies to the grave, and their souls to God
that gave them in hope of a better resurrection: and all this is well done; but
afterward they bequeath their goods gotten by fraud, oppression, and forged
cauillation to their own friends and children, without making any recompense
or satisfaction. But, alas, this should not be so: for obedience that goes with
good conscience must be performed to all Gods commandments without exception:
and if it be done but to some alone, it is but counterfeit obedience: and he
that is guilty in one is guilty in all.

As regenerate conscience gives testimony of our new obedience; so it does
also by certain sweet motions stir men forward to perform the same. Psalm.
16.7. My reins (that is, the mind and conscience enlightened by the spirit of
God) teach me in the night season. Esai. 30.22. And thine ears shall hear a
word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when thou turnest to
the right hand, and when thou turnest to the left. Now this word is not only
the voice of Pastors and teachers in the open ministry, but also the voice
of renewed conscience inwardly by many secret cogitations snibbing them that
are about to sin. A Christian man is not only a priest and a prophet, but
also a spiritual king, even in this life: and the Lord in mercy has
vouchsafed him this honor, that his conscience renewed within him shall be his
solliciter to put him in mind of all his affairs and duties which he is to
perform to God: yea it is the controller to see all things kept in order in
the heart, which is the temple and habitation of the holy Ghost.

The second office of conscience regenerate is to excuse, that is, to clear
and defend a man even before God against all his enemies both bodily and
ghostly. Psalm. 7.8. Judge thou me, O Lord, according to my righteousness, and
according to mine innocence in me. Again 26.1,2. Judge me, O Lord, for I have
walked in mine innocence, etc. Prove me, O Lord, and try me: examine my
reins and my heart. That the conscience can do this, it specially appears in
the conflict and combat made by it against the devil, on this manner.

The devil begins and disputes thus. Thou, O wretched man, art a most
grievous sinner: therefore thou art but a damned wretch. The conscience
answers and says, I know that Christ has made a satisfaction for my sins,
and freed me from damnation. The devil replieth again thus; Though Christ
has freed thee from death by his death; yet thou art quite barred from heaven,
because thou never did fulfill the law. The conscience answers, I know that
Christ is my righteousness and has fulfilled the law for me. Thirdly the devil
replies and says, Christ's benefits belong not to thee, thou art but an
hypocrite and want faith. Now when a man is driven to this straight, it is
neither wit, nor learning, nor favor, nor honor, that can repulse this
temptation, but only the poor conscience directed and sanctified by the
Spirit of God which boldly and constantly answers, I know that I believe.

And though it be the office of the conscience after it is renewed principally
to excuse, yet does it also in part accuse. When David had numbered the people
his heart smote him, 2. Sam. 24.10. Job says in his aff^iction that God did
write bitter things against him, and made him possess the sins of his youth.
Job 13. 26. The reason hereof is, because the whole man and the very conscience
is only in part regenerate, and therefore in some part remains still corrupt.

Neither must it seem strange that one and the same conscience should both
accuse and excuse, because it does it not in one and the same respect. It
excuses, in that it assures a man that his person stands righteous before
God, and that he has an endeavor in the general course of his life to please
God: it accuses him for his particular slippes, and for the wants that be in
his good actions.

If any shall demand why God does not perfectly regenerate the conscience and
cause it only to excuse, the answer is this. God does it for the preventing of
great mis^hiefes. When the Israelites came into the land of Canaan, the
Cananites were not at the first wholly displaced^ Why? Ex. 23.29.
Moses renders the reason; least wild beasts come and inhabit some parts of
the land that were dispeopled, and more annoy them then the Cananites. In like
manner God renues the conscience, but so as it shall still accuse when occasion
serves; for the preventing of many dangerous sins which like wild beasts
would make havoc of the soul.

Thus much of good conscience: now follows evil conscience: 4. Of evil
conscience.
and that is so called partly because it is defiled and corrupted by original
sin, and partly because it is evil, that is, troublesome and painful in
our sense and feeling; as all sorrows, calamities, and miseries are, which for
this very cause also are called evils. And though conscience be thus termed
evil, yet has it some respects of general goodness, in as much as it is an
instrument of the execution of divine justice; because it serves to accuse them
before God, which are justly to be accused.

It has spread it self over mankind as generally as original sin: and
therefore it is to be found in all men that come of Adam by ordinary
generation. The property of it is, with all the power it has, to accuse and
condemn; and thereby to make a man afraid of the presence of God, and to cause
him to fly from God as from an enemy. This the Lord signified when he said to
Adam, Adam where art thou? When Peter saw some little glimbring of the power
and majesty of God in the great draught of fish, he fell on his knees and
said to Christ, Luke 5.8.
Lord, go from me for I am a sinnefullman.

Evil conscience is either dead or stirring. Dead conscience is that, Dead
conscience.
which though it can do nothing but accuse, yet commonly it lies quiet,
accusing little or nothing at all.

The causes why conscience lies dead in all men, either more or less, are
many. I. Defect of reason or understanding in crased brains. II. Violence and
strength of affections, which as a cloud do ouercast the mind, and as a gulf
of water swallow up the judgment and reason: and thereby hinder the conscience
from accusing: for when reason can not do his part, then conscience does
nothing For example: some one in his rage behaues himself like a mad man,
and willingly commits any mischief without controlment of conscience: but when
choler is down, he begins to be ashamed and troubled in himself, not
always by grace, but even by the force of his natural conscience, which when
affection is calmed begins to stir, as appears in the example of Cain.
III. Ignorance of Gods will and errors in judgment cause the conscience to be
quiet, when it ought to accuse. This we find by experience in the deaths of
obstinate heretics, which suffer for their damnable opinions without check of
conscience.

Dead conscience has two degrees. The first is the slumbring or the benumbed
conscience; the second is the seared conscience.

Conscience be^ummed.
The benumbed conscience is that which does not accuse a man for any sin
unless it be grievous or capital; and not always for that but only in the
time of some grievous sickness or calamity. Joseph's brethren were not much
troubled in conscience for their villainy in selling their brother, till
afterward when they were afflicted with famine and distressed in Egypt. Genesis
42. 2. This is the conscience that commonly reigns in the hearts of drousie
Protestants, of all carnal and lukewarm gospellers, and of such as are
commonly termed civil honest men, whose apparent integrity will not free
them from guilty consciences.

Such a conscience is to be taken heed of us, as being most dangerous. It is
like a wild beast, which so long as he lies asleep, seems very tame and
gentle, and hurts no man: but when he is roused, he then awakes and flies in a
man's face, and offers to pull out his throat. And so it is the manner of dead
conscience, to lie still and quiet even through the course of a man's life: and
hereupon a man would think (as most do) that it were a good conscience
indeed: but when sickness or death approaches, it being awaked by the hand of
God, begins to stand up on his legs, and shows his fierce eyes, and offers
to rend out even the very throat of the soul. And heathen Poets knowing this
right well, have compared evil conscience to Furies pursuing men with
firebrands.

^eared consci^^ce.
The seared conscience is that which does not accuse for any sin; no not for
great sins. It is compared by Paul, 1. Tim. 4.2. to the part of a man's body
which is not only bereft of sense, life, and motion by the gangrene, but also
is burnt with a searing iron: and therefore must needs be utterly past all
feeling.

This kind of conscience is not in all men, but in such persons as are become
obstinate heretics and notorious malefactors. And it is not in them by
nature, but by an increase of the corruption of nature; and that by certain
steps and degrees. For naturally every man has in him blindness of mind, and
obstinacy or frowardnes of heart; yet so, as with the blindness and ignorance
of mind, are joined some remnants of the light of nature, showing us what is
good and evil. Now the heart of man being exceedingly obstinate and perverse,
carries him to commit sins even against the light of nature and common
conscience: by practice of such sins the light of nature is extinguished: and
then comes the reprobate mind, which judges evil good, and good evil:
after this follows the seared conscience, in which there is no feeling or
remorse: and after this comes an exceeding greedines to all manner of sin.
Ephesians. 4.18. Romans 1.28.

Here it may be demanded, how men's consciences shall accuse them in the day of
judgment, if they be thus benumbed and seared in this life. Ans. It is said,
Rev. 20.12. that at the last judgment all shall be brought before Christ, and
that the books then shall be opened: among these books, no doubt, conscience
is one. Wherefore though a dead conscience in this life be as a closed or
sealed book (because it does either little or nothing accuse,) yet after this
life, it shall be as a book laid open: because God shall inlighten it, and so
stir it up by his mighty power, that it shall be able to reveal and
discover all the sins that a man ever committed.

Stirring conscience, Stirring conscience.
is that which does sensibly either accuse or excuse. And it has four
differences.

The first which accuses a man for doing evil. This must needs be an evil
conscience. Because to accuse is not a property that belongs to it by
creation, but a defect that follows after the fall. And if the conscience
which truly accuses a man for his sins, were a good conscience, then the
worst man that is, might have a good conscience; which can not be.

When the accusation of the conscience is more forcible and violent, it is
called a wounded or troubled conscience: which though of it self it be not
good nor any grace of God; yet by the goodness of God it serves often to be an
occasion or preparation to grace; as a needle, that draws the thread into the
cloth, is some means whereby the cloth is sewed together.

The second, is that which accuses for doing well. And it is to be found in
them that are given to idolatry and superstition. As in the Church of Rome: in
which, because men's consciences are i^snared and entangled with humane
traditions, many are troubled for doing that which is good in it self, or at
the least a thing indifferent. As for example: let a priest omit to say mass
and to say his canonical hours, his conscience will accuse him therefore:
though the omitting of the canonical hours and of the idolatrous mass, be
indeed by-Gods word no sin.

The third, is the conscience which excuses for doing that which is evil.
This also is to be found in them that are given to idolatry and superstition.
And there is a particular example hereof, Ioh. 16.^. Yea, the time shall come
that whosoever kills you^ will think that he does God good service. Such is
the conscience of Popish traitors in these days, that are never touched at
all, though they intend and enterprise horrible villainies, and be put to death
therefore.

The fourth, is that which excuses for well doing at some times, and in some
particular actions of carnal men. When Abimelech had taken Sarai from Abraham,
God said unto him in a dream, I know that thou did this with an upright
mind, Genesis 20.6. This may be termed Moraliter bona sed in non renatis mala.
good conscience, but is indeed otherwise. For though it do truly excuse in
one particular action, yet because the man in whom it is, may be unregenerate
and as yet out of Christ, and because it does accuse in many other matters:
therefore it is no good conscience. If all the virtues of natural men, are
indeed but certain Splendida peccata.
beautiful sins, and their righteousness but a carnal righteousness; then the
conscience also of a carnal man, though it excuse him for well doing, is but a
carnal conscience.

CHAP. IIII. Man's duty touching conscience.
1. Man's first duty to get good conscience.
Man's duty concerning conscience is twofold. The first is, if he want good
conscience above all things to labor to obtain it: for it is not given by
nature to any man, but comes by grace.

For the obtaining of good conscience, three things must be procured; a
preparation to good conscience, the applying of the remedy, the reformation of
conscience.

In the preparation, four things are required. The first is, the knowledge of
the law, and the particular commandments thereof, whereby we are taught what
is good, what is badde; what may be done, and what may not be done.

The men of our days, that they may have the right knowledge of the law, must
lay aside many erroneous and foolish opinions, which they hold flat against the
true meaning of the law of God: otherwise they can never be able to discern
between sin and no sin. Their special and common opinions are these: I.
That they can love God with all their hearts, and their neighbors as
themselves; that they fear God above all, and trust in him alone; and that
they ever did so. II. That to rehearse the Lords prayer, the belief, and ten
Commandments, (without understanding of the words, and without affection) is
the true and whole worship of God. III. That a man may seek to wizzards and
soothsaiers without offense, because God has provided a salve for every sore.
IV. That to swear by good things and in the way of truth, is not a sin. V.
That a man going about his ordinary affairs at home or abroad on the Sabbath
day, may as well serve God as they which hear all in the sermons in the world.
VI. That religion and the practice thereof, is nothing but an affected
precisenes: that covetousness the root of evil, is nothing but worldlines:
that pride is nothing but a care of honesty and cleanlines: that single
fornication is nothing but the trick of youth: that swearing and blaspheming
argue the courageous mind of a brave gentleman. VII. That a man may do with
his own what he will, and make as much of it as he can. Hence arise all the
frauds and bad practices in traffic between man and man.

The second thing required, is the knowledge of the judicial sentence of the
law, which resolutely pronounces that a curse is due to man for every sin,
Gal. 3.10. Very few are resolved of the truth of this point, and very few do
unfeignedly believe it, because men's minds are possessed with a contrary
opinion, that though they sin against God, yet they shall escape death and
damnation. David says, The wicked man (that is, every man naturally) blesses
himself. Psalm. 10.3. and he makes a league with hell and death, Esa. 28.15.
This appears also by experience. Let the ministers of the Gospel reprove
sin, and denounce Gods judgments against it, according to the ^ule of Gods
word, yet men will not fear: stones will almost as soon move in the walls,
and the pillars of our Churches, as the flintie hearts of men. And the reason
hereof is, because their minds are forestalled with this absurd conceit, that
they are not in danger of the wrath of God, though they offend. And the opinion
of our common people is hereunto answerable, who think, that if they have a
good meaning, and do no man hurt, God will have them excused both in this life
and in the day of judgment.

The third, is a just and serious examination of the conscience by the law,
that we may see what is our estate before God. And this is a duty upon which
the Prophets stand very much. Lam. 3.40. Man suffers for his sin: let us
search and try our hearts, and turn again to the Lord. Zeph. 2. 1. Fan
your selves, fan you, O nation, not worthy to be beloved. In making
examination, we must specially take notice of that which does now lie, or may
hereafter lie upon the conscience. And after due examination has been made, a
man comes to a knowledge of his sins in particular, and of his wretched and
miserable estate. When one enters into his house at midnight, he finds or sees
nothing out of order: but let him come in the day time when the sun shines,
and he shall then epsy many faults in the house, and the very motes that fly
up and down: so let a man search his heart in the ignorance and blindness of
his mind, he will straightway think all is well: but let him once begin to
search himself with the light and lantern of the law, and he shall find many
foul corners in his heart, and heaps of sins in his life.

The fourth, is a sorrow in respect of the punishment of sin, arising of the
three former actions. And though this sorrow be no grace, for it befalls as well
the wicked as the godly: yet may it be an occasion of grace, because by the
apprehension of Gods anger, we come to the apprehensio^ of his mercy. And it
is better that conscience should grieve and wound us and do his worst against
us in this life, while remedy may be had, then after this life, when remedy is
past.

Thus much of preparation: now follows the remedy, and the application of it.
The remedy is nothing else but the blood or the merits of Christ, who
specially in conscience felt the wrath of God, as when he said, My soul is
heavy unto death: and his agony was not so much a pain and torment in body,
as the apprehension of the fear and anger of God in conscience: and when the
holy Ghost says, That he offered unto God prayers with strong cries and was
heard from fear, he directly notes the distress and anguish of his most holy
conscience for our sins. And as the blood of Christ is an all-sufficient
remedy, so is it also the alone remedy of all the sores and wounds of
conscience. For nothing can stanch or stay the terrrours of conscience, but the
blood of the immaculate lamb of God: nothing can satisfy the judgment of the
conscience, much less the most severe judgment of God, but the only
satisfaction of Christ. In the application of the remedy, two things are
required: the Gospel preached, and faith: the Gospel is the hand of God, that
offers grace to us: and faith is our hand whereby we receive it.

That we indeed by faith receive Christ with all his benefits, we must put in
practice two lessons. The first is, unfeignedly to humble our selves before God
for all our wants, breaches, and wounds in conscience: which, being unto us a
paradise of God, by our default we have made as it were a little hell within
us. This humiliation is the beginning of all grace and religion: pride and good
conscience can never go together. And such as have knowledge in religion and
many other good gifts without humiliation, are but unbridled, unmortified, and
unreformed persons. This humiliation contains in it two duties, the first is
confession of our sins, especially of those that he upon our consciences:
wherewith must be joined the accusing and condemning of our selves: for then we
put conscience out of office, and dispatch that labor before our God in this
life, which conscience would perform to our eternal damnation after this
life. The second duty is Deprecation, which is a kind of prayer made with
groans and desires of heart, in which we entreat for nothing but for pardon of
our sins, and that for Christ's sake, til such time as the conscience be
pacified.

To this humiliation standing on these two parts, excellent promises of grace
and life everlasting are made. Prou. 28. 13. He that hides his sins, shall
not prosper: but he that confesses and forsakes them shall find mercy. 1.
Ioh. 1.6. If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Luke 1.35. He has fi^led
the hungry with good things, and sent the rich empty away. Which are also
verified by experience in sundry examples, ^. Sam. 12.13. David said to
Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said to David, The Lord also
has put away thy sin. 2. Chr. 33.43. When Manasses was in tribulation, he
prayed to the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his
fathers, and prayed unto him: and God heard his prayer. Luke 23.43. And the
thief said to Jesus. Lord remember me when thou come to thy kingdom. Then
Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. By these and many other places it appears, that when a man does
truly humble himself before God, he is at that instant reconciled to God, and
has the pardon of his sins in heaven: and shall afterward have the assurance
thereof in his own conscience.

The second lesson is, when we are touched in conscience for our sins, not to
yield to natural doubtings and distrust; but to resist the same, and to
endeavor by Gods grace to resolve our selves that the promises of salvation by
Christ, belong to us particularly: because to do thus much, is the very
commandment of God.

The third thing is, the reformation of conscience; Good conscience a fruit of
faith.
which is, when it does cease to accuse and terrify, and begins to excuse and
testify unto us by the holy Ghost, that we are the children of God and have
the pardon of our sins. And this it will do after that men have seriously
humbled themselves, and prayed earnestly and constantly with sighs and groans
of spirit for reconciliation with God in Christ. For then the Lord will send
down his spirit into the conscience by a sweet and heavenly testimony to
assure us that we are at peace with God.

Thus we see how good conscience is gotten: and because it is so precious a
jewel, I wish all persons, that as yet never labored to get good conscience,
now to begin. Reasons to induce men thereto may be these: I. you seek day and
night from year to year for honors, riches, and pleasures, which ye must leave
behind you: much more therefore ought you to seek for renewed and reformed
consciences, considering that conscience will be with you in this life, in
death, at the last judgment, and for ever. II. He that wants a conscience
purged in the blood of Christ, can never have any true and lasting comfort in
this life. Suppose a man araied in cloth of tishue, set in a chair of estate,
before him a table furnished with all dainty provision: his servants,
Monarchs, and Princes; his riches the chiefest treasures and kingdoms in the
world: but withal suppose one standing by, with a naked sword to cut his
throat, or a wild beast ready ever and anon to pull him in pieces: now, what
can we say of this man's estate, but that all his happiness is nothing but woe
and misery? And such is the estate of all men that abounding with riches,
honors, and pleasures, carry about them an evil conscience, which is as a
sword to slay the soul, or as a ravenous beast ready to suck the blood of
the soul, and to rend it in pieces. III. He which wants good conscience can
do do nothing but sin: his very eating and drinking, his sleeping and
waking, and all he does, turns to sin: the conscience must first be good,
before the action can be good; if the root be corrupt, the fruits are
answerable. IV. An evil conscience is the greatest enemy a man can have,
because it does execute all the parts of judgment against him. It is the
Lords fergeant. God need not send out process by any of his creatures for
man: the conscience within man will arest him, and bring him before God. It is
the gayler to keep man in prison in bolts and irons, that he may be forth
coming at the day of judgment. It is the witness to accuse him, the judge
to condemn him, the hangman to execute him, and the flashings of the fire of
hell to torment him. Again, it makes a man to be an enemy to God: because it
accuses him to God, and makes him ^^ie from God, as Adam did when he had
sinned. Also he makes a man to be his own enemy, in that it does cause to lay
violent hands upon himself, and become his own hangman, or his own
cut-throate. And on the contrary, a good conscience is a man's best friend:
when all men entreat him hardly, it will speak him fair and comfort him: it
is a continual feast, and a paradise upon earth. V. The Scripture shows that
they which never seek good conscience, have terrible ends. For either they die
blocks, as Nabal did; or they die desperate, as Caine, Saul, Achitophel,
Judas. VI. We must consider often the terrible day of judgment, in which every
man must receive according to his doings. And that we may then be absolved,
the best way is to seek for a good conscience: for if our conscience be evil,
and condemn us in this life, God will much more condemn us. And whereas we
must pass through three judgments; the judgment of men, the judgment of our
conscience, and the last judgment of God: we shall never be strengthened
against them, and cleared in them all; but by the seeking of a good conscience.

After that man has got good conscience, his second duty is to keep it. And
as the governing the ship on the sea, 2 Men's second duty to ke^pe g^^^ (...).
the pilote holding the helm i^ his hand, has always an ^ie to the compass;
so we likewise, in the ordering of our lives and conuersations, must always
have a special regard to conscience.

That we may keep good conscience, we must do two things; avoid the
impediment thereof, and use convenient preseruations.

Impediments of good conscience, are either in us or forth of us. In us, our
own sins and corruptions. When men's bodies lie dead in the earth, there
breed certain worms in them, whereby they are consumed. For of the flesh
come the worms which consume the flesh: but unless we take great heed, out
of the sins and corruptions of our hear^s, there will breed a worm a
thousand fold more terrible, even the worm of conscience that never dies,
which will in a lingering manner wast the conscience, the soul, and the whol^
man; because he shall be always dying and never dead. These sins are
specially three; Ignorance, unmortified affections, worldly lusts.

Touching the first, namely ignorance, it is a great and usual impediment of
good conscience. For when the mind erreth or misconceiueth, it does mislead the
conscience, and deceive the whole man. The way to avoid this impediment is, to
do our endeavor that we may daiely increase in the knoweledge of the word of
God, that it may dwell in us plentifully, to this end we must pray with
David, that he would open our eyes, that we might understand the wonders of his
law: and withal we must daily search the Scriptures for understanding as men
use to search the mines of the earth for gold ore, Prou. 2.4. Lastly, we must
labor for spiritual wisdom, that we might have the right use of gods word
in every particular action: that being by it directed, we may discern what we
may with good conscience do or leave undone.

The second impediment, is unstaid and unmortified affections: which, if they
have their swing, as wild horses ouertu^ne the chariot with men and all, so
they ouerturne and ouercarrie the judgment and conscience of man: and
therefore when they bear rule, good conscience takes no place. Now to prevent
the danger th^^ comes hereby, this course must be followed. When we would have
a sword or a knife not to hurt our selves or others, we turn the edge of it.
And so, that we may prevent our affections from hurting and annoying the
conscience, we must turn the course of them, by directing them from our
neighbors to our selves and our own sins, or by inclining them to God and
Christ. For example: choler and anger directs it self upon every occasion
against our neighbor, and thereby greatly indamageth the conscience. Now, the
course of it is turned, when we begin to be displeased and to be angry with
our selves for our own sins. Our love set upon the world is hurtful to the
conscience, but when we once begin to set our love on God in Christ, and to
love the blood of Christ above all the world, then contrariwise it is a
furtherance of good conscience.

The third impediment, is worldly lusts, that is, the love and exceeding desire
of riches, honors, pleasures. Every man is as Adam, his good conscience is his
paradise; the forbidden fruit, is the strong desire of these earthly things;
the serpent is the old enemy the devil: who if he may be suffered to
entangle us with the love of the world, will straigh^ way put us out of our
paradise, and bar us from al good conscience. The remedy is to learn the
lesson of Paul, Phil. 4. 12. which is in every estate in which God shall place
us to be content; esteeming evermore the present condition the best for us of
all. Now that this lesson may be learned, we must further labor to be resolved
of Gods special providence toward us in every case and condition of life: and
when we have so well profited in the school of Christ, that we can see and
acknowledge Gods providence and goodness, as well in sickness as in health, in
poverty as in wealth, in hunger as in fulness, in life as in death, we shall be
very well content, whatsoever any way befalls unto us.

The preservatives of good conscience are two, the first is to preserve and
cherish that saving faith whereby we are persuaded of our reconciliatio^ with
God in Christ, for this is the root of good conscience, as has been showed.
Now this faith is cherished and confirmed by the daiely exercises of
invocation and repentance; which be, to humble our selves, to bewail and
confess our sins to God, to condemn our selves for them, to pray for pardon
and strength against sin, to praise God and give him thanks for his daily
benefits. And by the vn^ained and serious practice of these duties, repentance
and faith are daiely renewed and confirmed. The second preservative is the
maintaining of the righteousness of a good conscience: which righteousness (as
I have said) is nothing else but a constant endeavor and desire to obey the will
of god in all things. That this righteousness may be kept to the end, we must
practice three rules. The first is, that we are to carry in our hearts Consc.
bonae non stat cum proposito peccandi.
a purpose never to sin against God in any thing: for where a purpose is of
committing any sin wittingly and willingly, there is neither good faith nor
good conscience. The second is to walk with God as Enoch did, Genesis 5.24. which
is, to order the whole course of our lives as in the presence of God, desiring
to approve all our doings ever unto him. Now this persuasion that wheresoever
we are, we do stand in the presence of God, is a notable means to maintain
sincerity, Ge. 17.1. I am god all-sufficient, walk before me and be perfect.
And the want of this is the occasion of many offenses: as Abraham said, Because
I thought surely the fear of God is not in this place, they will slay me for
my wives sake, Genesis 20. 11. The third rule is, carefully to walk in our
particular callings, doing the duties thereof to the glory of God, to the good
of the common wealth, and the edification of the Church; avoiding therein
fraud, covetousness, and ambition, which cause men oftentimes to set their
consciences on the tenters, and make them stretch like cheuerill.

Thus we see how good conscience may be preserved. Reasons to induce hereunto
are many. I. Gods straight commandment, 1. Tim. 1.19. Keep faith and good
conscience. And Prou. 4.23. Keep thine heart with all diligence. II. The good
conscience is the most tender part of the soul, like to the apple of the eye;
which being pierced by the least pin that may be, is not only blemished,
but also loses his sight. Therefore as God does to the eye, so must we deal
with the conscience. God gives to the eye certain lids of flesh, to defend and
cover it from outward injuries: and so must we use means to avoid whatsoever
may offend or annoy conscience. III Manifold benefits redounde unto us by
keeping good conscience. First so long as we have care to keep it, we keep
and enjoy all other gifts of Gods spirit. Good conscience and the rest of Gods
graces are as a pair of turtle doves, when the one seeds, the other feeds;
when the one likes not, the other likes not; when the one dies, the other dies:
so, where good conscience is maintained, there are many other excellent gifts
of God Hourishing: and where conscience decaies, they also decaie. Again, good
conscience gives alacrity unto us, and boldness in calling on Gods name. 1.
John. 3.21. If our heart condemn us not, we have boldness toward God.
Thirdly it makes us patient in affliction, and comforts us greatly: and when by
reason of the grieuousnesse of our affl^ction, we are constrained to kneel on
both knees and take up our cross, regenerate conscience as a sweet companion,
or like a good Simon, lays too his shoulder and helps to bear one end of it.
Lastly, when none can comfort us, it will be an amiable comforter, and a friend
speaking sweetly unto us, in the very agony and pang of death. IV. Not to
preserve the conscience without spot, is the way to desperation. It is the
policy of the devil to use means to cast the conscience into the sleep of
security, that he may the more easily bring man to his own destruction. For as
diseases, if they be long neglected become incurable: so the conscience much
and often wounded, admits little or no comfort. Neither will it always boot a
man after many years to say at the last cast, Lord be merciful to me, I have
sinned. Though some be received to mercy in the time of death, yet far more
perish in desperation, that live in their sins wittingly and willingly
against their own conscience. Pharao, Saul, and Judas cried all peccaui, I
have sinned against god: yet Pharao is hardened more and more and perishes:
Saul goes on in his sins and despaireth: Judas made away himself. And no
marvel, for the multitude of sins oppress the conscience, and make the heart
to ouerflowe with such a measure of grief that it can fasten no affiance in
the mercy of God. Lastly they that shall neglect to keep good conscience,
procure many hurts, and dangers, and judgments of God to themselves. When a
ship is on the sea, if it be not well governed, or if there be a breach made
into it; it draws water and sinkes: and so both men and wares and all in
likelihood are cast away. Now we all are as passengers; the world is an huge
sea through which we must pass: our ship is the conscience of every man, 1.
Tim. 1.19. and 3.12. the wares are our religion and salvation and all other
gifts of God. Therefore it stands us in hand to be always at the helm, and to
carry our ship with as even a course as possibly we can, to the intended port
of happiness, which is the salvation of our souls. But if so be it we grow
careless, and make breaches in the ship of conscience, by suffering it to dash
upon the rocks of sin, it is a thousand to one, that we in the end shall cast
away our selves and all we have. And in the mean season, as conscience
decaies, so proportionally all graces and goodness goes from us: Gods
commandments begin to be vile unto us; the knowledge thereof, as also faith,
hope, and the invocation of Gods name, decay. Experience shows that men of
excellent gifts by using badde conscience, loose them all.

Finis.
A Reformed Catholic: OR, A DECLARATION Showing how near we may come to the
present Church of Rome in sundry points of Religion: and wherein we must for
ever depart from them: with an Aduertisment to all favorers of the Roman
Religion, showing how the said religion is against the Catholic principles and
grounds of the Catechism.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINTER to the University of Cambridge. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir William Bows Knight, etc. Grace and peace.
RIght Worshipful, it is a notable policy of the devil, which he has put
into the heads of sundry men in this age, to think that our religion and the
religion of the present Church of Rome are all one for substance: and that they
may be reunited as (in their opinion) they were before. Writings to this
effect, are spread abroad in the French tongue, and respected of English
protestants more then is meet; or ought to be. For, let men in show of
moderation, pretend the peace and good estate of the Catholic Church as long
as long as they will; this Union of the two religions can never be made, more
then the union of light and darkness. And this shall appear, if we do but a
little consider, how they of the Roman Church have rased the foundation. For
though in words they honor Christ, yet in deed they turn him to a
Pseudo-Christ and an Idol of their own brain. They call him our Lord, but
with this condition, that the Servant of Servants of this Lord may change and
add to his commandments: having so great a power, that he may open and shut
heaven to whom he will; and bind the very conscience with his own laws, and
consequently be partaker of the spiritual kingdom of Christ. Again they call
him a Savior, but yet in Us: in that he gives this grace unto us, that by our
merits we may be our own Saviors: and in the want of our own merits, we may
partake in the merits of the Saints. And they acknowledge that he died and
suffered for us, but with this caveat, that the Fault being pardoned, we must
satisfy for the temporal punishment either in this world or in Purgatory. In
a word, they make him our mediator of Intercession unto God: but withal his
Mother must be the Queen of Heaven, and by the right of a Mother command him
there. Thus, in word they cry Osunna, but in deed they crucify Christ.
Therefore we have good cause to bless the name of God, that has freed us
from the yoke of this Roman bondage, and has brought us to the true light and
liberty of the gospel. And it should be a great height of unthankfulness in
us, not to stand out against the present Church of Rome, but to yield our
selves to plottes of reconciliation. To this effect and purpose I have penned
this little Treatise, which I present to your Worship, desiring it might be
some token of a thankful mind, for undeserved love. And I crave withal, not
only your Worshipful (which is more common) but also your learned protection;
being well assured, that by skill and art you are able to justify whatsoever
I have truly taught. Thus wishing to you and yours the continuance and the
increase of faith and good conscience, I take my leave.

Cambridge, Iun. 28. 1597. Your Worships in the Lord, William Perkins.

THE AVTHOR TO THE Christian Reader.
BY a Reformed Catholic, I understand any one that holds the same necessary
beads of religion with the Roman Church: yet so, as he pares off and reiects
all errors in doctrine whereby the said religion is corrupted. How this may
be done, I have begun to make some little declaration in this small Treatise:
the intent whereof is to show how near we may come to the present Church of
Rome in sundry points of religion: and wherein we must for ever dissent.

My purpose in penning this small discourse is threefolde. The first is, to
confute all such Politikes as hold and maintain, that our religion, and that
of the Roman Church differ not in substance, and consequently that they may be
reconciled: yet my meaning is not here to condemn any Pacification that tends
to persuade the Roman Church to our religion. The second is, that the Papists
which think so basely of our religion, may be won to a better liking of it:
when they shall see how near we come unto them in sundry points. The third,
that the common protestant might in some part see and conceive the point of
difference between us and the Church of Rome: and know in what manner and how
far forth, we condemn the opinions of the said Church.

I crave pardon for the order which I use, in handling the several points. For
I have set them down one by one, as they came to mind, not respecting the
laws of method. If any Papist shall say that I have not alleged their
opinions aright, I answer, that their books be at hand, and I can justify
what I have said.

Thus craving thine acceptance of this my pains, and wishing unto thee the
increase of knowledge and love of pure and sound religion, I take my leave and
make an end.

The places of doctrine handled, are
1 Of Free Will. 2 Of Original sin. 3 Assurance of salvation. 4
Justification of a sinner. 5 Of merits. 6 Satisfactions for sin. 7 Of
Traditions. 8 Of Vows. 9 Of Images. 10 Of Real presence. 11 The sacrifice of
the Mass. 12 Of Fasting. 13 The state of perfection. 14 Worshipping of Saints
departed. 15 Intercession of Saints. 16 Implicit faith. 17 Of Purgatory. 18
Of the supremacy. 19 Of the efficacy of the Sacraments. 20 Of faith. 21 Of
Repentance. 22 The sins of the Roman Church.
REVELAT. 18. 4. And I heard another voice from heaven say, Go out of her my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues.
IN the former chapter S. John sets down a description of the whore of
Babylon, and that at large as he saw her in a vision described unto him. In the
sixteenth verse of the same chapter, he foretells her destruction: and in the
three first verses of this 18. chapter, he goes on to propound the said
destruction yet more directly and plainly: withal alleging arguments to
prove the same, in all the verses following. Now in this fourth verse is set
down a caveat serving to forewarne all the people of God, that they may escape
the judgment which shall befall the whore: and the words contain two parts: a
commandment, and a reason. The commandment, Come out of her my people, that
is, from Babylon. The reason, taken from the event, least ye be partakers, etc.
Touching the commandment, first I will search the right meaning of it, and
then set down the use thereof and doctrine flowing thence. In history
therefore are three Babylons mentioned: one is, Babylon of Assyria standing on
the river Euphrates, where was the confusion of Languages, and where the Jews
were in captivity: which Babylon is in Scripture reproched for Idolatry and
other iniquities. The second Babylon is in Egypt standing on the river Nylus,
and it is now called Cayr; of that mention is made, 1. Pet. 5.13. (as some
think) though indeed it is as likely and more commonly thought, thas there is
meant Babylon of Assyria. The third Babylon is mystical, whereof Babylon of
Assyria was a type and figure; and that is Rome, which is without question here
to be understood. And the whore of Babylon, as by all circumstances may be
gagathered, is the state or regiment of a people that are the inahbitants of
Rome and appertain thereto. This may be proved by the interpretation of the
holy ghost: for in the last verse of the 17. chapter the woman that is the
whore of Babylon is said to be a city which reigns over the kings of the
earth: now in the days when S. John penned this book of Revelation, there
was no city in the world that ruled over the kings of the earth but Rome; it
then being the seat where the Emperor put in execution his Imperial
authority. Again in the seventh verse she is said to sit on a beast having
seven heads and ten horns: which 7. heads be seven hills, v. 9. whereon the
woman sits, and also they be seven kings. Therefore by the whore of Babylon
is meant a city standing on seven hills. Now it is well known, not only to
learned men in the Church of god, but even to the heathen themselves, that Rome
alone is the city built on seven distinct hills, called Caelius, Auentinus,
Exquilinus, Tarpeius, or Capitolinus, Viminalis, Palatinus, Quirinal^^. Papists
to help themselves, do allege that old Rome stood on seven hells, but now
is removed further to Campus Martius. I answer, that howsoever the greatest
part of the city in regard of habitation be not now on seven hills, yet in
regard of regiment and practice of religion it is: for even to this day upon
these hills are feated certain Churches and Monasteries and other like places
where the Papal authority is put in execution: and thus Rome being put for a
state and regiment; even at this day, it stands upon seven hills. And though it
be come to pass that the harlot in regard of her latter days even changed her
seat, yet in respect of her younger times in which she was bred and borne, she
sat upon the seven hills. Others, because they fear the wounding of their own
heads, labor to frame these words to an other meaning, and say, that by the
whore is meant the company of all wicked men in the world wheresoever, the
devil being the head thereof. But this exposition is flat against the text:
for in the second verse of the 17. chapter, she is opposed to the kings of the
earth with whom she is said to commit fornication: and in the last verse she
is called a city standing on seven hills and reigning over the kings of the
earth (as I have said,) and therefore must needs be a state of men in some
particular place. And the Papists themselves perceiving that this shift will
not serve their turn, make two Romes, heathenish Rome, and that whereof the
Pope is head: now (say they) the whore spoken of, is heathenish Rome, which was
ruled by cruel tyrants, as Nero, Domitian, and the rest: and that Rome whereof
now the Pope is head, is not here meant. Behold a vain and foolish
distinction: for Ecclesiastical Rome in respect of state, princely dominion,
and cruelty in persecuting the Saints of God, is all one with the heathenish
Empire: the Sea of the Bishop being turned into the Emperors court, as all
histories do manifest. But let the distinction be as they suppose, yet by
their leaves, here by the whore must be understood not only heathenish Rome,
but even the Papal or Ecclesiastical Rome: for v.3. of this chapter the holy
Ghost says plainly, that she has mad^ all nations drunk with the wine of the
wrath of her fornication: yea it is added, that she has committed fornication
with the kings of the earth, whereby is signified that she has endeavored to
entangle all the nations of the earth in her spiritual idolatry, and to bring
the kings of the earth to her religion. Which thing cannot be understood of the
heathenish Rome, for that left all the kings of the earth to their own
religion and idolatry: neither did they labor to bring foreign kings to
worship their gods. Again chap. 17. v. 16. it is said, that the ten horns,
which be ten kings, shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked,
which must not be understood of heathenish Rome, but of popish Rome: for
whereas in former times all the kings of the earth did submit themselves to the
whore, now they have begun to withdraw themselves, and make her desolate; as
the king of Bohemia, Denmark, Germany, England, Scotland, and other parts:
therefore this distinction is also frivolous. They further allege that the
whore of Babylon is drunk with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs, chap.
17.6. shed not in Rome, but in Jerusalem, where the Lord was crucified: and
the two prophets being slain lie there in the streets, Reuelat. 11.8. Epist.
17. Eusto. and Paulae ad Marcel.
But this place is not meant of Jerusalem, as Hierome has fully taught, but
it may well be understood of Rome: Christ was crucified there, either because
the authority, whereby he was crucified was from the Roman Empire, or else
because Christ in his members was and is there daily crucified, though locally
in his own person he was crucified at Jerusalem. And thus, notwithstanding all
which has been said, we must here by the whore understand the state and
Empire of Rome, not so much under the heathen Emperors as under the head
thereof the Pope: which exposition, besides the authority of the text, has
the favor and defense of ancient and learned men. Bernard says, Ser. in
Cant. 33. Epist. 125.
They are the ministers of Christ, but they serve Antichrist. Again, The beast
spoken of in the Apocalypse to which a mouth is given to speak blasphemies, and
to make war with the Saints of God, is now gotten into Peter's chair, as a
lion prepared to his pray. It will be said, that Bernard speaks these latter
words of one that came to the Popedom by intrusion or usurpation. It is true
indeed: but wherefore was he an usurper? He renders a reason thereof in the
same place: because the Antipope called Innocentius was chosen by the kings of
Almaine, France, England, Scotland, Spain, Jerusalem, with consent of the
whole Clergy and people in these nations, and the other was not. And thus
Bernard has given his verdict, that not only this usurper, but all the Popes
for this many years are the beast in the Apocalypse: because now they are only
chosen by the college of Cardinals. To this agrees the decree of Pope
Nicolas the second, C. in nomine did. 23.
ann. 1059. that the Pope shall afterward be created by the suffrages of the
Cardinal Bishops of Rome, with the consent of the rest of the clergy and
people, and the Emperor himself: and all Popes are excommunicate and accursed
as Antichrists, referente I^ello 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that enter otherwise, as all now do. Ioachimus Abbas says, Antichrist was
long since borne in Rome, and shall be yet advanced higher in the Apostolic
See. Petrarch says, Once Rome, now Babylon. And Ireneus book 5. chap. last,
said before all these, that Antichrist should be Lateinus, a Roman.

Again, this commandment must not so much be understood of a bodily departure
in respect of cohabitation and presence, as of a spiritual separation in
respect of faith and religion. And the meaning of the holy Ghost is, that men
must depart from the Romish Church in regard of judgment and doctrine, in
regard of their faith and the worship of God.

Thus then we see that the words contain a commandment from God, inioyning
his Church and people to make a separation from Babylon. Whence I observe, That
all those who will be saved, must depart and separate themselves from the faith
and religion of this present Church of Rome. And whereas they are charged with
schism that separate on this manner; the truth is, they are not schismatics
that do so, because they have the commandment of God for their warrant: and
that party is the schismaticke in whom the cause of this separation lies:
and that is the Church of Rome, namely the cup of abomination in the whores
hand, which is, their heretical and schismatic religion.

Now touching the duty of separation I mean to speak at large, not standing
so much to prove the same, because it is evident by the text, as to show the
manner and measure of making this separation: and therein I will handle two
things. First how farforth we may join with them in the matter of religion:
secondly how farforth and wherein we must dissent and depart from them. And for
this cause I mean to make choice of certain points of religion, and to speak
of them in as good order as I can, showing in each of them our consent and
difference: and the rather, because some harp much upon this string, that a
Union may be made of our two religions, and that we differ not in substance but
in points of circumstance.

The first point wherewith I mean to begin shall be the point of Freewill;
though it be not the principal.

I. Our consent.
Freewill both by them and us, is taken for a mixed power in the mind and will
of man: whereby discerning what is good and what is evil, he does accordingly
choose or refuse the same.

I. Conclus. Man must be considered in a fourfold estate, as he was created,
as he was corrupted, as he is renewed, as he shall be glorified. In the first
estate, we ascribe to man's will liberty of nature in which he could will or
^ill either good or evil: in the third, liberty of grace: in the last
liberty of glory. All the doubt is of the second estate: and yet therein also
we agree, as the conclusions following will declare.

II. Conclus. The matters where about freewill is occupied are principally the
actions of men, which be of three sorts; natural, humane, spiritual. Natural
actions are such as are common to men with beasts, as to eat, drink, sleep,
hear, see, smell, taste, and to move from place to place: in all which we
join with the Papists, and hold that man has freewil, and even since the fall
of Adam by natural power of the mind does freely perform any of these actions
or the like.

III. Conclus. Humane actions are such as are common to all men good and bad,
as to speak and use reason, the practice of all mechanical and liberal arts,
and the outward performance of Civil and Ecclesiastical duties, as to come to
the Church, to speak and preach the word, to reach out the hand to receive the
Sacrament, and to lend the ear to listen outwardly to that which is taught.
And hither we may refer the outward actions of civil virtues; as namely
Justice, temperance, gentleness, liberality. And in these also we join with
the Church of Rome, and say (as experience teaches) that men have a natural
freedom of will, to put them or not to put them in execution. Paul says, Romans
2.14. The Gentiles that have not the law do the things of the law by nature,
that is, by natural strength: and he says of himself, that before his
conversion touching the righteousness of the law, he was unblameable, Phil. 3.
6. And for this external obedience, natural men receive reward in temporal
things. Matthew. 6.5. Ezech. 29.19. And yet here some caueats must be remembered:
I. that in humane actions, man's will is weak and feeble, and his understanding
dim and dark; and thereupon he often fails in them. And in all such actions
with Augustine I understand the will of man to be only wounded or half dead.
II. That the will of man is under the will of God, and therefore to be ordered
by it: as Jeremy says, chap. 10.23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not
in himself, neither is in man to walk or direct his steps.

IV. Conclus. The third kind of actions are spiritual more nearly concerning
the heart or conscience, and these be twofold: they either concern the
kingdom of darkness, or else the kingdom of God. Those that concern the
kingdom of darkness are sins properly: and in these we likewise join with
the Papists and teach, that in sins or evil actions man has freedom of
will. Some peradventure will say, that we sin necessarily, because he that
sins cannot but sin: and that freewill and necessity cannot stand
together. Indeed the necessity of compulsion or coaction, and freewill cannot
agree: but there is another kind of necessity which may stand with freedom of
will: for some things may be done necessarily and also freely. A man that is in
close prison, must needs there abide and can not possibly get forth and walk
where he will; yet can he move himself freely and walk within the prison: so
likewise, though man's will be chained naturally by the bonds of sin, and
therefore cannot but sin: and thereupon sins necessarily, yet does it also
sin freely.

V. Conclus. The second kind of spiritual actions or things, concern the
kingdom of God: as repentance, faith, the conversion of a sinner, new
obedience, and such like: in which we likewise in part join with the Church of
Rome and say, that in the first conversion of a sinner, man's freewill concurres
with Gods grace, as a fellow or coworker in some sort. For in the conversion of
a sinner three things are required: the word, Gods spirit, and man's will: for
man's will is not passive in all and every respect, but has an actio^ in the
first conversion and change of the soul. When any man is converted, this work
of God is not done by compulsion, but he is converted willingly: and at the
very time when he is converted, by Gods grace he wills his conversion. To this
end said Augustine, Sermon. 15. de verb. Apost. He which made thee without
thee, will not save thee without thee. Again, de great. and l. arbitr. 1.
That is certain, that our will is required in this, that we may do any good
thing well: but we have it not from our own power but God works to will in us.
For look at what time God gives grace, at the same time he Posse velle, and
actu velle recipere.
gives a will to desire and will the same grace: as for example, when God
works faith, at the same time he works also upon the will causing it to
desire faith and willingly to receive the gift of believing. God makes of the
unwilling will a willing will: because no man can receive grace utterly against
his will, considering will constrained is no will. But here we must remember,
that howsoever in respect of time the working of grace by Gods spirit, and the
willing of it in man go together: yet in regard of order, grace is first
wrought, and man's will must first of all be acted and moved by grace, and then
it also acts, wills, and moves it self. And this is the last point of
consent between us and the Roman Church touching freewill: neither may we
proceed further with them.

II. The dissent or difference.
The point of difference stands in the cause of the freedom of man's will in
spiritual matters, which concern the kingdom of God. The Papists say, man's
will concurreth and works with Gods grace in the first conversion of a sinner
by it self, and by it own natural power; and is only helped by the holy
Ghost. We say, that man's will works with grace in the first conversion, yet
not of it self, but by grace. Or thus; They say will has a natural
cooperation: we deny it, and say it has cooperation only by grace, being in
it self not active but passive; willing well only as it is moved by grace,
whereby it must first be acted and moved, before it can act or will. And that
we may the better conceive the difference, I will use this comparison: The
church of Rome sets forth the estate of a sinner by the condition of a
prisoner, and so do we: mark then the difference. It supposes the said
prisoner to lie bound hand and foot with chains and fetters, and withal to
be sick and weak, yet not wholly dead but living in part: it supposes also
that being in this case, he stirs not himself for any help, and yet has
ability and power to stir. Hereupon if the keeper come and take away his
bolts and fetters, and hold him by the hand, and help him up, he can and will
of himself stand and walk and go out of prison: even so (say they) is a
sinner bound hand and foot with the chain of his sins: and yet he is not
dead but sick, like to the wounded man in the way between Ierico and
Jerusalem. And therefore does he not will and a^fect that which is good: but if
the holy Ghost come and do but untie his bands, and reach him his hand of
grace, then can he stand of himself and will his own salvation, or any thing
else that is good. We in like manner grant, that a prisoner fitly resembles a
natural man, but yet such a prisoner must he be, as is not only sick and
weak, but even stark dead: which can not stir though the keeper untie his
bolts and chains, not hear though he sound a trumpet in his ear: and if the
said keeper would have him to move and stir, he must give him not only his
hand to help him, but even soul and life also: and such a one is every man by
nature; not only chained and fettered in his sins but stark dead therein: as
one that lies rotting in the grave, not having any ability or power to move
or stir: and therefore he cannot so much as desire or do anything that is
truly good of himself, but God must first come and put a new soul into him,
even the spirit of grace to quicken and revive him: and then being thus
revived, the will begins to will good things at the very same time, when God
by his spirit first infuseth grace. And this is the true difference between us
and the Church of Rome in this point of freewill.

III. Our reasons.
Now for the confirmation of the doctrine we hold, namely, that a man wills
not his own conversion of himself by nature either in whole or in part, but
by grace wholly and alone: these reasons may be used. The first is taken from
the nature and measure of man's corruption, which may be distinguished into two
parts. The first is the want of that original righteousness, which was in man
by creation: the second, is a pronenes and inclination to that which is evil,
and to nothing that is truly good. This appears, Genesis 8.21. the frame of man's
heart (says the Lord) is evil from his childhood: that is, the disposition of
the understanding, will, affections, with all that the heart of man deuiseth,
forms, or imagines, is wholly evil. And Paul says, Romans 8.7. The wisdom
of the flesh is enmity against God. Which words are very significant: for the
word [(...)] translated wisdom, signifies that the best thoughts the best
desires, affections, and endeavor that be in any natural man, even those that
come most near to true holiness, are not only contrary to God, but even
enmity it self. And hence I gather, that the very heart it self, that is,
the will and mind, from whence these desires and thoughts do come, are also
enmity unto God. For such as the action is, such is the faculty whence it
proceeds: such as the fruit is, such is the tree: such as the branches are
such are the roots. By both these places it is evident, that in man there is
not only a want, absence, or deprivation of original righteousness, but a
pronenesse also by nature unto that which is evil: which pronenesse includes
in it an inclination not to some few, but to all and every sin: the very
sin against the holy Ghost not excepted. Hence therefore, I reasons thus: If
every man by nature does both want original justice, and be also prone unto
all evil, then wants he natural freewill to will that which is truly good:

But every man by nature wants original justice, and is also prone unto all
evil:

Ergo: Every man naturally wants freewill, to will that which is good.



Reason II. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the
spirit of God: for they are foolishnes unto him, neither can know them, because
they are spiritually discerned. In these words Saint Paul sets down these
points: I. that a natural man does not so much as think of the things
revealed in the Gospel. II. that a man hearing, and in mind conceiving them;
can not give consent unto them, and by natural judgment approve of them: but
contrariwise thinks them to be foolishnes. III. that no man can give assent
to the things of God, unless he be enlightened by the spirit of God. And hence
I reason thus: If a man by nature does not know and perceive the things of God,
and when he shall know them, can not by nature give assent unto them: then has
he no power to will them:

But the first is evidently true: Ergo:



For first the mind must approve and give assent, before the will can choose
or will: and when the mind has not power to conceive or give assent, there the
will has no power to will.

Reason III. Thirdly the holy Ghost avouches, Ephesians. ^.1. Coloss. 2. 13. that
all men by nature are dead in sins and trespasses: not as the Papists say,
weak, sick, or half dead. Hence I gather, that man wants natural power
not to will simply, but freely and frankly to will that which is truly good. A
dead man in his grave can not stir the least finger, because he wants the
very power of life, sense, and motion: no more can he that is dead in sin,
will the least good: nay if he could either will or do any good, he could not be
dead in sin. And as a dead man in the grave, cannot rise but by the power of
god; no more can he that is dead in sin rise, but by the power of Gods grace
alone, without any power of his own.

Reason IV. Fourthly, in the conversion and salvation of a sinner, the
scripture ascribes all to God, and nothing to man's freewill. Ioh. 3.3. Except
a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Ephesians. 2. 10. We are
his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good works. And c. 4. v. 24. the
new man is created to the image of God. Now to be borne again, is a work of
no less importance then our first creation: and therefore wholly to be
ascribed to God as our creation is. Indeed Paul, Philip. 2. 12, 13 bids the
Philippians work out their salvation with fear and trembling: not meaning to
ascribe unto them a power of doing good by themselves. And therefore in the
next verse he adds, It is God that works both the will and the deed:
directly excluding all natural free will in things spiritual: and yet withal
he acknowledges, that man's will has a work in doing that which is good, not
by nature but by grace. Because when God gives man power to will good things,
then he can will them: and when he gives him a power to do good, then he can
do good, and he does it. For though there be not in man's conversion a natural
cooperation of his will with Gods spirit, yet is there a supernatural
cooperation by grace, enabling man when he is to be converted, to will his
conversion: according to which S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 15.10. I have labored in
the faith: but least any man should imagine, that this was done by any natural
power, therefore he adds, yet not I, that is, not by any thing in me, but
Gods grace in me, inabling my will to do the good I do.

Reason V. The judgment of the ancient Church. August. de corrept. and great.
c. 12.
August. The will of the regenerate is kindled only by the holy Ghost: that
they may therefore be able because they will thus: and they will thus, because
God works in them to will. Epist. 105.
And, We have lost our freewill to love God, by the greatness of our sin.
Sermon. 2. on the words of the Apostle: Man when he was created, received great
strength in his freewill^ but by sinning he lost it. Fulg. lib. Praed.
Fulgentius, God gives grace freely to the unworthy whereby the wicked man
being justified is enlightened with the gift of good will, and with a faculty
of doing good: that by mercy prruenting him, he may begin to will well, and
by mercy coming after, he may do the good he will. Bernard says, Bernard.
l. de libro arbitrio.
It is wholly the grace of God that we are created, healed, saved. Cou^cil.
Arausic. 2. cap. 6. To believe and to will is given from above by infusion, and
inspiration of the holy Ghost. More testimonies and reasons might be alleged
to prove this conclusion, but these shall suffice: now let us see what reasons
are alleged to the contrary.

III. Objections of Papists.
Object. I. First they allege that man by nature may do that which is good,
and therefore will that which is good: for none can do that which he neither
wills nor thinks to do, but first we must will and then do. Now (say
they) men can do good by nature, as give alms, speak the truth, do justice,
and practice other duties of civil virtue: and therefore will that which is
good. I answer, that a natural man may do good works for the substance of
the outward work: but not in regard of the goodness of the manner: these are
two diverse things. A man without supernatural grace may give alms, do
justice, speak the truth, etc. which be good things considered in themselves;
as God has commanded them; but he cannot do them well. To think good things
and to do good things are natural works: but to think good things in a good
manner, and to do them well, so as God may accept the action done, are works of
grace. And therefore the good thing done by a natural man is a sin, in
respect of the doer; because it fails both for his right beginning, which is a
pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned; as also for his end which is
the glory of God.

Object. II. God has commanded all men to believe and repent: therefore they
have natural freewill: by virtue whereof (being helped by the spirit of God)
they can believe and repent. Ans. The reason is not good: for by such
commandments God shows not what men are able to do; but what they should
do, and what they cannot do. Again, the reason is not well framed, it ought
rather to be thus: Because God gives men commandment to repent and believe,
therefore they have power to repent and believe, either by nature or by grace,
and then we hold with them. For when God in the Gospel commands men to
repent and to believe, at the same time by his grace he inableth them both to
will or desire to believe and repent, as also actually to repent and believe.

Object. III. If man have no freewill to sin or not to sin, then no man is
to be punished for his sins: because he sins by a necessity not to be
avoided. Ans. The reason is not good: for though man cannot but sin, yet is
the fault in himself, and therefore he is to be punished; as a bankrupt is not
therefore freed from his debts, because he is not able to pay them: but the
bills against him stand in force, because the debt comes through his own
default.

The second point: of Original sin.
The next point to be handled, is concerning Original sin after baptism;
that is, how farreforth it remains after baptism. A point to be well
considered, because hereupon depend many points of popery.

I. Our Consent.
I. Conclus. They say, natural corruption after baptism is abolished, and so
say we: but let us see how far it is abolished. In original sin are three
things; I. the punishment, which is the first and second death. II. Guiltines,
which is the binding up of the creature unto punishment. III. the fault or the
offending of God, under which I comprehend our Guiltiness in Adams first
offense, as also the corruption of the heart: which is a natural inclination
and pronenesse to any thing that is evil or against the law of God. For the
first we say, that after baptism in the regenerate, the punishment of
original sin is taken away: There is no condemnation (says the Apostle) to
them that be in Jesus Christ. Romans 8.1. For the second, that is, guiltines, we
further condescend and say: that is also taken away in them that are borne
anew: for considering there is no condemnation to them, there is nothing to
bind them to punishment. Yet this caveat must be remembered, namely that the
guiltines is removed from the person regenerate, not from the sin in the
person: but of this more afterward. Thirdly, the guilt in Adams first offense
is pardoned. And touching the corruption of the heart, I avouch two things: I.
That that very power or strength whereby it reigns in man, is taken away in
the regenerate. II. That this corruption is abolished (as also the fault of
every actual sin past) so far forth as it is the fault and sin of the man
in whom it is. Indeed it remains till death, and it is sin considered in
it self, so long as it remains, but it is not imputed unto the person: and in
that respect is as though it were not: it being pardoned.

II. The dissent or difference.
Thus far we consent with the Church of Rome: now the difference between us
stands not in the abolishment, but in the manner, and the measure of the
abolishment of this sin.

Papists teach, that Original sin is so far forth taken away after
baptism, me, that it cease to be a sin properly: and is nothing else but a
want, defect, and weakness, making the heart fit and ready to conceive sin:
much like tinder, which though it be not fire of it self, yet is it very apt
and fit to conceive fire And they of the Church of Rome deny it to be sin
properly, that they might uphold some gross opinions of theirs, namely, that a
man in this life may fulfill the law of God: and do good works void of
sin: that he may stand righteous at the bar of Gods judgment by them.

But we teach otherwise, that though original sin be taken away in the
regenerate, and that in sundry respects: yet does it remain in them after
baptism, not only as a want and weakness but as a sin, and that properly:
as may by these reasons be proved.

Reason I. Romans 7. 17. Paul says directly: It is no more I that do it, but
sin that dwells in me: that is, original sin. The Papists answer again,
that it is so called improperly: because it comes of sin and also is an
occasion of sin to be done. But by the circumstances of the text, it is sin
properly: for in the words following, Saint Paul says, that this sin
dwelling in him, made him to do the evil which he hated. And. v. 24. he
cries out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? whence I reason thus: That which once was sin properly, and still
remaining in man makes him to sin, and intangleth him in the punishment of
sin, and makes him miserable: that is sin properly.

But original sin does all these. Ergo:



Reason II. Infants baptized and regenerate, die the bodily death before they
come to the years of discretion: therefore original sin in them is sin
properly: or else they should not die, having no cause of death in them: for
death is the wages of sin, as the Apostle says, Romans 6. 23. and Romans 5. 12.
Death entered into the world by sin. As for actual sin they have none, if
they die presently after they are borne before they come to any use either of
reason or affection.

Reason III. That which lusts against the spirit, and by lusting tempts,
and in tempting intiseth and draws the heart to sin, is for nature sin it
self: but concupiscence in the regenerate lusts against the spirit, Gal.
5.17. and tempts as I have said, Iam. 1.14. God tempts no man, but every
man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is
in^^sed: then when lust conceiueth, it brings forth sin. And therefore it
is sin properly: such as the fruit is, such is the tree. Aug. contr. ^ul. l.
5. c. 3.
August. Concupiscence against which the spirit lusts is sin, because in it
there is disobedience against the rule of the mind: and it is the punishment
of sin because it befalls man for the merits of his disobedience: and it is
the cause of sin.

Reason V. The judgment of the ancient Church. August. epist. 29. Charity in
some is more, in some less, in some none: the highest degree of all which
cannot be increased, is in none, as long as man lives upon earth. And as long
as it may be increased, that which is less then it should be, is in fault: by
which fault it is, that there is no just man upon earth that does good and
sins not: by which fault none living shall be justified in the sight of God.
For which fault, if we say we have no sin, there is no truth in us: for
which also, though we profit never so much, it is necessary for us to say,
forgive us our debts, though all our words, deeds, and thoughts be already
forgiven in baptism. Indeed Augustine in sundry places seems to deny
concupiscence to be sin after baptism: but his meaning is, that
concupiscence in the regenerate is not the sin of the person in whom it is.
For thus he expounds himself, ad Valor. I. 1. c. 24.
This is not to have sin, not to be guilty of sin. And, Lib. 2. cont. Iul.
the law of sin in baptism is remitted and not ended. And, Tract. 24. in Ioh.
Let not sin reign: he says not, let not sin be, but let it not reign.
For as long as thou live, of necessity sin will be in thy members: at the
least, look it reign not in thee, etc.

Objections of Papists.
The arguments which the Church of Rome alleges to the contrary, are these:
Object. I. In baptism men receive perfect and absolute pardon of sin: and
sin being pardoned is taken quite away: and therefore original sin after
baptism cease to be sin. Ans. Sin is abolished two ways: first in
regard quoad imputationem.
of imputation to the person: secondly in regard of quoa^ existentiam.
existing and being. For this cause, God vouchsafes to man two blessings in
baptism, Remission of sin, and Mortification of the same. Remission or
pardon abolisheth sin wholly in respect of any imputation thereof unto man,
but not simply in regard of the being thereof. Mortification therefore goes
further, and abolisheth in all the powers of body and soul, the very
concupiscence or corruption it self, in respect of the being thereof. And
because mortification is not accomplished till death, therefore original
corruption remains till death, though not imputed.

Object. II. Every sin is voluntary: but original sin in no man after
baptism is voluntary: and therefore no sin. Ans. The proposition is a
polliticke rule pertaining to the courts of men, and must be understood of such
actions as are done of one man to another: and it does not belong to the court
of conscience, which God holds and keeps in men's hearts, in which every
want of conformity to the law is made a sin. Secondly I answer, that
original sin was voluntary in our first parent Adam: for he sinned, and
brought this misery upon us willingly: though in us it be otherwise upon just
cause. Actual sin was first in him, and then original corruption: but in us
original corruption is first, and then actual sin.

Object. III. Where the form of any thing is taken away, there the thing it
self cease also: but after baptism in the regenerate, the form of
original sin, that is, the guilt is quite removed: and therefore sin
cease to be sin. Answ. The guilt, or obligation to punishment, is not the
form of original corruption, but (as we say in schools) an accident or
necessary companion thereof. The true form of original sinne^ is a defect
and deprivation of that which the law requires at our hands in our mind,
will, affections, and in all the powers both of soul and body. But they urge
this reason further, saying: where the guilt and punishment is taken away,
there is no fault remaining: but after baptism the guilt and punishment is
removed: and therefore, though original corruption remain, it is not as a
fault to make us guilty before God, but only as a weakness. Ans. Guilt is
removed, and not removed. It is removed from the person regenerate, which
stands not guilty for any sin original or actual: but Guilt is not
removed from the sin it self: or as some answer, there be two kinds of
guilt, actual, and potentiall. The actual guilt is, whereby sin makes man
stand guilty before God: and that is removed in the regenerate. But the
potentiall guilt, which is an aptness in sin, to make a man stand guilty if
he sin, that is not removed: and therefore still sin remains sin. To
this or like effect says Augustine, We say that the guilt of concupiscence,
not whereby it is Guilty ( for that is not a person) but that whereby it made
man guilty from the beginning, is pardoned, and that the thing it self is
evil so as the regenerate desire to be healed of this plague.

Object. III. Lastly, for our disgrace they allege that we in our doctrine
teach, that original sin after baptism is only clipped or pared, like the
hair of a man's head, whose roots still remain in the flesh, growing and
increasing after they are cut, as before. Answ. Our doctrine is abused: for in
the paring of any thing; as in cutting of the hair or in lopping a tree, the
root remains untouched, and thereupon multiplieth as before. But in the
mortification of original sin after baptism, we hold no such paring: but
teach, that in the very first instant of the conversion of a sinner, sin
receives his deadly wound in the root, never afterward to be recovered.

The third point: Certentie of salvation.
I. Our Consent.
I. Concl. We hold and believe that a man in this life, may be certain of
salvation: and the same thing does the Church of Rome teach and hold.

II. Concl. We hold and believe that a man is to put a certain affiance in
Gods mercy in Christ for the salvation of his soul: and the same thing by
common consent holds the foresaid Church: this point makes not the
difference between us.

III. Concl. We hold that with assurance of salvation in our hearts is joined
doubting; and there is no man so assured of his salvation, but he at sometime
doubts thereof, especially in the time of temptation; and in this the Papists
agree with us, and we with them.

IV. Concl. They go further and say, that a man may be certain of the
salvation of men, or of the Church by Catholic faith: and so say we.

V. Concl. Yea they hold that a man by faith may be assured of his own
salvation through extraordinary revelation, as Abraham and others were, and so
do we.

Bellar. l. 3. p. 1. 129. cl.
VI. They teach that we are to be certain of our salvation by special faith
in regard of God that promises: though in regard of our selves and our
indisposition we can not; and in the former point they consent with us.

II. The dissent or difference.
The very maine point of difference lies in the manner of assurance.

I. Concl. We hold that a man may be certain of his salvation in his own
conscience even in this life, and that by an ordinary and special faith. They
hold that a man is certain of his salvation only by hope: both of us hold a
certainty, we by faith, they by hope.

II. Concl. Further, we hold and avouch that our certainety by true faith is
infallible: they say, their cetaintie is only probable.

III. Conclus. And further though both of us say, that we have confidence in
Gods mercy in Christ for our salvation: yet we do it with some difference. For
our confidence comes from certain and ordinary faith: theirs from hope,
ministering (as they say) but a coniecturall certentie.

Thus much of the difference: now let us see the reasons too and fro.

III. Objections of Papists.
Object. I. Where there is no word there is no faith: for these two are
relatiues: but there is no word of God, saying, Cornelius believe thou, Peter
believe thou, and thou shall be saved. And therefore there is no such ordinary
faith to believe a man's own particular salvation. Ans. The proposition is
false, unless it be supplied with a clause on this manner: Where there is no
word of promise, nor any thing that does counteruaile a particular promise,
there is no faith. But (say they) there is no such particular word. It is true,
God does not speak to men particularly, Believe thou, and thou shall be saved.
But yet does he that which is answerable hereunto, in that he gives a general
promise, with a commandment to apply the same: and has ordained the holy
ministry of the word to apply the same to the persons of the hearers in his
own name: and that is as much as if the Lord himself should speak to men
particularly. To speak more plainly: in the Scripture the promises of
salvation be indefinitely propounded: it says not any where, if John will
believe, he shall be saved, or if Peter will believe he shall be saved; but
whosoever believes shall be saved. Now then comes the minister of the word,
who standing in the room of God, and in the stead of Christ himself, takes
the indefinite promises of the Gospel, and lays them to the hearts of every
particular man: and this in effect is as much as if Christ himself should say,
Cornelius believe thou, and thou shall be saved: Peter believe thou, and thou
shall be saved. It is answered, that this applying of the Gospel is upon
condition of men's faith and repentance, and that men are deceived touching
their own faith and repentance: and therefore fail in applying the word unto
themselves. Ans. Indeed this manner of applying is false in all hypocrites,
heretics, and unrepentant persons: for they apply upon carnal presumption,
and not by faith. Nevertheless it is true in all the Elect having the spirit
of grace, and prayer: for when God in the ministry of the word being his
own ordinance, says, Seek ye my face: the heart of Gods children truly
answers, O Lord, I will seek thy face, Psalm. 17.8. And when God shall say,
Thou art my people, they shall say again, The Lord is my God, Zach. 13.6. And
it is a truth of God, that he which believes knows that he believes: and he
that truly repents knows that be repe^teth: unless it be in the beginning of
our conversion, and in the time of distress and temptation. Otherwise what
thankfulness can there be for grace received.

Object. II. It is no article of the Creed, that a man must believe his own
salvation: and therefore no man is bound thereto. Ans. By this argument it
ap^^^res plainly, that the very pillars of the Church of Rome do not
understand the Creed: for in that which is commonly called the Apostles
Creed, every article implies in it this particular faith. And in the first
article, I believe in God, are three things contained: the first, to believe
that there is a God, the second to believe the same God to be my God, the third
to put my confidence in him for my salvation: and so much contain the other
articles, which are concerning God. When Thomas said, Ioh. 20.28. My God,
Christ answered, Thou have believed Thomas. Where we see that to believe in
God, is to believe God to be our God. And Psalm. 78. 22. to believe in God and
to put trust in him are all one, They believed not in God, and trusted not in
his help. And the articles concerning Remission of sins and Life
everlasting, do include, and we in them acknowledge our special faith
concerning our own salvation. For to believe this or that is to believe there
is such a thing and that the same thing belongs to me: as when David said, I
should have fainted except I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living. Psalm. 27.13. It is answered, that in those articles we
only profess our selves to believe remission of sins, and life everlasting,
to be vouchsafed to the people and Church of God. Ans. This indeed is the
exposition of many, but it stands not with common reason. For if that be all
the faith that is there confessed, the devil has as good a faith as we. He
knows and believes that there is a God: and that this God imparteth
remission of sins and life everlasting to his church. And to the end that we
being Gods children, may in faith go beyond all the devils in hell, we must
further believe, that remission of sins and life everlasting belongs unto us:
and unless we do particularly apply the said articles unto our selves, we
shall little or nothing differ from the devil, in making confession of faith.

Object. III. We are taught to pray for the pardon of our sins day by day,
Matthew. 6.12. and all this were needless, if we could be assured of pardon in
this life. Answ. The fourth petition must be understood not so much of our old
debts or sins, as of our present and new sins: for as we go on from day
to day, so we add sin to sin: and for the pardon of them must we humble
our selves and pray. I answer again, that we pray for the pardon of our
sins; not because we have no assurance thereof, but because our assurance is
weak and small: we grow on from grace to grace in Christ, as children do to
man's estate by little and little. The heart of every believer is like a vessel
with a narrow neck, which being cast into the sea is not filled at the first:
but by reason of the straight passage, receives water drop by drop. God gives
unto us in Christ even a sea of mercy, but the same on our parts is
apprehended and received only by little and litte, as faith grows from age
to age: and this is the cause why men having assurance pray for more.

Our reasons to the contrary.
Reason I. The first reason may be taken from the nature of faith, on this
manner. True faith is both an infallible assurance and a particular assurance
of the remission of sins and of life everlasting. And therefore by this
faith, a man may be certainly and particularly assured of the remission of
sins and life everlasting. That this reason may be of sorce, two things must
be proved: first that true faith is a certain assurance of Gods mercy to
that party in whom it is. Secondly that faith is a particular assurance
thereof. For the first, that faith is a certain assurance, Christ says to
Peter, Mat. 14.31. O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt. Where he
makes an opposition between faith and doubting: whereby giving us directly to
understand, that, to be certain, and to give assurance, is of the nature of
faith. Romans 4.20.22. Paul says of Abraham, that he did not doubt of the
promise of God through unbelief: but was strengthened in faith, and gave
glory to God, being fully assured, that he which had promised was able to do
it: where I observe first, that doubting is made a fruit of unbelief: and
therefore infallible certentie and assurance, being contrary to doubting must
needs proceed from true faith: considering that contrary effects come of
contrary causes: and contrary causes produce contrary effects. Secondly, I
note that the strength of Abraham's faith, did stand in fulness of assurance: for
the text says, he was strengthened in the faith, being fully assured: and
again, Heb. 11.1. true saving faith is said to be the ground and subsistence
of things hoped for: and the evidence or demonstration of things that are not
seen: but faith can be no ground or evidence of things, unless it be for
nature certenty it self; and thus the first point is manifest. The second,
that saving faith is a particular assurance, is proved by this, that the
property of faith is to apprehend and apply the promise, and the thing
promised, Christ with his benefits. Ioh. 1.12. As many, says S. John, as
received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of god, namely to them
that believe in his name. In these words to believe in Christ, and to receive
Christ, are put for one and the same thing. Now to receive Christ, is to
apprehend and apply him with all his benefits unto our selves, as he is offered
in the promises of the gospel. For in the sixth chapter following, first of all
he sets forth himself not only as a Redeemer generally, but also as the bread
of life and the water of life: secondly, he sets forth his best hearers as
eaters of his body and drinkers of his blood; and thirdly he intends to prove
this conclusion, that to eat his body and to drink his blood, and to believe
in him, are all one. Now then if Christ be as food, and if to eat and drink
the body and blood of Christ be to believe in him, then must there be a
proportion between eating and believing. Look then as there can be no eating
without taking or receiving of meat, so no believing in Christ without a
spiritual receiving and apprehending of him. And as the body has his hand,
mouth, and stomach whereby it takes, receives, and digesteth meat for the
nourishment of every part: so likewise in the soul there is a faith, which is
both hand, mouth, and stomach to apprehend, receive, and apply Christ and all
his merits for the nourishment of the soul. And Paul says yet more plainly,
Gal. 3.14.
that through faith we receive the promise of the spirit.

Now as the property of apprehending and applying of Christ belongs to
faith, so it agrees not to hope, love, confidence, or any other gift or grace
of God. But first by faith we must apprehend Christ, and apply him to our
selves before we can have any hope or confidence in him. And this applying
seems not to be done by any affection of the will, but by a supernatural act
of the mind, which is to acknowledge, set down, and believe that remission of
sins, and life everlasting by the merit of Christ, belong to us particularly.
To this which I have said agrees Augustine. Tract. 25. on Ioh. Why preparest
thou teeth and belly: believe and thou have eaten: and Tract. 50. How shall I
reach my hand into heaven, that I may hold him sitting there? Send up thy
faith, and thou laiest hold on him. And Bernard says, homil. in Cant. 76.
Where he is thou can not come now --: yet go to follow him and seek him
--; believe and thou have found him: for to believe is to find. Chrysostom. on
Mark. Homil. 10. Let us believe and we see Jesus present before us. Ambr. on
Luke lib. 6. c. 8. By faith Christ is touched, by faith Christ is seen.
Tertul. de resur. car. He must be chewed by understanding, and be digested by
faith.

Reason II. Whatsoever the holy Ghost testifies unto us, that we may, yea that
we must certainly by faith believe: but the holy Ghost does particularly
testify unto us our adoption, the remission of our sins, and the salvation
of our souls: and therefore we may and must particularly and certainly by
faith believe the same. The first part of this reason is true, and cannot be
denied of any. The second part is proved thus: Saint Paul says, Romans 8.15.
We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear: but the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry Abba, father: adding further, that the same spirit
bears witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God. Where the
Apostle makes two witnesses of our adoption: the spirit of God, and our
spirits, that is, the conscience sanctified by the holy Ghost. The Papists to
elude this reason, allege that the spirit of God does indeed witness of our
adoption, by some comfortable feelings of Gods love and favor, being such as
are weak and oftentimes deceitful. But by their leaves, the testimony of the
spirit is more then a bare sense or feeling of Gods grace: for it is called the
pledge and earnest of Gods spirit in our hearts, 2. Cor. 1.22. and therefore it
is fit to take away all occasion of doubting of our salvation: as in a bargain
the earnest is given between the parties to put all out of question. Bernard
says, that the testimony of the spirit is a most sure testimony. epist. 107.

Reason III. That which we must pray for by Gods commandment, that we must
believe: but every man is to pray for the pardon of his own sins, and for
life everlasting: of this there is no question: therefore he is bound to
believe the same. The proposition is most of all doubtful: but it is proved
thus. In every petition there must be two things: a desire of the things we
ask, and a particular faith whereby we believe, that the thing we ask shall
be given unto us. So Christ says, Whatsoever ye desire when you pray, believe
that you shall have it, and it shall be given unto you. Mar. 11.24.
And S. John further notes out of this particular faith, calling it our
assurance that God will give unto us, whatsoever we ask according to his will.
1. Ioh. 5. 14.
And hence it is, that in every petition there must be two grounds: a
commandment to warrant us in making a petition, and a promise to assure us of
the accomplishment thereof. And upon both these follows necessarily an
application of the things which we ask to our selves.

Reason IV. Whatsoever God commands in the Gospel, that a man must and can
perform: but God in the Gospel commands us to believe the pardon of our
own sins, and life everlasting: and therefore we must believe thus much,
and may be assured thereof. This proposition is plain by the distinction of
the commandments of the law, and of the Gospel. The commandments of the
law show us what we must do, but minister no power to perform the thing to
be done: but the doctrine and commandments of the gospel do otherwise: and
therefore they are called spirit and life: Ioh. 6.63.
God with the commandment giving grace that the thing prescribed may be done.
Now this is a commandment of the Gospel, to believe remission of sins: for
it was the substance of Christ's ministry, repent and believe the Gospel. And
that is not generally to believe that Christ is a Savior, and that the
promises made in him are true (for so the devils believe with trembling:) but
it is particularly to believe that Christ is my Savior, and that the promises
of salvation in Christ belong in special to me, as Saint John says: This is
his commandment, that we believe in the name of Jesus Christ: now to believe
in Christ is to put confidence in him: which none can do, unless he be first
assured of his love and favor. And therefore in as much, as we are enjoined
to put our confidence in Christ, we are also joined to believe our
reconciliation with him, which stands in the remission of our sins, and our
acceptance to life everlasting.

Reason V. Whereas the Papists teach, that a man may be assured of his
salvation by hope: even hence it follows, that he may be infallibly assured
thereof. For the property of true and lively hope is never to make a man
ashamed, Romans 5.5. And true hope follows faith and presupposes certainty of
faith^ neither can any man truly hope for his salvation unless by faith he be
certainly assured thereof in some measure.

The Popish doctors make exception to these reasons on this manner. First they
say, it cannot be proved that a man is as certain of his salvation by faith,
as he is of the articles of the creed. I answer. First they prove thus much,
that we ought to be as certain of the one as of the other. For look, what
commandment we have to believe the articles of our faith: the like we have
inioyning us to believe the pardon of our own sins, as I have proved.
Secondly, these arguments prove it to be the nature or essential property of
faith, as certainly to assure man of his salvation, as it does assure him of
the articles which he believes. And howesoeuer commonly men do not believe
their salvation as infallible, as they do their articles of faith: yet some
special men do: having Gods word applied by the spirit as a sure ground of
their faith, whereby they believe their own salvation, as they have it for a
ground of the articles of their faith. Thus certainly was Abraham assured of
his own salvation: as also the Prophets and Apostles, and the martyrs of God
in all ages: whereupon without doubting they have bin content to lay down
their lives for the name of Christ: in whom they were assured to receive
eternal happiness. And there is no question, but there be many now, that by
long and often experience of Gods mercy, and by the inward certificate of the
holy Ghost, have attained to full assurance of their salvation.

II. Exception. Howesoeuer a man may be assured of his present estate, yet no
man is certain of his perseverance unto the end. Ans. It is otherwise: for in
the sixth petition, Lead vs-not into temptation, we pray that God would not
suffer us to be wholly overcome of the devil in any temptation: and to this
petition we have a promise answerable, 1. Cor. 10. That God with temptation
will give an issue: and therefore howesoeuer the devil may buffit, molest, and
wound the servants of God, yet shall he never be able to overcome them. Again,
he that is once a member of Christ, can never be wholly cut off. And if any by
sin were wholly severed from Christ for a time, in his recovery he is to be
baptized the second time: for baptism is the sacrament of initiation or
ingrafting into Christ. By this reason we should as often be baptized as we fall
into any sin, which is absurd. Again S. John says, 1. Ioh. 2.19. They went
out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would
have continued with us. Where he takes it for granted, that such as be once
in Christ shall never wholly be severed or fall from him. Though our communion
with Christ may be lessened, yet the union and the bond of conjunction is never
dissolved.

III. Exception. They say, we are indeed to believe our salvation on Gods
part: but we must needs doubt in regard of our selves; because the promises of
remission of sins are given upon condition of man's faith and repentance. Now
we cannot (say they) be assured that we have true faith and repentance, because
we may lie in secret sins; and so want that indeed, which we suppose our
selves to have. Ans. I say again, he that does truly repent and believe, does
by Gods grace know that he does repent and believe: for else Paul would never
have said, Prove your selves whither you be in the faith or not: and the same
Apostle says, 2. Cor. 12. We have not received the spirit of the world, but
the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which are given of
God: which things are not only life everlasting, but justification,
sanctification, and such like. And as for secret sins, they cannot make our
repentance void: for he that truly repents of his known sins, repents
also of such as be unknown, and receives the pardon of them all. God
requires not an express or special repentance of unknown sins: but
accepts it as sufficient, if we repent of them generally: as David says, Psalm.
19. Who knows the errors of this life: forgive me my secret sins. And
whereas they add that faith and repentance must be sufficient. I answer, that
the sufficiency of our faith and repentance, stands in the truth and not in
the measure or perfection thereof; and the truth of both where they are, is
certainly discerned.

Reason VI. The judgment of the ancient Church. de verbis Dei. ser. 28.
August. Of an evil servant thou art made a good child: therefore presume not
of thine own doing, but of the grace of Christ: it is not arrogancy but
faith: to acknowledge what thou have received, is not pride but devotion. And,
Tract. 5. in epist. Ioh.
Let no man ask an other man, but return to his own heart: if he find
charity there, he has security for his passage from life to death. Hilar. on
Matthew. 5. The kingdom of heaven which our Lord professed to be in himself,
his will is that it must be hoped for without any doubtfulnesse of uncertain
will. Otherwise there is no justification by faith, if faith is self be made
doubtful. Bernard in his epist. 107. Who is the just man but he that being
loved of God, loves him again: which comes not to pass but by the spirit
revealing by Faith the eternal purpose of God of his salvation to come. Which
revelation is nothing else but the infusion of spiritual grace: by which, when
the deeds of the flesh are mortified the man is prepared to the kingdom of
heaven --. Together receiving in one spirit that whereby he may presume that he
is loved and also love again --.

To conclude, the Papists have no great cause to dissent from us in this point.
For they teach and profess, that they do by a special faith believe their
own salvation certainly and infallibly in respect of God, that promises. Now
the thing which hinders them is their own in disposition and unworthiness (as
they say) which keeps them from being certain otherwise then in a likely hope.
But this hindrance is easily removed, if men will judge indifferently. For
first of all, in regard of our selves and our disposition we can not be certain
at all, but must despair of salvation even to the very death. We cannot be
sufficiently disposed so long as we live in this world, but must always say
with Jacob, I am less then all thy mercies, Genesis 32. and with David, Enter not
into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for none living shall be justified in
thy sight: and with the Centurion, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should
come under my roof, Matthew. 8. Secondly God in making promise of salvation
respects not men's worthiness. For he chose us to life everlasting when we were
not: he redeemed us from death being enemies: and intitles us to the promise
of salvation, if we acknowledge our selves to be ^inners, Matthew. 9. if we
labor and travail under the burden of them, Matthew. II. if we hunger and
thirst after grace, Ioh. 7.37. And these things we may certainly and sensibly
perceive in our selves: and when we find them in us, though our unworthiness be
exceeding great, it should not hinder our assurance. For God makes manifest his
power in our weakness, 2. Cor. 12. and he will not break the bruised reed, nor
quench the smoking flax, Isa. 42. Thirdly if a man love God for his mercies
sake, and have a true hope of salvation by Christ, he is in Christ and has
fellowshippe with him: and he that is in Christ, has all his unworthiness and
wants laid on Christ, and they are covered and pardoned in his death: and in
respect of our selves thus considered as we are in Christ, we have no cause to
waver, but to be certain of our salvation, and that in regard of our selves.

The fourth point: touching the justification of a sinner.
That we may see how far we are to agree with them and where to differ, first
I will set down the doctrine on both parts, and secondly the maine differences
wherein we are to stand against them, even to death.

Our doctrine touching the justification of a sinner, I propound in 4 rules.

Rule I. That, justification is an action of God, whereby he absolueth a
sinner, and accepts him to life everlasting for the righteousness and merit of
Christ.

Rule II. That, justification stands in two things: first in the remission of
sins by the merit of Christ his death: secondly in the imputation of Christ
his righteousness; which is an other action of God whereby he accounts and
esteems that righteousness which is in Christ, as the righteousness of that
sinner which believes in him. By Christ his righteousness we are to understand
two things: first his sufferings specially in his death and passion, secondly
his obedience in fulfilling the law: both which go together: for Christ in
suffering obeyed, and obeying suffered. And the very shedding of his blood to
which our salvation is ascribed, must not only be considered as it is passive,
that is a suffering, but also as it is active, that is, an obedience, in which
he showed his exceeding love both to his father and us, and thus fulfilled the
law for us. This point if some had well thought on, they would not have placed
all justification in remission of sins as they do.

Rule III. That, justification is from Gods mere mercy and grace, procured
only by the merit of Christ.

Rule IV. That, man is justified by faith alone; because faith is that alone
instrument created in the heart by the holy Ghost, whereby a sinner lays hold
of Christ his righteousness, and applies the same unto himself. There is
neither hope, nor love, nor any other grace of God within man, that can do
this but faith alone.

The doctrine of the Roman Church touching the justification of a sinner is on
this manner.

I. They hold that before justification there goes a preparation thereunto:
which is an action wrought partly by the holy Ghost, and partly by the power of
natural freewill, whereby a man disposes himself to his own future
justification.

In the preparation they consider the ground of justification, and things
proceeding from it. The ground is faith, which they define to be a general
knowledge, whereby we understand and believe that the doctrine of the word of
God is true. Things proceeding from this faith are these; a sight of our
sins, a fear of hell, hope of salvation, love of God, repentance, and such
like: all which, when men have attained, they are then fully disposed (as they
say) to their justification.

This preparation being made, then comes justification it selfe^ which is an
action of God, whereby he makes a man righteous. It has two parts: the first,
and the second. The first is, when a sinner of an evil man is made a good man.
And to effect this, two things are required: first the pardon of sin, which
is one part of the first justification: secondly the infusion of inward
righteousness, whereby the heart is purged and sanctified: and this habit of
righteousness stand specially in hope and charity.

After the first justification, follows the second; which is, when a man of a
good or just man is made better and more just: and this, say they, may proceed
from works of grace; because he which is righteous by the first justification,
can bring forth good works: by the merit whereof, he is able to make himself
more just and righteous: and yet they grant that the first justification
comes only of Gods mercy by the merit of Christ.

I. Our consent and difference.
Now let us come to the points of difference between us and them touching
justification.

The first maine difference is in the matter thereof, which shall be seen by
the answer both of Protestant and Papist to this one question. What is the very
thing, that causes a man to stand righteous before God, and to be accepted to
life everlasting: we answer, Nothing but the righteousness of Christ, which
consists partly in his sufferings, and partly in his active obedience in
fulfilling the rigor of the law. And here let us consider, how near the
Papists come to this answer, and wherein they dissent.

Consent I. They grant, that in justification sin is pardoned by the merits
of Christ, and that none can be justified without remission of sins: and that
is well.

II. They grant, that the righteousness whereby a man is made righteous before
God, comes from Christ, and from Christ alone.

III. The most learned among them say, that Christ his satisfaction, and the
merit of his death is imputed to every sinner that does believe, for Bellarm.
de iustif. lib. 2. cap. 7.
his satisfaction before God: and hitherto we agree.

The very point of difference is this; we hold that the satisfaction made by
Christ in his death, and obedience to the law, is imputed to us and becomes our
righteousness. They say, it is our satisfaction and not our righteousness
whereby we stand righteous before God: because it is inherent in the person of
Christ as in a subject. Now the answer of the Papist to the former question is
on this manner: The thing (says he) that makes us righteous before God, and
causes us to be accepted to life everlasting, is remission of sins, and the
habit of inward righteousness, or charity with the fruits thereof. We
condescend and grant that the habit of righteousness, which we call
sanctification, is an excellent gift of God, and has his reward of God; and is
the matter of our justification before man: because it serves to declare us to
be reconciled to God, and to be justified; yet we deny it to be the thing,
which makes us of sinners to become righteous or just before God.

And this is the first point of our disagreement in the matter of
justification: which must be marked; because if there were no more points of
difference between us, this one alone were sufficient to keep us from uniting
of our religions: for hereby the Church of Rome does raze the very foundation.

Now let us see by what reasons we justify our doctrine: and secondly answer
the contrary objections.

Our reasons.
Reason I. That very thing which must ^e our righteousness before God, must
satisfy the justice of the law, which says, do these things and thou shall
live. Now there is nothing can satisfy the justice of the law but the
righteousness obedience of Christ for us. If any allege civil justice, it is
nothing: for Christ says, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, you can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. What?
shall we say that works do make us just? that cannot be: for all men's works
are defective in respect of the justice of the law. Shall we say our
sanctification, whereby we are renewed to the image of God in righteousness and
true holiness? that also is imperfect and can not satisfy Gods justice required
in the law: as Isai has said of himself and the people, Al our righteousness
is as a menstruous cloth. To have a clear conscience before God is a
principal part of inward righteousness: and of it Paul in his own person says
thus, I am privy to nothing by my self, yet am I not justified thereby, 2.
Cor. 4.4. Therefore nothing can procure unto us an absolution and acceptance to
life everlasting, but Christ's imputed righteousness. And this will appear, if
we do consider, how we must come one day before Gods judgment seat, there to
be judged in the rigor of justice: for when we must bring some thing that may
counteruaile the justice of God; not having only acceptance in mercy, but
also approbation in justice: God being not only merciful, but also a just
judge.

II. Reason 2. Cor. 5.21. He which knew no sin, was made sin for us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God which is in him. Whence I reason thus:
As Christ was made sin for us, so are we made the righteousness of God in him:
but Christ was made sin, or, a sinner by imputation of our sins, he being
in himself most holy: therefore a sinner is made righteous before God, in that
Christ's righteousness is imputed and applied unto him. Now if any shall say,
that man is justified by righteousness infused: then by like reason, I say
Christ was made sin for us by infusion of sin, which to say is blasphemy.
And the exposition of this place by Saint Hierome is not to be despised. Christ
(says he) being offered for our sins, took the name of sin that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him, Not ours nor in us. If this
righteousness of God be neither ours nor in us, then it can be no inherent
righteousness, but must needs be righteousness imputed. And Chrysostom on
this place says, It is called Gods righteousness, because it is not of
works, and because it must be without all stain or want: and this cannot be
inherent righteousness. Anselme says, He is made sin as we are made justice:
not ours but Gods: not in us but in him: as he is made sin not his own but
ours: not in himself, but in us.

Reason III. Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so
by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous: mark here is a
comparison between the first and second Adam. And hence I reason thus. As by
the disobedience of the first Adam men were made sinners: so by the obedience
of the second Adam, are we made righteous. Now we are not only made sinners by
propagation of natural corruption, but by imputation. For Adams first sin
was the eating of the forbidden fruit: which very act is no personal offense,
but is imputed to all his posterity, in who^ we have all sinned. The Iren.
lib. 5. cap. 17.

Chrysostom. homil. ad Neoph.


Fathers call this very sin Adams handwriting, making us debtors unto God.
And therefore in like manner the obedience of Christ is made the righteousness
of every believer, not by infusion but by imputation.

IV. Reason. A satisfaction made for the want of that justice or obedience
which the law requires at our hands, is accepted of God as the justice it
self. But Christ's obedience is a satisfaction made for the want of that
justice or obedience which the law requires, as the Papists themselves avouch.
Therefore this satisfaction is our justice. And me thinks, the Papists upon
this consideration have little cause to dissent from us. For if they make
Christ's obedience their satisfaction, why should they not fully close hands
with us, and make it their justice also.

V. Reason. The consent of the ancient Church. Bernard says, epist. 190. The
justice of an other is a assigned unto man, who wanted his own: man was
indebted and man made payment. The satisfaction of one is imputed to all. And,
why may not justice be from an other, as well as guiltines is from an other.
And in Cant. sermon. 25. It suffices me, for all righteousness to have him alone
merciful to me, against whom I have sinned. And, Not to sin is Gods
justice, man's justice is the mercifulnes of God. And sermon. 61. Shall I sing
mine own righteousness, Lord I will remember thy righteousness alone: for it is
mine also: in that even thou art made unto me righteousness of God. What, shall
I fear least that one be not sufficient for us both? it is not a short cloak
that cannot cover two: it will cover both thee and me largely being both a
large and eternal justice. August. on Psalm. 22. He prays for our faults, and
has made our faults his faults, that he might make his justice our justice.

Objections of Papists.
Objections of the Papists proouing inherent righteousness to be in the matter
of our justice before God, are these. I. Object. It is absurd, that one man
should be made righteous by the righteousness of an other: for it is as much as
if one man were made wise by the wisdom of an other. Ans. It is true, that no
man can be made righteous by the personal righteousness of an other, because it
pertaines only to one man. And because the wisdom that is in one man, is his
altogether wholly, it can not be the wisdom of an other: no more then the
health and life of one body, can be the health of an other. But it is
otherwise with the righteousness of Christ: it is his indeed, because it is
inherent in him as in a subject: it is not his alone, but his and ours together
by the tenor of the Covenant of grace. Christ as he is a Mediator is given to
every believer as really and truly, as land is given from man to man: and with
him are given all things that concern salvation; they being made ours by Gods
free gift: among which, is Christ his righteousness. By it therefore, as being
a thing of our own, we may be justified before God, and accepted to life
everlasting.

II. Object. If a sinner be justified by Christ his righteousness, then every
believer shall be as righteous as Christ: and that can not be. Ans. The
proposition is false: for Christ his righteousness is not applied to us
according as it is in Christ; neither according to the same measure, nor the
same manner. For his obedience in fulfilling the law, is above Adams
righteousness, yea above the righteousness of all Angels. For they were all but
creatures, and their obedience the obedience of creatures: but Christ his
obedience is the obedience or righteousness of god: so termed Romans 1.17, 18. 2.
Cor. 5.21. not only because god accepted of it, but because it was in that
person which is very God. When Christ obeyed, God obeyed: and when he suffered,
God suffered: not because the godhead suffered or performed any obedience, but
because the person which according to one nature is God, performed obedience
and suffered. And by this means his righteousness is of infinite value,
price, merit, and efficacy. Hence also it comes to pass, that this
obedience of Christ serves not only for the justifying of some one person (as
namely for himself.
Adams did) but of all and every one of the Elect: yea it is sufficient to
justify many thousand worlds. Now to come to the point, this righteousness
that is in Christ, in this largeness and measure; is pertaining to us in a
more narrow skantling: because it is only received by faith As any one star
partakes in the whole light of the ^un with the rest of the stars, so far
forth as the said: light makes it to shine.
so farreforth, as it serves to justify any particular believer. But they
urge the reason further, saying: If Christ his righteousness be the righteousness
of every believer, then every man shauld be a Savior; which is absurb. Answ. I
answer as before, and yet more plainly thus: Christ his righteousness is
imputed to the person of this or that man, not as it is the price of redemption
for all mankind, but as it is the price of redemption for one particular man:
as for example, Christ his righteousness is imputed to Peter, not as it is the
price of redemption for all, but as it is the price of redemption for Peter.
And therefore Christ his righteousness, is not applied to any one sinner in
that largenes and measure, in which it is in the person of Christ: but only so
farforth as it serves to satisfy the law for the said sinner, and to make his
person accepted of God as righteous, and no further.

III. Object. If we be made righteous by Christ his righteousness truly, then
Christ is a sinner truly by our sins: but Christ is not indeed a sinner by
our sins. Ans. We may with reverence to his majesty in good manner say, that
Christ was a sinner, and that truly: not by any infusion of sin into his most
holy person, but because our sins were laid on him: thus says the holy
Ghost, he which knew no sin was made sin for us, and he was counted with
sinners, Isa. 53. 12. yet so, as even then in himself he was without blot, yea
more holy then all men and angels. On this manner said Chrysostom, 2. Cor. 3.
God permitted Christ to be condemned as a sinner. Again, He made the just one
to be a sinner, that he might make sinners just.

IV. Object. If a man be made righteous by imputation, then God judges sinners
to be righteous: but God judges no sinner to be righteous, for it is
abomination to the Lord. Ans. When God justifies a sinner by Christ his
righteousness, at the same time, he cease in regard of guiltines to be a
sinner: and to whom God imputes righteousness, them he sanctifies at the very
same instant by his holy Spirit: giving also unto original corruption his
deadly wound.

V. Object. That which Adam never lost, was never given by Christ: but he never
lost imputed righteousness: therefore it was never given unto him. Ans. The
proposition is not true: for saving faith, that was never lost by Adam, is
given to us in Christ: and Adam never had this privilege, that after the first
grace should follow the we have and posse and velle, he had no more but posse
si vellet, and he wanted velle quod posset. August. de corrept. and gra. cap.
11.
second: and therefore being left to himself, he fell from God: and yet this
mercy is vouchsafed to all believers, that after their first conversion God
will still confirm them with new grace: and by this means, they persevere
unto the end. And whereas they say, that Adam had not imputed righteousness: I
answer, that he had the same for substance, though not for the manner of
applying by imputation.

VI. Object. Justification is eternal: but the imputation of Christ his
righteousness is not eternal, for it cease in the end of this life: therefore
it is not that which justifies a sinner. Ans. The imputation of Christ's
righteousness is everlasting: for he that is esteemed righteous in this life by
Christ his righteousness, is accepted as righteous for ever; and the remission
of sins granted in this life, is for ever continued. And though
sanctification be perfect in the world to come, yet shall it not justify: for
we must conceive it no otherwise after this life, but as a fruit springing from
the imputed righteousness of Christ, without which it could not be. And a good
child will not cast away the first garment, because his father gives him a
second. And what if inward righteousness be perfect in the end of this life,
shall we therefore make it the matter of our justification? God forbid. For the
righteousness whereby sinners are justified, must be had in the time of this
life, before the pangs of death.

II. Difference about the manner of justification.
All, both Papists and Protestants agree, that a sinner is justified by faith.
This agreement is only in word, and the difference between us is great
indeed. And it may be reduced to these three heads. First, the Papist saying
that a man is justified by faith: understands a general or a Catholic
faith, whereby a man believes the articles of religion to be true. But we
hold that the faith which justifies, is a particular faith whereby we apply
to our selves the promises of righteousness and life everlasting by Christ. And
that our opinion is the truth, I have proved before: but I will add a reason
or twain.

I. Reason. The faith whereby we live, is that faith whereby we are justified:
but the faith whereby we live spiritually, is a particular faith whereby we
apply Christ unto our selves, as Paul says, Gal. 2.20. I live, that is,
spiritually, by the faith of the son of God, which faith he shows to be a
particular faith in Christ, in the very words following, who has loved me and
given himself for me particularly: and in this manner of believing Paul was
and is an example to all that are to be saved. 1. Tim. 1.16. and Phil. 3.15.
II. Reason. That which we are to ask of God in prayer, we must believe it shall
be given us, as we ask it: but in prayer we are to ask the pardon of our own
sins, and the merit of Christ's righteousness for our selves: therefore we must
believe the same particularly. The proposition is a rule of Gods word,
requiring that in every petition we bring a particular faith, whereby we
believe, that the thing lawfully asked, shall be given accordingly. Matthew.
11.24. The minor is also evident, neither can it be denied: for we are taught
by Christ himself to pray on this manner, Forgive us our debts: and to it we
say, Amen, that is, that our petitions shall without doubt be granted unto us.
Aug. sermon. de Temp. 182.

And here note, that the Church of Rome in the doctrine of justification by
faith cuts off the principal part and property thereof. For in justifying
faith two things are required: first Knowledge revealed in the word touching
the means of salvation: secondly an Applying of things known unto our selves,
which some call affiance. Now the first they acknowledge, but the second,
which is the very substance and principal part thereof, they deny.

III. Reason. The judgment of the ancient Church. de verb. dei sermon. 7.
August. I demand now, do thou believe in Christ, O sinner? Thou say, I
believe. What beleeuest thou? that all thy sins may freely be pardoned in
him. Thou have that which thou beleeuest. S^rm. 1. d^ Annunc.
Bernard. The Apostle thinks that a man is justified freely by faith. If thou
beleeuest that thy sins cannot be remitted but by him alone against whom
they were committed: but go further and believe this too, that by him thy
sins are forgiven thee. This is the testimony which the holy Ghost gives in
the heart: saying, thy sins are forgiven thee. Cyprian. Sermon. de Natal.
God promises thee immortality, when thou go out of this world, and do
thou doubt? This is indeed not to know God, and this is for a member of the
Church in the house of faith not to have faith. If we believe in Christ, let
us believe his words and promises, and we shall never die, and shall come to
Christ with joyful security with him to reign for ever.
The II. difference touching faith in the act of justification, is this. The
Papist says, we are justified by faith, because it disposes a sinner to his
justification after this manner: By faith (says he) the mind of man is
enlightened in the knowledge of the law and gospel: knowledge stirs up a
fear of hell with a consideration of the promise of happiness, as also the love
and fear of God, and hope of life eternal. Now when the heart is thus
prepared, God infuseth the habit of charity and other virtues, whereby a sinner
is justified before god. We say otherwise, that faith justifies because it is
a supernatural Instrument created by God in the heart of man at his
conversion, whereby he apprehends and receives Christ's righteousness for his
justification.

In this their doctrine is a twofold error: I. that they make faith which
justifies, to go before justification it self, both ^or order of nature, as
also for time: whereas by the word of God, at the very instant, when any man
believes first, he is then justified and sanctified. For he that believes,
eats and drinks the body and blood of Christ, and is already passed from
death to life. Ioh. 6.54. The second is, that faith being nothing else with
them but an illumination of the mind, stirs up the will: which being
moved and helped, causes in the heart many spiritual motions: and thereby
disposes man to his future justification. But this indeed is as much as if we
should say, that dead men only helped, can prepare themselves to their future
resurrection. For we are all by nature dead in sin, and therefore must not
only be enlightened in mind, but also renewed in will, before we can so much as
will or desire that which is good. Now we (as I have said) teach otherwise:
that faith justifies as it is an instrument to apprehend and apply Christ with
his obedience; which is the matter of our justification. This is the truth, I
prove it thus. In the covenant of grace two things must be considered: the
substance thereof, and the condition. The substance of the covenant is, that
righteousness and life everlasting, is given to Gods Church and people by
Christ. The condition is, that we for our parts, are by faith to receive the
foresaid benefits: and this condition is by grace as well as the substance. Now
then, that we may attain to salvation by Christ, he must be given unto us
really, as he is propounded in the tenor of the foresaid covenant. And for the
giving of Christ, God has appointed special ordinances, as the preaching of
the word, and the administration o^ ^^e Sacraments. The word preached is the
power of God to salvation to every one that believes: and the end of the
sacraments is to communicate Christ with all his benefits to them that come to
be partakers thereof: as is most plainly to be seen in the supper of the
Lord, in which the giving of bread and wine to the several communicants, is a
pledge and sign of Gods particular giving of Christ's body and blood with all
his merits, unto them. And this giving on Gods part cannot be effectual
without receiving on our parts: and therefore faith must needs be an instrument
or hand to receive that which God gives, that we may find comfort by this
giving.

The III. difference concerning faith is this: the Papist says, that a man is
justified by faith: yet not by faith alone, but also by other virtues, as hope,
love, the fear of God, etc. The reasons which are brought to maintain their
opinion are of no moment.

I. Reason. Luke 7.47. Many sins are forgiven her, Particula non causalissed
illatiua vel rationalis.
because she loved much. Whence they gather that the woman here spoken of, was
justified and had the pardon of sins by love. Ans. In this text, love is not
made an impulsive cause to move God to pardon her sins, but only a figne to
show and manifest that God had already pardoned them. Like to this is the
place of John who says, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. We are translated from death to life,
because we love the brethren: where love is no cause of the change, but a
sign and consequent thereof. II. Reason. Gal. 5.6. Neither circumcision, nor
vncircumeision avails any thing, but faith that works by love. Hence they
gather that faith does justify together with love. Ans. The property of true
faith is, to apprehend and receive something unto it self: and love, that goes
always with faith, as a fruit and an inseperable companion thereof, is of
another nature. For it does not receive in, but as it were give out it self
in all the duties of the first and second table toward God and man: and this
thing faith by it self cannot do: and therefore Paul says, that faith
works by love. The hand has a property to reach out it self, to lay hold
of any thing, and to rec^^ue a gift: but the hand has no property to cut a
piece of wood of it self, without saw or knife, or some like instrument: and
yet by help of the^, it can either divide or cut. Even so it is the nature of
faith, to go out of it self and to receive Christ into the heart: as for the
duties of the first and second table, faith cannot of it self bring them
forth; no more then the hand can divide or cut: yet join love to faith, and
then can it practice duties commended concerning God and man. And this I take
to be the meaning of this text, which speaks not of justification by faith,
but only of the practice of common duties, which faith puts in execution by
the help of love. III. Reason. Faith is never alone, therefore it does not
justify alone. Ans. The reason is naught, and they might as well dispute thus.
The eye is never alone from the head, and therefore it sees not alone: which
is absurd. And though in regard of substance the eye be never alone, yet in
regard of seeing, it is alone: and so though faith subsist not without love and
hope and other graces of god, yet in regard of the act of justification it is
alone without the^ al. IV. Reason. If faith alone do justify, then we are
saved by faith alone: but we are not saved by faith alone; and therefore not
justified by faith alone. Ans. The proposition is false: for more things are
requisite to the maine end then to the subordinate means. And the assumption
is false: for we are saved by faith alone, if we speak of faith as it is an
instrument apprehending Christ for our salvation. V. Reason. We are saved by
hope: therefore not by faith alone. Ans. We are saved by hope, not because it
is any cause of our salvation. Paul's meaning is only this: that we have not
salvation as yet in possession, but wait patiently for it, in time to come to
be possessed of us, expecting the time of our full deliverance: that is all,
that can justly be gathered hence.
Now the doctrine which we teach on the contrary is, That a sinner is
justified before God by faith: yea, by faith alone. The meaning is, that
nothing within man, and nothing that man can do either by nature or by grace
concurreth to the act of justification before God, as any cause thereof, either
efficient, material, formal, or final, but faith alone: all other gifts and
graces, as hope, love, the fear of God, are necessary to salvation, as signs
thereof, and co^sequents of faith. Nothing in man co^curs as any cause to this
work but by faith alone. And faith it self is no principal but only an
isntrumental cause whereby we receive, apprehend, and apply Christ and his
righteousness for our justification.

Reason I. Ioh. 3.14,15. As Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so
must the son of man be lift up: that whosoever believes in him shall not
perish but have everlasting life. In these words Christ makes a comparison on
this manner: when any one of the Israelites were stung to death by fiery
serpents: his cure was not by any physic surgerie, but only by the casting
of his eyes up to the brazen serpent, which Moses had erected by Gods
commandment: even so in the cure of our souls, when we are stung to death by
sin, there is nothing required within us for our recovery, but only that we
cast up and fix the eye of our faith on Christ and his righteousness.

Reason II. The exclusive forms of speech used in scripture prove thus much.
We are justified freely, not of the law, not by the law, without the law,
without works, not of works, not according to works, not of us, not by the
works of the law but by faith. Gal. 2.16. All boasting excluded, only
believe. Luke 8.50. These distinctions, whereby works and the law are
excluded in the work^ of justification, do include thus much: that faith alone
does justify.

Reason III. Very reason may teach thus much: for no gift in man is apt and fit
as a spiritual hand to receive and apply Christ and his righteousness unto a
sinner, but faith. Indeed love, hope, the fear of God, and repentance, have
their several uses in men, but none serve for this end to apprehend Christ
and his merits; none of them all have this receiving property: and therefore
there is nothing in man, that justifies as a cause but faith alone.

Reason IV. The judgment of the ancient Church. Ambr. on Romans 4. They are
blessed to whom without any labor or work done, iniquities are remitted and
sin covered: no works or repentance required of them, but only that they
believe. And cap. 3. Neither working any thing, nor requiting the like, are
they justified by faith alone through the gift of God. And 1. Cor. 1. this is
appointed of God that whosoever believes in Christ shall be saved without any
work by faith alone, freely receiving remission of sins. de verbis dom^ ser.
4^.
Augustine, There is one propitiation for all sins, to believe in Christ.
Hesyc. on Leuit. lib. 1. c. 2. Grace which is of mercy is apprehended by faith
alone and not of works. Bernard. supra Can. sermon. 22.
Whosoever is pricked for his sins and thirsts after righteousness, let him
believe in thee, who justifies the sinner, and being justified by Faith
alone, he shall have peace with God. Chrysostom. on Gal. 3. They said, he which
rests on faith alone^ is accursed: but Paul shows, that he is blessed which
rests on faith alone. Basil. de Humil. Let man acknowledge himself to want
true justice, and that he is justified only by faith in Christ. Origin. on c.
3. Romans We think that a man is justified by faith without the works of the
law: and he says justification by faith alone suffices, so as a man only
believing may be justified. And, therefore it lies upon us --, to search who
was justified by faith without works. And for an example, I think upon the
theife who being crucified with Christ, cried unto him, Lord remember me when
thou co^mest into thy kingdom: and there is no other good work of his
mentioned in the Gospel: but for this alone faith, Jesus says unto him, This
night thou shall be with me in paradise.

III. Difference.
The third difference about justification is concerning this point, namely, how
farreforth good works are required thereto.

The doctrine of the Church of Rome is, that there be two kinds of
justification: the first and the second, as I have said. The first is, when one
of an evil man is made a good man: and in this, works are wholly excluded, it
being wholly of grace. The second is, when a man of a just man is made more
just. And this they will have to proceed from works of grace: for (say they)
as a man when he is once borne can by eating and drinking make himself a
bigger man, though he could not at the first make himself a man: even so, a
sinner having his first justification, may afterward by grace make himself
more just. Therefore they hold these two things: I. that good works are
meritorious causes of the second justification, which they term Actual: II.
that good works are means to increase the first justification, which they call
habitual.

Now let us see how farforth we must join with them in this point. Our consent
therefore stands in three conclusions.

I. That good works done by them that are justified do please God, and are
approved of him, and therefore have a reward. II. Good works are necessary
to salvation two ways: first, not as causes thereof, either conversant,
adiuvant, or procreant: but only as consequents of faith: in that they are
inseparable companions and fruits of that faith, which is indeed necessary to
salvation. Secondly they are as necessary as marks in a way, and as the way
it self directing us unto eternal life. III. We hold and believe, that the
righteous man, is in some sort justified by works: for so the holy Ghost
speaks plainly and truly, Iam. 2.21. That Abraham was justified by works.
Thus far we join with them: and the very difference is this. They say, we
are justified by works, as by causes thereof: we say, that we are justified by
works as by signs and fruits of our justification before God, and no
otherwise: and in this sense must the place of S. James be understood, that
Abraham was justified, that is, declared and made manifest to be just indeed by
his obedience, and that even before God. Now that our doctrine is the truth, it
will appear by reasons on both parts.

Our reasons.
I. Romans 3.28. We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works
of the law. Some answer, that ceremonial works be excluded here: some, that
moral works: some, works going before faith. But let them devise what they can
for themselves, the truth is, that Paul excludes all works whatsoever, as by
the very text will appear. For v. 24. he says, We are justified freely by his
grace: that is, by the mere gift of God: giving us to understand, that a
sinner in his justification is merely passive, that is, doing nothing on his
part whereby God should accept him to life everlasting. And v. 27. he says,
justification by faith excludes all boasting: and therefore all kind of works
are thereby excluded; and specially such as are most of all the matter of
boasting, that is, good works. For if a sinner, after that he is justified by
the merit of Christ, were justified more by his own works, then might he have
some matter of boasting in himself. And that we may not doubt of Paul's
meaning, consider and read Ephesians. 2.8,9. By grace (says he) you are saved
t^rough faith: and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: not of
works least any man should boast himself. Here Paul excludes all and every
work, and directly works of grace themselves as appears by the reason
following: For we are his workemanshippe created in Christ Jesus unto good
works: which God has ordained that we^ should walk in them. Now let the
Papists tell me, what be the works which God has prepared for men to walk
in, and to which they are regenerate, unless they be the most excellent
works of grace, and let them mark how Paul excludes them wholly from the
work of justification and salvation.

II. Gal. 5.3. If ye be circumcised, ye are bound to the whole law, and ye are
abolished from Christ. Here Paul disputes against such men as would be saved
partly by Christ, and partly by the works of the law: hence I reason thus. If
a man will be justified by works, he is bound to fulfill the whole law,
according to the rigor thereof: that is Paul's ground. I now assume: no man
can fulfill the law according to the rigor thereof: for the lives and works
of most righteous men are imperfect, and stained with sin: and therefore they
are taught every day, to say on this manner: forgive us our debts. Again our
knowledge is imperfect, and therefore our faith, repentance, and sanctifi^atio^
is answerable. And lastly, the regenerate man is partly flesh and partly
spirit: and therefore his best works are partly from the flesh, and in part
only spiritual. Thus then for any man to be bound to the rigor of the whole
law, is as much as if he were bound to his own damnation.

III. Election to salvation is of grace without works; therefore the
justification of a sinner is of grace alone without works. For it is a certain
rule, that the cause of a cause is the cause of a thing caused. Now grace
without works is the cause of election, which election is the cause of our
justification: and therefore grace without works is the cause of our
justification.

IV. A man must first be fully justified before he can do a good work: for
the person must first please God before his works can please him. But the
person of a sinner cannot please God till he be perfectly justified: and
therefore till he be justified, he cannot do so much as one good work. And
thus good works cannot be any meritorious causes of justification, after which
they are both for time, and order of nature. In a word, whereas they make two
distinct iustifications: we acknowledge that there be degrees of
sanctification, yet so as justification is only one, standing in remission of
sins and Gods acceptance of us to life everlasting by Christ: and this
justification has no degrees but is perfect at the very first.

Objections of Papists.
Psalm. 7.8. Judge me according to my righteousness. Hence they reason thus, if
David be judged according to his righteousness then may he be justified thereby:
but David desires to be judged according to his righteousness: and therefore he
was justified thereby. Ans. There be two kinds of righteousness, one of the
person, the other of the cause or action. The righteousness of a man's person, is
whereby it is accepted into the favor of God into life eternal. The
^ighteousnes of the action or cause is, when the action or cause is judged of
God to be good and just. Now David in this psalm, speaks only of the
righteousness of the action, or innocence of his cause, in that he was falsely
charged to have sought the kingdom. In like manner it is said of Phineas,
Psalm. 166.31. that his fact in killing Zimri and Cosbie, was imputed to him for
righteousness: not because it was a satisfaction to the law, the rigor whereof
could not be fulfilled in that one work; but because God accepted of it as a
just work, and as a token of his righteousness and zeal for Gods glory.

II. Object. The Scripture says in sundry places, that men are blessed which
do good works. Psalm. 119.1. Blessed is the man that is upright in heart, and
walks in the law of the Lord. Ans. The man is blessed that indeauoureth to
keep Gods commandments. Yet is he not blessed simply, because he does so; but
because he is in Christ, by whom he does so: and his obedience to the law of
God is a sign thereof.

III. Object. When man confesses his sins and humbles himself by prayer
and fasting, Gods wrath is pacified and stayed: therefore prayer and fasting
are causes of justification before God. Answ. Indeed men that truly humble
themselves by prayer and fasting, do appease the wrath of God: yet not
properly by these actions, but by their faith expressed and testified in the^,
whereby they apprehend that which appeaseth Gods wrath, even the merits of
Christ, in whom the Father is well pleased: and for whose sake alone he is
well pleased with us.

IV. Object. Sundry persons in Scripture are commended for perfection^ as Noe,
and Abraham, Zachary, and Elizabeth: and Christ bids us all be perfect:
and where there is any perfection of works, there also works may justify.
Ans. There be two kinds of perfection: perfection in parts, and perfection in
degrees. Perfection in part is, when being regenerate, and having the seeds of
all necessary virtues, we endeavor accordingly to obey God, not in some few,
but in all and every part of the law: as Josias turned unto God according to
all the law of Moses. Perfection in degrees is, when a man keeps every
commandment of God, and that according to the rigor thereof, in the very
highest degree. Now then whereas we are commanded to be perfected, and have
examples of the same perfection in scripture: both commandments and examples
must be understood of perfection in parts, and not of perfection in degrees,
which ca^^ot be attained unto in this life; though we for our parts, must daily
strive to come as near unto it, as possibly we can.

V. Object. 2. Cor. 4. 17. Our momentany afflictions work unto us a greater
meas^re of glory: now if afflictions work our salvation, then works also
do the same. Ans. Afflictions work salvation, not as causes procuring it, but
as means directing us thereto. And thus always must we esteem of works, in
the matter of our salvation, as of a certain way, or a mark therein, directing
us to glory, not causing and procuring it: as Bernard says they are, Lib. d^
great. and lib. ^rbit.
via Regni non causa regnandi. The way to the kingdom, not the cause of
reigning there.

VI. Object. We are justified by the same thing whereby we are judged: but we
are judged by our good works: therefore justified also. Ans. The proposition is
false: for judgment is an act of God, declaring a man to be just that is
already just: and justification is another distinct act of God, whereby he
makes him to be just, that is by nature unjust. And therefore in equity the
last judgment is to proceed by works: because they are the fittest means to
make trial of every man's cause, and serve fitly to declare whom God has
justified in this life.

VII. Object. Wicked men are condemned for evil works: and therefore
righteous men are justified by good works. Ans. The reason holds not: for
there is great difference between evil and good works. An evil work is
perfectly evil, and so deserves damnation: but there is no good work of any
man that is perfectly good: and therefore cannot justify.

VIII. Object. To believe in Christ is a work, and by it we are justified: and
if one work do justify, why may we not be justified by all the works of the
law. Ans. Faith must be considered two ways: first, as a work, quality, or
virtue: secondly as an Instrument, or an hand reaching out it self to receive
Christ's merit. And we are justified by faith, not as it is a work, virtue, or
quality: but as it is an instrument to receive and apply that thing whereby we
are justified. And therefore it is a figurative speech to say, We are justified
by faith. Faith considered by it self makes no man righteous: neither does
the actio^ of faith which is to apprehend, justify: but the object of faith,
which is Christ's obedience apprehended.

These are the principal reasons commonly used: which as we see, are of no
moment. To conclude therefore we hold: that works concur to justification,
and that we are justified thereby as by signs and effects, not as causes: for
both the beginning, middle, and accomplishment of our justification is only in
Christ: and hereupon John says, If any man (being already justified) sin,
we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ, and he is the propitiation
for our sins. And to make our good works means or causes of our
justification, is to make every man a Savior to himself.

The V. point: Of merits.
By merit, we understand any thing or any work, whereby Gods favor and life
everlasting is procured: and that for the dignity and excellency of the work
or thing done: or, a good work done, binding him that receives it to repay
the like.

Our Consent.
Touching merits, we consent in two conclusions with them. The first
conclusion, that merits are so far forth necessary, that without them there
can be no salvation.

The second, that Christ our Mediator and Redeemer, is the root and fountain
of all merit.

The dissent or difference.
The popish Church places merits within man, making two sorts thereof: the
merit of the person, and the merit of the work. The merit of the person, is a
dignity in the person, whereby it is worthy of life everlasting. And this (as
they say) is to be found in Infants dying after baptism, who though they want
good works, yet are they not void of this kind of merit, for which they
^eceiue the kingdom of heaven. The merit of the work, is a dignity or
excellency in the work, whereby it is made fit and enabled to deserve life
everlasting for the doer. And works (as they teach) are meritorious two ways:
first, by covenant, because God has made a promise of reward unto them:
secondly, by their own dignity; for Christ has merited that our works might
merit. And this is the substance of their doctrine. From it we dissent in these
points.

I. We renounce all personal merits, that is, all merits within the person of
any mere man. II. And we renounce all merit of works, that is, all merit of
any work done by any mere man whatsoever. And the true merit whereby we look
to attain the favor of God, and life everlasting, is to be found in the
person of Christ alone: who is the storehouse of all our merits: whose
prerogative it is, to be the person alone in whom God is well pleased. Gods
favor is of infinite dignity, and no creature is able to do a work that may
counteruaile the favor of God, save Christ alone: who by reason of the
dignity of his person, being not a mere man but God-man, or Man-god, he can
do such works as are of endless dignity every way answerable to the favor of
God: and therefore sufficient to merit the same for us. And though a merit or
meritorious work agree only to the person of Christ, yet is it made ours by
imputation. For as his righteousness is made ours, so are his merits depending
thereon: but his righteousness is made ours by imputation, as I have showed.
Hence arises another point, namely that as Christ's righteousness is made ours
really by imputation to make us righteous: so we by the merit of his
righteousness imputed to us do merit and deserve life everlasting. And this
is our doctrine. In a word, the Papist maintains the merits of his own
works: but we renouuce them all, and rest only on the merit of Christ. And
that our doctrine is truth, and theirs falsehood, I will make manifest by
sundry reasons; and then answer their arguments to the contrary.

Our reasons.
The first shall be taken from the properties and conditions that must be in
a work meritorious, and they are four. I. A man must do it of himself, and
by himself: for if it be done by another, the merit does not properly belong
to the doer. II. A man must do it of his own freewill and pleasure, not of
due debt: for when we do that which we are bound to do, we do no more but
our duty. III. The work must be done to the profit of another, who thereupon
must be bound to repay the like. IV. The reward and the work must be in
proportion equal, for if the reward be more then the work, it is not a reward
of desert, but a gift of good will. Hence follows a notable conclusion: That
Christ's manhood considered a part from his Godhead, cannot merit at Gods hand^
though it be more excellent every way then all both men and angels. For being
thus considered, it does nothing of it self, but by grace received from the
godhead: though it also be without measure. Secondly Christ's manhood is a
creature, and in that regard bound to do whatsoever it does. Thirdly, Christ
as man cannot give any thing to God, but that which he received from God:
therefore cannot the manhood properly by it self merit, but only as it is
personally united unto the godhead of the Son. And if this be so, then much
less can any mere man, or any angel merit: yea it is a madness to think,
that either our actions or persons should be capable of any merit whereby we
might attain to life eternal.

Reason II. Exodus 20. ^. And show mercy upon thousands in them that love me,
and keep my commandments. Hence I reason thus: where reward is given upon
mercy, there is no merit: but reward is given of mercy to them that fulfill
the law: therefore no merit. What can we any way deserve, when our full
recompense must be of mercy? And this appears further by Adam: if he had
stood to this day, he could not by his continual and perfect obedience, have
procured a further increase of favor at Gods hand, but should only have
continued that happy estate in which he was first created.

Reason III. Scripture directly condemns merit of works. Romans 6.23: The
wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord. The proportion of the argument required that S. Paul should
have said: The reward of good works is eternal life, if life everlasting could
be deserved, which cannot; because it is a free gift. Again, Tit. 3.5. We are
saved not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us. And Ephesians. 2.8, 10. By grace you are faued through faith, and
that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: not of works which God has
prepared that we should walk in them. If any works be crowned, it is certain
that the sufferings of Martyrs shall be rewarded: now of them Paul says, Romans
8.18. The sufferings of this life are not worthy of the glory to come. Where
then is the value and dignity of other works? To this purpose Ambr. says, The
just man though he be tormented in the brazen bull is still just, because he
justifies God, and says he suffers less then his sins deserve.

Reason IV. Whosoever will merit, must fulfill the whole law: but none can
keep the whole law: For if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, 1.
Ioh. 1. And he that sins against one commandment is guilty of the whole
law. And what can he merit, that is guilty of the breach of the whole law?

Reason V. We are taught to pray on this manner, Give us this day our daily
bread: wherein we acknowledge every morsel of bread to be the mere gift of
God without desert: and therefore must we much more acknowledge life eternal
to be every way the gift of God. It must needs therefore be a satanicall
insolency for any man to imagine, that he can by his works merit eternal
life, who can not merit bread.

Reason VI. Consent of the ancient Church. De interpellatione David. 4. vel.
ps. 72.
Bernard, Those which we call our merits, are the way to the kingdom, and not
the cause of reigning. August. Manuali chap. 22. All my hope is in the death of
my Lord. His death is my merit --: my merit is the passion of the Lord. I shall
not be void of merits, so long as Gods mercies are not wanting. Basil on Psalm.
114. Eternal rest is reserved for them, which have striuen lawfully in this
life: not for the merits of their doings, but upon the grace of the most
bountiful God, in which they trusted. August. on Psalm. 120. He crowns thee,
because he crowns his own gifts, not thy merits. And Psalm. 142. Lord thou will quicken me in thy justice, not in mine: not because I deserved it, but
because thou have compassion.

Objections of Papists.
Object. I. In sundry places of Scripture, promise of reward is made to them
that believe and do good works: therefore our works do merit: for a reward
and merit be relatiues. Answ. Reward is twofold: of debt, and of mercy. Life
everlasting is not a reward of debt but of mercy, given of the good will of
God, without any thing done of man. Secondly, the kingdom of heaven is
properly an inheritance given of a father to a child, and therefore it is
called a reward not properly, but by a figure or by resemblance. For as a
workman having ended his labor, receives his wages; so after men have lead
their lives and finished their course in keeping faith and good conscience, as
dutiful children, God gives them eternal life. And hereupon it is termed a
reward. Thirdly, if I should grant that life everlasting is a deserved reward,
it is not for our works, but for Christ's merit imputed to us, causing us
thereby to merit: and thus the relation stands directly between the Reward and
Christ's Merit applied unto us.

Ob. II. Christ by his death merited that our works should merit life
everlasting. Ans. That is false: all we find in Scripture is, that Christ by
his merit procured pardon of sin, imputation of righteousness, and life
everlasting: and it is no where said in the word of God, that Christ did
merit, that our works should merit: it is a dotage of their own deuifing. He
died not for our good works to make them able to satisfy Gods anger; but for
our sins that they might be pardoned. Thus much says the Scripture, and no
more. And in that Christ did sufficiently merit life eternal for us, by his
own death: it is a sufficient proof that he never intended to give us power of
meriting the same: unless we suppose that at some time he gives more then is
needful. Again, Christ in the office of mediation as he is a king, Priest, and
prophet, admits no deputy or fellow. For he is a most perfect Mediator,
doing all things by himself, without the help of any. And the ministers that
dispense the word are not his deputies, but reasonable and voluntary
instruments, which he uses. But if men by works can merit increase of grace
and happiness for themselves, then has Christ partners in the work of
redemption: men doing that by him, which he does of himself, in procuring
their salvation. Nay, if this might stand, that Christ did merit, that our
works should merit, then Christ should merit that our stained righteousness
being for this cause not capable of merit, should nevertheless merit. I call it
stained; because we are partly flesh and partly spirit: and therefore in our
selves deserving the curse of the law, though we be regenerate. Again, for one
good work we do, we have many evil, the offense whereof defaceth the merit of
our best deeds, and maks the^ too light in the bala^ce of the law.

Object. III. Our works merit by bargain or covenant, because God has
promised to reward them. Ans. The word of God sets down two covenants: one
legal, the other euangelical. In the legal covenant life everlasting is
promised to works, for that is the condition of the law; do these things and
thou shall live. But on this manner can no man merit life everlasting, because
none is able to do all that the law requires; whether we respect the manner,
or the measure of obedience. In the evangelical covenant, the promises that
are made are not made to any work or virtue in man, but to the worker: not for
any merit of his own person or work, but for the person and merit of Christ.
For example, it is a promise of the Gospel, Be faithful unto death, and I
will give thee the crown of life. Reuelat. 2.10. Here the promise is not made
to the virtue of fidelity, but to the faithful person; whose fidelity is but
a token that he is in Christ: for the merit of whose obedience God promises
the crown of life: and therefore Christ says further, I come quickly and will
give to every man according to his works: mark, he says not to the work, or
for the work; but to the worker according to his works. And thus the bond of
all other promises of the Gospel, in which God willingly binds himself to
reward our works, do not directly concern us, but have respect to the
person, and obedience of Christ, for whose sake alone God binds himself as
debtor unto us, and gives the recompense or reward, according to the measure of
our faith testified by our works. And therefore it cannot be truly gathered,
that works do merit by any promise or covenant, passed on Gods part to man.
Some may say, if works merit not why are they mentioned in the promises? I
answer, not because they merit, but because they are tokens that the doer of
the work is in Christ, for whose merit the promise shall be accomplished.

Object. IV. Good works are perfect and without fault, for they are the works
of the holy Ghost, who cannot sin: therefore they merit. Ans. If works did
proceed only and immediately from the holy Ghost, there could not be any fault
in them: but our works come from the holy Ghost, in and by the will and
understanding of man: and by this means they are tainted with sin; as water
in the fountain is both clear and sweet, yet the streams thereof passing
through the filthy channel, are defiled thereby. Again they reason thus:
That which we are bound to do has no fault in it: but we are bound to do
good works: therefore they are perfect. Ans. The proposition must be
expounded: that which we are bound to do, in it self, according to the
intention of the commander, has no fault: or, that which we are bound to do
according as we are bound to do it, has no fault, yet in regard of the
intention of the doer, or in regard of our manner of doing, it may be faulty.

Object. V. Christ says, Revel. 3.4. that the faithful in the Church of
Sardis shall walk with him in white, for they are worthy: therefore believers
merit. Ans. Every believer is worthy to walk with Christ; yet not worthy in
himself, but in Christ, to whom he is united, and made bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh. And by reason of this conjunction it is, that men are said
to be worthy, because they are enriched with Christ's merits and righteousness.

Object. VI. 2. Tim. 4.8. Everlasting life is termed a crown, and a crown of
righteousness to be given of a just judge: therefore man for his part by his
works deserves the same. Ans. Everlasting life is called a crown only in
resembla^ce. For as he which runs a race, must continue and run to the
end, and then be crowned; even so must we continue to walk in good works unto
the end, and then receive eternal life. And it is called a crown of
righteousness, not because it belongs to any man by due and desert; but because
God has bound himself by a promise to give it, in performing whereof he is
termed just: and by virtue of this promise it is obtained and no otherwise.
These are the principal objections, by which we may judge what the rest are.
And thus we see what is the truth, namely that merit is necessary to
salvation: yet neither merit of man's work, or person, but the merit of Christ
imputed to us, whereby we being in him do procure and deserve the favor of
God and life eternal.

The sixth point. Of satisfaction.
Our consent.
Conclus. I. First we acknowledge and hold Civil or Politic satisfaction:
that is, a recompense for injuries, and damages offered any way to our
neighbors. This Zacheus practiced, when at his conversion he restored
fourfold things gotten by forged cauillation. Again by civil satisfaction I
understand, the imposition of fines, mulcts, and penalties upon offenders, and
the inflicting of death upon malefactors. For all these are satisfactions to
the law, and societies of men when they are wronged. All these we maintain as
necessary, for neither Church, nor commonwealth can well be without them:
considering they are notable means to uphold civil peace; and otherwhiles
they are fruits of true faith, as the satisfaction of Zacheus was.

Conclus. II. We acknowledge canonical or Ecclesiastical satisfaction: and
that is, when any having given offense to the Church of God or any part
thereof, do make an open public testimony of their repentance. Mirian for
murmuring against Moses, was stricken with leprosy, and afterward by his
prayer she was cleansed, and yet for all that she must go seven days out of
the tent and congregation, that she might make a kind of satisfaction to the
people for her trespass. And in the old testament, sackcloth and ashes were
signs of their satisfaction.

Conclus. III. We hold that no man can be saved, unless he make a perfect
satisfaction to the justice of God for all his sins; because God is infinite
in justice, and therefore will either exact an everlasting punishment, or
satisfaction for the same.

The dissent or difference.
The point of our difference and dissent are these. The Church of Rome teaches
and believes, that Christ by his death has made a satisfaction for all the
sins of men, and for the eternal punishment of them all: yet so, as they
themselves must satisfy the justice of God for the temporal punishment of
their offenses, either on earth, or in purgatory. We teach and believe, that
Christ by his death and passion has made a perfect and all sufficient
satisfaction to the justice of God for all the sins of men, and for the whole
punishment thereof both eternal and temporal. Thus we differ, and herein we
for our parts must for ever stand at difference wi^h them: so as if there were
no more points of variance but this one, it should be sufficient to keep us
always from uniting our religions, and cause us to obey the voice of Christ,
Come out of her my people. For as in the former points, so in this also, the
Papists err, not in circumstance, but in the very foundation and life of
religion.

Our reasons.
I. A satisfaction that is made imperfect either directly or by consequent, is
indeed no satisfaction at all. But the Papists make Christ's satisfaction
imperfect, in that they do add a supply by humane satisfactions: and thus
much a learned schooleman, Biel in plain words confessed. Although (says he)
the passion of Christ be the principal merit, for which grace is conferred,
the opening of the kingdom and glory: Super. lib. 3. did. 19. concl. 5.
yet is it never the alone and total meritorious cause: it is manifest,
because always with the merit of Christ, there concurreth some work, as the
merit of congruitie or condignitie of him that receives grace or glory, if he
be of years and have the use of reason: or of some other for him, if he want
reason. For that which admits a supply by an other, is imperfect in it self.
Therefore humane satisfactions can not stand. Learned Papists make answer, that
Christ's satisfaction and man's may stand well together. For (say they) Christ's
satisfaction is sufficient in it self to answer the justice of God for all
sin and punishment; but it is not sufficient to this or that man till it be
applied: and it must be applied by our satisfaction made to God for the
temporal punishment of our sins. But I say again, that man's satisfaction
can be no means to apply the satisfaction of Christ, and I prove it thus.
The means of applying Gods blessings and graces unto man are twofold: some
respect God himself, and some respect man. Those which respect God, are such
whereby God on his part does offer and convey his mercies in Christ unto man:
of this sort are the preaching of the word, Baptism, and the Lords supper; and
these are as it were the hand of God whereby he reaches down and gives unto
us Christ with all his benefits. The other means of applying on man's part, are
those whereby the said benefits are received. Of this sort there is only one,
namely faith, whereby we believe that Christ with all his benefits belong unto
us. And this is the hand of man whereby he receives Christ as he is offered,
or exhibited by God in the word and sacraments. As for other means beside
these, in Scripture we find none. Foolish therefore is the answer of the
Papist, that make men's satisfactions means to apply the satisfaction of
Christ unto us: for by humane satisfactions, Christ is neither offered on Gods
part, nor yet received on man's part: let them prove it if they can. Others,
not content with this their former answer say, that our satisfactions do
nothing derogate from the satisfaction of Christ; because our works have their
dignity and merit from Christ's satisfaction: he meriting that our works
should satisfy Gods justice for temporal punishments. But this is also absurd
and false, as the former was. For if Christ did satisfy that man might
satisfy, then Christ does make every believer to be a Christ, a Jesus, a
Redeemer, and a Priest in the same order with his own self. But to make
sinful man his own redeemer, though it be but from temporal punishments,
is a doctrine of devils. For the holy Ghost teaches that the priesthood of
Christ is incommunicable, and can not pass from him to any other. Heb. 7.24.
Now to make satisfaction for sin or any part of the punishment thereof, is a
duty, or a part of Christ his priesthood, and therefore to make satisfaction
is a work that can not pass from his person to the person of any man. Again,
if Christ by his satisfaction give power to man to satisfy, then man does
satisfy by Christ, and Christ beside his own satisfaction upon the cross,
must daily satisfy in man to the end of the world: but this can not be: for
Christ upon the cross, when death was upon him, said, It is finished, that
is, I have fully satisfied for all the sins of mankind, both in respect of
the fault and punishment. As for Christ's burial and resurrection which
followed his death, they served not to satisfy but to confirm the same.
Again Paul says, 2. Cor. 5.12. He that knew no sin, was made sin for us,
that is, the punishment of sin for us: but if the Church of Rome say true,
that Christ does daily satisfy, then Paul spoke too short, and should have
said further, that Christ was made sin for us, and in us too: and that God
was not only in Christ but also in us, reconciling the world to himself. But
Paul never knew this learning: and therefore let them turn themselves which
way they will, by putting a supplement to Christ's satisfaction, they do
indeed annihilate the same.

Reason II. In sundry places of Scripture, especially in the Epistles of Paul,
we are said to be redeemed, justified, and saved freely: which word freely,
does import that we are justified and saved without any thing done on our part
or by our selves in the matter of our salvation: and if this be so, then can we
do nothing at all that may satisfy the justice of God for the least
punishmen^ of our sins. If we satisfy in our own persons, we are not saved
freely: and if we be saved freely, we make no satisfaction at all.

Reason III. We pray daily, forgive us our sins: now to plead pardon, and to
satisfy for our sins be contrary: and for all things, for which we can make
satisfaction, we need not crave a pardon: but we are taught in the foresaid
petition wholly and only to use the plea o^ pardon for our sins, and
therefore we acknowledge that we can not make any satisfaction at all.

Reason IV. The judgment of the ancient Church. Tertul. de Baptism.
Guiltiness being taken away, the punishment is also taken away. Sermon. 37. de
ve^bis Apost.
Augustine, Christ, by taking upon him the punishment and not the fault, has
done away both fault and the punishment. Tom. 10. hom. 5. he says, When we are
gone out of this world, there will remain no compunction or satisfaction. Some
new Editions have foisted in the word [ aliqua] and so have turned the sense on
this manner: There will remain no compunction or some satisfaction. But this
is flat against Augustines meaning, who says a little before, that when the
way is ended, there is no compounding of our cause with any. Chrysostom. proem.
in Esa. Say not to me, I have sinned: how shall I be freed from so many sins?
Thou can not: but thy God can. Yea, and he will so blot out thy sins that
there shall remain no print of the^: which thing befalls not the body, for
when it is healed there remain^s a skarre: but God as soon as he exempts thee
from punishment, he gives thee justice. Luc. 22. Petri negat. De bono mor.
Ambrose says, I read of Peter's tears, but I read not of his satisfaction.
Again, Let us adore Christ that he may say unto us, Fear not thy sins of
this world, nor the waves of bodily sufferings: I have remission of sins.
Hierome says in Psalm. 31. The sin that is covered is not seen, the sin
that is not seen is not imputed, that which is not imputed, is not punished.
Chrysostom in Matthew, hom. 44. Among all men, some endure punishment in this
life and the life to come: others in this life al^ne: others alone in the life
to come: others neither in this life nor in the life to come. There alone, as
Dives, who was not lord so much as of one drop of water. Here alone, the
incestuous man among the Corinthians. Neither here nor there, as the Apostles
and Prophets, as also Job and the rest of this kind: for they endured no
sufferings for punishment, but that they might be known to be conquerours in
the fight.

Objections of Papists.
I. Object. Leuit. 4. Moses according to Gods commandment prescribed several
sacrifices for several persons; and they were means of satisfaction for the
temporal punishments of their daily sins. Ans. Those sacrifices were only
signs and types of Christ's satisfaction to be offered to his father in his
alone sacrifice upon the cross: and whosoever offered any sacrifice in the old
testament, did thus and no otherwise esteem of it, but as a type and figure of
better things. Secondly, the said sacrifices were satisfactions to the Church,
whereby men did testify their repentance for their offenses, and likewise
their desire to be reconciled to God and men. And such kind of satisfactions,
we acknowledge.

II. Object. Men, whose sins are all pardoned, have afterward sundry crosses
and afflictions laid upon them, unto the end of their days: therefore in all
likelihood they make satisfaction to God for temporal punishments. As for
example, the Israelites for murmuring against the Lord in the wilderness were
barred all from the land of promise: and the like befell Moses and Aaron for
not glorifying God as they should have done at the waters of strife. Ans. Man
must be considered in a twofold estate, as he is under the law, and as he is
under grace. In the first estate, all afflictions are curses or legal
punishments, be they little or great: but to them that are in the second estate
and believe in Christ, though the same afflictions remain, yet do they change
their habit or condition, and are the actions of a Father serving to be
trialls, corrections, preuentings, admonitions, 1. Cor. 11.32. When we are
judged, we are nurtered of the Lord. and Heb. 12.7. If ye endure chastisment,
God offers himself unto you as children. and Chrysostom says, 1. Cor. hom.
28. When we are corrected of the Lord, it is more for our admonition then
damnation: more for a medicine then for a punishment: more for a correction
then for a penalty. And whereas God denied the believing Israelites, with
Moses and Aaron to enter into the land of Canaan, it cannot be proved that it
was a punishment or penalty of the law upon them. The scripture says no more
but that it was an admonition to all men in all ages following, to take heed
of like offenses, as Paul writes, All these things came unto them for
ensamples, and were written for our admonition, 1. Cor. 10.11.

III. Object. David was punished after his repentance for his adultery, for
the child died, and he was plagued in his own kind, in the incest of Absolon:
and when he had numbered the people he was yet punished in the death of his
people after his own repentance. Ans. I answer as before that the hand of God
was upon David after his repentance; but yet the judgments which befell him
were not curses unto him properly, but corrections for his sins, and trialls
of his faith, and means to prevent further sin, and to renew both his faith
and repentance: as also they served to admonish others in like case; for David
was a public person and his sins were offensive, both within the Church of
God and without.

IV. Object. The prophets of God, when the people are threatened with the
plague, famine, sword, captivity, etc. exhort them to repent and to humble
themselves in sackcloath and ashes: and thereby they turned away the wrath of
God that was then coming forth against them. Therefore by temporal
humiliation, men may escape the temporal punishments of the Lord. Answ..
Famine, sword, banishment, the plague, and other judgments sent on Gods
people, were not properly punishments of sin but only the corrections of a
father whereby he humbles them that they might repent: or thus, they were
punishments tending to correction, not serving for satisfaction. And the
punishments of God are turned from them, not because they satisfy the justice
of God in their own s^fferings, but because by faith they lay hold on the
satisfaction of the Messiah, and testify the same by their humiliation and
repentance.

Object. V. Dan. 4.24. Daniel gives this counsel to Nabuchadnezar, redeem thy
^innes by justice, and thine iniquities by alms deeds. Behold (say they)
alms deeds are made a means to satisfy for man's iniquities. Ans. The word
which they translate to redeem, (as the most learned in the Chalde tongue with
one consent avouch) does properly signify to break off; as if the Prophet
should say: O King, thou art a mighty Monarch, and to enlarge thy kingdom
thou have used much injustice and cruelty, therefore now rep^^^ of thine
iniquity, and break off these thy sins, testify thy repentance by doing
justice, and give alms to the poor whom thou have oppressed. Therefore here
is nothing spoken of satisfaction for sin, but only of testification of
repentance by the fruits thereof.

Object. VI. Matthew. 3.2. Do penance: and bring forth fruits worthy of penance,
which (say they) are works of satisfaction enjoined by the priest. Ans. This
text is absurd: for the word (...), signifies thus much, change your minds
from sin to God, and testify it by good works, that is, by doing the duties
of the moral law: which must be done, not because they are means to
satisfy Gods justice for man's sin, but because they are fruits of that faith
and repentance which lies in the heart.

Object VII. 2. Cor. 7.10. Paul sets down sundry fruits of repentance:
whereof the last is revenge, whereby repentant persons punish themselves,
thereby to satisfy Gods justice for the temporal punishment of their sins.
Ans. A repentant sinner must take revenge of himself, and that is only to use
all means which serve to subdue the corruption of his nature, to bridle carnal
affections, and to mortify sin: and these kind of actions are restrainments
properly, and not punishments: and are directed against the sin and not
against the person.

Lastly, they make three works of satisfaction, prayer, fasting, and alms
deeds. For the first, it is mere foolishnes to think, that man by prayer can
satisfy for his sins. It is all one, as if they had said, that a beggar by
asking of alms should deserve his alms: or, that a debtor by requesting his
creditor to pardon his debt, should thereby pay his debt. Secondly, fasting is
a thing indifferent, of the same nature with eating and drinking, and of it
self conferreth nothing to the obtainment of the kingdom of heaven, no more
then eating and drinking does. Thirdly and lastly alms deeds cannot be
works of satisfaction for sins. For when we give them as we ought, we do
but our duty, whereunto we are bound. And we may as well say, that a man by
paying one debt, may discharge another: as to say that by doing his duty he
may satisfy Gods justice for the punishment of his sins. These we confess
be fruits of faith, but yet are they no works of satisfaction: but the only
and alsufficient satisfaction made to Gods justice for our sins, is to be
found in the person of Christ, being procured by the merit of his death, and
his obedience. And thus our doctrine touching satisfaction is cleared: and it
is to be learned carefully of our common people, because the opinion of humane
satisfaction is natural and sticks fast in the heart of natural men.
Hereupon when any have sinned, and feel touch of conscience any way, their
manner is, then to perform some outward humiliation and repentance, thinking
thereby to stop the mouth of conscience, and by doing some ceremonial duties
to appease the wrath of God for their sins. Yea, many think to satisfy gods
justice by repeating the Creed, the Lords prayer, and then ten commandments,
so foolish are they in this kind.

The seventh point. Of Traditions. Traditions, are doctrines delivered from
hand to hand, either by word of mouth, or by writing, beside the written word
of God.
Our Consent.
Conclus. I. We hold that the very word of God, has been delivered by
tradition. For first God revealed his will to Adam by word of mouth: and renewed
the fame unto the Patriarchs, not by writing, but by speech, by dreams, and
other inspirations: and thus the word of God went from man to man for the space
of two thousand and four hundred years, unto the time of Moses who was the
first penman of ho^y Scripture. For as touching the prophecy of Enoch, we
commonly hold it was not penned by Enoch, but by some Jew under his name. And
for the space of this time, men worshipped God, and held the articles of their
faith by tradition, not from men but immediately from God himself. And the
history of the new testament (as some say) ^or eighty years, as some others
think, for the space of twenty years and more, went from hand to hand by
tradition, til penned by the Apostles, or being penned by others was approved
by them.

Conclus. II. We hold that the Prophets, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles,
spoke and did many things good and true which were not written in the
scriptures; but came either to us, or to our ancetours only by tradition. As
2. Tim. 3.8. it is said. Iannes and Iambres were the Magitians that withstood
Moses: now in the books of the old testament we shall not find them once
named, and therefore it is like, that the Apostle had their names by tradition,
or by some writings then extant among the Jews. So Heb. 12.21. the author of
the Epistle records of Moses, that when he saw a terrible sight in Mount
Sinai, he said, I tremble, and am afraid: which words are not to be found in
all the books of the old testament. In the epistle of Jude mention is made,
that the devil strove with Michaell the Archangel about the body of Moses:
which point (as also the former) considering it is not to be found in holy wine
it seems the Apostle had it by tradition from the Jews. That the prophet ^say
was killed with a fullers club is received for truth, but yet not recorded in
scripture: and so likewise that the virgin Marie lived and died a virgin. And
in Ecclesiastical writers many worthy sayings of the Apostles and other holy
men are recorded, and received of us for truth, which nevertheless are not
set down in the books of the old or new testament. And many things we hold
for truth, not written in the word, if they be not against the word.

Conclus. III. We hold that the Church of God has power to prescribe
ordinances, rules, or traditions, touching time and place of Gods worship, and
touching order and comelines to be used in the same: and in this regard, Paul,
1. Cor. 11.2. commends the Church of Corinth for keeping his traditions, and
Act. 15. the Council at Jerusalem decreed that the Churches of the Gentiles
should abstain from blood, and from things strangled. This decree is termed a
tradition, and it was in force among them so long as the offense of the Jews
remained. And this kind of traditions whether made by general Councels or
particular Synods, we have care to maintain and observe: these caueats being
remembered: first that they prescribe nothing childish or absurd to be done:
secondly that they be not imposed as any parts of Gods worship: thirdly, that
they be severed from superstition or opinion of merit: lastly that the Church
of God be not burdened with the multitude of them. And thus much we hold
touching Traditions.

The difference.
Papists teach, that beside the written word, there be certain unwritten
traditions, which must be believed as profitable and necessary to salvation.
And these they say are twofold; Apostolical, namely such as were delivered by
the Apostles and not written; and Ecclesiastical, which the Church decrees as
occasion is offered. We hold that the Scriptures are most perfect, containing
in them all doctrines needful to salvation, whether they concern faith or
manners: and therefore we acknowledge no such traditions beside the written
word, which shall be necessary to salvation: so as he which believes them not
cannot be saved.

Our Reasons.
Testimony I. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Thou shall not add to the words that I command
thee, nor take any thing thing therefrom: therefore the written word is
sufficient for all doctrines pertaining to salvation. If it be said that this
commandment is spoken as well of the unwritten as of the written word, I
answer: that Moses speaks of the written word only: for these very words are
a certain preface which he set before a long commentary made of the written
law, for this end to make the people more attentive, and obedient.

Testimony II. Isai 8.20. To the law and to the testimony. If they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Here the
Prophet teaches what must be done in cases of difficulty. Men must not ru^ne
to the wizard or southsayer, but to the law and testimony, and here he
commends the written word, as sufficient to resolve all doubts and scruples in
conscience whatsoever.

Testimony III. Ioh. 20.31. Those things were written that ye might believe
that Jesus is the Christ, and in believing might have everlasting life. Here is
set down the full end of the gospel, and of the whole written word: which is
to bring men to faith and consequently to salvation: and therefore the whole
scripture alone is sufficient to this end without traditions. If it be said,
that this place must be understood of Christ's miracles only: I answer, that
miracles without the doctrine of Christ, and knowledge of his sufferings, can
bring no man to life everlasting, and therefore the place must be understood
of the doctrine of Christ and not of his miracles alone, as Paul teaches. Gal.
1.8. If we or an angel from heaven preach unto you any thing beside that
which we have preached, let him be accursed. And to this effect he blames them
that taught but a diverse doctrine to that which he had taught, 1. Tim. 1.3.

Testimony IV. 2. Tim. 3.16,17. The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of
God and is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
every good work. In these words be contained two arguments, to prove the
sufficiency of Scripture without unwritten verities. The first: that which is
profitable to these four uses: namely, to teach all necessary truth, to
confute all errors to correct faults in manners, and to instruct in
righteousness, that is to inform al men in all good duties, that is sufficient
to salvation. But Scripture serves for all these uses: and therefore it is
sufficient: and unwritten traditions are superfluous. The second: that which
can make the man of God, that is, Prophets, and Apostles, and the ministers of
the word, perfect in all the duties of their callings, that same word is
sufficient to make all other men perfect in all good works. But Gods word is
able to make the man of God perfect. Therefore it is sufficient to prescribe
the true and perfect way to eternal life, without the help of unwritten
traditions.

V. The judgment of the Church, Tertul. says, de resur. rect. carnis.
Take from heretics the opinions which they maintain with the heathen, that
they may defend their questions by Scripture alone, and they cannot stand.
Again, We need no curiosity after Christ Jesus, nor inquisition after the
gospel. When we believe it, we desire to believe nothing beside: for this we
first believe that there is nothing more which we may believe. Hierome on
Math. 23. writing of an opinion that John Baptist was killed, because he
foretold the coming of Christ, says thus: This, because it has not
authority from Scriptures, may as easily be contemned as approved. In which
words there is a conclusion with a minor, and the mayor is to be supplied by
the rules of logic thus: That which has not authority from Scriptures, may
as easily be contemned as approved: but this opinion is for therefore. Behold
a notable argument against all unwritten traditions. Augustine, book 2. cap.
9. de doct. Christ. In those things which are plainly set down in Scripture,
are found all those points which contain faith and manners of living well.
Vincentius Lirinen says, the Canon of the Scripture is perfect, and fully
sufficient to it self for all things.

Beside these testimonies, other reasons there be that serve to prove this
point. I. The practice of Christ and his Apostles, who for the confirmamatio^
of the doctrine which they taught, used always the testimony of Scripture,
neither can it be proved, that they ever confirmed any doctrine by tradition.
Act. 26.22. I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying
none other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come.
And by this we are given to understand, that we must always have recourse to
the written word, as being sufficient to instruct us in matters of salvation.
II. If the believing of unwritten traditions were necessary to salvation, then
we must as well believe the writings of the ancient Fathers as well as the
writings of the Apostles, because Apostolical traditions are not else where to
be found but in their books. And we may not believe their sayings as the word
of God, because they often err being subject to error: and for this cause
their authority, when they speak of traditions, may be suspected: and we may
not always believe them upon their word.

Objections for Traditions.
First they allege 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. where the Apostle biddes that Church keep
the ordinances which he taught them either by word or letter. Hence they
gather, that beside the written word, there be unwritten traditions, that are
indeed necessary to be kept and obeyed. Ans. It is very likely, that this
Epistle to the Thessalonians was the first that ever Paul writ to any Church,
though in order it have not the first place; and therefore at that time when
this Epistle was penned, it might well fall out, that some things needful to
salvation were delivered by word of mouth, not being as yet written by any
Apostle. Yet the same things were afterward set down in writing, either in the
second epistle or in the epistles of Paul.

Object. II. That Scripture is Scripture, is a point to be believed: but that
is a tradition unwritten: and therefore one tradition there is not written,
that we are to believe. Ans. That the books of the old and new Testament are
Scripture, it is to be gathered and believed not upon bare tradition, but from
the very books themselves, on this manner. Let a man that is endued with the
spirit of discerning, read the several books, withal let him consider the
professed author thereof which is God himself, and the matter therein
contained, which is a most divine and absolute truth full of piety; the manner
and form of speech, which is full of majesty in the simplicity of words: the
end whereat they wholly aim, which is the honor and glory of God alone,
etc. and he shall be resolved that Scripture is Scripture, even by the
Scripture it self. Yea, and by this means he may discern any part of
Scripture, from the writings of me^ whatsoever. Thus the^ scripture proves it
self to be scripture: and yet we despise not the universal consent or
tradition of the Church in this case; which though it do not persuade the
conscience, yet is it a notable inducement to move us to reverence, and regard
the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. It will be said, where is it written
that scripture is scripture? I answer, not in any one particular place or book
of scripture, but in every line and page of the whole Bible to him that can
read with the spirit of discerning, and can discern the voice of the true
pastor, as the sheep of Christ can do.

Object. III. Some books of the canon of the Scripture are lost, as the book
of the wars of God, Number. 21.14. the book of the just. Joshua 10.13. the
books of Chronicles of the Kings of Israel and Judah. 1.King. 14.19. the books
of certain prophets, Nathan, God, Iddo, Ahiah, and Semiah: and therefore the
matter of these books must come to us by tradition. Answ. Though it be
granted that some books of Canonical scripture be lost: yet the scripture
still remains sufficient because the matter of those books (so farreforth as
it was necessary to salvation) is contained in these books of Scripture that
are now extant. Again, I take it to be a truth (though some think otherwise)
that no part of the Canon is lost: for Paul says, Whatsoever things were
written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures, etc. Romans 15.4. Where he takes it for granted, that
the whole Canon of holy scripture was then extant. For if he had thought, that
some books of scripture had been lost, he would have said: whatsoever was
written and is now extant, was written for our learning and comfort. For books
that are lost serve neither for learning nor comfort. Again to hold that any
books of scripture should be lost, calls into question Gods providence, and
the fidelity of the Church, who has the books of God in keeping, and is
therefore called the pillar and ground of truth. And touching the books
before mentioned, I answer thus: The book of the wars of God, Number. 21. 14.
might be some short bill or narration of things done among the Israelites,
which in the days of Moses went from hand to hand. For sometime a book in
Scripture signifies a roll or catalogue, as the first chapter of Matthew,
which contains the genealogy of our Savior Christ is called the book of
the generation of Jesus Christ. Again, the book of the just, and the books
of Chronicles, which are said to be lost, were but as the Chronicles of England
are with us: even politic records of the acts and events of things, in the
kingdom of Judah and Israel: out of which the Prophets gathered things
necessary to be known, and placed them in holy scripture. As for the books
of Iddo, Ahiah, Semiah, Gad, and Nathan, they were contained in the books of
the Kings and Chronicles and in the books of Samuel, which were not written by
him alone, but by sundry prophets, 1. Chr. 29.29. as also was the book of
Judges. As for the books of Solomon which are lost, they did not concern
religion and matters of salvation, but were concerning matters of philosophy
and such like things.

Object. IV. Moses in Mount Sina, beside the written law, received from God a
more secret doctrine, which he never writ, but delivered by tradition or word
of mouth to the Prophets after him; and this the Jews have now set down in
their Cabala. Ans. This indeed is the opinion of some of the Jews, whom in
effect and substance sundry Papists follow: but we take it for no better then
a Jewish dotage. For if Moses had known any secret doctrine beside the written
law, he would never have given this commandment of the said law, thou shall
not add any thing thereto.

Object. V. Heb. 5. 12. Gods word is of two sorts, milk and strong meat. By
milk we must understand the word of God written wherein God speaks plainly
to the capacity of the rudest: but strong meat is unwritten traditions, a
doctrine not to be delivered unto all, but to those that grow to perfection.
Ans. We must know, that one and the same word of God is milk and strong meat,
in regard of the manner of handling and propounding of it. For being delivered
generally and plainly to capacity of the simplest, it is milk; but being
handled particularly and largely, and so fitted for men of more understanding,
it is strong meat. As for example, the doctrine of the creation, of man's fall,
and redemption by Christ, when it is taught ouerly and plainly, it is milk:
but when the depth of the same is thoroughly opened, it is strong meat. And
therefore it is a conceit of man's brain, to imagine that some unwritten word
is meant by strong meat.

Object. VI. Sundry places of scripture be doubtful: and every religion has
his several exposition of them, as the Papists have theirs, and the
Protestants theirs. Now then seeing there can be but one truth, when question
is of the interpretation of Scripture, recourse must be had to the tradition
of the Church, that the true sense may be determined and the question ended.
Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 1. and 2.
Ans. It is not so: but in doubtful places scripture it self is sufficient to
declare his own meaning: first by the analogy of faith, which is the sum of
religion gathered out of the clearest places of scripture: secondly, by the
circumstances of the place and the nature and signification of the words:
thirdly by conference of place with place. By these and like helps contained in
scripture, we may judge which is the truest meaning of any place. Scripture it
self is the text and the best gloss. And the scripture is falsely termed the
matter of strife, it being not so of it self, but by the abuse of man.

And thus much for our dissent concerning traditions, wherein we must not be
wavering but steadfast, because notwithstanding our renouncing of popery; yet
popish inclinations and dispositions be rife among us. Our common people
marueilously affect humane traditions: yea man's nature is inclined more to be
pleased with them, then with the word of God. The feast of the nativity of our
Savior Christ is only a custom and tradition of the Church, and yet men are
commonly more careful to keep it then the Lords day, the keeping whereof
stands by the moral law. Positive laws are not sufficient to restrain us
from buying and selling on the Sabbath: yet within the twelve days no man
keeps market. Again see the truth of this in our affection to the ministry
of the word: let the preacher allege Peter and Paul, the people count it but
common sluffe, such as any man can bring; but let men come and allege
Ambrose, Austine, and the rest of the fathers: oh, he is the man, he is alone
for them. Again, let any man be in danger any way, and straight he sends to
the wise man or wizzard: Gods word is not sufficient to comfort and direct him.
All this argues that popery denied with the mouth, abides still in the heart:
and therefore we must learn to reverence the written word by ascribing unto it
all manner of perfection.

The eight point: Of Vows.
Our Consent.
Touching Vows this must be known, that we do not condemn them altogether,
but only labor to restore the purity of doctrine touching this point, which
by the Church of Rome from time to time has been corrupted and defaced. We
hold therefore that a vow is a promise made to God touching some duties to be
performed unto him: and it is twofold, general, or special. The general vow
is that which concerns all believers: and it is made in the covenant both of
the law, and of the Gospel. I will here only speak of the vow which is
made in the covenant of the Gospel, in which there be two actions: one of God,
the other of man. God in mercy on his part promises to men the remission of
sins and life everlasting: and man again for his part promises to believe
in Christ, and to obey God in all his commandments. Al men ever made this vow
unto God, as the Jews in circumcision: which also they renewed so often as they
received the Passover: and in the new testament all that are baptized do the
like. And in Baptism this vow is called the stipulation of a good conscience,
whereby we purpose to renounce our selves, to believe in Christ, and to bring
forth the fruits of true repentance: and it ought to be renewed so often as we
are partakers of the supper of the Lord. This vow is necessary and must be
kept as a part of the true worship of God; because it is a promise, wherein we
vow to perform all duties commanded of God either in the law or in the
Gospel. It may be demanded, considering we are bound to obedience, how we
bind our selves in baptism thereto. Ans. Though we be already bound partly
by nature and partly by the written word, yet may we renew the same bond in a
vow, and he that is bound may further bind himself, so it be for this end,
to help his dullness for want of zeal, and to make himself more forward in
duties of love to men and the worship of God: to this end David swear to
keep the law of God. Psalm. 119.116. though he were bound unto it by nature
and by the written law it self.

The special vow is that, which does not reach to the person of all
believers, but only concerns some special men upon some special occasions.
And this kind of vow is twofold. The first, is the vow of a ceremonial
duty in the way of service to God: and it was in practice in the Church of the
Jews under the old testament: examples hereof are two especially, the first
was the vow of the Nazarites, whereto no kind of men were bound by Gods
commandment, but they bound themselves: God only prescribing the manner and
order of keeping the same with rites pertaining thereto, as abstinence from
wine, the not cutting of their hair, and such like. The second example is of
the Jews, when of their own accords, they vowed to give god house or land,
sheep or oxen, or any like things, for the maintenance of the legal worship:
and of this also God prescribes certain rules, Leuit 27. Now these vows
were part of the Jewish pedagogue or ceremonial law, wherein God trained up
the Jews in the old testament: and being observed of them, they were parts of
Gods worship: but now under the Gospel they are not: being all abolished
with the ceremonial law, to which Christ put an end at his death upon the
cross. It is true Paul made a vow, and since kept the same, in the time of
the new testament, Act. 18. yet not as a part of Gods worship: but as a thing
indifferent for the time, wherein he only condescended to the weakness of the
Jews, that by this means he might bring them the better unto Christ. And
whereas Christ is called a Nazarite, Matthew. 2.23. we may not think he was of
that very order, because he did not abstain from wine: but he was so termed
because he was the verity and accomplishment of this order. For by it was
signified that Gods Church was a peculiar people severed or chosen out of the
world, and that Christ in respect of holiness was also separated from all
sinners. And the words in S. Matthew, he shall be called a Nazarite, are
borrowed from the book of Judges, cap. 13. where they are properly spoken of
Sampson, and in type or figure of Christ. For as Sampson saved Israel by his
death, so did Christ save his Church. And as Sampson killed his enemies more by
death then by life, so did Christ. It is plain therefore that this kind of
vow binds not us: for there are no more ceremonies to be kept under the
gospel for parts of Gods worship, but the outward rites of baptism and the
Lords supper. Vows concerning meats, drinks, attire, touching, tasting,
times, places, days, were proper to the Jews.

The second kind of special vow is that whereby a man promises freely to
perform some outward and bodily exercise, for some good end: and this vow
also (if it be made accordingly) is lawful, and belongs both to the Church of
the old and new testament. In the old we have the example of the Rekabites,
Ier. 35. who by the appointment of Ionadab their father abstained from strong
drink, and wine, from planting vineyards and orchards: whereby Ionadab
intended only to break them before hand, and to acquaint them with their
future condition and state, that they should be strangers in a foreign land:
that so they might prepare themselves to endure hardness in the time to come.
And now in the new testament we have warrant in like manner to vow: as if a
man by drinking of wine or strong drink, find himself prone to drunkenness,
he may vow with himself to drink no more wine nor strong drink for so long
time, as he feels the drinking thereof will stir up his infirmity, and
minister occasion of sinning. Of this kind also are the vows in which we
purpose and promise to God, to keep set times of fasting, to task our selves
in prayer and reading of holy scriptures, and to give set alms for special
causes known to our selves, and to do sundry like duties. And that we be not
deceived in making such vows, certain rules must be remembered: I. that the vow
be agreeable to Gods will and word: for if it be otherwise, the making as also
the keeping thereof is sin. Vows must not be the bonds of iniquity. II. It
must so be made, that it may ftand with Christian liberty. For we may not
make such things necessary in conscience, which God has made free. Now
Christian liberty allows unto us the free use of all things indifferent, so
it be out of the case of offense. Hence it follows that vows must be made and
kept or not kept, so farreforth as in conscience they may stand or not stand
with our liberty purchased by Christ. III. The vow must be made with consent
of superiors, if we be under government. Thus among the Jews the vow of a
daughter might not stand, unless the consent of Parents came thereunto. IV. It
must be in the power and ability of the maker thereof, to do or not to do.
A vow made of a thing impossible, is no vow. V. It must be agreeable to the
calling of him that makes it: that is, both to his general calling as he is a
Christian, and to that particular calling whereein he lives. If it be against
either one or both, it is unlawful. VI. It must be made with deliberation.
Rash vows be not lawful, though the things vowed may be done lawefully. VII.
The end must be good which is to preserve and exercise the gifts of faith,
prayer, repentance, obedience, and other virtues of the mind; as also to
testify our thankfulness unto God for blessings received. These are the
principal rules that must be observed in making of vows: and herewithall must
be remembered, that vows made on this manner, are by themselves no part of Gods
worship, but only helps and furtherances thereunto: and thus are we to
esteem of all the vows of the new Testament. And (...) much of special
vows, and of our consent herein.

The dissent or difference.
The points of difference between us touching vows are especially three.

I. The Church of Rome teaches that in the new Testament we are as much bound
to make vows, as was the Church of the Jews, and that even in external
exercises. We say no: considering the ceremonial law is now abolished: and we
have only two ceremonies by commandment to be observed, Baptism, and the
Supper of the Lord. Again we are not so much bound to make or keep vows as
the Jews were; because they had a commandment so to do, and we have none at
all. But they allege to the contrary the Prophet Esai, chap. 19.20. who
speaking of the time of the Gospel, says, The Egyptians shall know the Lord,
and shall vow unto him and keep it. I answer two ways: first, that the
Prophet in this place expresses and signifies the spiritual worship of the
new Testament by ceremonial worship then used: as he does also in the last
chapter where he calls the ministers of the new testament Priests and
Levites. Secondly, we grant, the Church of the new Testament makes vows unto
God, but they are of moral and evangelical duties; which must not be left
undone: and if vowing will indeed further them, it is not to be neglected. And
therefore so often as we come to the Lords Table, we in heart renew the vow and
promise of obedience. And though vows be made of things and actions
indifferent, yet are they not any parts of Gods worship, which is the point to
be proved.

Again they allege, Psalm. 75.11. Vow unto God and perform it. And they say
that this commandment binds all men. Answ. That commandment first binds
the Jews to the making of ceremonial vows. Again David here speaks of the
vowing of praise and thanksgiving unto God: and so he expoundes himself, Psalm.
56. 12. My vows are upon me, I will offer praises unto God: and this vow
indeed concerns all men, because it respects a moral duty, which is to set
forth the praise of God.

II. Point of difference. They also hold, that vows made even of things not
commanded, as meats, drinks, attire, etc. are parts of Gods worship, yea that
they tend to a state of perfection, in that the keeping of them brings man to
an higher estate then the keeping of the law can do. We flatly say, no:
holding that lawful vows be certain adminicula cultus divini.
stays and proppes of Gods worship, and not the worship it self. For Paul
says plainly, 1. Tim. 4.8. Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness
is profitable for much. Again, as Gods kingdom is, so must his worship be:
and Gods kingdom stands not in outward things, as in eating, drinking, and
such like actions: and therefore his worship stands not in outward things.
III. Point of difference. They maintain such vows to be made, as are not
agreeable to the rules before named: and herein also we are to dissent from
them. The first and principal is, the vow of continency, whereby a man
promises to God to keep chastity always in single life, that is, out of the
estate of wedlock. This kind of vow is flat against the word of God: and
therefore unlawful. For Paul says, 1. Corinthians. 7.9. If they can not contain,
let them marry. 1. Tim. 4.1. It is a doctrine of devils to forbid to
marry. Hebr. 13.4. Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled.
Again, this vow is not in the power of himself that voweth: for continency
is the gift of God, who gives not it unto all, but to whom he will and when
he will, and as long as he will. They allege, that in the want of
continency, fasting and prayer obtain it. Answ. It is not so: Gods gifts be
of two sorts: some are common to all believers, as the gift of faith,
repentance and the fear of God, etc. others are peculiar to some only, as the
gift of continency, 1. Corinthians. 7.7. I would that all men were as I my self
am, but every man has his proper gift of God, one this way, an other that way.
Now, if we fast and pray for the increase of the common gifts of God, as faith,
repentance, and all such as are needful to salvation, we may obtain them in
some measure, but the like can not be said of particular gifts. The child of
God may pray for health or wealth, and not obtain either of them in this
world; because it is not the will of God to vouchsafe these blessings to all
men: and Paul prayed three times to be delivered from a temptation, and yet
obtained not his suite. And so may we likewise pray for chastity in single
estate, and yet never obtain it: because, it may be, it is the will of God to
save us without it. This vow therefore we abhor as a thing that has
heretofore and does still bring forth innumerable abominations in the world.
Yet here mark in what manner we do it. First of all, though we mislike the
vow: yet we like and commend single life. Marriage indeed is better in two
respects: first because God has ordained it to be a remedy of continency to
all such persons as can not contain: secondly because it is the seminary both
of Church and commonwealth; and it brings forth a seed of God for the
enlarging of his kingdom. Yet single life in them that have the gift of
continency, is in some respects to be preferred. First, because it brings
liberty in persecution. Thus Paul says, 1. Corin. 7.26. I suppose it to be
good for the present necessity for a man so to be. Secondly, because it frees
men from the common cares, molestations, and distractions that be in the
family, verse. 28. Such shall have trouble in the flesh, but I spare you.
Thirdly, because single parties do commonly with more bodily ease and liberty
worship God: it being still presupposed, that they have the gift of
continency. v. 34. The unmarried woman cares for the things of the Lord, that
she may be holy both in body and spirit.
Again, though we mislike the vow, yet we hold and teach, that men or women
being assured that they have the gift of continency, may constantly resolve
and purpose with themselves to live and lead a single life. 1. Cor. 7. 37. He
that stands firm in his own heart that he has no need, but has power of
his own will, and has so decreed in his heart that he will keep his virgin,
he does well. And we embrace the saying of Theodoret on 1. Tim. chap. 4. For he
does not (says he) blame single life or continency, but he accuses them that
by law inacted compel men to follow these. And men made themselves chaste for
the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 19.12. not by vow, but by a purpose of heart,
which is far less then a vow, and may be changed upon occasion, whereas a
vow cannot, unless it do evidently appear to be unlawful.

Thirdly, for such persons as are able to contain, to live single for the ends
before named, indeed we hold it to be no counsel of perfection, yet do we
not deny it to be a counsel of expedience, or outward ease: according to that
which Paul says, v. 25. I give mine advise --, and 35. I speak this for your
commodity not to entangle you in a snare.

Lastly, we think that if any having the gift of continency, do make a vow
to live single, and yet afterward marry (the said gift remaining) they have
sinned. Yet not because they are married but because their vow is broken. And
thus said Augustine of widows that married after their vow. lib. de bono
viduit. cap. 9.

The second is the vow of poverty and monastical life, in which men bestow
all they have on the poor: and give themselves wholly and only to prayer and
fasting. This vow is against the will of God. Act. 20.35. It is a more blessed
thing to give then to receive. Prou. 28.7. Give me neither riches nor poverty.
Deuteronomy. 28.22. Poverty is numbered among the curses of the law: none whereof are
to be vowed. And it is the rule of the holy Ghost, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. He that
will not labor, namely in some special and warrantable calling, must not
eat. And v. 12. I exhort that they work with quietness and eat their own
bread. Now when as men live apart from others, giving themselves only to
prayer and fasting, they live in no calling. And it is against the general vow
made in baptism, because it freeth men from sundry duties of the moral law,
and changes the proper end of man's life. For every man must have two
callings. The first is a general calling of a Christian, by virtue of which he
performs worship unto God, and duties of love to men. The second is a
particular calling, wherein according to his gift he must do service to men in
some function, pertaining either to the Church or commonwealth whereof he is a
member. And the first of these twain must be performed in the second: and the
second in and with the first. The end of man's life is, not only to serve God
by the duties of the first table, but by serving of man in the duties of the
second table to serve God. And therefore the love of our neihhbour is called
the fulfilling of the whole law, Romans 13.10. because the law of God is
practiced not apart, but in and with the love of our neighbor. This being so,
it is manifest that vowed poverty in monkish life makes many unprofitable
members both of Church and commonwealth.

And though we mislike this vow also, yet we do it, holding these conclusions.
I. That a man may forsake all his goods upon special calling, as the Apostles
did, when they were sent to preach the Gospel through the whole world.
Secondly goods may be forsaken, yea wife, children, parents, brethren, and all,
in the case of confession, that is, when a man for the religion of Christ is
persecuted and constrained to forsake all he has. For then the second table
gives place to the duties of the first. Mark. 10.29. II. That, for the time of
persecution, men may withdraw themselves (just occasion offered) and go apart
to wildernesses or like places, Heb. 11.37. yet for the time of peace I see no
cause of solitary life. If it be alleged that men go apart for
contemplation and spiritual exercises, I say again that Gods grace may as
well be exercised in the family as in the cloister. The family is indeed as
it were a school of God, in which they that have but a spark of grace, may
learn and exercise many virtues; the acknowledgement of God, invocation, the
fear of God, love, bountifulnes, patience, meeknes, faithfulness, etc. Nay here
be more occasions of doing or taking good, then be or can be in a cloister.
III. That, we condemn not the old and ancient Monks, Zozom. l. 1. cap. 13.
though we like not every thing in the^. For they lived not like idle-bellies,
but in the sweat of their own brows, as they ought to do: and many of them
were married: Epiph. bar. 78. August. de mon. Eccl. l. 2. c. 31. and de opere
Monach. c. 17.
and in their meat, drink, apparel, rule, vow, and whole course of life,
differed from the Monks of this time; even as heaven from earth.

The third vow is of regular obedience, whereby men give themselves to keep
some devised rule or order, standing most commonly in the observation of
exercises in outward things, as meats and drinks, and apparel, etc. This vow
is against Christian liberty, whereby is granted a free use of all things
indifferent, so it be without the case of offense. Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the
liberty wherein Christ has made you free. Coloss. 2. 16. Let no man judge you
in meat and drink. To conclude, whereas the Papists magnify these their
vows, and yet make no such account of the vow in baptism: we for our parts
must be contrary to them, not only in judgment, but also in practice: and we
ought to have special care to make good the vows we have plight to God
according to his commandment. In our creation we made vow of obedience: and
being received into the covenant of grace, we vowed to believe in Christ, and
to bring forth fruits of new obedience, and this vow is renewed as often as we
come to the Lords table: our duty therefore is, to perform them also to God,
as David says, Vow unto God and keep it: and if we keep them not, all turns
to our shame and confusion. Men stand much on the keeping of that word which
they have passed to men, and it is taken for a point of much honesty, as it is
indeed. Now then, if there be such care to keep touch with men, much more
should we have care to keep covenant with God.

The ninth point. Of Images.
Our consent.
Conclus. I. We acknowledge the civil use of images as freely and truly as the
Church of Rome does. By civil use I understand, that use which is made of them
in the common societies of men, out of the appointed places of the solemn
worship of God And this to be lawful, it appears; because the arts of
painting and grauing are the ordinance of God: and to be skillful in them is
the gift of God, as the example of Bezaleel, and Aholiab declare, Exodus 35.^0.
This use of Images may be in sundry things. I. In the adorning and setting
forth of buildings: thus Solomon beautified his throne with the image of lions.
And the Lord commanded his temple to be adorned with the images of palm trees,
of pomegranates, of bulls, cherubes, and such like. II. It serves for the
distinction of coins; according to the practice of Emperors and Princes of
all nations. When Christ was asked, Math. 22. whether it was lawful to give
tribute to Caesar or no? he called for a penny and said, Whose image or
superscription is this, they said, Cesars: he then said, Give to Caesar the
things that are Cesars: not condemning but approouing the stamp or image upon
his coin. And though the Jews were forbidden to make images in way of
representation, or worship of the true God: yet the Sycle of the sanctuary,
which they used, specially after the time of Moses, was stamped with the image
of the Almond tree, and the pot of Manna. III. Images serve to keep in
memory friends deceased, whom we reverence. And it is like, that hence came
one occasion of the images that are now in use in the Roman Church. For in the
days after the Apostles men used privately to keep the pictures of their
friends departed: and this practice after crept into the open congregation; and
at last, superstition getting head, images began to be worshipped.

Conclus. II. We hold the historical use of images to be good and lawful: and
that is, to represent to the eye the acts of histories, whether they be
humane, or divine: and thus we think the histories of the Bible may be painted
in private places.

Conclus. III. In one case it is lawful to make an image to testify the
presence or the effects of the majesty of God, namely when God himself gives
any special commandment so to do. In this case Moses made and erected a
brazen serpent, to be a type, sign, or image to represent Christ crucified.
Ioh. 3.14 And the Cherubes over the mercieseat served to represent the majesty
of God, to whom the Angels are subject. And in the second commandment it is
not simply said, Thou shall not make a graven image: but with limitation, Thou
shall not make to thy self, that is, on thine own head upon thine own will
and pleasure.

Conclus. IIII. The right images of the new Testament which we hold and
acknowledge, are the doctrine and preaching of the Gospel, and all things that
by the word of God pertaines thereto. Gal. 3. Who has bewitched you that ye
should not obey the truth, to whom Jesus Christ was before described in your
sight and among you crucified. Hence it follows that the preaching of the
word, is as a most excellent picture in which Christ with his benefits are
lively represented unto us. And we dissent not from Origin, contra Cells. lib.
8. who says, We have no images framed by any base workman, but by such as are
brought forth and framed by the word of God; namely patterns of virtue, and
frames resembling Christians. He means that Christians themselves are the
images of Christians.

The difference.
Our dissent from them touching images stands in three points. I. The Church
of Rome holds it lawful for them to make images to resemble God, though not in
respect of his divine nature; yet in respect of some properties and actions. We
on the contrary hold it unlawful for us to make any image, any way to
represent the true God: or, to make an image of any thing in way of religion,
to worship God, much less the creature thereby. For the second commandment
says plainly, Exodus 20.4. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image,
or the likeness of any thing in heaven, etc. The Papists say, the commandment
is meant of the images of false gods. But, will they, nill they, it must be
understood of the images of the true Jehovah; and it forbids us So says Roman
Cate^h. o^ ^. Command.
to resemble God, either in his nature, properties, or works, or to use any
resemblance of him for any sacred use: as to help the memory, when we are
about to worship God. Thus much the holy Ghost who is the best expounder of
himself, teaches most plainly, Deuteronomy. 4.15,16. Thou saw no image at all
(either of false or true God) and therefore thou shall not make any likeness of
any thing. And again the Prophet Esai, chap. 40.18. reproouing idolaters,
asks to whom they will liken God, or, what ^^militude will they set upon
him. and v. 21. Know ye nothing? have you not heard? has it not bin told you
from the beginning? As if he should say, have ye forgotten the second
commandment, that God gave unto your fathers? And thus he flatly reprooues all
them that resemble the true God in images. But they say further, that by images
in the second commandment are meant idols, that is (say they) such things as
men worship for gods. Answ^ If it were so, we should confound the first and
second commandments. For the first, Thou shall have no other gods before my
face, forbids all false gods, which man wickedly frames unto himself, by
giving his heart and principal affections thereof, to them: and therefore
idols also are here forbidden, when they are esteemed as Gods. And the
distinction they make that an Image is the representation of true things, an
Idol of things supposed, is false. de Idol. c. 3.
Tertullian says, that every form of representation is to be termed an Idol.
And Etym. l. 8.
Isidore says, that the heathen used the names of image and idol indifferently
in one and the same signification. And Saint Steven in his apology, Act.
7.4.^. calls the golden calfe an Idol. in Isa. 37.
Hierome says, that idols are images of dead men. Ancient Divines accord with
all this which I have said. Lactantius says, ^nst lib. 2. cap. 19. Where
images are for religions sake, there is no religion. The Council of Elibera^
can. 36. decreed, that nothing should be painted on the walls of Churches,
which is adored of the people. contr. Ce^s. lib. 7.
Origin, We suffer not any to worship Jesus at altars, images and temples:
because it is written, Thou shall have none other Gods. And Epist. ad Job.
Hierus.
Epiphanius faith, It is against the authority of the Scriptures to see the
image of Christ, or of any Saints hanging in the Church. In the seventh
Council of Constantinople, these words of Epiphanius are cited against the
Encratitae. Be mindful be loved children not to bring images into the Church,
nor set them in the places where the Saints are buried, but always carry God
in your hearts: neither let them be suffered in any common house: for it is not
meet that a Christian should be occupied by the eyes but by the meditation of
the mind.

Arguments of the Papists.
The reasons which they use to defend their opinions are these, I. In Salomons
temple were erected Cherubins, which were images of Angels, on the Mercieseat
where God was worshipped: and thereby was resembled the majesty of God:
therefore it is lawful to make images to resemble God. Answ. They were erected
by^ special commandment from God, who prescribed the very form of them and
the place where they must be set: and thereby Moses had a warrant to make them;
otherwise he had sinned: let them show the like warrant for their images if
they can. Secondly the Che^ubins were placed in the holy of holies in the most
inward place of the Temple, and consequently were removed from the sight of
the people, who only heard of them: and none but the high priest saw them, and
that but once a year. And the Cherubins without the veil though they were to
be seen, yet were they not to be worshipped. Exodus 20.4. Therefore they serve
nothing at all to justify the images of the church of Rome.

Object. II. God appeared in the form of a man to Abraham, Genesis 18. 1, 13. and
to Daniel, who saw the ancient of days sitting on a throne, Dan. 9. Now as
God appeared, so may he be resembled: therefore (say they) it is lawful to
resemble God in the form of a man or any like image in which he showed
himself to men. Ans. In this reason the proposition is false: for God may
appear in whatsoever form it pleases his majesty; yet does it not follow,
that man should therefore resemble God in those forms: man having no liberty
to resemble him in any form at all; unless he be commanded so to do.
Again, when God appeared in the form of a man, that form was a sign of Gods
presence only for the time when God appeared and no longer; as the bread and
wine in the Sacrament are signs of Christ's body and blood, not for ever but
for the time of administration: for afterward they become again as common
bread and wine. And when the holy Ghost appeared in the likeness of a dove, that
likeness was a sign of his presence no longer then the holy Ghost so appeared.
And therefore he that would in these forms represent the Trinity, does greatly
dishonor God, and do that for which he has no warrant.

Object. III. Man is the image of God, but it is lawful to paint a man, and
therefore to make the image of God. Ans. A very cavil: for first a man cannot
be painted, as he is the image of God, which stands in the spiritual gifts of
righteousness and true holiness. Again, the image of a man may be painted for
civil or historical use, but to paint any man for this end to represent God,
or in the way of religion, that we may the better remember and worship God, it
is unlawful. Other reasons which they use, are of small moment, and therefore I
omit them.

II. Differ. They teach and maintain, that images of God and of Saints may be
worshipped with religious worship, specially the crucifix. For Sum. part. 3.
quest. 25. art. 3.
Thomas of Watering says, Seeing the cross does represent Christ, who died
upon a cross, and is to be worshipped with divine honor: it follows that
the cross is to be worshipped so too. We on the contrary, hold they may not.
Our principal ground is the second commandment, which contains two parts:
the first forbids the making of images to resemble the true God: the second
forbids the worshipping of them, or God in them: in these words, Thou shall not
bow down to them. Now, there can be no worship done to any thing less then
the bending of the knee. Again the brazen serpent was a type or image of
Christ crucified, Ioh. 3.14. appointed by God himself: yet when the people
burned incense to it, 2. King. 18.4. Hezekias brake it in pieces, and is
therefore commended. And when the devil bad our Savior Christ, but to bow
down the knee unto him, and he would give him the whole world: Christ reiects
his offer, saying, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. Math. 4. 10. Again it is lawefull for one man to worship another
with civil worship, but to worship man with religious honor is unlawful.
For all religious worship is prescribed in the first table: and the honor due
to man is only prescribed in the second table and the first commandment
thereof, Honor thy father: which honor is therefore civil and not religious.
Now the meanest man that can be, is a more excellent image of God, then all the
images of God or of Saints that are devised by men. Augustine, and long after
him Gregory, in plain terms denies images to be adored.

The Papists defend their opinions by these reasons. I. Psalm. 99.5. Cast down
your selves before his footestoole. Ans. The words are thus to be read: Bow
at his footestoole: that is, at the Arc and Mercyseat, for there he has made
a promise of his presence: the words therefore say not, bow to the Arc, but to
God at the Arc.

II. Object. Exodus 3.5. God said to Moses, Stand afar off and put off thy
shoes, for the place is holy. Now if holy places must be reverenced, then much
more holy images, as the cross of Christ, and such like. Ans. God commanded
the ceremony of putting off the shoes, that he might thereby strike Moses with
a religious reverence, not of the place but of his own majesty, whose presence
made the place holy. Let them show the like warrant for images.

III. Object. It is lawefull to kneel down to a chair of estate in the
absence of the king or Queen: therefore much more to the images of God and of
Saints in heaven glorified, being absent from us. Answer. To kneel to the
chair of estate, is no more but a civil testimony, or sign of civil
reverence by which all good subjects when occasion is offered, show their
loyalty and subjection to their lawful princes. And this kneeling being on
this manner, and to no other end, has sufficient warrant in the word of God.
But kneeling to the image of any Saint departed, is religious and consequently
more then civil worship, as the Papists themselves confess. The argument then
proves nothing, unless they will keep themselves to one and the same kind of
worship.

III. Differ. The Papists also teach, that God may be lawfully worshipped in
images, in which he has appeared unto men: as the Father, in the image of an
old man: the son in the image of a man crucified: and the holy Ghost in the
likeness of a dove, etc. But we hold it unlawful to worship God, in, by, or at
any image: for this is the thing which (as I have proved before) the second
commandment forbids. And the fact of the Israelites, Exodus 32. in
worshipping the golden calfe is condemned as flat idolatry; albeit they
worshipped not the calfe but God in the calfe; for v. 5. Aaron says, Tomorrow
shall be the solemnity of Jehovah: whereby he does give us to understand,
that the calfe was but a sign of Jehovah whom they worshipped. Object. It
seems the Israelites worshipped the calfe. For Aaron says, v. 4. These be
thy Gods (O Israel) that brought thee out of Egypt. Ans. Aarons meaning is
nothing else, but that the golden calfe was a sign of the presence of the true
God. And the name of the thing signified is given to the sign, as upon a stage
he is called a king that represents the king. And Augustine says, ad Simpli^.
lib. 2. q. 3.
that images are wont to be called by the names of things whereof they are
images, as the counterfeit of Samuel is called Samuel. And we must not esteem
them all as mad men to think that a calfe made of their earings, being but
one or two days old, should be the God that brought them out of Egypt with a
mighty hand many days before.

And these are the points of difference touching images; wherein we must stand
at variance for ever with the Church of Rome. For they ^rre in the foundation
of religion, making indeed an idol of the true God, and worshipping another
Christ then we do, under new terms, maintaining the idolatry of the
heathen. And therefore have we departed from them: and so must we still do
because they are Idolaters; as I have proved.

The X. point. Of real presence.
Our Consent.
I. We hold and believe a presence of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament
of the Lords supper: and that no fained, but a true and real presence which
must be considered two ways: first in respect of the signs, secondly in
respect of the communicants. For the first we hold and teach, that Christ's
body and blood, are truly present with the bread and wine, being signs in
the Sacrament: but how? not in respect of place or coexistence: but by
sacramental relation on this manner. When a word is uttered, the sound comes
to the ear; and at the same instant, the thing signified comes to the mind;
and thus by relation the word and the thing spoken of, are both present
together. Even so at the Lords table bread and wine must not be considered
barely, as subsista^ces and creatures, but as outward signs in relation to the
body and blood of Christ: and this relation, arising from the very institution
of the Sacrament, stands in this, that when the elements of bread and wine are
present to the hand and to the mouth of the receiver; at the very same time the
body and blood of Christ are presented to the mind: thus and no otherwise is
Christ truly present with the signs. The second presence is in respect of the
communicants, to whose believing hearts he is also really present. It will be
said, what kind of presence is this? Ans. Such as the communion in the
sacrament is, ^uch is the presence: and by the communion must we judge of the
presence. Now the communion is on this manner: God the father according to the
tenor of the Evangelical covenant. gives Christ in this sacrament as really
and truly, as any thing can be given to man, not by part and peecemeale (as
we say) but whole Christ, God and man, on this sort. In Christ there be two
natures, the godhead^ and manhood. The godhead is not given in regard of
substance, or essence: but only in regard of efficacy, merits, and operation
conceived thence to the manhood. And further in this sacrament Christ's whole
manhood is given both body and soul, in this order. First of all is given the
very manhood in respect of substance, and that really: secondly the merits and
benefits thereof, as namely, the satisfaction performed by and in the manhood;
to the justice of God. And thus the entire manhood with the benefits thereof,
are given wholly and jointly together. For the two dislinct signs of bread and
wine signify not two distinct giuings of the body apart, and the blood apart;
but the full and perfect nourishment of our souls. Again the benefits of
Christ's manhood are diversely given, some by imputation, which is, an action of
God accepting that which is done by Christ as done by us: and thus it has
pleased God to give the passion of Christ and his obedience. Some again are
given by a kind of propagation, which I cannot fitly express in terms but I
resemble it thus. As one candle is lighted by another, and one torch or
candlelight is conveyed to twenty candles: even so the inherent righteousness
of every believer, is derived from the storehouse of righteousness, which is
in the manhood of Christ; for the righteousness of all the members, is but the
fruit thereof, even as the natural corruption in all mankind, is but a fruit
of that original sin which was in Adam. Thus we see how God for his part
gives Christ: and that really. To proceed, when God gives Christ, he gives
withal at the same time the spirit of Christ, which spirit creates in the
heart of the receiver the instrument of true faith, by which the heart does
really receive Christ given of God, by resting upon the promise, which God has
made that he will give Christ and his righteousness to every true believer.
Now then, when God gives Christ with his benefits, and man for his part by
faith receives the same as they are given, there rises that union which is
between every good receiver and Christ himself. Which vnio^ is not forged but
a real, true, and near conjunction: nearer then which, none is or can be:
because it is made by a solemn giving and receiving that passes between God
and man: as also by the bond of one and the same spirit. To come then to the
point, considering there is a real union, and consequently a real communion
between us and Christ, (as I have proved) there must needs be such a kind
of presence wherein Christ is truly and really present to the heart of him
that receives the sacrament in faith. And thus far do we consent with the
Romish Church touching real presence.

The dissent.
We differ not touching the presence it self, but only in the manner of
presence. For though we hold a real presence of Christ's body and blood in the
sacrament, yet do we not take it to be local, bodily, or substantial, but
spiritual and mystical; to the signs by sacramental relation, and to the
communicants by faith alone. On the contrary the Church of Rome maintains
transubstantiation, that is, a local, bodily, and substantial presence of
Christ's body and blood, by a change and conversion of the bread and wine into
the said body and blood.

Our reasons.
I. This corporal presence ouerturnes sundry articles of faith. For we
believe that the body of Christ was made of the pure substance of the Virgin
Marie, and that but once, namely when he was conceived by the holy Ghost, and
borne. But this cannot stand, if the body of Christ be made of bread and his
blood of wine, as they must needs be, if there be no succession or annihilation
but a real conversion of substances in the sacrament: unless we must believe
contrarieties, that his body was made of the substance of the Virgin, and not
of the Virgin; made once and not once but often. Again, if his body and blood
be under the forms of bread and wine, then is he not as yet ascended into
heaven, but remains still among us. Neither can he be said to come from
heaven at the day of judgment: for he that must come thence to judge the
quick and dead, must be absent from the earth. And this was the ancient
faith. Augustine says, Tract. 1. in Ioh. Li. 9. in Ioh. c. 21. Contr. Eutich.
l. 1. and 4 Lib. 2. ad Thrasi mundum.
that Christ according to his majesty and providence and grace is present with
us to the end of the world: but according to his assumed flesh he is not
always with us. Cyril says, He is absent in body and present in virtue,
whereby all things are governed. Vigilius says, That he is gone from us
according to his humanity: he has left us in his humanity: in the form of a
servant absent from us: when his flesh was on earth, it was not in heaven:
being on earth, he was not in heaven: and being now in heaven, he is not on
earth. Fulgentius says, One and the same Christ according to his humane
substance, was absent from heaven when he was on earth: and left the earth when
he ascended into heaven.

Reason II. This bodily presence ouerturnes the nature of a true body, whose
common nature or essential property it is, to have length, breadth, and
thicknes, which being taken away a body is no more a body. And by reason of
these three dimensions, a body can occupy but one place at once, as Aristotle
said, cap. de categor. quant.
the property of a body is to be seated in some place, so as a man may say
where it is. They therefore that hold the body of Christ to be in many places
at once, do make it no body at all; but rather a spirit, and that infinite.
They allege that God is almighty; that is true indeed, but in this and like
matters we must not dispute what God can do, but what he will do. And I say
further because god is omnipotent, therefore there be some things which he
cannot do, as for him to deny himself, to lie, and to make the parts of a
contradiction to be both true at the same time. To come to the point, if God
should make the very body of Christ to be in many places at once, he should
make it to be no body while it remains a body: and to be circumscribed in
some one place and not circumscribed, because it is in many places at the same
time: to be visible in heaven and invisible in the sacrament; and thus should
he make contradictions to be true: which to do, is against his nature, and
argues rather impote^cie then power. Augustine says to this purpose. De Symb.
ad Catech. l. 1. c. 1.
If he could lie, deceive, he deceived, deal unjustly, he should not be
omnipotent. And, Therefore he is omnipotent, because he can not do these
things. Again, He is called omnipotent^ by doing that which he will, and not
by doing that which he will not: which if it should befall him, he should not
be omnipotent.

Reason III. Transubstantiation ouerturnes the very supper of the Lord. For in
every sacrament there must be a sign, a thing signified, and a proportion or
relation between them both. But popish real presence takes al away: for when
the bread is really turned into Christ's body, and the wine into his blood,
then the sign is abolished, and there remains nothing but the outward forms
or appearance of bread and wine. Again, it abolisheth the ends of the
sacrament, whereof one is to remember Christ till his coming again, who
being present in the sacrament bodily, needs not to be remembered: because
helps of remembrance are of things absent. Another end is to nourish the
soul unto eternal life: but by transubstantiation the principal feeding is
of the body and not of the soul, which is only fed with spiritual food:
for though the body may be bettered by the food of the soul, yet can not the
soul be fed with bodily food.

Reason IV. In the sacrament the body of Christ is received as it was
crucified, and his blood as it was shed upon the cross: but now at this time
Christ's body crucified, remains still as a body, but not as a body
crucified; because the act of crucifying is ceased. Therefore it is faith
alone, that makes Christ crucified to be present unto us in the sacrament.
Again, that blood which ran out of the feet and hands and side of Christ upon
the cross, was not gathered up again and put into the veins: nay, the
collection was needles, because after the resurrection, he lived no more a
natural but a spiritual life: and none knows what is become of this blood.
The Papist therefore can not say it is present under the form of wine locally:
and we may better say it is received spiritually by faith, whose property is
to give a being to things which are not.

Reason V. 1. Cor. 10.3. The fathers of the old testament did eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of the
rock which was Christ. Now they could not eat his body which was crucified,
or drink his blood shed bodily, but by faith: because then his body and
blood were not in nature. The Papists make answer, that the fathers did eat
the same meat, and drink the same spiritual drink with themselves, not with
us. But their answer is against the text. For the Apostles intent is to prove,
that the Jews were every way equal to the Corinthians, because they did eat
the same spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink with the
Corinthians; otherwise his reason proves not the point which he has in hand,
namely that the Israelites were nothing inferior to the Corinthians.

Reason VI. And it is said, the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath: so it may be said, that the sacrament of the Lords supper was made
for man, and not man for it: and therefore man is more excellent then the
sacrament. But if the signs of bread and wine be really turned into the body
and blood of Christ, then is the sacrament infinitely better then man; who in
his best estate is only joined to Christ, and made a member of his mystical
body: whereas the bread and wine are made very Christ. But the sacrament or
outward elements indeed are not better then man: the end being always better
then the thing ordained to the end. It remains therefore that Christ's
presence is not corporal but spiritual. Again in the supper of the Lord,
every believer receives whole Christ, God and man, though not the godhead: now
by this carnal eating, we receive not whole Christ, but only a part of his
manhood: and therefore in the sacrament there is no carnal eating, and
consequently no bodily presence.

Reason VII. The judgment of the ancient Church. Theodoret says, Dialog. 1.
immutab.
The same Christ, who called his natural body food and bread, who also
called himself a vine, he vouchsafed the visible signs the name of his own
body, not changing nature, but putting grace to nature, whereby he means
consecration. And, same dialog.
The mystical signs after sanctification loose not their proper nature. For
they remain in their first nature, and keep their first figure and form: and
as before, may be touched and seen: and that which they are made, is
understood, believed, adored. Gelasius says, Lib. de duab. not. Christ.
Bread and wine pass into the substance of the body and blood of Christ, yet
so as the substance or nature of bread and wine cease not. And they are
turned into the divine substance, yet the bread and wine remain still in the
property of their nature. Lumbard says, Li. 4. did. 11.
If it be asked what conversion this is, whether formal, or substantial, or
of an other kind, I am not able to define. And that the fathers held not
transubstantiation, I prove it by sundry reasons. First, they used in former
times Hesych. lib. 2. c. 8. in Leuiticum. Theodoret. dialog. 2.
to burn with fire that which remained after the administration of the Lords
supper. Secondly by the sacramental union of the bread and wine with the body
and blood of Christ, they used to confirm the personal union of the manhood
of Christ with the godhead against heretics: which argument they would not
have used, if they had believed a popish real presence. Thirdly it was a
custom in Constantinople, that if many parts of the sacrament remained after
the administration thereof was ended, that young children should be sent for
from the school to eat them; who nevertheless were barred the Lords table.
Euang. l. 4. Niceph. l. 17 c. 25.
And this argues plainly that the Church in those days, took the bread after
the administration was ended, for common bread. Again, it was once an order in
the Roman Church, that the wine should be consecrated by dipping into it
bread, which had been consecrated. Am^la. 2. l. de off. eccles. c. 12. and 15.
Li. de expos. Liturg. c. 26.
But this order cannot stand with the real presence, in which the bread is
turned both into the body and blood. Nicholaus Cabasilas says, After he has
used some speech to the people, he erects their minds, and lif^s their
thoughts from earth and says, Sursum corda, Let us lift up our hearts, let us
think on things above, and not on things that are upon the earth. They consent
and say, that they lift up their hearts thither, where is their treasure, and
where Christ sits at the right hand of his father.

Objections of Papists.
I. Their first reason is, Ioh. 6.55. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed: therefore (say they) Christ's body must be eaten with the mouth
and his blood drunk accordingly. Ans. The chapter must be^ understood of a
spiritual eating of Christ: his body is meat indeed, but spiritual meat,
and his blood spiritual drink, to be received not by the mouth, but by faith.
This is the very point that Christ here intends to prove, namely that to
believe in him is to eat his flesh and to drink his blood are all one.
Again, this chapter must not be understood of that special eating of Christ
in the sacrament: for it is said generally, v. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of
Christ, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: and if these very words
(which are the substance of the chapter) must be understood of a sacramental
eating, no man before the coming of Christ was saved: for none did bodily eat
or drink his body or blood; considering it was not then existing in nature,
but only was present to the believing heart by faith.

II. Object. An other argument is taken from the words of the institution. This
is my body. Ans. These words must not be understood properly but by a figure:
his body being put for the sign and seal of his body. It is objected, that
when any make their last wills and testaments, they speak as plainly as they
can; now in this supper Christ ratifies his last will and testament: and
therefore he spoke plainly, without any figure. Ans. Christ here speaks
plainly and by a figure also: for it has been always the usual manner of
the Lord in speaking of the sacraments, to give the name of the thing signified
to the sign: as Genesis 17. 10. circumcision is called the covenant of God: and
in the next verse in the way of exposition, the sign of the covenant. And
Exodus 12. 11. the paschall lamb is called the angels passing by or over the
houses of the Israelites, whereas indeed it was but a sign thereof: and 1.
Cor. 10.4. The rock was Christ. 1. Cor. 5.7. The passover was Christ. And the
like phrase is to be found in the institution of this sacrament concerning
the cup, which the Papists themselves confess to be figurative: when it is
said, Luke 22. This cup is the new testament in my blood, that is, a sign,
seal, and pledge thereof. Again the time when these words were spoken must be
considered, and it was before the passion of Christ, whereas yet his body was
not crucified nor his blood shed: and consequently neither of them could be
received in bodily manner, but by faith alone. Again, Christ was not only the
author, but the minister of this sacrament at the time of institution thereof:
and if the bread had been truly turned into his body, and the wine into his
blood, Christ with his own hands should have taken his own body and blood,
and have given it to his disciples, nay, which is more, he should with his own
hands, have taken his own flesh, and drunken his own blood, and have eaten
himself. For Christ himself did eat the bread and drink the wine, that he
might with his own person consecrate his last supper, as he had consecrated
baptism before. And if these words should be properly understood, every man
should be a manslaier in his eating of Christ. Lastly by means of popish real
presence, it comes to pass, that our bodies should be nourished by naked
qualities without any substance which in all philosophy is false and
erroneous. To help this and the like absurdities, some Papists make nine
wonders in the sacrament. Ioh. de Combis comp. Theolog. lib. 6. cap. 14.
The first, that Christ's body is in the Eucharist in as large a quantity as
he was upon the crosse^ and is now in heaven, and yet excludes not the
quantity of the bread. The second, that there be accidents without a subject.
The third, that bread is turned into the body of Christ, and yet is not the
matter of the body, nor resolved to nothing. The fourth, that the body
increases not by consecration of many hosts, and is not diminished by often
receiving. The fifth, that the body of Christ is under many consecrated hosts.
The sixth, that when the host is divided, the body of Christ is not divided, but
under every part thereof is whole Christ. The seventh, that when the priest
holds the host in his hand, the body of Christ is not felt by it self nor
seen, but the forms of bread and wine. The eight, that when the forms of
bread and wine cease, the body and blood of Christ cease also to be there.
The ninth, that the accidents of bread and wine have the same effects with the
bread and wine it self, which are to nourish and fil^. On this manner it shall
be easy for any man to defend the most absurd opinion that is or can be, if he
may have liberty to answer the arguments alleged to the contrary by wonders.

To conclude, seeing there is a real communion in the sacrament between Christ
and every believing heart, our duty therefore is, to bestow our hearts on
Christ, endeavoring to love him, and to rejoice in him, and to long after him
above all things: all our affiance must be in him, and with him; we being now
on earth must have our conversation in heaven. And this is the true real
presence, which the ancient Church of God has commended unto us: for in all
these liturgies these words are used, and are yet extant in the Popish mass,
Lift up your hearts: we lift them up unto the lord. By which words the
communicants were admonished to direct their minds and their faith to Christ
sitting at the right hand of God. Thus said Augustine, Sermon. de Ascens. 1.
Sermon. 14. fer. pascae.
If we celebrate the ascension of the Lord with devotion, let us ascend with
him, and lift up our hearts. Again, they which are already risen with Christ
in faith and hope are invited to the great table of heaven, to the table of
Angels, where is the bread.

The eleventh point. Of the sacrifice in the Lords Supper, which the Papists
call the sacrifice of the Mass.
Touching this point, first I will set down what must be understood by the
name Sacrifice. A sacrifice is taken properly, or improperly. Properly it is a
sacred or solemn action, in which man offers and consecrateth some outward
bodily thing unto God for this end, to please and honor him thereby. Thus all
the sacrifices of the old testament, and the oblation of Christ upon the cross
in the new testament are sacrifices. Improperly, that is, only by the way of
resemblance, the duties of the moral law are called sacrifices. And in
handling this question; I understand a sacrifice both properly and improperly
by way of resemblance.

Our Consent.
Our consent I propound in two conclusions. Conclus. I. That the supper of the
Lord is a sacrifice, and may truly be so called as it has been in former
ages; and that in three respects. I. Because it is a memorial of the real
sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, and contains withal a thanksgiving to
God for the same, which thanksgiving is the sacrifice and calves of our lips.
Heb. 13.15. II. Because every communicant does there present himself body and
soul a living, holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto God. For as in this
sacrament god gives unto us Christ, with his benefits: so we answerable give up
our selves unto God as servants to walk in the practice of all dutiful
obedience. III. It is called a sacrifice in respect of that which was joined
with the sacrament, namely the alms given to the poor as a testimony of our
thankefulnes unto God. And in this regard also, the ancient fathers have called
the sacrament, an unbloody sacrifice: and the table, an altar, and the
ministers priests: and the whole action an oblation not to God but to the
congregation, and not by the priest alone but by the people. A canon of a
certain Council says. We decree that every Lords day the oblation of the
altar be offered of every man and woman both for bread and wine. And Augustine
says, Council. Matiscon. 2. c. 4. Epist. 122.
that women offer a sacrifice at the altar of the Lord, that it might be
offered by the priest to God. And usually in ancient writers the communion of
the whole body of the congregation is called the sacrifice or oblation.

Conclus. II. That the very body of Christ is offered in the Lords supper For
as we take the bread to be the body of Christ sacramentally by resemblance and
no otherwise: so the breaking of bread is sacramentally the sacrificing or
offering of Christ upon the cross. And thus the fathers have termed the
Eucharist an immolation of Chrtst, because it is a commemoration of his
sacrifice upon the cross. Aug. Epist. 23. Neither does he he which says
Christ was offered. For if sacraments had not the resemblance of things whereof
they are sacraments, they should in no wise be sacraments: but from a
resemblance, they often take their names. Again Christ is sacrificed in the
last supper, in regard of the faith of the communicants, which makes a thing
past and done as present. Augustine says, When we believe in Christ he is
offered for us daily. And, Lib. 2. quaest. vet. and Nou. Test. Ad Romans Lib. 2.
de Virg. Ad Damas.
Christ is then slain for every one, when he believes that he is slain for
him. Ambrose says, Christ is sacrificed daily in the minds of believers, as
upon an altar. Hierome says, He is always offered to the believers.

II. The difference.
They make the Eucharist to be a real, external, or bodily sacrifice offered
unto God: holding and teaching, that the minister is a priest properly: and
that in this sacrament he offers Christ's body and blood to God the father
really and properly under the forms of bread and wine. We acknowledge no real,
outward, or bodily sacrifice for the remission of sins, but only Christ's
oblation on the cross once offered. Here is the maine difference between us,
touching this point and it is of that weight and moment, that they stiffly
maintaining their opinion (as they do) can be no Church of God. For this point
raseth the foundation to the very bottom. And that it may the better appear
that we avouch the truth, first I will confirm our doctrine by scripture, and
secondly confute the reasons which they bring for themselves.

III. Our reasons.
Reason I. Heb. 9,15. and 26. and c. 10.10. The holy Ghost says, Christ
offered himself but once. Therefore not often: and thus there can be no real
or bodily offering of his body and blood in the sacrament of his supper: the
text is plain. The Papists answer thus. The sacrifice of Christ (say they) is
one for substance, yet in regard of the manner of offering it is either bloody
or unbloody, and the holy ghost speaks only of the bloody sacrifice of
Christ: which was indeed offered but once. Ans. But the author of this epistle
takes it for granted, that the sacrifice of Christ is only one, and that
bloody sacrifice. For he says, Heb. 9.25. Christ did not offer himself
often, as the high priests did. and v. 26. For then he must have often suffered
since the foundation of the world: but now in the end he has appeared once
to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. and v. 22. without shedding of
blood is no remission of sins. By these words it is plain, that the
scripture never knew the twofold manner of sacrificing of Christ. And every
distinction in divinity not founded in the written word, is but a forgerie of
man's brain. And this distinction be good, how shall the reason of the Apostle
stand. He did not offer himself but once, because he suffered but once.

Reason II. The Romish Church holds that the sacrifice in the Lords supper is
all one for substance, with the sacrifice which he offered on the cross: if
that be so, then the sacrifice in the Eucharist, must either be a continuance
of that sacrifice which was begun on the cross, or else an alteration or
repitition of it. Now let them choose of these twain which they will: if they
say it is a continuance of the sacrifice on the cross, Christ being but the
beginner and the priest the finisher thereof, they make it imperfect: for to
continue a thing till it be accomplished, is to bring perfection unto it: but
Christ's sacrifice on the cross was then fully perfected, as by his own
testimony appears, when he said, Consummatum est, it is finished. Again, if
they say, it is a repetition of Christ's sacrifice, thus also they make it
imperfect: for that is the reason which the holy Ghost uses to prove that the
sacrifices of the old testament were imperfect, because they were repeated.

Reason III. A real and outward sacrifice in a sacrament, is against the
nature of a sacrament and especially the supper of the Lord: for one end
thereof is to keep in memory the sacrifice of Christ. Now every remembrance
must be of a thing absent, past, and done: and if Christ be daily and really
sacrificed, the sacrament is no fit memorial of his sacrifice. Again the
principal end for which the sacrament was ordained, is that God might give and
we receive Christ with his benefits: and therefore to give and take, to eat
and drink, are here the principal actions. Now in a real sacrifice God does
not give Christ and the priest receive him of God; but contrariwise he gives
and offers Christ unto God, and God receives some thing of us. To help the
matter they say, that this sacrifice serves not properly to make any
satisfaction to God, but rather to apply unto us the satisfaction of Christ
being already made. But this answer s^ill makes against the nature of a
sacrament, in which God gives Christ unto us: whereas in a sacrifice God
receives from man, and man gives something to God: a sacrifice therefore is no
fit means to apply any thing unto us, that is given of God.

Reason IV. Hebr. 7.24,25. The holy Ghost makes a difference between Christ
the high priest of the new testament, and all Leuiticall priests in this, that
they were many, one succeeding another: but he is only one, having an eternal
priesthood, which cannot pass from him to any other. Now if this difference be
good, then Christ alone in his own very person must be the priest of the new
testament, and no other with, or, under him: otherwise in the new testament
there should be more priests in number then in the old. If they say, that the
whole action remains in the person of Christ, and that the priest is but an
instrument under him (as they say) I say again it is false; because the whole
oblation is acted or done by the priest himself: and he which does all, is
more then a bare instrument.

Reason V. If the priest do offer to God Christ's real body and blood for
the pardon of our sins, then man is become a mediator between God and
Christ. Now the Church of Rome says, that the priest in his mass is a priest
properly, and his sacrifice a real sacrifice, differing only in the manner of
offering from the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross: and in the very canon of
the mass they insinuate thus much, when they request God to accept their gifts
and offerings, namely Christ himself offered, as he did the sac^ifices of Abel
and Noe. Now it is absurd, to think that any creature should be a mediator
between Christ and God. Therefore Christ can not possibly be offered by any
creature unto God.

Reason VI. The judgment of the ancient Church. A certain Council held at
Toledo in Spain, reprooueth the Ministers that they offered sacrifice often
the same day without the holy communion. Tolet. Council. 12. c. 5.
The words of the Canon are these: Relation is made unto us that certain
priests do not so many times receive the grace of the holy communion, as they
offer sacrifices in one day: but in one day, if they offer many sacrifices to
God, in all the oblations, they suspend themselves from the communion --. Here
mark, that the sacrifices in ancient Masses were nothing else but forms of
divine service; because none did communicate, no not the priest himself. And
in an other Council the name of the Mass is put only for a form of prayer.
It has pleased us, that prayers, supplications, Masses, which shall be allowed
in the Council --, be used. And in this sense it is taken when speech is used
of the making or compounding of Masses: for the sacrifice propitiatory of the
body and blood of Christ admits no composition. Abbat Paschasius says,
Milevet. cap. 12. Council. Tol. 4. c. 12. etc. Jacob. de co^secr. dip. 1. Lib.
de corpor. and sang. dom. cap. 9.
Because we sin daily Christ is sacrificed for us mystically, and his Passion
is given in mystery. These his words are against the real sacrifice: but yet
he expoundes himself more plainly, cap. 10. The blood is drunk in mystery
spiritually: and, it is all spiritual which we eat. etc. 12. The priest --,
distributes to every one not as much as the outward ^ight gives, but as much
as faith receives. cap. 13. The full similitude is outwardly, and the
immaculate flesh of the lamb is faith inwardly --, that the truth be not
wanting to the sacrament, and it be not ridiculous to Pagans that we drink the
blood of a killed man. cap. 6. One eats the flesh of Christ spiritually and
drinks his blood, another seems to receive not so much as a morsel of bread
from the hand of the priest: his reason is, because they come unprepared. Now
then considering in all these places he makes no receiving but spiritual,
neither does he make any sacrifice but spiritual.

IV. Objections of Papists.
I. Genesis 14. v. 18. When Abraham was coming from the slaughter of the Kings,
Melchizedech met him, and brought forth bread and wine: and he was a priest
of the most high God. Now this bread and wine (say they) he brought forth to
offer for a sacrifice; because it is said he was a priest of the most high God:
and they reason thus. Christ was a priest after the order of Melchizedek:
therefore as Melchizedek offered bread and wine, so Christ under the forms of
bread and wine offers himself in sacrifice unto God. Ans. Melchizedek was no
type of Christ in regard of the act of sacrificing, but in regard of his
person, and things pertaining thereto, which all are fully expounded, Hebr. 7.
the sum whereof is this. I. Melchizedeck was both king and priest: so was
Christ. II. He was a prince of peace and righteousness: so was Christ. III. He
had neither father nor mother: because the scripture in setting down his
history makes no mention either of beginning or ending of his days: and so
Christ had neither father nor mother: no father, as he was man: no mother, as
he was God. IV. Melchizedek being greater the^ Abraham blessed him, and Christ
by virtue of his priesthood blesses, that is, justifies and sanctifies all
those that be of the faith of Abraham. In these things only stands the
resemblance and not in the offering of bread and wine. Again the end of
bringing forth the bread and wine, was not to make a sacrifice, but to refresh
Abraham and his servants, that came from the slaughter of the Kings. And he is
called here a priest of the most high God, not in regard of any sacrifice: but
in consideration of his blessing of Abraham, as the order of the words
teaches, And he was the priest of the most high God, and therefore he blessed
him. Thirdly, though it were granted, that he brought forth bread and wine to
offer in sacrifice, yet will it not follow, that in the sacrament Christ
himself is to be offered unto God under the naked forms of bread and and
wine. Melchizedeks bread and wine were absurd types of no-bread and no-wine, or
of forms of bread and wine in the Sacrament.

II. Object. The paschall lamb was both a sacrifice and a sacrament: now the
Eucharist comes in room thereof. Ans. The paschall lamb was a sacrament, but
no sacrifice. Indeed Christ says to his disciples, Go and prepare a place to
sacrifice the Passover in, Mark, 14.12. but the words to offer, or to
sacrifice, do often signify no more but to kill. As when Jacob and Laban made
a covenant, it is said, Jacob sacrificed beasts, and called his brethren to
eat bread, Genesis 31.54. Which words must not be understood of killing for
sacrifice, but of killing for a feast: because he could not in good conscience
inuit them to his sacrifice, that were out of the covenant, being (as they
were) of another religion: secondly, it may be called a sacrifice, because it
was killed after the manner of a sacrifice. Thirdly, when Saul sought his
fathers asses, and asked for the Seer, a maid bids him go up in have: for
(says she) there is an offering of the people this day in the high place, 1.
Sam. 9. 12. where the feast that was kept in Rama, is called a sacrifice: in
all likelihood because at the beginning thereof, the priest offered a sacrifice
to God: and so the Passover may be called a sacrifice, Deuteronomy. 16.2.
because sacrifices were offered within the compass of the appointed feast or
solemnity of the Passover: and yet the thing it self was no more a sacrifice
then the feast in Rama was. Again, if it were granted that the Passover was
both, it will not make much against us: for the supper of the Lord succeedes
the Passover only in regard of the maine end thereof, which is the increase
of our communion with Christ.

III. Object. Malac. I.II. The prophet foretells of a clean sacrifice that
shall be in the new testament: and that (say they) is the sacrifice of the
Mass. Ans. This place must be understood of a spiritual sacrifice, as we
shall plainly perceive if we compare it with 1. Tim. 2.8. where the meaning of
the prophet is fitly expounded. I will (says Paul) that men pray in all
places, lifting up pure hands, without wrath or doubting. And this is the
clean sacrifice of the Gentiles. Thus Justin Martyr says, Dialog. cum Triph.
Ad Scapulam. Lib. 4. c. 35.
That supplicatio^s and thanksgiuings are the only perfect sacrifices pleasing
God, and that Christians have learned to offer them alone. And Tertullian
says, We sacrifice for the health of the Emperor --: as God has commanded
with pure prayer. And Ireneus says, that this clean offering to be offered in
every place, is the prayers of the Saints.

IV. Object. Hebr. 13.10. We have an altar, whereof they may not eaten which
serve in the tabernacle. Now (say they) if we have an altar, then we must
needs have a priest; and also a real sacrifice. Ans. Here is meant not a
bodily, but a spiritual altar; because the altar is opposed to the material
Tabernacle; and what is meant thereby is expressed in the next verse, i^ which
he proves that we have an altar. The bodies of the beasts, whose blood was
brought into the holy place by the high priest for sin, were burnt without
the camp: so Christ Jesus, that he might sanctify the people with his own
blood, suffered without the gate. Now lay the reason or proof to the thing
that is proved, and we must needs understand Christ himself, who was both
the altar, the priest, and the sacrifice.

V. Object. Lastly, they say, where alteration is both of law and covenant,
there must needs be a new priest and a new sacrifice. But in the new testament
there is alteration both of law and covenant: and therefore there is both new
priest and new sacrifice. Ans. All may be granted: in the new testament, there
is both new priest and sacrifice: yet not any popish priest, but only Christ
himself both God and man. The sacrifice also is Christ as he is man: and the
altar, Christ as he is God, who in the new testament offered himself a
sacrifice to his Father for the sins of the world. For though he were the
lamb of God slain from the beginning of the world, in regard of the purpose
of God, in regard of the value of his merit, and in regard of faith which
makes things to come as present, yet was he not actually offered till the
fulness of time came; and once offering of himself, he remains a priest for
ever, and all other priests beside him, are superfluous: his one offering once
offered, being all-sufficient.

The twelfth point. Of fasting.
Our consent.
Our consent may be set down in three conclusions. I. We do not condemn
fasting, but maintain three sorts thereof: to wit, a moral, civil, and a
religious fast. The first being moral, is a practice of sobriety or
temperance, when as in the use of meats and drinks, the appetite is
restrained, that it do not exceed moderation. And this must be used of all
Christians in the whole course of their lives. The second being civil, is
when upon some particular and politic considerations, men abstain from
certain meats: as in this our commonwealth the Law inioynes us to abstain
from flesh meat at certain seasons of the year, for these special ends; to
preserve the breed of cattle, and to maintain the calling of the fisherman.
The third, namely a religious fast, is when the duties of religion, as the
exercise of prayer and humiliation are practiced in fasting. And I do now
specially entreat of this kind.

Conclus. II. We join with them in the allowance of the principal and right
ends of a religious fast, and they are three. The first is, that thereby the
mind may become attentine in meditation of the duties of godliness to be
performed^ The second is, that the rebellion of the flesh may be subdued: for
the flesh pampered becomes an instrument of licentiousnes. The third, and (as I
take it) the chief end of a religious fast is, to profess our guiltiness,
and to testify our humiliation before God for our sins: and for this end in
the fast of Nineue, the very beast was made to abstain.

Conclus. III. We yield unto them, that fasting is an help and furtherance to
the worship of God; yea and a good work also if it be used in a good manner.
For though fasting in it self being a thing indifferent, as eating and
drinking are: is not to be termed a good work, yet being applied, and
considered in relation to the right ends before spoken of, and practiced
accordingly: it is a work allowed of God, and highly to be esteemed of all the
servants and people of God.

The difference or dissent.
Our dissent from the Church of Rome in the doctrine of fasting stands in three
things. I. They appoint and prescribe set times of fasting, as necessary to be
kept: but we hold and teach that to prescribe the time of a religious fast, is
in the liberty of the Church and the governors thereof, as special occasion
shall be offered. When the disciples of John asked Christ, why they and the
Pharisees fast often, but his disciples fasted not, he answered, Can the
children of the marriage chamber mourn as long as the bridegroom is with
them: but the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away from
them, and then shall they fast, Math. 9.15. where he gives them to understand,
that they must fast, as occasions of mourning are offered. Where also I gather,
that a set time of fasting is no more to be enjoined then a set time of
mourning. It was the opinion of Augustine, that neither Christ nor his
Apostles, appointed any times of fasting. Epist. 86. Contra Psychicos. Hist.
l.5. c. 17.
And Tertullian says, that they of his time fasted of their own accordes
freely, without law or commandment, as occasions and times served. And
Eusebius says, that Montanus was the first that made laws of fasting. It is
objected, that there is a set time of fasting prescribed, Leuit. 16.29. Ans.
This set and prescribed fast was commanded of God as a part of the legal
worship which had his end in the death of Christ: therefore it does not
justify a set time of fasting in the new testament, where God has left man to
his own liberty, without giving the like commandment. It is again
alleged, that Zachary, 7.5. there were set times appointed for the
celebration of religious fasts unto the Lord, the fifth and the seventh
months. Ans. They were appointed upon occasion of the present afflictions of
the Church in Babylon, and they ceased upon their deliverance. The like upon
like occasion may we appoint. It is further objected, that some Churches of the
Protestants observe set times of fasting. Ans. In some Churches there be set
days and times of fasting, not upon necessity or for conscience or ^eligions
sake, but for politic or civil regardes, whereas in the Romish Church it is
held a mortal sin, to defer the set time of fasting till the next day
following.

Secondly we dissent from the Church of Rome touching the manner of keeping a
fast. Mola. tract. 3. c. 11.
For the best learned among them allow the drinking of wine, water,
electuaries, and that Navar. c. 21. Number. 27. Iud. 20.26. 2. Sam. 1.12.
often within the compass of their appointed fast: yea they allow the eating
of one meal on a fasting day at noone-tide, and upon a reasonable cause, one
hour before: the time of fasting not yet ended. But this practice indeed is
absurd, and contrary to the practice of the old testament: yea it does
frustrate the end of fasting. For the bodily abstinence is an outward means
and sign whereby we acknowledge our guiltiness and unworthiness of any of
the blessings of God. Again they prescribe a difference of meats, as
whit-meate only to be used on their fasting days, and that of necessity and
for conscience sake in most cases. But we hold this distinction of meats both
to be foolish and wicked. Foolish; because in such meats as they prescribe,
there is as much filling and delight, as in any other meats: as namely in
fish, fruits, wine, etc. which they permit. And it is against the end of a
religious fast to use any refreshing at all; so far as necessity of health
and comeliness will permit. Thus the Church in times past used to abstain not
only from meat and drink, but from all delights whatsoever, even from soft
apparel and sweet ointments. Joel 2.15. -- Sanctify a fast --: let the
bridegroom go forth of his chamber and the bride out of her bride chamber.
Dan. 10.3. I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine within my
mouth, neither did I anoint my self at all, till three weeks of days were
fulfilled. 1. Cor. 7.5. Defraud not one an other, except it be with consent for
a time, that ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer.

Again, we hold this practice to be wicked, because it takes away the
liberty of Christians: by which, unto the pure all things are pure. And the
Apostle, Gal. 5. biddes us to stand fast in this liberty, which the Church of
Rome would thus abolish. For the better understanding of this, let us consider
how the Lord himself has from the beginning kept in his own hands as a
master in his own house, the disposition of his creatures for the use of man,
that he might depend on him and his word for temporal blessings. In the first
age, he appointed unto him for mea^e every herb of the earth bearing seed,
and every tree wherein there is the fruit of a tree bearing ^eede, Genesis 1.29.
And as for flesh, whether God gave unto him liberty to eat or not to eat, we
hold it uncertain. After the flood the Lord renewed his grant of the use of the
creatures, and gave his people liberty to eat the flesh of living creatures:
yet so as he made some things unclean, and forbad the eating of them: among
the rest, the eating of blood. But since the coming of Christ he has enlarged
his word, and given liberty to all both Jews and Gentiles, to eat of all
kinds of flesh. This word of his we rest upon; holding it a doctrine of
devils, Act. 10.6. 1. Tim. 4.
for men to command an abstinence from meats, for conscience sake; which the
Lord himself has created to be received with thanksgiving. Socrates a
Christian historiagrapher says, Trip. hist. ^. 9. cap. 38. Hist. trip. l. 1.
c. 10.
that the Apostles left it free to every one to use what kind of meat they
would on fasting days, and other times. Spiridion in lent dressed swines
flesh, and set it before a stranger, eating himself and bidding the stranger
also to eat: who refusing and professing himself to be a Christian, therefore
(says he) the rather must thou do it: for to the pure all things are pure, as
the word of God teaches us.

But they object Ier. 35. where Ionadab commanded the Rechabites to abstain
from wine: which commandment they obeyed^ and are commended for doing well in
obeying of it: therefore (say they) some kind of meats may lawfully be
forbidden^ Ans. Ionadab gave this commandment not in way of religion, or
merit, but for other wise and politic regardes. For he enjoined his
posterity not to drink wine, not to build houses, not to sow ^eed, or plant
vineyards, or to have any in possession: but to live intents to the end they
might be prepared to bear the calamities, that should befall them in time to
come. But the Popish abstine^ce from certain meats, has respect to
conscience and religion: and therefore is of an other kind, and can have no
warrant thence.

II. Object. Dan. 10.3. Daniel being in heaviness for three weeks of days,
abstained from flesh: and his example is our warrant. Ans. It was the manner of
holy men in ancient times, when they fasted many days together of their own
accords freely to abstain from sundry things; and thus Daniel abstained from
flesh. But the popish abstinence from flesh is not free, but stands by
commandment, and the omitting of it, is mortal sin. Again, if they will
follow Daniel in abstaining from flesh, why do they not also abstain from all
pleasant bread and wine; yea from ointments: and why will they eat any thing
in the time of their fast; whereas they can not show that Daniel ate any thing
at all till evening. Tract. 3. c. 11. conc. 8.
And Molanus has noted that our ancetours abstained from wine and dainties,
and that some of them ate nothing for two or three days together.

Thirdly they allege the diet of John Baptist, whose meat was Locusts and
wild honey: and of Timothy, who abstained from wine Ans. Their kind of diet,
and that abstinence which they used, was only for temperance sake; not for
conscience, or, to merit any thing thereby: let them prove the contrary if
they can.

Thirdly and lastly, we dissent from them touching certain ends of fasting.
For they make abstinence it self in a person fitly prepared, to be a part of
the worship of God: but we take it to be a thing indifferent in it self, and
therefore no part of Gods worship: and yet withal, being well used, we esteem
it as a proppe or furtherance of the worship, Mark. 7.6.
in that we are made the fitter by it to worship God. And hereupon some of the
more learned sort of them say, Not the work of fasting done, but the devotion
of the worker, is to be reputed the service of God. Again, they say, that
fasting in, or, with devotion, is a work of satisfaction to Gods justice for
the temporal punishment of our sins. Wherein we take it they do
blasphemously derogate from Christ our Savior, who is the whole and perfect
satisfaction for sin, both in respect of fault and punishment. Here they
allege the example of the Nineuites, and Achabs fasting, whereby they turned
away the judgments of God denounced against the^ by his Prophets. We answer,
that Gods wrath was appeased toward the Nineuites, not by their fasting, but
by faith laying hold on Gods mercy in Christ, and thereby staying his
judgment. Their fasting was only a sign of their repentance: their
repentance a fruit and sign of their faith, Mat. 12.41.
whereby they believed the preaching of ^onas. As for Ahabs humiliation, it is
nothing to the purpose: for it was in hyprocrisie: if they get any thing
thereby, let them take it to themselves. To conclude, we for our parts do not
condemn this exercise of fasting, but the abuse of it: and it were to be
wished that fasting were more used of all Christians in all places: considering
the lord does daily give us new and special occasions of public and private
fasting.

The XIII. point. Of the state of perfection.
Our consent.
Our consent I will set down in two conclusions. I. All true believers have a
state of true perfection in this life, Matthew. 5.48. Be you perfect as your
father in heaven is perfect. Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just and perfect man in his
time, and walked with God. Genesis 17.1. Walk before me and be perfect. And
sundry kings of Judah are said to walk uprightly before god with a perfect
heart, as David, Josias, Hezekias, etc. And Paul accounts himself with the
rest of the faithful to be perfect, saying, Let us all that are perfect be
thus minded. Phil. 3.15. Now this perfection has two parts. The first is the
imputation of Christ's perfect obedience, which is the ground and fountain of
all our perfection whatsoever. Heb. 10.14. By one offering, that is, by his
obedience in his death and passion, has he consecrated, or made perfect, for
ever them that believe. The second part of Christian perfection is synceritie,
or, vprightnes, standing in two things. The first is, to acknowledge our
imperfection and unworthiness in respect of our selves: and hereupon, though
Paul had said he was perfect, Phil. 3.13. and 15.
yet he adds further, that he did account of himself, not as though he had
attained to perfection: but did forget the good things behind, and indeauoured
himself to that which was before. Here therefore it must be remembered, that
the perfection whereof I speak, may stand with sundry wants and
imperfections. Chr. 15.17. and 16.12.
It is said of Asa that his heart was perfect with God all his days, and yet
he pulled not down the high places, and being diseased in his feet he put
his trust in the physicians and not in the Lord. Secondly this vprightnes
stands in a constant purpose, endeavor, and care to keep not some few, but
all and every commandment of the law of God, as David says, Psalm. 119.6.
Then shall I not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy commandments.
And this endeavor is a fruit of perfection, in that it proceeds from a man
regenerate. For, as all men through Adams fall, have in them by nature the
seeds of all sin, none excepted, no not the sin against the holy ghost: so
by grace of regeneration through Christ, all the faithful have in them
likewise the seeds of all virtues needful to salvation: and hereupon they
both can and do endeavor to yield perfect obedience unto God, according to the
whole law. And they may be termed perfect, as a child is called a perfect
man: though it want perfection of age and stature and reason: yet has it
perfection of parts: because it has all and every part and faculty both of
body and soul that is required to a perfect man.

Conclus. II. There be certain works of supererogation: that is, such works as
are not only answerable to the law, and thereupon deserve life everlasting:
but go beyond the law, and merit more then the law by it self can make any
man to merit. But where may we find these works? not in the person of any
mere man, or angel, nor in all men and angels: but only in the person of
Christ God and man: whose works are not only answerable to the perfection of
the law, but go far beyond the same. For first the obedience of his life
considered alone by it self, was answerable even to the rigor of the law:
and therefore the sufferings of his death and passion, were more then the law
could require at his hand: considering it requires no punishment of him, that
is a doer of all things contained therein. Secondly, the very rigor of the
law requires obedience only of them that are mere men: but the obedience of
Christ was the obedience of a person that was both God and man. Thirdly, the
law requires personal obedience, that is, that every man fulfill the law for
himself, and it speaks of no more. Christ obeyed the law for himself, not
because he did by his obedience merit his own glory: but because he was to
be a perfect and pure high priest, not only in nature but also in life; and as
he was a creature, he was to be conformable to the law. Now the obedience
which Christ performed, was not for himself alone, but it serves also for all
the elect: and considering it was the obedience of God (as Paul signified when
he said, feed the Church of God, which he purchased with his blood) it was
sufficient for many thousand worlds: and by reason the law requires no
obedience of him that is God: this obedience therefore may truly be termed a
work of supererrogation. This one we acknowledge, and beside this we dare
acknowledge none. And thus far we agree with the Church of Rome, in the
doctrine of the estate of perfection; and further we dare not go.

The difference.
The Papists hold (as the writings of the learned among them teach) that a man
being in the state of grace, may not only keep all the commandments of the
law, and thereby deserve his own salvation: but also go beyond the law and
do works of supererrogation which the law requires not: as to perform the
vow of single life, and the vow of regular obedience, etc. And by this means
(they say) men deserve a greater degree of glory then the law can affoard. Of
perfection they make two kinds: one they call necessary perfection, which is
the fulfilling of the law in every commandment, whereby eternal life is
deserved. The second, is profitable perfection, when men do not only such
things as the law requires, but over and besides, they make certain vows, and
perform certain other duties which the law inioynes not: for the doing
whereof they shall be rewarded with a greater measure of glory, then the law
designeth. This they make plain by comparison: Two soldiers fight in the
field under one and the same captain: the one only keeps his standing, and
thereby deserves his pay: the other in keeping of his place, does also win
the enemies standard; or do some other notable exploit: now this man besides
his pay deserves some greater reward. And thus (say they) it is with all true
Catholics in the state of grace: they that keep the law shall have life
eternal: but they that do more then the law, as works of supererrogation,
shall be crowned with greater glory. This is their doctrine. But we on the
contrary teach, that albeit we are to strive to a perfection as much as we
can, yet no man can fulfill the law of God in this life: much less do works
of supererrogation: for the confirmation whereof, these reasons may be used. I.
In the moral law two things are commanded. First the love of God and man.
Secondly, the manner of this love: now the manner of loving God, is to love
him with all our heart and strength. Luke 10.27. Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and
with all thy thought, etc. As Bernard said, The measure of loving god, is to
love him without measure, and that is to love him with the greatest perfection
of love that can befall a creature. Hence it follows that in loving God, no
man can possibly do more then the law requires: and therefore the performance
of all vows whatsoever, and all like duties, comes short of the intention or
scope of the law.

II Reason. The compass of the law is large, and comprehends in it more then
the mind of man can at the first conceive: for every commandment has two
parts, the negative and the affirmative. In the negative is forbidden not only
the capital sin named, as murder, theft, adultery, etc. but all sins of
the same kind, with all occasions and prouocations thereto. And in the
affirmative is commanded not only the contrary virtues, as the love of God,
and the love of our neigbours honor, life, chastity, goods, good name, but
the use of all helps and means, whereby the said virtues may be preserved,
furthered, and practiced. Thus has our Savior Christ himself expounded the
law, Math. 5.6. upon this plain ground I conclude, that all duties pertaining
to life and manners, come within the list of some moral commandment. And that
the Papists making their works of supererrogation means to further the love of
God and man, must needs bring them under the compass of the law. Under
which, if they be, they cannot possibly go beyond the same.

Reason III. Luke 17.10. When ye have done all those things that are commanded
us we are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do.
The Papists answer that we are unprofitable to God but not to our selves: but
this shift of theirs is beside the very intent of the place. For a servant in
doing his duty is unprofitable even to himself, and does not so much as
deserve thanks at his masters hand as Christ says, v: 9^ Does he thank that
servant. Secondly they answer, that we are unprofitable servants in doing
things commanded: yet when we do things prescribed in the way of counsel, we
may profit our selves, and merit thereby. But this answer does not stand
with reason. For things commanded, in that they are commanded, are more
excellent then things left to our liberty: because the will and commandment
of God gives excellency and goodness unto them. Again counsels are thought
to be harder then the commandments of the law: and if men cannot profit
themselves by obedience of moral precepts, which are more easy: much less
shall they be able to profit themselves by counsels which are of greater
difficulty.

Reason IV. If it be not in the ability and power of man to keep the law,
then much less is he able to do any work that is beyond and above all the
law requires: but no man is able to fulfill the law, and therefore no man is
able to supererrogate. Here the papists deny the proposition: for (say they)
though we keep not the law, yet we may do things of counsel above the law,
and thereby merit. But by their leaves, they speak absurdly: for in common
reason, if a man fail in the less, he cannot but fail in the greater. Now
(as I have said) in popish doctrine, it is easier to obey the moral law then
to perform the counsels of perfection.

Objections of Papists.
1. Isay 56.4. The Lord says unto Eunuchs that keep his sabbath, and choose
the thing that pleases him, will he give a place and name better then the
sons and daughters. Now (say they) an Eunuch is one that lives a single
life, and keeps the vow of chastity, and hereupon he is said to deserve a
greater measure of glory. Answ. If the words be well considered, they prove
nothing less: for honor is promised to Eunuchs, not because they make and
perform the vow of single life, but because (as the text says) they observe
the Lords sabbath, and choose the thing that pleases God, and keep his
covenant, which is to believe the word of God and to obey the commandments of
the moral law.

Object. II. Mark. 16.12. Christ says, There are some which have made
themselves chaste for the kingdom of heaven: therefore the vow of single life
is warrantable, and is a work of special glory in heaven. Ans. The meaning
of the text is, that some having received the gift of continency, do willingly
content themselves with single estate, that they may with more liberty without
distraction further the good estate of the Church of God, or, the kingdom of
grace in themselves and others. This is all that can be gathered out of this
place; hence therefore cannot be gathered the merit of everlasting glory by
single life.

Object III. Math. 9.21. Christ says to the young man. If thou will be perfect
go sell that thou have and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven. Therefore say they, a man by forsaking all may merit not only heaven,
but also treasure there, that is, an exceeding measure of glory. Ans. This
young man being in likelihood, a strickt Pharise, thought to merit eternal
life by the works of the law, as his first question imports, Good master,
what shall I do to be saved: and therefore Christ goes about to discover unto
him the secret corruption of his heart. And hereupon the words alleged are a
commandment of trial not common to all, but especially to him. The like
commandment gave the Lord to Abraham saying, Abraham take thine only son
Isaac, and offer him upon the mountain which I shall show thee, Genesis 12.2.

IV. Object. 1. Cor. 7.8. Paul says, It is good for all to be single as he
was: and v. 38. he says, it is better for virgins not to marry: and, this he
speaks by permission not by commandment, v. 26. Answ. Here single life is not
preferred simply, but only in respect of the present necessity, because the
Church was then under persecution: and because such as live a single life, are
freed from the cares and distractions of the world.

V. Object. 1. Cor. 9.15,17,18. Paul preached the gospel freely, and that was
more then he was bound to do: and for so doing he had a reward. Answ. It was
generally in Paul's liberty to preach the gospel freely or not to do it: but
in Corinth upon special circumstances, he was bound in conscience to preach it
freely as he did; by reason of the false teachers, who would otherwise have
taken occasion to disgrace his ministry, and have hindered the glory of God.
Now it was Paul's duty by all means to prevent the hindrances of the gospel
and the glory of god: and if he had not so done; he had abused his liberty, v.
18. Therefore he did no more in that case then the law it self required. For
an action indifferent, or an action in our liberty, cease to be in our
liberty and becomes moral, in the case of offense. What is more free and
indifferent then to eat flesh, yet in the case of offense Paul said he would
not eat flesh as long as the world stood, 1. Cor. 8.13.

The XIV. point. Of the worshipping of Saints, specially of Invocation.
Our consent.
Conclus. I. The true Saints of God, as Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, and
such like, are to be worshipped and honored, and that three ways: I. by
keeping a memory of them in godly manner. Thus the Virgin Marie as a
prophetess foretells, that all nations shall call her blessed, Luke 1.48.
When a certain woman poured a box of ointment on the head of Christ, he
says, this fact shall be spoken in remembrance of her, wheresoever that
Gospel should be preached throughout the world, Mark. 14.9. This duty also
was practiced by David toward Moses, Aaron, Phineas, and the rest that are
commended, Psalm. 105. and 106. and by the author of the epistle to the Ebrewes,
chap. 11.
upon the Patriarchs and Prophets, and many others that excelled in faith in
the times of the old and new testament. II. They are to be honored by giving
of thanks to God for them, and the benefits that God vouchsafed by them unto
his Church. Thus Paul says, that when the Churches heard of his conversion,
they glorified God for him, or, in him. Gal. 1.13. And the like is to be done
for the Saints departed. III. They are to be honored by an imitation of their
faith, humility, meeknes, repentance, the fear of God, and all good virtues
wherein they excelled. For this cause the examples of godly men in the old and
new testament, are called a cloud of witnesses by allusion: for as the cloud
did guide the Israelites through the wilderness to the land of Canaan: so the
faithful now are to be guided to the heavenly Canaan by the examples of good
men, that have believed in God before us, and have walked the strait way to
life everlasting.

Concl. II. Again their true Relics, that is, their virtues and good
examples left to all posterity to be followed, we keep and respect with due
reverence. Yea if any man can show us the bodily relic of any true Saint: and
prove it so to be though we will not worship it, yet will we not despise it
but keep it as a monument, if it may conveniently be done without offense. And
thus far we consent with the church of Rome. Further we must not go.

The dissent.
Our difference stands in the manner of worshipping of Saints. The Papists
make two degrees of religious worship. The highest they call Latria, whereby
God himself is worshipped, and that alone. The second lower then the former is
called Doulia, whereby the Saints and Angels that be in the special favor of
God, and glorified with everlasting glory in heaven, are worshipped. This
worship they place in outward adoration, in bending of the knee, and bowing of
the body to them being in heaven: in invocation whereby they call upon them: in
dedication of Churches and houses of religion unto them: in sabbaths and
festival days: lastly in pilgrimages unto their relics and images. We
likewise distinguish adoration or worship: for it is either religious or
civil. Religious worship, is that which is done to him that is Lord of all
things, the searcher and trier of the heart, omnipotent, every where present,
able to hear and help them that call upon him every where, the author and
first cause of every good thing: and that simply for himself, because he is
absolute goodness it self. And this worship is due to God alone, being also
commanded in the first and second commandment of the fist table. Civil
worship is the honor done to men set above us by God himself, either in
respect of their excellent gifts, or in respect of their offices and authority
whereby they govern others. The right end of this worship is to testify and
declare that we reverence the gifts of God, and that power which he has
placed in those that be his instruments. And this kind of worship is commanded
only in the second table and in the first commandment thereof. Honor thy
father and mother. Upon this distinction we may judge, what honor is due to
every one. Honor is to be given to God, and to whom he commands. He
commands that inferiors should honor or worship their betters. Therefore
the unreasonable creatures, and among the rest images are not to be worshipped,
either with civil or religious worship: being indeed far baser then man
himself is. Again unclean spirits the enemies of God, must not be
worshipped: yea to honor them at all is to dishonor god. Good angels, because
they excel men both in nature and gifts, when they appeared were lawfully
honored: yet so, as when the least signification of honor was given that was
proper to god, they refused it. And because they appear not now as in former
times, not so much as civil adoration in any bodily gesture is to be done unto
them. Lastly, governors and Magistrates have civil adoration as their due:
and it can not be omitted without offense. Thus Abraham worshipped the
Hittites, Genesis 23. and Joseph his brethren, Genesis 50. To come to the very point;
upon the former distinction, we deny against the Papists that any civil
worship in the bending of the knee or prostrating of the body, is to be given
to the Saints, they being absent from us: much less any religious worship, as
namely invocation signified by any bodily adoration. For it is the very honor
of God himself: let them call it latria, or doulia, or by what name they will.

Our reasons.
Reason. I. All true invocation and prayer made according to the will of God,
must have a double foundation: a commandment, and a promise. A commandment,
to move us to pray: and a promise, to assure us that we shall be heard. For
all and every prayer must be made in faith; and without a commandment or
promise there is no faith. Upon this infallible ground I conclude, that we may
not pray to Saints departed: for in the scripture there is no word, either
commanding us to pray unto them, or assuring us that we shall be heard when we
pray. Nay we are commanded, only to call upon God, him only shall thou serve,
Mat. 4.10. And, How shall we call upon him in whom we have not believed? To.
10.14. And we have no promise to be heard but for Christ's sake. Therefore
prayers made to Saints departed are unlawful. Answer is made, that
invocation of Saints, is warranted by miracles and revelations, which are
answerable to commandments and promises. Ans. But miracles and revelations had
an end before this kind of invocation took any place in the Church of God: and
that was about three hundred years after Christ. Again to judge of any point
of doctrine by miracles, is deceitful; unless three things concur: the first
is, doctrine of faith and piety to be confirmed: the second is prayer unto
God, that some thing may be done for the ratifying of the said doctrine: the
third is the manifest edification of the Church by the two former. Where any of
these three are wanting, miracles may be suspected: because otherwhiles false
prophets have their miracles to try men whether they will cleave unto God or
no Deuteronomy. 13.1,3. Again miracles are not done, or to be done for them that
believe, but for infidels that believe not: as Paul says, 1. Cor. 14.22.
Tongues are a sign not to the^ that believe, but to unbelievers. And to this
agree Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Isidore, who says, Behold a sign is not
necessary to believers which have already believed, but to infidels that they
may be converted. Lastly, our faith is to be confirmed not by revelations and
apparitions of dead me^, but by the writings of the Apostles and prophets, Luke
16.29.

Reason II. To pray unto Saints departed, to bow the knee unto them while they
are in heaven, is to ascribe that unto them which is proper to God himself:
namely, to know the heart, with the inward desires and motions thereof: and to
know the speeches and behauiours of all men in all places upon earth at all
times. The Papists answer, that Saints in heaven see and hear all things upon
earth, not by themselves (for that were to make them Gods) but in God, and in
the glass of the Trinity, in which they see men's prayers revealed unto them.
I answer first, that the Saints are still made more the^ creatures; because
they are said, to know the thoughts and all the doings of all me^ at all
times, which no created power can well comprehend at once. Secondly I answer,
that this glass, in which all things are said to be seen, is but a forgerie
of man's brain: and I prove it thus. The angels themselves, who see further
into God then men can do, never knew all things in God: which I confirm on
this manner. In the temple under the law, upon the arc were placed two
Cherubins, signifying the good angels of god: and they looked downward upon the
mercieseat covering the arc, which was a figure of Christ; and their looking
downward figured their desire to see into the mystery of Christ's incarnation
and our redemption by him; as Peter alluding, no doubt, to this type in the
old Testament says, 1 Pet. 1.12. which things the angels desired to behold:
and Paul says, Ephesians. 3.10. The manifold wisdom of God is revealed by the
Church unto principalities and powers in heavenly places, that is, to the
angels: but how and by what means? by the Church; and that two ways, first
by the Church, as by an example, in which the angels saw the endless wisdom
and mercy of God in the calling of the Gentiles. Secondly by the Church, as it
was founded and honored by the preaching of the Apostles. For it seems that
the Apostolical ministry in the new testament revealed things touching
Christ, which the angels never knew, before that time. Thus Chrysostom upon
occasion of this text of Paul says, Prolog. in Ioh.
that the angels learned some things by the preaching of John Baptist. Again,
Christ says, that they know not the hour of the last judgment, Math. 24. 23.
much less do the Saints know al things in God. And hence it is that they are
said to be under the altar, where they cry: Reu. 6.9.
How long Lord holy and true! will thou not revenge our blood? as being
ignorant of the day of their full deliverance. And the Jews in affliction
confess Abraham was ignorant of them and their estate. Isa 63.16.

Reason III. Math. 4.10. Christ refused so much as to bow the knee to Satan
upon this ground, because it was written thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve. Hence it was, that Peter would not suffer
Cornelius so much as to kneel unto him, though Cornelius intended not to
honor him as God. Therefore neither Saint nor angel is to be honored so much
as with the bowing of the knee: if it carry but the least signification of
divine or religious honor.

Reason IV. The judgment of the ancient Church. August. We honor the Saints
with charity, and not by servitude: neither do we erect Churches to them.
And, Let it not be religion for us to worship dead men. de vera relig. c. 53.
here is. 79.
And, They are to be honored for imitation, and not to be adored for religion.
Epiphan. Neither Tecla nor any Saint is to be adored, for that ancient error
may not ouerrule us, that we should leave the living God, and adore things made
by him. Again, Let Marie be in honor: let the Father, Son, and holy ghost
be adored: let none adore Marie; I mean neither woman nor man. Again, Marie
is beutifull, holy, and honored, yet not to adoration. When Julian objected to
the Christians that they worshipped their Martyrs as God, Cyrill graunts the
memory and honor of them, but denies their adoration: and of invocation, he
makes no mention at all. Ambrose on To. 1. Is any so mad that he will give to
the Earl the honor of the King --?yet these men do not think themselves
guilty, who give the honor of Gods name to a creature, and leaving the Lord,
adore their fellow servants, as though there were any thing more reserved for
God.

Objections of Papists.
I. Genesis 48.16. Let the angel that kept me bless thy children. Here (say they)
it is a prayer made to angels. Ans. By the angel is meant Christ, who is called
the angel of the covenant, Malac. 3.1. and the angel that guided Israel in the
wilderness, 1. Cor. 10.9. compared with Exodus 23.20.

Object. 11. Exodus 23.13. Moses prays that God would respect his people, for
Abraham's sake, and for Isaac and Israel his servants, which were not then
living. Ans. Moses prays God to be merciful to the people, not for the
intercession of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but for his covenants sake which he
had made with them, Psalm. 123.10,11. Again by popish doctrine, the fathers
departed knew not the estate of men upon earth, neither did they pray for them:
because then they were not in heaven but in Limbo Patrum.

III. Object. One living man makes intercession to God for another: therefore
much more do the Saints in glory, that are filled with love pray to god for
us; and we pray to them no otherwise then we desire living men to pray for us.
Ans. The reason is naught: for we have a commandment, one living man to pray
for another, and to desire others to pray for us: but there is no warrant in
the word of God, for us to desire the prayers of men departed. Secondly there
is great difference between these two: To request our friend either by word of
mouth or by letter to pray for us: and by Invocation to request them that are
absent from us and departed this life to pray for us: for this is indeed a
worship, in which is given unto them a power to hear and help all that call
upon them, at what place or time soever, yea though they be not present in the
place in which they are worshipped: and consequently the seeing of the heart,
presence in all places, and infinite power to help all that pray unto them;
which things agree to no creature but God alone. Thirdly when one living man
requests an other to pray from him, he only makes him his companion and
fellow member in his prayer made in the name of our mediator Christ: but when
men invoke Saints in heaven, they being then absent, they make them more then
fellow members, even mediators between Christ and them.

The XV. point. Of intercession of Saints.
Our Consent.
Our consent with the^ I will set down in two conclusions. Conclus. I. The
saints departed pray unto God, by giving thanks unto him for their own
redemption, and for the redemption of the whole church of God upon earth, Rev.
5. 8. The four beasts and the four and twenty elders fell down before the
Lamb, -- 9. and they song a new song, Thou art worthy to take the book, and
to open the seals thereof: because thou wast killed and have redeemed us to
God --.13. And all the creatures which are in heaven --, heard I saying, Praise
and honor and glory and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and
unto the Lamb for evermore.

II. Conclus. The Saints departed pray generally for the state of the whole
church. Reu. 6.9. And I saw under the altar, the souls of them that were
killed for the word of God --, and they cried, 10. How long Lord holy and true!
do thou not judge and aueuge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?
whereby we see they desire a final deliverance of the church, and a
destruction of the enemies thereof; that they themselves with all the people of
God might be advanced to fullness of glory in body and soul: yea the dumb
creatures, Romans 8. 23. are said to groan and sigh, waiting for the adoption,
even the redemption of our bodies: much more then do the Saints in heaven
desire the same. And thus far we consent.

The dissent or difference.
They hold and teach, that the Saints in heaven, as the virgin Marie, Peter,
Paul, etc. do make intercession to God for particular men according to their
several wants: and that having received particular men's prayers, they present
them unto God. But this doctrine we flatly renounce upon these grounds and
reasons.

I. Isa. 63.16. The Church says to God, doubtless thou art our father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not. Now if Abraham knew not
his posterity, neither Marie, nor Peter, nor any other of the Saints departed
know us and our estate: and consequently they cannot make any particular
intercession for us. If they say that Abraham and Jacob were then in Limbo,
which they will have to be a part of hell: what joy could Lazarus have in
Abraham's bosom. Luke 16.25. and with what comfort could Jacob say on his death
bed: O Lord I have waited for thy salvation. Genesis 46.18.

II. Reason. 2. King. 22.20. Huldah the prophetess tells Josias, he must be
gathered to his fathers, and put in his grave in peace, that his eyes may not
not see all the evil which God would bring on this place. Therefore the Saints
departed see not the state of the Church on earth, much less do they know the
thoughts and prayers of men. This conclusion Augustine confirms at large.

III. Reason. No creature, Saint, or Angel can be a mediator for us to God,
saving Christ alone, who is indeed the only Advocate of his church. For in a
true and sufficient Mediator there must be three properties. First of all, the
word of God must reveal and propound him unto the Church, that we may in
conscience be ass^red, that praying to him and to God in his name, we shall be
heard. Now there is no Scripture that mentions either Saints or Angels as
mediator in our behalf, save Christ alone. Secondly, a mediator must be
perfectly just, so as no sin be found in him at all, 1. Ioh. 2.1. If any man
^inne we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righ^eous. Now the
Saints in heaven, howsoever they be fully sanctified by Christ, yet in
themselves they were conceived and borne in sin: and therefore must needs
eternally stand before God by the mediation and merit of an other. Thirdly, a
mediator must be a propitiatour, that is, bring something to God, that may
appease and satisfy the wrath and justice of God for our sins: therefore John
adds, and he is a propitiation for our sins. But neither Saint nor Angel
can satisfy for the least of our sins: Christ only is the propitiation for
them all. The virgin Marie and the rest of the Saints being sinners, could not
satisfy so much as for themselves.

Lib. 3. contr. Parmen. c.3. Tract. in Ioh. 22. De perfectu Evang.
IV. Reason. The judgment of the Church. Augustine, All Christian men commend
each other in their prayers to God. And who prays for all, and for whom none
prays, he is that one and true mediator. And, This says thy Savior, thou
have no whither to go but to me, thou have no way to go but by me.
Chrysostom, Thou have no need of Patrons to God, or much discourse that thou
should sooth others: but though thou be alone and want a Patron, and by thy
self pray unto God, thou shall obtain thy desire. And on the saying of John,
If any sin, etc. Thy prayers have no effect unless they be such as the Lord
commends unto thy father. And Augustine on the same place has these words, He
being such a man said not, ye have an Advocate, but if any sin we have: he
said not ye have, neither said he, ye have me.

Objections of Papists.
I. Reu. 5.8,9. The four and twenty Elders fall down before the lamb,
having every one harpes and golden vyals full of odours, which are the prayers
of the Saints. Hence the Papists gather, that the Saints in heaven receive the
prayers of men on earth, and offer them unto the Father. Ans. There by prayers
of the Saints, are meant their own prayers, in which they sing praises to God
and to the Lamb, as the verses following plainly declare. And these prayers
are also presented unto God only from the hand of the Angel, which is Christ
himself. chap. 8.4.


II. Object. Luke 16.27. Dives in hell prays for his brethren upon earth,
much more do the Saints in heaven pray for us. Ans. Out of a parable nothing
can be gathered, but that which is agreeable to the intent and scope thereof:
for by the same reason it may as well be gathered that the soul of Di^es
being in hell had a tongue. Again, if it were true which they gather, we may
gather also that the wicked in hell have compassion and love to their brethren
on earth, and a zeal to Gods glory: all which are false.

III. Object. The angels in heaven know every man's estate: they know when any
sinner repents and rejoices thereat: and pray for particular men: therefore
the Saints in heaven do the like, for they are equal to the good angels, Luke
20.36. Ans. The place in Luke is to be understood of the estate of holy men at
the day of the last judgment: as appears, Math. 22.30. where it is said,
that the servants of God in the resurrection are as the angels in heaven.
Secondly they are like the angels not in office and ministry, by which they
are ministering spirits for the good of men: but they are like them in glory.

Secondly we di^^ent from the Papists: because they are not content to say that
the Saints departed pray for us in particular: but they add further, that they
make intercession for us by their merits in heaven. New Jesuits deny this: but
let them here Lumbard, Lib. 4. did. 4.5. p.6.
I think (says he, speaking of one that is but of mean goodness) that he as
it were passing by the fire shall be saved by the merits and intercessions of
the heavenly Church: which does always make intercession for the faithful by
request and merit, till Christ shall be complete in his members. And the
Roman Catechism says as much. on the second Command.
Saints are so much the more to be worshipped and called upon, because they
make prayers daily for the salvation of men: and God for their merit and favor
bestows many benefits upon us. We deny not, that men upon earth have help
and benefit by the faith and piety which the Saints departed showed, when they
were in this life. For God shows mercy on them that keep his commandments
to a thousand generations. And Augustine says, it was good for the Jews, that
they were loved of Moses, q. 149. supe^ Exodus
whom God loved. But we utterly deny that we are helped by merits of Saints
either living or departed. For Saints in glory have received the full reward
of all their merits; if they could merit: and therefore there is nothing
further that they can merit.

The 16. point. Of implicit, or infolded faith.
Our consent.
We hold that there is a kind of implicit, or unexpressed faith: yea that the
faith of every man in some part of his life, as in the time of his first
conversion, and in the time of foam grievous temptation or distress, is
implicit or infolded. The Samaritans are said to believe, Ioh. 4. 14. because
they took Christ for the Messiah, and thereupon were content to learn and
obey the glad tidings of salvation. And in the same place, v.51. the Ruler with
his family is said to believe, who did no m^^e but generally acknowledge that
Christ was the Messiah, and yielded himself to believe and obey his holy
doctrine; being moved thereunto by a miracle wrought upon his young son. And
Rahab Heb. 11.13. is said to believe, yea she is commended for faith even at
the time when she received the spies. Now in the word of God we cannot find,
that she had any more but a confused, general, or infolded faith, whereby she
believed that the God of the Hebrews was the true God, and his word to be
obeyed. And this faith (as it seems) was wrought in her by the report and
relation of the miracles done in the land of Egypt, whereby she was moved to
join her self unto the people of God and to believe as they did. By these
examples then it is manifest, that in the very servants of God, there is and
may be for a time an implicit faith. For the better understanding of this
point, it is to be considered that faith may be infolded two ways: first in
respect of knowledge of things to be believed: secondly in respect of the
apprehension of the object of faith, namely Christ and his benefits. Now faith
is infolded in respect of knowledge, when as sundry things that are necessary
to salvation are not as yet distinctly known. Though Christ commended the
faith of his disciples, for such a faith, against which the gates of hell
should not prevail; yet was it unexpressed or wrapped up in regard of sundry
points of religion: for first of all, Peter that made confession of Christ in
the name of the rest, was at that time ignorant of the particular means
whereby his redemption should be wrought. For after this, he went about to
dissuade his master from the suffering of death at Jerusalem, whereupon Christ
sharply rebuked him, saying, Come behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto
me. Again, they were all ignorant of Christ's resurrection, till certain women
who first saw him after he was risen again, had told them: and they by
experience in the person of Christ had learned the truth. Thirdly, they were
ignorant of the ascension: for they dreamed of an earthly kingdom, at the very
time when he was about to ascend: saying, Will thou at this time restore the
kingdom to Israel^ Act. 1.6. And after Christ's ascension, Peter knew nothing
of the breaking down of the partition wall between the Jews and Gentiles,
till God had better schooled him in a vision, Act. 10.14. And no doubt, we have
ordinary examples of this Implicit faith in sundry persons among us. For some
there be, which are dull and hard both for understanding and memory, and
thereupon make no such proceedings in knowledge as many others do: and yet for
good affection and conscience in their doings, so far as they know, they come
not short of any; having withal a continual care to increase in knowledge,
and to walk in obedience according to that which they know. And such persons
though they be ignorant in many things, yet have they a meaning of true faith:
and that which is wanting in knowledge, is supplied in affection: and in some
respects they are to be preferred before many that have the glibbe tongue, and
the brain swimming with knowledge. To this purpose Melancthon said well,
Epitom. phil. moral. de grad. delict.
We must acknowledge the great mercy of God, who puts a difference between
sins of ignorance, and such as are done wittingly; and forgiues manifold
ignorances to them, that know but the foundation and be teachable; as may be
seen by the Apostles, in whom there was much want of understanding before the
resurrection of Christ. But, as has bin said, he requires that we be
teachable, and he will not have us to be hardened in our sluggishnesse and
dullness. As it is said psalm. 1. he meditateth in his law day and night.

The second kind of implicit faith, is in regard of Apprehension; when as a
man can not say distinctly and certainly, I believe the pardon of my sins, but
I do unfeignedly desire to believe the pardon of them all: and I desire to
repent. This case befalls many of Gods children, when they are touched in
conscience for their sins. But where men are displeased with themselves for
their offenses, and do withal constantly from the heart desire to believe,
and to be reconciled to God, there is faith and many other graces of God
infolded: as in the little and tender budde, is infolded the leaf, the
blossom, and the f^uit. For though a desire to repent and to believe be not
faith and repentance in nature, yet in Gods acceptance it is, God accepting
the will for the deed. Isa. 42.3. Christ will not quench the smoking flax,
which as yet by reason of weakness gives neither light nor heat. Christ
says, Math. 6. 6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness:
for they shall be satisfied: where by persons hungring and thirsting are meant
all such, as feel with grief their own want of righteousness, and withal
desire to be justified and sanctified. Romans 8.26. God hears and regards the
very groans and sighs of his servants: yea, though they be unspeakable by
reason they are oftentimes little, weak, and confused: yet God has respect
unto them, because they are the work of his own spirit. Thus when we see that
in a touched heart desiring to believe, there is an infolded faith. And this is
the faith which many of the true servants of God have: and our salvation stands
not so much in our apprehending of Christ, as in Christ's comprehending of us:
and therefore Paul says, Phil. 3. 12. he follows, namely after perfection,
if that he might comprehend that, for whose sake he is comprehended of Christ.
Now if any shall say, that without a lively faith in Christ none can be saved:
I answer, that God accepts the desire to believe for lively faith, in the time
of temptation, and in the time of our first conversion, as I have said. Put
case, a man that never yet repented falls into some grievous sickness, and then
begins to be touched in conscience for his sins, and to be truly humbled:
hereupon he is exhorted to believe his own reconciliation with God in Christ,
and the pardon of his own sins. And as he is exhorted, so he endeavors
according to the measure of grace received, to believe: yet after much striving
he can not resolve himself, that he does distinctly and certainly believe the
pardon of his own sins: only this he can say, that he does heartely desire
to believe: this he wishes above all things in the world: and he esteems all
things as dung for Christ: and thus he dies. I demand now, what shall we say
of him? surely, we may say nothing, but that he died the child of God, and is
undoubtedly saved. For howsoever it were an happy thing if men could come to
that fullness of faith which was in Abraham, and many servants of God: yet
certain it is, that God in sundry cases accepts of this desire to believe, for
true faith indeed. And look as it is in nature, so is it in grace: in nature
some die when they are children, some in old age, and some in full strength,
and yet all die men: so again, some die babes in Christ, some of more perfect
faith: and yet the weakest having the seeds of grace, is the child of God; and
faith in his infancy is faith. All this while, it must be remembered I say not,
there is a true faith without all apprehension, but without a Distinct
apprehension for some space of time: for this very desire by faith to apprehend
Christ and his merits, is a kind of apprehension. And thus we see the kinds of
implicit or infolded faith.

This doctrine is to be learned for two causes: first of all it serves to
rectify the consciences of weak ones, that they be not deceived touching
their estate. For if we think that no faith can save, but a full perswa^ion,
such as the faith of Abraham was, many truly bearing the name of Christ must be
put out of the role of the children of God. We are therefore to know that there
is a growth in grace, as in nature: and there be differences and degrees of
true faith, and the least of them all is this Infolded faith. This in effect is
the doctrine of M. Calvin: Just. lib. 3. c. 2.9.5.
that, when we begin by faith to know somewhat, and have a desire to learn
more, this may be termed an unexpressed faith. Secondly this point of doctrine
serves to rectify and in part to expound sundry Catechismes, in that they
seem to propound faith unto men at so high a reach, as few can attain unto
it: defining it to be a certain and full persuasion of Gods love and favor in
Christ; whereas, though every faith be for his nature a certain persuasion, yet
only the strong faith is the full persuasion. Therefore faith is not only in
general terms to be defined, but also the degrees and measures thereof are
to be expounded, that weak ones to their comfort may be truly informed of
their estate. And though we teach there is a kind of implicit faith, which is
the beginning of true and lively faith: yet none must hereupon take an occasion
to content themselves therewith, but labor to increase and go on from faith
to faith: and so indeed will every one do that has any beginnings of true
faith, be they never so little. And he which thinks he has a desire to
believe, and contents himself therewith; has indeed no true desire to
believe.

The difference.
The pillars of the Romish Church lays down this ground: that faith in his
own nature, is not a knowledge of things to be believed; but a reverent assent
unto them whether they be known or unknown. Hereupon they build: that if a
man know some necessary points of religion, as the doctrine of the Godhead, of
the Trinity, of Christ's incarnation, and of our redemption, etc. it is
needelesse to know the rest by a particular or distinct knowledge, and it
suffices to give his consent to the Church, and to believe as the pastors
believe. Behold a ruinous building upon a rotten foundation: for faith
contains a knowledge of things to be believed, and knowledge is of the nature
of faith: and nothing is believed that is not known. Isai 53.11. The knowledge
of my righteous servant, shall justify many. and Ioh. 17.2. This is eternal
life, to know the eternal God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. In these
places, by knowledge is meant faith grounded upon knowledge, whereby we know
and are assured that Christ and his benefits belong unto us. Secondly this kind
of assent is the mother of ignorance. For when men shall be taught, that for
sundry points of religion they may believe as the Church believes: Mol. tract.
3. c. 27. conclus. 15.
that the study of the Scriptures is not to be required of them: yea that to
their good they may be barred the reading of them, so be it they know some
principal things contained in the articles of faith; that Bonnav. and Durand.
common believers are not bound expressly to believe all the articles of the
Apostles Creed: Bannes 2. q. 2. art. 7. ascribes this opinion to Gul.
Pa^isiensis, and to Altisiodoransis. Rhem. Test. on 1. Cor. 14.
that it suffices them to believe the articles by an implicit faith: by
believing as the Church believes, few or none will have care to profit in
knowledge. And yet Gods commandment is that we should grow in knowledge, and
that his word should dwell plenteously in us, Col. 3.16. Again, the Papists
say, that the devotion of the ignorant, is often service better accepted then
that which is done upon knowledge. Such (say they) as pray in latin, pray with
as great consolation of spirit, with as little tediousnes, with as great
devotion and affection, and oftentimes more then the other, and always more
then any scismaticke or heretic in his own language. To conclude, they teach
that some articles of faith are believed generally of the whole Church only by
a simple or implicit faith, which afterward by the Authority of a general
Counsel are propounded to be believed of the Church by express faith. Mol.
tract. 5. c. 30. conclus. 12. Contra affer. Luc. art. 8.
Roffensis against Luther gives an example of this, when he confesses that
Purgatory was little known at the first, but was made known partly by
Scripture, and partly by revelation in process of time. This implicit faith
touching articles of religion we reject; holding that all things concerning
faith and manners necessary to salvation, are plainly expressed in Scripture,
and accordingly to be believed.

The 17. point. Of Purgatory.
Our consent.
We hold a Christian Purgatory, according as the word of God has set down
the same unto us. And first of all by this Purgatory we understand the
afflictions of Gods children here on earth. Ier. 3. The people afflicted say,
thou have sent a fire into our bones. Psalm. 65.12. We have gone through water
and fire. Malach. 3.3. The children of Levi must be purified in a purging fire
of affliction. 1. Pet. 1.7. Afflictions are called the fi^rie trial, whereby
men are cleansed from their corruptions, as gold from the dross by the fire.
Secondly, the blood of Christ is a purgatory of our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
Christ's blood purges us from all our sins. Heb. 9.14. It purges our
consciences from dead works. And Christ baptizeth with the holy Ghost and with
fire: because our inward washing is by the blood of Christ: and the holy Ghost
is as fire to consume and abolish the inward corruption of nature. To this
effect says Origin, in Levit. l. 9. apud Cyril.
Without doubt, we shall feel the unquenchable fire, unless we shall now
entreat the Lord to send down from heaven a purgatory fire unto us, whereby
worldly desires may he utterly consumed in our minds. August. Suppose the
mercy of God is thy purgatory. de Act. Foelic. c. 21.


The difference or dissent.
We differ from the Papists touching purgatory in two things. And first of
all, for the place. They hold it to be a part of hell into which an entrance is
made only after this life: we for our parts deny it, as having no waraant in
the word of God: which mentions only two places for men after this life,
heaven and hell, with the twofold condition thereof, joy and torment, Luke
16.25, 26. Ioh. 3.36. Apoc. 22.14, 15. and 21.7,8. Matthew. 8.11. Nay we find
the contrary, Reu. 14.13. they that die in the Lord are said to rest from
their l^bours: which can not be true, if any of them go to purgatory. And to
cut off all cauills: it is further said, their works, that is, the reward of
their works, Homil. 50. tom. 10. Enchir. cap. 115. de verbis Apost. ser. 31.
Lib. 3. in Es. ad pop. Antioch. hom. 22.
follow them, even at the heels, as an Acoluth or servant does his master.
Augustine says well, After this life there remains no compunction or
satisfaction. And, Here is all remission of sin: here be temptations that
move us to sin: lastly here is the evil from which we desire to be
delivered: but there is none of all these. And, We are not here without sin,
but we shall go hence without sin. Cyril says, They which are once dead can
add nothing to the things which they have done, but shall remain as they were
left, and wait for the time of the last judgment. Chrysostom. After the end of
this life, there be no occasions of merits.

Secondly, we differ from them touching the means of Purgation. They say, that
men are purged by suffering of pains in Purgatory, whereby they satisfy for
their venial sins, and for the temporal punishment of their mortal sins.
We teach the contrary, holding that nothing can free us from the least
punishment of the smallest sin, but the sufferings of Christ, and purge us
from the least taint of corruption, saving the blood of Christ. Indeed they
say, that our sufferings in themselves considered, do not purge and satisfy,
but as they are made meritorious by the sufferings of Christ: but to this I
oppose one text of Scripture, Heb. 1. 3. where it is said, that Christ has
purged our sins by himself: where the last clause cuts the throat of all
humane satisfactions and merits: and it gives us to understand, that
whatsoever thing purges us from our sins, is not to be found in us but in
Christ alone: otherwise it should have bin said, that Christ purges the
sins of men by themselves, as well as by himself: and he should merit by his
death, that we should become our own Saviors in part.

To this place I may well refer prayer for the dead: of which I will propound
two conclusions affirmative, and one negative. Conclus. I. We hold that
Christian charity is to extend it self to the very dead: and it must show it
self in their honest burial, in the preservation of their good names, in the
help and relief of their posterity, as time and occasion shall be offered.
Ruth 1.8. Ioh. 19.23.

II. Conclus. We pray further in general manner for the faithful departed,
that God would hasten their joyful resurrection, and the full accomplishment
of their happiness, both for the body and the soul: and thus much we ask in
saying, Thy kingdom come, that is, not only the kingdom of grace, but also
the kingdom of glory in heaven. Thus far we come: but nearer the gates of
Babylon we dare not approach.

III. Conclus. To pray for particular men departed: and to pray for their
deliverance out of purgatory, we think it unlawful: because we have neither
promise nor commandment so to do.

The eighteenth point. Of the Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical.
Our consent.
Touching the point of Supremacy Ecclesiastical, I will set down how near
we may come to the Roman Church in two conclusions. Conclus. I. For the
founding of the primitive Church, the ministry of the word was distinguished
by degrees not only of order but also of power, and Peter was called to the
highest degree. Ephesians. 4.11. Christ ascended up on high and gave gifts unto men,
for the good of his Church: as some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors. Now, howsoever one Apostle, be not
above an other, or one Evangelist above an other, or one Pastor above an
other: yet an Apostle was above an Evangelist: and an Evangelist above all
pastors and teachers. And Peter was by calling an Apostle, and therefore above
all Evangelists and Pastors; having the highest room in the ministry of the
new testament both for order and authority.

Conclus. II. Among the twelve Apostles Peter had a threefold privilege or
prerogative. I. The prerogative of authority. II. Of primacie. III. Of
principality. For the first, by the privilege of authority, I mean a
pre-eminence in regard of estimation, whereby he was had in reverence above the
rest of the twelve Apostles, for Cephas with James and John are called Pillars,
and seemed to be great. Gal. 2.6.9. Again he had the pre-eminence of
primacie, because he was the first named, as the foreman of the quest. Math.
10.2. The names of the twelve Apostles are these, the first is Simon called
Peter. Thirdly he had the pre-eminence of principality among the twelve,
because in regard of the measure of grace, he excelled the rest: for when
Christ asked his disciples whom they said he was; Peter as being of greatest
ability and zeal answered for them all. Math. 16.16. I use this clause, among
the twelve, because Paul excelled Peter every way, in learning zeal,
understanding, as far as Peter excelled the rest. And thus near we come to
popish supremacy.

The difference.
The Church of Rome gives to Peter a supremacy under Christ above all causes
and persons: that is, full power, to govern and order the Catholic Church
upon the whole earth both for doctrine and regiment. This supremacy stands
(as they teach) in a power, or, judgment, to determine of the true sense of
all places of Scripture: to determine all causes of faith: to assemble general
counsels: to ratify the decrees of the said councels: to excommunicate any man
upon earth, that lives within the Church, even princes and nations: properly to
absolve and forgive sins: to decide causes brought to him by appeal from all
the parts of the earth: lastly to make laws that shall bind the conscience.
This fulness of power with one consent is ascribed to Peter, and the Bishops of
Rome that follow him in a supposed succession. Now we hold on the contrary,
that neither Peter nor any Bishop of Rome has any supremacy over the
Catholic Church: but that al supremacy under Christ, is pertaining to kings
and princes within their dominions. And that this our doctrine is good, and
theirs false and forged, I will make it manifest by sundry reasons.

I. Christ must be considered of us as a king two ways. First as he is God:
and so is he an absolute king over all things in heaven and earth, with the
Father and the Holy Ghost by the right of creation. Secondly he is a king as
he is a redeemer of mankind: and by the right of redemption he is a sovereign
king over the whole Church, and that in special manner. Now as Christ is God
with the father and the holy ghost, he has his deputies on earth to govern
the world: as namely kings and princes, who are therefore in Scriptures called
Gods. But as Christ is Mediator, and consequently a king over his redeemed
ones, he has neither fellow, nor deputy. No fellow: for then he should be
an imperfect mediator. No deputy: for no creature is capable of this office
to do in the room and stead of Christ that which he himself does: because
every work of the Mediator is a compound work, arising of the effects of two
natures concurring in one and the same action, namely the godhead and the
manhood: and therefore to the effecting of the said work there is required an
infinite power, which far exceedes the strength of any created nature.
Again, Heb. 7.24. Christ is said to have a priesthood which cannot pass from
his person to any other: whence it follows, that neither his kingly nor his
prophetical office can pass from him to any creature, either in whole or in
part: because the three offices of mediatio^ in this regard be equal. Nay, it
is a needless thing for Christ to have a deputy, to put in exequution any
part of his mediatourship: considering a deputy only serves to supply the
absence of the principal: whereas Christ is always present with his church by
his word and spirit: for where two or three be gathered together in his name:
he is in the midst among them. It may be said that the ministers in the work
of the ministry are deputies of Christ. I answer, that they are no deputies
but active instruments. For in the preaching of the word there be two actions:
the first is the uttering or propounding of it to the ear: the second is, the
inward operation of the holy Ghost in the heart: which indeed is the principal
and belongs to Christ alone: the action of speaking in the minister being only
instrumental. Thus likewise the church of God in cutting off any member by
excommunication, is no more but an instrument performing a ministry in the
name of Christ, and that is to testify and pronounce whom Christ himself
has cut off from the kingdom of heaven: whom he also will have for this
cause, to be severed from the company of his own people till he repent. And so
it is in all Ecclesiastical actions. Christ has no deputy, but only
instruments: the whole entire action being personal in respect of Christ. This
one conclusion overthrows not only the Popes supremacy, but also: many other
points of popery.

Reason II. All the Apostles in regard of power and authority were equal: for
the commission apostolical both for right and exequution was given equally to
them all, as the very words import. Math. 28.19. Go teach all nations
baptizing them, etc. and the promise, I will give to thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, is not private to Peter, but is made in his person to the
rest, according as his confession was in the name of the rest. Thus says
Theophylact, in Mar. 16.
They have the power of committing and binding that receive the gift of a
bishop as Peter. And Ambr. says, What is said to Peter, is said to the
Apostles. in Psalm. 38.
Therefore Peter had no supremacy over the rest of the Apostles in respect of
right to the commission: which they say belonged to him only, and the
exequution thereof to the rest. But let all be granted, that Peter was in
commission above the rest, for the time of his life: yet hence may not any
superiority be gathered for the Bishops of Rome: because the authority of the
Apostles were personal, and consequently ceased with them: without being
conveyed to any other: because the Lord did not vouchsafe the like honor to
any after them. For first of all, it was the privilege of the Apostles to be
called immediately, and to see the Lord Jesus. Secondly, they had power to give
the gift of the holy Ghost by the imposition of hands. Thirdly, they had such
a measure of the assistance of the spirit, that in their public sermons and in
writing of the word, they could not err: and these writings were all denied to
those that followed after them. And that their authority ceased in their
persons, it stands with reason also, because it was given in so a^ple a manner
for the founding of the church of the new testament: which being once founded,
it was needful only, that there should be pastors and teachers for the
building of it up unto the end of the world.

Reason III. When the sons of Zebedeus sued unto Christ for the greatest
rooms of honor in his kingdom (deeming he should be an earthly king)
Christ answers them again, ye know that the Lords of the Gentiles have
dominion, and they that are great, exercise authority over them: but it shall
not be so with you. De consider. ad Euge. l. 2.
Bernard applies these very words to Pope Eugenius on this manner. It is
plain, says he, that here dominion is forbidden the Apostles. Go to then:
dare if you will, to take upon you ruling an Apostleship, or in your
Apostleship rule or dominion: if you will have both alike, you shall loose
both. Otherwise you must not think your self exempted from the number of
them, of whom the Lord complains thus: they have reigned but not of me: they
have been but I have not known them.

Reason IV. Ephesians. 4. Mention is made of gifts which Christ gave to his church
after his ascension, whereby some were Apostles, some prophets, some
Evangelists, some pastors and teachers. Now if there had been an office in
which men as deputies of Christ should have governed the whole church to the
end of the world, the calling might here have been named fittely with a gift
thereto pertaining: and Paul (no doubt) would not here have concealed it, where
he mentions callings of lesser importance.

Reason V. The Popes supremacy was judged by sentences of scripture and
condemned long before it was manifest in the world: the spirit of prophecy
foreseeing and foretelling the state of things to come. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3,4. The
man of sin (which is that Antichrist) shall exalt himself above all that is
called God, etc. Now this whole chapter with all the circumstances thereof,
most fitly agrees to the sea of Rome and the Head thereof: and the thing which
then stayed the revealing of the man of sin, v. 6. is of most expounded to be
the Roman Emperor. I will allege one testimony in the room of many.
Chrysostom says on this place, As long as the Empire shall be had in awe, no
man shall straightly submit himself to Antichrist: but after that the Empire
shall be dissolved, Antichrist shall invade the state of the Empire standing
void, and shall labor to pull unto himself the Empire both of man and God. And
this we find now in experience to be true: for the Sea of Rome never
flourished, till the Empire decayed, and the seat thereof was removed from
the city of Rome. Again Reu. 13. mentioned is made of two beasts, one
coming out of the sea, whom the Papists confess to be the heathenish Roman
Emperor: the second coming out of the earth; which does all that the first
beast could do before him: and this fitly agrees to the popes of Rome, who do
and have done all things that the Emperor did or could do, and that in his
very sight.

Reason VI. The judgment of the ancient Church. Cyprian says, De simplicit.
Praelat.
Dou^tlesse the same were the rest of the Apostles that Peter was: endued with
equal fellowshippe both of honor and of power: but a beginning is made of
unity, that the Church may appear to be one. Gregory says, ^^ Registro l.
6. c. 118.
If one be called universal Bishop, the universal Church goes to decaie. And
chap. 144. I say boldly, that whosoever calls or desires to call himself
universal priest, in his pride is a forerunner of Antichrist. And, Lib. 7. c.
30. ad. Eugen. l. 3.
behold, in the preface of the Epistle which ye directed unto me, you caused
to be set a proud title, calling me universal Pope. Bernard. Consider that thou
art not a Lord of Bishops, but one of them. Churches are maimed, in that the
Roman bishop draws all power to himself. Again Gregory himself being
Pope says to the Emperor, I which am subject to your commandment --; have
every way discharged that which was due, in that I have performed mine
allegiance to the Emperor, and have not concealed what I thought on Gods
behalf. And pope Leo the fourth after Gregory 200. years, acknowledged the
Emperor Lotharius for his sovereign prince, C. de capitulis. did. 10.
and professed obedience without gainsaying to his imperial commandments.

To conclude, whereas they say, that there is a donble head of the Church, one
imperial which is Christ alone, the other ministerial, which is the pope,
governing the whole Church under Christ, I answer, this distinction robs
Christ of his honor, because in setting up their ministerial head, they are
feign to borrow of Christ things proper unto him, as the privilege to forgive
sins Alen book of priesthood.
properly, and the power to govern the whole earth, by making of laws that
shall as truly bind conscience as the laws of God, etc.

The 19 point. Of the efficacy of the sacraments.
Our Consent.
Conclus. I. We teach and believe that the sacraments are signs to represent
Christ with his benefits unto us.

Conclus. II. We teach further; that the Sacraments are indeed instruments,
whereby God offers and gives the foresaid benefits unto us. Thus far we
consent with the Roman Church.

The difference.
The difference between us stands in sundry points. First of all, the best
learned among them teach, that sacraments are physical instruments, that is,
true and proper isntrumental causes, having force and efficacy in them to
produce and give grace. Bellar. de Sacr. l. 2. c. ^1.
They use to express their meaning by these comparisons. When the scriuener
takes the pen into his hand and writes, the action of writing comes from the
pen, moved by the hand of the writer: and in cutting of wood or stone, the
division comes from the saw, moved by the hand of the workman: even so the
grace (say they) that is given by God, is conferred by the sacrament it self.
Now we for our parts hold, that sacraments are not physical, but mere
voluntary instruments. Voluntary, because it is the will and appointment of
God, to use them as certain outward means of grace. Instruments: because when
we use them aright according to the institution. God then answerably conferres
grace from himself. In this respect only take we them for instruments and no
otherwise.

The second difference is this: they teach that the very action of the minister
dispe^sing the sacrament, as it is a work done gives grace immediately if the
party be prepared: as the very washing or sprinkling of water in baptism, and
the giving of bread in the Lords supper: even as the orderly moving of the pen
upon the paper by the hand of the writer causes writing. We hold the
contrary: namely, that no action in the dispensation of a Sacrament conferreth
grace as it is a work done, that is, by the efficacy and force of the very
sacramental action it self, though ordained of God: but for two other ways.
First by the signification thereof. For God testifies unto us his will and good
pleasure partly by the word of promise, and partly by the sacrament: the signs
representing to the eyes that which the word does to the ears: being also
types and certain images of the very same things, that are promised in the word
and no other. Yea the elements are not general and confused, but particular
signs to the several communicants, and by the virtues of the Institution: for
when the faithful receive the signs from God by the hands of the Minister, it
is as much as if God himself with his own mouth should speak unto them
severally, and by name promise to them remission of sins. And things said to
men particularly, do more affect, and more take away doubting, then if they
were generally spoken to an whole company. Therefore signs of graces are as
it were an applying and binding of the promise of salvation to every particular
believer: and by this means, the oftener they are received, the more they help
our infirmity, and confirm our assurance of mercy.

Again the sacrament conferres grace, in that the signs thereof confirms
faith as a pledge, by reason it has a promise annexed to it. For when God
commands us to receive the signs in faith, and withal promises to the
receivers to give the thing signified, he binds himself, as it were in bond
unto us, to stand to his own word; even as men bind themselves in obligations
putting to their hands and seals, so as they cannot go back. And when the
signs are thus used as pledges, and that often: they greatly increase the
grace of God: as a token sent from one friend to an other, renewes and
confirms the persuasion of love.

These are the two principal ways whereby the sacraments are said to confer
grace, namely in respect of their signification, and as they are pledges of
Gods favor unto us. And the very point here to be considered is, in what order
and manner they confirm. And the manner is this. The signs and visible
elements affect the senses outward and inward: the senses convey their object
to the mind: the mind directed by the holy Ghost reasons on this manner, out
of the promise annexed to the sacrament. He that uses the elements aright,
shall receive grace thereby: but I use the elements aright in faith and
repentance, says the mind of the believer: therefore shall I receive from God
increase of grace. Thus then, faith is confirmed not by the work done, but by
a kind of reasoning caused in the mind, the argument or proof whereof is
borrowed from the elements, being signs and pledges of Gods mercy.

The third difference. The Papists teach that in the sacrament by the work
done, the very grace of justification is conferred. We say no: because a man of
years must first believe and be justified, before he can be a meet partaker
of any sacrament. And the grace that is conferred, is only the increase of our
faith, hope, sanctification, etc.

Our Reasons.
Reason I. The word preached and the sacraments differ in the manner of giving
Christ and his benefits unto us: because in the word the spirit of God teaches
us by a voice conveyed to the mind by the bodily ears: but in the sacraments
annexed to the word, by certain sensible and bodily signs viewed by the eye.
Aug. l. 19. contr. Faust. cap. 16.
Sacraments are nothing but visible words and promises. Otherwise for the
giving it self they differ not. Christ himself faith, that in the very word,
is eaten his own flesh, which he was to give for the life of the world: and
what can be said more of the Lords supper. Augustine says, that believers are
partakers of the body and blood of Christ in baptism: Sermon. ad infant. ad
altar de Sacr.
and Hierome to Edibia, that in baptism we eat and drink the body and blood
of Christ. If thus much may be said of baptism, why may it not also be said of
the word preached. Again Hierom upon Ecclesiastes says, It is profitable to be
filled with the body of Christ and drink his blood, not only in mystery but
in knowledge of holy Scripture. cap. 3.
Now upon this it follows, that seeing the work done in the word preached
conferres not grace, neither does the work done in the sacrament confer any
grace.

Reason II. Math. 3.11. I baptize you with water to repentance: but he that
comes after me is stronger then I --, he shall baptize you with the holy
Ghost and with fire. Hence it is manifest, that grace in the sacrament
proceeds not from any action in the sacrament: for John, though he do not
disioyne himself and his action from Christ, and the action of his spirit, yet
does he distinguish the^ plainly in number, persons, and effect. To this
purpose Paul, who had said of the Galathians, that he traveled of them and
beget them by the Gospel, says of himself that he is not any thing, not
only as he was a man, but as he was a faithful Apostle: 1. Cor. 7.3.
thereby excluding the whole Evangelical ministry whereof the Sacrament is a
part, from the least part of divine operation, or, efficacy in conferring of
grace.

Reason III. The blessed Angels, nay the very flesh of the son of God has
not any quickening virtue from it self; but all this efficacy or virtue is in
and from the godhead of the son: who, by means of the flesh apprehended by
faith, deriueth heavenly and spiritual life from himself to the members. Now
if there be no efficacy in the flesh of Christ, but by reason of the
hypostatical union: how shall bodily actions about bodily elements confer
grace immediately.

Reason IV. Paul, Romans 4. stands much upon this, to prove that justification
by faith is not conferred by the sacraments. And from the circumstance of time
he gathers that Abraham was first justified, and then afterward received
circumcision, the sign and seal of his righteousness. Now we know that the
general condition of all sacraments is one and the same, and that baptism
succeeded circumcision. And what can be more plain then the example of
Cornelius, Act. 10. who before Peter came unto him, had the commendation of the
fear of God, and was endued with the spirit of prayer: and afterward when
Peter by preaching opened more fully the way of the Lord, he and the rest
received the holy Ghost. And after all this they were baptized. Now if they
received the holy Ghost before baptism, then they received remission of
sins, and were justified before baptism.

V. Reason. The judgment of the Church. Basil. If there be any grace in the
water, it is not from the nature of the water, but from the presence of the
spirit. Hierome says, Man gives water but God gives the holy Ghost. Augustine
said, Lib. de Spir sanct. c. 15. in Esa. 14. Tract. 6. in epist. Ioh.
Water touches the body and washes the heart: but he shows his meaning else
where. There is one water (says he) of the sacrament, another of the spirit:
the water of the Sacrament is visible, the water of the spirit invisible. That
washes the body and signifies what is done in the soul. By this the soul
is purged and healed.

Object. Remission of sins, regeneration, and salvation is ascribed to the
sacrament of baptism, Act. 22.21. Ephesians. 5. Gal. 3.27. Tit. 2. Ans. Salvation
and remission of sins is ascribed to baptism and the Lords supper, as to the
word; which is the power of God to salvation to all that believe: and that, as
they are instruments of the holy ghost to signify, zeal, and exhibit to the
believing mind the foresaid benefits: but indeed the proper instrument
whereby salvation is apprehended is faith, and sacraments are but proppes of
faith furthering salvation two ways: first because by their signification they
help to nourish and preserve faith: secondly because they seal grace and
salvation to us: yea God gives grace and salvation when we use them well: so be
it, we believe the word of promise made to the sacrament, whereof also they are
seals. And thus we keep the middle way, neither giving too much nor too
little to the sacraments.

The XX. point. Of saving faith: or, the way to life.
Our Consent.
Conclus. I. They teach it to be the property of faith, to believe the whole
whole word of God, and especially the redemption of mankind by Christ.

Conclus. II. They avouch that they believe and look to be saved by Christ and
by Christ alone, and by the mere mercy of God in Christ.

Conclus. III. Thirdly, the most learned among them hold and confess, that the
obedience of Christ is imputed unto them for the satisfaction of the law, and
for their reconciliation with God.

Conclus. IV. They avouch that they put their whole trust and confidence in
Christ, and in the mere mercy of God, for their salvation.

Concl. V. Lastly they hold that every man must apply the promise of life
everlasting by Christ unto himself: and this they grant we are bound to do.
And in these five points do they and we agree, at least in show of words.

By the auouching of the five conclusions, papists may easily escape the hands
of many magistrates. And unless the mystery of popish doctrine be well
known, any common man may easily be deceived, and take such for good
protestants that are but popish priests. To this end therefore that we may the
better discern their guile, I will show wherein they fail in each of their
conclusions, and wherein they differ from us.

The difference.
Touching the first conclusion, they believe indeed all the written word of
God, and more then all: for they also believe the books Apocryphal, which
antiquity for many hundred years has excluded from the canon: yea they
believe unwritten traditions received (as they say) from Councills, the
writings of the Fathers, and the determinations of the Church: making them also
of equal credit with the written word of God, given by inspiration of the
spirit. Now we for our parts despise not the Apocrypha, as namely the books of
the Machabees, Ecclesiasticus and the rest, but we reverence them in all
convenient manner, preferring them before any other books of men, in that they
have been approved by an universal consent of the Church: yet we think
them not meet to be received into the Canon of holy scripture, and therefore
not to be believed, but as they are co^senting with the written word. And for
this our doing we have direction from Athanasius, Origin, Hierom, and the
Council of Laodicea. As for the unwritten Traditions they come not within the
compass of our faith, neither can they: because they come unto us by the hands
of men, that may deceive and be deceived. And we hold and believe, that the
right Canon of the books of the old and new Testament, co^taines in it
sufficient direction for the Church of God to life everlasting, both for faith
and manners. Here then is the point of difference, that they make the object of
faith larger then it should be, or can be: and we keep our selves to the
written word; believing nothing to salvation out of it.

In the second conclusion, touching salvation by Christ alone, there is a
manifest deceit: because they craftily include and couch their own works under
the name of Christ. For (say they) works done by men regenerate, are not their
own, but Christ's in them; and as they are the works of Christ; they save, and
no otherwise. But we for our parts look to be saved only by such works as
Christ himself did in his own person: and not by any work at all done by him
in us. For all works done, are in the matter of justification and salvation,
opposed to the grace of Christ: Romans 11.6. Election is of grace not of works:
if it be of works, it is no more of grace. Again whereas they teach that we
are saved by the works of Christ, which he works in us, and makes us to
work; it is flat against the word. For Paul says, We are not saved by such
works as God has ordained that men regenerate should walk in. Ephesians. 2.10. And
he says further, that he counted all things even after his conversion loss
unto him, that he might be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness
which is of the law. Phil. 3.8. Again, Heb. 1.3. Christ washed away our
sins by himself: which last words exclude the merit of all works done by
Christ within man. Thus indeed the Papists ouerturne all that which in word
they seem to hold touching their justification and salvation. We confess with
them that good works in us are the works of Christ: yet are they not Christ's
alone, but ours also, in that they proceed from Christ by the mind and will
of man: as water from the fountain by the channel. And look as the channel
defiled, defiles the water, that is without defilement in the fountain; even
so the mind and will of man defiled by the remnants of sin, defile the
works, which as they come from Christ are undefiled. Hence it is that the works
of grace which we do by Christ, or, Christ in us, are defective: and must be
severed from Christ in the act of justification, or salvation.

The third conclusion is touching the imputation of Christ's obedience, which
some of the most learned among them acknowledge: and the difference between us
stands on this manner. They hold that Christ's obedience is imputed only to
make satisfaction for sin, and not to justify us before God. We hold and
believe that the obedience of Christ is imputed to us, eue^ for our
righteousness before God. Paul says, 1. Cor. 1.30. Christ is made unto us of
God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Hence I reason
thus. If Christ be both our sanctification, and our righteousness; then he is
not only unto us inherent righteousness, but also righteousness imputed. But he
is not only our sanctification (which the Papists themselves expound of
inherent or habitual righteousness) but also our righteousness: for thus by
Paul are they distinguished. Therefore he is unto us both inherent and imputed
righteousness. And very reason teaches thus much. For in the end of the
world at the bar of Gods judgment, we must bring some kind of righteousness
for our justification, that may stand in the rigor of the law according to
which we are to be judged. But our inherent righteousness is imperfect and
stained with manyfold defects and shall be as long as we live in this world,
as experience tells us: and consequently it is not suitable to the justice of the
law: and if we go out of our selves we shall find no righteousness serving
for our turns either in men or angels, that may or can procure our absolution
before God and acceptance to life everlasting. We must therefore have recourse
to the person of Christ, and his obedience imputed unto us, must serve not
only to be a satisfaction to God for all our sins; but also for our perfect
justification: in that god is content to accept of it for our righteousness, as
if it were inherent in us, or performed by us.

Touching the fourth conclusion, they hold it the safest and surest course to
put their trust and confidence in the mercy of God alone for their salvation:
yet they condescend, that men may also Bellar. l. 5. c. 7. de iustifi.
put their confidence in the merit of their own works, and in the merits also
of other men, so it be in sobriety. But this doctrine quite marres the
conclusion: because by teaching that men are to put confidence in the creature,
they ouerturne al confidence in the Creator. For in the very first
commandment, we are taught to make choice of the true God for our God, which
thing we do when we give to God our hearts: and we give our hearts to God,
when we put our whole confidence in him for the salvation of our souls. Now
then to put confidence in men, or in works, is to make them our Gods. The true
and ancient form of making confession was on this manner: I believe in God
the father, in Jesus Christ, and in the holy ghost, without mention making of
any confidence in works or creatures: the ancient Church never knew any such
confession or confidence. Cyprian says, He believes not in God, who puts
not affiance concerning his salvation in God alone. And indeed the Papists
themselves when death comes, De duplic^^ Martyr, Lib. de causiss cur Euang. p.
436.
forsake the confidence of their merits, and fly to the mere mercy of God in
Christ. And for a confirmation of this I allege the testimony of one
Vlinbergius of Colen, who writes thus. There was a book found in the vestrie
of a certain parish of Colen, written in the dutch tongue in the year of our
Lord 1475. which the Priests used in visiting of the sick. And in it these
questions be found. Supposed to be questions of An^elme.
Do thou believe that thou can not be saved but by the death of Christ?
The sick person answered, Yea. Then it is said unto him, Go too then, while
breath remains in thee, put thy confidence in this death alone: have affiance
in nothing else: commit thy self wholly to this death: with it alone cover thy
self: diue thy self in every part into this death: in every part pearse thy
self with it: infold thy self in this death. And if the Lord will judge thee,
say: Lord, I put the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and thy
judgment, and by no other means I contend with thee. And if he shall say unto
thee, that thou art a sinner, say: Lord, the death of my Lord Jesus Christ, I
put between thee and my sins. If he shall say unto thee, that thou have
deserved damnation, say: Lord, I oppose the death of our Lord Jesus Christ
between thee and my evil merits, and I offer his merit for the merit which I
should have, and have not. If he shall say, that he is angry with thee, say:
Lord, I oppose the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and thine anger.
Here we see, what Papists do, and have done in the time of death. And that
which they hold and practice, when they are dying; they should hold and
practice every day while they are living.

In the last conclusion they teach, that we must not only believe in general
but also apply unto our selves, the promises of life everlasting. But they
differ from us in the very manner of applying. They teach that the promise is
to be applied, not by faith as^uring us of our own salvation: but only by hope,
in likelihood coniecturall. We hold that we are bound in duty to apply the
promise of life by faith without making doubt thereof, and by hope to continue
the certentie after the apprehension made by faith. We do not teach that all
and every man living within the precincts of the church, professing the name of
Christ, is certain of his salvation, and that by faith: but that he ought so to
be, and must endeavor to attain thereto. And here is a great point in the
mystery of iniquity to be considered: for by this uncertain application of the
promise of salvation, and this wavering hope, they ouerturne half the doctrine
of the Gospel. For it inioynes two things: first to believe the promises
thereof to be true in themselves: secondly to believe, and by faith to apply
them unto our selves. And this latter part, without which the former is void
of comfort, is quite ouerturned. The reasons which they allege against our
doctrine, I have answered before: now therefore I let them pass.

To conclude, though in colored terms they seem to agree with us in
doctrine concerning faith; yet in deed they deny and abolish the substance
thereof, namely, the particular and certain application of Christ crucified and
his benefits, unto our selves. Again they fail in that they cut off the
principal duty and office of true saving faith, which is to apprehend and to
apply the blessing promised.

The 21. point. Of Repentance.
Our consent.
Conclus. I. That, repentance is the conversion of a sinner. There is a
twofold conversion, passive, and active: passive, is an action of God whereby
he conuerteth man being as yet vnco^uerted. Active is an action whereby man
being once turned of God, turns himself: and of this latter must this
conclusion be understood. For the first conversion, considering it is a work
of God turning us unto himself, is not the repentance whereof the Scripture
speaks so often, but it is called by the name of regeneration: and repentance,
whereby we being first turned of God do turn our selves, and do good works,
is the fruit thereof.

Conclus. II. That, repentance stands specially for practice, in contrition of
heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction in work or deed. Touching
contrition there be two kinds thereof: Legal, and Euangelical. Legal contrition
is nothing but a remorse of conscience for sin in regard of the wrath and
judgment of God, and it is no grace of God at all; nor any part, or, cause of
repentance: but only an occasion thereof, and that by the mercy of God: for
of it self, it is the sting of the law and the very entrance into the pit of
hell. Euangelical contrition is, when a repentant sinner is grieved for his
sins, not so much for fear of hell, or, any other punishment; as because he
has offended and displeased so good and merciful a God. This contrition is
caused by the ministry of the Gospel, and in the practice of repentance it
is always necessary, and goes before as the beginning thereof. Secondly we
hold, and maintain that confession is to be made, and that in sundry
respects: first to God, both publicly in the congregation, and also privately
in our secret and private prayers. Secondly to the Church, when any person has
openly offended the congregation by any crime, and is therefore excommunicate.
Thirdly to our private neighbor, when we have upon any occasion offended and
wronged him. Math. 5.23. If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, go first and be
reconciled to him: now reconciliation presupposes confession. Lastly in all
true repentance, we hold and acknowledge there must be satisfaction made; first
to God, and that is when we entreat him in our supplications to accept the
death and passion of Christ, as a full, perfect, and sufficient satisfaction
for all our sins. Secondly it is to be made unto the Church, after
excommunication for public offenses; and it sta^ds in duties of humiliatio^
that fitly serve to testify the truth of our repe^ta^ce. Thirdly satisfaction
is to be made to our neighbor: because if he be wronged, he must have
recompense and restitution made, Luke 19.8. and there repentance may justly be
suspected, where no satisfaction is made, if it lie in our power.

Conclus. III. That, in repentance we are to bring outward fruits worthy
amendment of life: for repentance it self is in the heart, and therefore must
be testified in all manner of good works: whereof the principal is, to
endeavor day by day by Gods grace to leave and renounce all and every sin,
and in all things to do the will of God. And here let it be remembered that we
are not patrons of licentiousnes and enemies of good works. For though we
exclude them from the act of our justification and salvation: yet we maintain
a profitable and necessary use of them in the life of every Christian man.
This use is threefold, in respect of God, of man, of our selves. Works are to
be done in respect of God, that his commandments may be obeyed, 1. Ioh. 5.12.
that his will may be don, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. that we may show our selves to be
obedient children to God our Father, 1. Pet. 1.14. that we may show our selves
thankful for our redemption by Christ, Tit. 2. 14. that we might not grieve
the spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30. but walk according to the same, Gal. 5. 22. that
God by our good works may be glorified, Math. 5.16. that we may be good
followers of God, Ephesians. 5.1. Again, works are to be done in regard of men:
that our neighbor may be helped in worldly things, Luke 6.38. that he may be
won by our example to godliness, 1. Pet. 3.14. that we may prevent in our
selves the giving of any offense. 1. Cor. 10.32. that by doing good, we may
stop the mouths of our adversaries. Thirdly and lastly, they have use in
respect of our selves: that we may show our selves to be new creatures, 2. Cor.
5.17. that we may walk as the children of light, Ephesians. 5.8. that we have some
assurance of our faith and of our salvation, 2. Pet. 1.8,10. that we may
discern dead and counterfeit faith, from true faith, Iam. 2. 17. that faith
and the gifts of God may be exercised and continued unto the end, 2. Tim. 1.6.
that the punishments of sin both temporal and eternal may be prevented,
Psalm. 89.32. that the reward may be obtained which God freely in mercy has
promised to men for their good works. Gal. 6.9.

The difference.
We dissent not from the Church of Rome in the doctrine of repentance it self:
but in the damnable abuses thereof, which are of two sorts, general and
special. General are these which concern repentance wholly considered: and
they are these. The first is, that they place the beginning of repentance
partly in themselves, and partly in the holy Ghost, or, in the power of their
natural freewill being helped by the holy Ghost: whereas Paul indeed
ascribes this work, wholly unto God. 2. Tim. 2.15. Proouing if God at any time
will give them repentance. And men that are not weak but dead in trespasses
and sins, can not do any things that may further their conversion, though
they be helped never so: no more then dead men in their graves, can rise from
thence. The second abuse is, that they take penance, or rather repentance for
that public discipline and order of correction that was used against notorious
offenders in the open congregation. For the Scripture sets down but one
repentance, and that common to all men without exception: and to be practiced
in every part of our lives for the necessary mortification of sin: whereas
open ecclesiastical correction pertained not to all and every man within the
compass of the Church, but to them alone that gave any open offense. The third
abuse is, that they make repentance to be not only a virtue, but also a
sacrament: whereas for the space of a thousand years after Christ, and upward it
was not reckened among the sacraments: yea it seems that Lu^bard was one of
the first that called it a sacrament: and the schoolmen after him disputed of
the matter and form of this sacrament: not able any of them certainly to
define, what should be the outward element. The fourth abuse is touching the
effect and efficacy of repentance: for they make it a meritorious cause of
remission of sins and of life everlasting, flat against the word of God. Paul
says notably, Romans 4.24. We are justified freely by his grace through the
redemption which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has sent to be a reconciliation
by faith in his blood. In these words these forms of speech, redemption in
Christ, reconciliation in his blood, by faith, freely by grace, must be
observed and considered: for they show plainly that no part of satisfaction or
redemption is wrought in us, or, by us: but out of us only in the person of
Christ. And therefore we esteem of repentance only as a fruit of faith: and
the effect, or efficacy of it, is to testify remission of our sins, and our
reconciliation before God. It will be said that remission of sins and life
everlasting, are promised to repentance. Ans. It is not to the work of
repentance, but to the person which repents, and that not for his own merits
or work of repentance, but for the merits of Christ, which he applies to
himself by faith. And thus are we to understand the promises of the Gospel, in
which works are mentioned; presupposing always in them the reconciliation of
the person with God, to who^ the promise is made. Thus we see wherefore we
dissent from the Roman Church touching the doctrine of repentance.

Special abuses do concern Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction. The
first abuse concerning contrition is, that they teach it must be sufficient and
perfect. They use now to help the matter by a distinction: saying, that the
sorrow in contrition, must be in the highest degree in respect of appretiative
non inte^sive.
value and estimation. Yet the opinion of q. 2. de poenit. art. 2. and quodlib.
5. art. 3. cap. de Sactpoenit.
Adrian was otherwise, that in true repentance a man should be grieved
according to all his endeavor. And the Roman Catechism says as much, that
the sorrow conceived of our sins must be so great, that none can be conceived
to be greater: that we must be contrite in the same manner we love God, and
that is with all our heart and strength in a most vehement sorrow: and that the
hatred of sin must be not only the greatest but also most vehement and
perfect, so as it may exclude all sloth and slacknes. Indeed afterward it
follows, that true contrition may be effectual though it be imperfect: but
how can this stand, if they will not only commend but also pre^cribe and
avouch, that contrition must be most perfect and vehement. We therefore only
teach, that God requires not so much the measure, as the truth of any grace:
and that it is a degree of unfeigned contrition to be grieved, because we cannot
be grieved for our sins as we should. The second abuse is, that they ascribe
to their contrition the merit of congruitie. But this can not stand with the
all-sufficient merit of Christ. And an ancient Council says, God inspires
into us first of all the faith and love of himself, no merits going before,
that we may faithfully require the sacrament of baptism, and after baptism
do the things that please him. And we for our parts hold, that God requires
contrition at our hands, not to merit remission of sins: but that we may
acknowledge our own unworthiness, and be humbled in the sight of God, and
distrust all our own merits: and further, that we may make the more account of
the benefits of Christ, whereby we are received into the favor of God: lastly,
that we might more carefully avoid all sins in time to come, whereby so many
pains and terrors of conscience are procured. And we acknowledge no
contrition at all to be meritorious, save that of Christ: whereby he was broken
for our iniquities. The third abuse is, that they make imperfect contrition or
att^ition arising of the fear of hell, to be good and profitable: and to it
they apply the saying of the Prophet, The fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom. But servile fear of it self is the fruit of the law, which is the
ministry of death and condemnation: and consequently it is the way to
eternal destruction, if God leave men to themselves: and if it turn to the
good of any, it is only by accident: because God in mercy makes it to be an
occasion going before, of grace to be given: otherwise remorse of conscience
for sin is no beginning of repentance, or the restrainment of any sin: but
rather is and that properly the beginning of unspeakable horrors of
conscience, and everlasting death, unless God show mercy. And yet this fear
of punishment, if it be tempered and delaied with other graces and gifts of God
in holy men; it is not unprofitable: in whom there is not only a sorrow for
punishment, but also and that much more for the offense. And such a kind of
fear, or, sorrow is commanded, Malac. 1.6. If I be a father, where is my
fear? if I be a lord, where is my fear? And Chrysostom says, that the fear
of hell in the heart of a just man, is a strong man armed against thieves and
robbers, to drive them from the house. And Ambrose says, that Martyrs in the
time of their sufferings, confirmed themselves against the cruelty of
persecuters by setting the fear of hell before their eyes.

Abuses touching Confession are these. The first is, that they use a form of
confession of their sins unto God, uttered in an unknown language, being
therefore foolish and ridiculous, withal requiring the aid and intercession
of dead men and such as be absent: whereas, there is but one Mediator between
God and man the man Jesus Christ. The second is, that they in practice make
confession of their sins not only to God but to the Saints departed: in that
they make prayer to them, in which they ask their intercession for the pardon
of their sins: and this is, not only to match them with God in seeing and
knowing the heart, but also to give a part of his divine worship unto them. The
third and principal abuse is, that they have corrupted Canonical confession
by turning it into a private auricular confession: binding all men in
conscience by a law made, to confess all their mortal sins, with all
circumstances that change the kind of the sin (as far as possibly they can
remember) once every year at the least, and that to a priest, unless it be in
the case of extreme necessity. But in the word of God there is no warrant for
this confession, nor in the writings of Orthodoxe antiquity for the space of
many hundred years after Christ, as one of their own side avouches. Beatus
Rhemanus on Tertul. lib. de poenis.
And the commandment of the holy Ghost, Confess one for an other, and pray
one for an other, Iam. 5.17. binds as well the priest to make confession unto
us, as any of us to the priest. And whereas it is said, Math. 3. that many were
baptized confessing their sins: and Act. 19.18. Many that believed came and
confessed and showed their works, the confession was voluntary and not
constrained: it was also general and not particular of all and every sin,
with the necessary circumstances thereof. And in this liberty of confession
the Church remained 1200. years till the Council of Lateran; in which the law
of auricular confession was first inacted: being a notable invention serving
to discover the secrets of men, and to enrich that covetous and ambitious See,
with the revenues of the world. It was not known to Augustine, when he said,
What have I to do with men that they should hear my confessions, as though
they should heal my diseases: nor to Chrysostom when he says, Confess. lib.
10. c. 3. De dei not. ^o^. 5. to. 5. Hom. 2. in psalm. 50.
I do not compel thee to confess thy sins to others. And, If thou be
ashamed to confess them to any man, because thou have sinned, say them daily
in thine own mind. I do not bid thee confess them to thy fellow servant,
that he should mock thee: confess them to God that cures them.

The abuse of Satisfaction is, that they have turned canonical satisfaction
which was made to the congregation by open offenders, into a satisfaction of
the justice of God for the temporal punishment of their sins. Behold here a
most horrible profanation of the whole Gospel, and specially of the
satisfaction of Christ, which of it self without any supply is sufficient
every way for the remission both of fault and punishment. But of this point I
have spoken before.

Hitherto I have handled and proved by induction of sundry particulars, that
we are to make a separation from the present Church of Rome, in respect of the
foundation and substance of true religion. Many more things might be added to
this very purpose, but here I conclude this first point: adding only this one
caveat, that we make separation from the Roman religion without hatred of the
persons that are maintainers of it. Nay we join in affection more with them,
then they with us. They die with us not for their religion ( Deuteronomy. 13.5
though they deserve it) but for the treasons which they intend and enterprise:
we are ready to do the duties of love unto them enjoined us in the word: we
reverence the good gifts in many of them; we pray for them, wishing their
repentance and eternal salvation.

Now I mean to proceed, and to touch briefly other points of doctrine
contained in this portion of Scripture, which I have now in hand. In the second
place therefore out of this commandment, Go out of her my people, I gather
that the true Church of God is and has been in the present Roman Church, as
corn in the heap of chafe. Though Popery reigned and ouerspread the face of
the earth for many hundred years; yet in the midst thereof, God reserved a
people unto himself, that truly worshipped him: and to this effect the holy
Ghost says that the Dragon, which is the devil caused the woman, that is, the
Church to fly into the wilderness, where he sought to destroy her but could
not, Reu. 12. 17.
and she still retains a remnant of her seed which kept the commandments
of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. Now this which I speak of the
Church of Rome, can not be said in like manner of the congregations of Turks
and other infidels, that the hidden Church of God is preserved among them;
because there is no means of salvation at all: whereas the Church of Rome has
the Scriptures, though in a strange language; and baptism for the outward
form: which helps God in all ages preserved, that his Elect might be gathered
out of the midst of Babylon. This serves to stop the mouths of Papists,
which demand of us, where our Church was fourscore years ago, before the
days of Luther: whereby they would insinuate to the world, that our Church and
religion is green or new: but they are answered out of this very text, that
our Church has ever been since the days of the Apostles, and that in the
very midst of the papacy. It has bin always a Church, and did not first
begin to be in Luthers time: but only then began to show it self, as having
bin hid by an universal Apostasy, for many hundred years together. Again we
have here occasion to consider the dealing of God with his own church and
people. He will not have them for external society to be mixed with their
enemies, and that for special purpose: namely, to exercise the humility and
patience of his few servants. When Elias saw idolatry spread over all Israel,
he went a part into the wilderness, and in grief desired to die. And David
cried out: Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Mesheck, and to have my
habitation in the tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5. And just Lot must have his
righteous soul vexed with seeing and hearing the abominations of Sodom.

Thirdly by this commandment we are taught, what opinion to carry of the
present church of Rome. It is often demanded, whether it be a church or no;
and the answer may hence be formed on this manner. If by this church be
understood a state or regiment of the people, whereof the Pope is head; and the
members are all such as do acknowledge him to be their head, and do believe
the doctrine established in the Council of Trent, we take it to be no church
of God. Because Babylon, which I have proved to be the church of Rome, is here
opposed to the church or people of God: and because we are commanded to come
out of it: whereas we may not wholly forsake any people till they forsake
Christ. Some will happily say, the church of Rome has the Scriptures and the
Sacrament of baptism. I answer first of all, they have indeed the books of
holy Scripture among them: but by the rest of their doctrine they overthrow the
true sense thereof in the foundation, as I have proved before. And though they
have the outward form of baptism, yet they ouerturne the inward baptism,
which is the substance of all, standing in the justification and sanctification
of a sinner. Again I answer, that they have the word and baptism, not for
themselves but for the true church of God among them: like as the lantern
holds the candle, not for it self but for others. Secondly, it may be and is
alleged, that if the Pope be Antichrist, he then sittes in the temple, that
is, the church of God, and by this means the Roman church shall be the true
church. Ans. He sittes in the temple of God, but mark further how: as God,
that is, not as a member but as a manifest usurper: like as the thief sittes
in the true man's house. ^. Thessalonians. 2.4.
For the popish church and Gods church are mingled like chafe and corn in one
heap: and the church of Rome may be said to be in the church of God, and the
church of God in the church of Rome, as we say the wheat is among the chafe,
and the chafe in the wheat. Again he is said to sit in the temple of God;
because the Roman church, though falsely, takes unto it self the title of the
true catholic church. Some go about to delay and qualify the matter, by
comparing this church to a man lying sick full of ^oares, having also his
throat cut, yet so as body and soul are joined together, and life is
remaining still. But all things well considered, it is rather like a dead
carcass, and is void of all spiritual life; as the popish errors in the
foundation do manifest. Indeed a known harlot may afterward remain a wife
and be so termed; yet after the bill of diuorcement is given, she cease to
be a wife, though she can show her marriage ring: now the church has received
the bill of her diuorcement in the written word, namely 2 Thessalonians. 2. and Reu.
13.11,12, etc.

Furthermore in this commandment we may see a lively portraiture of the state
of all mankind. Here we see two sorts of men: some are pertaining to Babylon, a
people running on to their destruction: some again are a people of God severed
from Babylon, and reserved to life everlasting. If any ask the cause of this
distinction; I answer, it is the very will of God vouchsafing mercy to some and
forsaking others by withdrawing his mercy from them, for the better declaration
of his justice. Thus says the Lord, Romans 11.4. I have reserved seven thousand
that never bowed the knee to Baal: and the prophet Esai says, Unless the Lord
had reserved a remnant, we had bin as Sodom and Gomorrha. By this distinction
we are taught, above al things to seek to be of the number of Gods people, and
to labor for assurance of this in our own consciences. For if all should be
saved, less care would snffice: but this mercy is not common to all: and
therefore the more to be thought upon.

Lastly, here I not^ the special care that God has over his own children. He
first gives the^ warning to depart, before he begin to execute his judgment
upon his enemies, with whom they live: that they might not be partakers of
their sins or punishments. Thus, before God would punish Jerusalem, an angel
is sent to mark them in the forehead that mourned for the abominatious of the
people. And in the destruction of the first borne of Egypt the angel passed
over the houses of the Jews, that had their posts sprinkled with the blood of
the paschal lamb: and this passing over betokens safety and preservation in
the common destruction to those that have their hearts sprinkled with the blood
of Christ. This blessing of protection should move us all, to become true and
hearty servants of God. Men usually become members of those societies and
corporations, where they may enjoy many freedo^es and priuiledges^ Well, behold:
in the society of the Saints of god, which is the true Church, there is the
freedom from danger in all common destructions and from eternal vengeance at
the last day. When Hester had procured safety for the Jews, and liberty to
revenge themselves upon their enemies: it is said, that many of the people of
the land became Jews. Eue^ so, considering Christ has procured freedom from
hell, death, and damnation for all that believe in him: we should labor above
all things to become new creatures, joining our selves always to the true
church of God.

Hitherto I have spoken of the commandment: now follows the reason thereof
drawn from the end, that they be not partakers of her sins: and that they
receive not of her plagues. Here I might stand long to show what be the sins of
the church of Rome: but I will only name the principal. The first sin is
Atheism: and and that I prove on this manner. Atheism is twofold, open,
colored. Open Atheism is, when men both in word and deed deny God and his
word. Colored Atheism is not so manifest: and it has two degrees. The first
is, when men acknowledge God the creator and governor of heaven and earth, and
yet deny the father, son and holy Ghost. Thus the Ephesia^s before they
received the gospel, Ephesians. 2.12.
are said to be without God whom in their natural judgment they
acknowledged: because they denied Christ, and consequently worshipped an idol
of their own brain, in that they worshipped God out of Christ. And in this
respect though the Samaritans worshipped the God of Abraham, yet our Savior
Christ says, Ioh. 5.46. Psalm. 96.3.
they worshipped they knew not what. And the Psalmist says of all the
Gentiles that their Gods are Idols. In this degree of Atheism are placed
Turks and Jews at this day: the Anti-Trinitaries, and Arians, and all that
conceive and worship God out of the Trinity. The 2. degree is, when men do
rightly acknowledge the unity of the godhead in the Trinity of persons: yet
so, as by other necessary consequents partly of their doctrine, and partly of
the service of God they ouerturne that which they have well maintained. And
thus I say, that the very religion of the Church of Rome is a kind of
Atheism. For whereas it makes the merit of the works of men to concur with
the grace of god, it overthrows the grace of God. Romans 11. In word they
acknowledge the infinite justice and mercy of God: but by consequent both are
denied. How can that be infinite justice, which may any way be appeased by
humane satisfactions? And how shall Gods mercy be infinite, when we by our
satisfactions must add a supply to the satisfaction of Christ? Again, He that
has not the son, has not the father: 1. Ioh. 2.23.
and he that has neither father nor son, denies God. Now the present Roman
religion has not the son, that is, Jesus Christ, God and man, the Mediator
of mankind: but has tra^sformed him into a fained Christ. And I show it thus.
For one Jesus Christ, in all things like unto us in his Humanity, sin only
excepted; they have framed a Christ, to whom they ascribed two kinds of
existing: one natural, whereby he is visible, touchable, and circumscribed in
heaven: the other not only above, but also against nature; by which, he is
substantially according to his flesh in the hands of every priest, in every
host, and in the mouth of every communicant, invisible, vntouchable,
uncircumcised. And thus in effect they abolish his manhood. Yea they disgrade
him of his offices. For one Jesus Christ, the only king, lawgiuer, and head of
the Church; they join unto him the Pope not only as a Vicar but also as a
fellow: in that they give unto him power to make laws binding conscience, to
resolve and determine infallibly the sense of holy scripture, properly to
pardon sin both in respect of fault and temporal punishment, to have
authority over the whole earth and a part of hell: to depose kings, to whom
under Christ every soul is to be subject, to absolve subjects from the oath of
allegiance, etc. For one Jesus Christ the only real priest of the new
testament, they join many secondary priests unto him, which offer Christ
daiely in the mass for the sins of the quick and the dead. For one Jesus
Christ the all-sufficient Mediator of intercession, they have added many
fellows unto him to make request for us, namely as many Saints as be in the
Popes Calendar. Lastly, for the only merits of Christ, in whom alone, the
Father is well pleased, they have devised a treasury of the Church containing
beside the merits of Christ, the overplus of the merits of Saints to be
dispensed to men, at the discretion of the Pope. And thus we see, that Christ,
and consequently God himself to be worshipped in Christ, is transformed into
a fantasy or idol of man's conceit. Again there is always a proportion
between the worship of God, and our persuasion of him: and men in giving unto
God any worship, have respect to his nature, that both may be suitable, and he
well pleased. Let us then see what manner of worship the Roman religion
affoardeth. It is for the greatest part mere will worship, without any
allowance or commandment from God, as Durande in his Rationale in effect
acknowledges. It is a carnal service standing of innumerable bodily rites and
ceremonies borrowed partly from the Jews, and partly from the heathen: it is
divided between God and some of his creatures: in that they are worshipped
both with one kind of worship: let them paint it as they can. Thus then, if by
their manner of worshipping God, we may judge how they conceive of him, as we
may: they have plainly turned the true God into a fantasy of their own. For
God is no otherwise to be conceived, then he has revealed himself in his
creatures and word, and specially in Christ: who is the engraven image of the
person of the Father.

The second sin is Idolatry: and that as gross as was ever among the heathen.
And it is to be seen in two things. First that they worship the Saints with
religious worship which without exception is proper to God. Yea they transform
some of them into detestable idols, making them in truth mediators of
redemption, specially the Virgin Marie, whom they call a Lady, a Goddess, a
queen whom Bellar. l. 1. de sanct. c. 16 Missali and Breuiario refor.
Christ her son obeys in heaven, a mediatresse: or life, hope, the medicine
of the diseased: and they pray unto her thus: Prepare thou glory for us:
defend us from our enemies, and in the hour of death receive us, loose the
bonds of the guilty, bring light to the blind, drive away all devils. Show
thy self to be a mother, Let him receive the prayers. Again, their idolatry
is manifest, in that they worship God in, at, before images: having no
commandment so to do, but the contrary. They allege that they use and
worship images only in a remembrance of God. But this is al one as if an
unchaste wife should receive many lovers into her house in the absence of her
husband^ and being reproved, should answer: that they were the friends of
her husband, and that she kept them only in remembrance of him. Thirdly,
their Idolatry exceedes the Idolatry of the heathen, in that they worship a
Breadengod, or, Christ in and under the forms of bread and wine. And if Christ
according to his humanity be absent from the earth, as I have proved, the
Popish host is as abominable an idol as ever was.

The third sin is the maintenance of Adultery. And that is manifest: first
of all, in the Toleration of the stews flat against the commandment of God.
Deuteronomy. 23.17. There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel: neither shall
there be a whore keeper of the sons of Israel. And this toleration is an
occasion of uncleanness to many young men and women, that otherwise would
abstain from all such kind of filthiness. And what an abomination is this,
when brother and brother, father and son, nephew and uncle, shall come to one
and the same harlot, one before or after the other. Secondly, Greg. c. 9. de
consang.
their Law beyond the fourth degree allows the marriage of any persons: and
by this means, they sometime allow incest. For in the unequal collateral
line, the person next the common stock is a father or mother to the brothers or
sisters posterity, as for example.

1 John Anne Nicholas 2 Thomas 3 Jews 4 Roger 5 Anthony 6 James.

Here Anne and Nicholas are brother and sister, and Anne is distant from James
six degrees, he being her neecca far off: and the marriage between them is
allowed by the Church of Rome, they not being within the compass of four
degrees: which nevertheless is against the law of nature. For Anne being the
sister of Nicholas, is in stead of a mother to all that are begotten of
Nicholas, even to James and James posterity. Yet thus much I grant, that the
daughter of Anne may lawfully marry James or Anthony, the case being
altered, because they are not one to an other a^ parents and children.

The fourth sin is Magic, ^orcerie, or witchcraft, in the consecration of the
host in which they make their Breaden-god: in exorcismes over holy bread, holy
water and salt; in the casting out or driving away of devils, by the sign of
the cross, by solemn coniurations, by holy water, by the ringing of bells, by
lighting tapers, by relics, and such like. For these things have not their
supposed force, either by creation, or by any institution of God in his holy
word: and therefore if any thing be done by the^, it is from the secret
operation of the devil himself.

The fifth sin is, that in their doctrine they maintain perjury, because
they teach with one consent, that a papist examined may answer doubtfully
against the direct intention of the examiner: framing an other meaning unto
himself in the ambiguitie of his words. A^ for example, when a man is asked,
whether he said or heard Mass in such a place: though he did: they affirm he
may say, no: and swear unto it: because he was not there, to reveal it to the
examiner: whereas in the very law of nature, he that takes an oath should
swear according to the intention of him that has power to minister an oath:
and that in truth, justice, ^^^gement. Let them clear their doctrine from all
defense of perjury, if they can.

The six^ sin is, that they reuerse many of Gods commandments, making that
no sin which Gods word makes a sin. Thus they teach, Molo. tract. 2. c. 6.
con. 1. prop. 5. idem catera.
that if any man steal some little thing, that is thought not to cause any
notable hurt, it is no mortal sin: that, the officious lie, and the lie made
in sport are venial sins: that, to pray for our enemies in particular is no
precept but a counsel: and that none is bound to salute his enemy in the way
of friendship, flat against the rule of Christ, Mat. 5.47. where the word
(...), signifies al manner of duty and courtesy: that, rash judgment, though
consent ^^me thereto, is regularly but a venial sin: that, it is lawful
otherwhiles to feign holiness: that, the painting of the face is ordinarily but
a venial sin: that, it is not lawful to forbid begging: whereas the Lord
forbade there should be any beggar in Israel. Again, Deuteronomy. 15. Greg. de Val.
tom. 3. dis. 1. q. 13. and Caietan.
they teach that men in their choler, when they are chiding, and swear,
wounds and blood, are not indeed blasphemers.

Lastly their writers use manifest lying, to justify their doctrine. They
plead falsely that all antiquity is on the^r side; whereas it is as much
against them as for them: and as much for us as them. Again their manner has
bin and is still to prove their opinions by forged and counterfeit writings of
men, some whereof I will name.

1 Saint James Liturgy. 2 The Canons of the Apostles. 3 The books of
Dionysius Ariopagita, and namely De Hierarchia Ecclesiastica. 4 The Decretall
Epistles of the Popes. 5 Pope Clements works. 6 Some of the Epistles of
Ignatius. 7 Origens book of repentance. His homelies in diuersos sanctos.
Commentaries ^^ Job: and book of Lamentation. 8 Chrysostomes Liturgy. 9
Basils liturgy and his Ascetica. 10 Augustines book de 8. quest. Dulcity. A
book of true and false repentance. Ser. de festo commemorationis animarum.
book de dogm. Ecclesiast. Sermon ad fratres in Heremo. Sermon of Peter's
chair. Book of visiting the sick, etc. 11 Justin Martyrs Questions and Answ.
12 Athanasius epistle to Pope Foelix. 13 Bernards sermons of the Lords supper.
14 Hieromes epistle ad Demetriadem sauouring of Pelagius. 15 Tertullian de
Monogamia. 16 Cyprian de Chrismate and de ablutione pedum. 17 In the Council
of Sardica the 3,4, and 5. canons are forged. 18 In the Council of Nice all
save 20. are forged. 19 Certain Roman Councels under Sylvester are forged.
For he was at this time dead, and therefore could not confirm them. Sozom.
lib. 2. 20 To the sixth canon of the Council of Nice are patched these words,
That the Roman church has always had the Supremacy. 21 Lastly, I will not
omit that Pope Sozimus, Bonifacius, and Coelestinus falsified the canons of the
council of Nice, to prove appeals from all places to Rome; so as the Bishops
of Afric were forced to send for the true copies of the said council from
Constantinople and the Churches of Greece.
I might here rehearse many other sins which with the former call for
vengeance upon the Roman Church, but it shall suffice to have named a few of
the principal.

Now in this reason, our Savior Christ prescribes another maine duty to his
own people: and that is, to be careful to eschew all the sins of the Church
of Rome, that they may withal escape her deserved plagues and punishments. And
from this prescribed duty I observe two things. The first is, that every good
servant of God, must carefully avoid contracts of marriage with professed
Papists, that is, with such as hold the Pope for their head, and believe the
doctrine of the Council of Trent. For in such matches men hardly keep faith
and good conscience, and hardly avoid communication with the sins of the
Roman church. A further ground of this doctrine I thus propound. In Gods word
there is mentioned a double league between man and man, country and country.
The first is the league of concord, when one kingdom binds it self to live
in peace with another, for the maintenance of traffic without disturbance:
and this kind of league may stand between Gods church and the enemies thereof.
The second is the league of amity: which is when men, people, or countries
bind themselves to defend each other in all causes: and to make the wars of
the one, the wars of the other; and this league may not be made with those
that be enemies of God. Iehosaphat, otherwise a good king, made this kind of
league with Ahab: and is therefore reproved by the prophet, saying, Would
thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? 2. Chr. 19.2. Now the
marriages of Protestants with Papists are private leagues of amity, between
person and person: and therefore not be allowed. Again Malac. 2.11. Judah has
defiled the holiness of the Lord which he loved, and has married the
daughters of a strange God: where is ^latly condemned marriages made with the
people of a false god: now the papists by the consequents of their doctrine
and religion, turn the true Iehoua into an idol of their own brain, as I have
showed; and the true Christ revealed in the written word into a fained Christ
made of bread. Yet if such a marriage be once made and finished it may not be
dissolved. For such parties sin not simply in that they marry, but because
they marry not in the Lord, being of diverse religions. The fault is not in the
substance of marriage but in the manner of making it; and for this cause, the
Apostle commaundes the believing party, not to forsake or refuse the
unbelieving party, being a very infidel (which no Papist is) if he or she
will abide. 1. Cor. 7.13.

The second thing is, that every servant of God must take heed how he
travels into such countries where Popish religion is stablished, least he
partakes in the sins and punishments thereof. Indeed to go upon embassage
to any place, or to travel for this end, that we may perform the necessary
duties for our special or general callings, is not unlawful: but to travel
out of the precincts of the chnrch only for pleasures sake, and to see strange
fashions, has no warrant. And hence it is, that many men which go forth in
good order well minded, come home with crased consciences. The best traveler
of all is he, that living at home or abroad, can go out of himself, and
depart from his own sins and corruptions by true repentance.

FINIS.
An advertisement to all favorers of the Roman religion, showing that the
said religion is against the Catholic principles and grounds of the Catechism.
GReat is the number of them that embrace the religion of the present Church of
Rome, being deceived by the glorious titles of Universality, Antiquity,
Succession. And no doubt, though some be wilfully blinded, yet many devoted
this way, never saw any other truth. Now of them and the rest I desire this
favor, that they will but weigh and ponder with themselves this one thing,
which I will now offer to their considerations, and that is, That the Roman
religion now stablished by the council of Trent, is in the principal points
thereof against the grounds of the Catechism, that have been agreed upon ever
since the days of the Apostles, by all Churches. These grounds are four; the
first is the Apostles Creed: the second is the decalogue or ten
commandments: the third is the form of prayer called the Lords prayer: the
fourth is the Institution of the two Sacraments baptism and the Lords supper.
1. Cor. 11.23.

That I may in some order manifest this which I say, I will begin with the
Symbol or Creed. And first of all it must be considered, that some of the
principal doctrines believed in the Church of Rome are, that the Pope or
Bishop of Rome is the vicar of Christ, and the head of the Catholic church:
that there is a fire of purgatory after this life: that images of God and
Saints are to be placed in Churches and worshipped: that prayer is to be made
to Saints departed and their interceffion to be required: that there is a
propitiatory sacrifice daily o^^ered in the mass for the sins of the quick
and the dead. These points are of that moment, that without them the Roman
religion cannot stand: and in the council of Trent the curse Anathema is
pronounced upon all such as deny these or any of them. And yet mark; the
Apostles Creed which has bin thought to contain all necessary points in
religion to be believed: and has therefore been called the kay and rule of
faith: this creed I say, has not any of these points: nor the Expositions made
thereof by the ancient fathers, nor any other Creed or confession of faith
made by any council or Church for the space of many hundred years. This is a
plain proof to any indifferent man, that these be new articles of faith never
known in the Apostolic Church: and that the fathers and councels could not
find any such articles of faith in the books of the old and new testament.
Answer is made: that all these points of doctrine are believed under the
article, I believe the Catholic Church; the meaning whereof, they will have to
be this, I believe all things which the Catholic church holds and teaches
to be believed. If this be as they say, we must needs believe in the Church:
that is, put our confidence in the Church, for the manifestation and the
certentie of all doctrines necessary to salvation: and thus the eternal truth
of God the Creator, shall depend on the determination of the creature; and the
written word of God in this respect is made insufficient; as though it had not
plainly revealed all points of doctrine pertaining to salvation. And the
ancient Churches have been far ouerseene, that did not propound the former
points to be believed as articles of faith, but left them to these latter times.

2. In this Creed, to believe in God, and to believe the Church, are
distinguished. To believe in, is pertaining to the Creator, to believe, to the
creature: Ruff. in Symb.
as Ruffinus has noted, when he says, that by this preposition in, the
Creator is distinguished from the creature, and things pertaining to God from
things pertaining to men. And Augustine says, Ser. 131. de Temp.

Rhem. Test. on Romans 10. 14.

Eusebius. Emiss. hom. 2. de Symb.

Cypr. de dup. Martyr.


It must be known that we must believe the Church, and not believe in the
Church: because the Church is not God, but the house of God. Hence it follows,
that we must not believe in the Saints, nor put our confidence in our works,
as the learned Papists teach. Therefore Eusebius says, We ought of right to
believe Peter and Paul, but to believe in Peter and Paul, that is, to give to
the servants the honor of the Lord, we ought not. And Cyprian says, He does
not believe in God which does not place in him alone the trust of his whole
felicity.

3. The article, conceived by the holy Ghost, is ouerturned by the
transubsta^tiation of bread and wine in the mass, into the body and blood of
Christ. For here we are taught to confess the true and perpetual incarnation
of Christ, beginning in his conception, and never ending afterward: and we
acknowledge the truth of his manhood, and that his body has the essential
properties of a true body, standing of flesh and bone: having quantity,
figure, dime^sions, namly length, breadth, thicknes: having part out of part,
as head out of feet, and feet out of head, being also circu^scribed, visible,
touchable: in a word, it has al things in it, which by order of creation,
belong to a body. It will be said, that the body of Christ may remain a true
body and yet be altered in respect of some qualities, as namely
circumscription. But I say again, that local circumscription can no way be
severed from a body, it remaining a body. For to be circumscribed in place,
is an essential property of every quantity: and quantity is the common
essence of every body. And therefore a body in respect of his quantity must
needs be circumscribed in one place. This was the judgment of Leo, when he
said, The ^odie of Christ is by no means out of the truth of our bod^^. And
Augustine, when he said, Epist. 70. Tract. 31. in Ioh.
Only God in Christ so comes that he does not depart^ ^o returns, that he
does not leave us: but man according to body is in place, and goes out of the
same place, and when he shall come unto another place, he is not in that place
whence he comes. To help the matter, they use to distinguish thus. Christ's
body in respect of the totalitate essentiae, non totalitate quantitatis.
whole essence thereof may be in many places; but not in respect of the whole
quantity, whereby it is only in one place. But as I have said, they speak
contraries: for quantity (by all learning) is the essence of a body, without
which a body cannot be.

4. In the Creed we confess that Christ is ascended into heaven, and there
after his ascension sits at the right hand of his father, and that according to
his manhood. Hence I conclude, that Christ's body is not really and locally in
the sacrament, and in every Host, which the priest consecrateth. This argument
was good when Vigilius against Eutiches said, When it (the flesh) was on earth,
it was not in heaven: and because it is now in heaven, it is not on earth:
Lib. 4.
and he adds afterward that this is the Catholic faith and confession. And it
was good when Fulgentius said, ad Thras.
According to his humane substance he was absent from earth, when he was in
heaven, and he left the earth when he ascended into heaven. And, The same
inseparable Christ, according to his whole manhood leaving the earth, locally
ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand, and according to the same
whole manhood, he is to come to judgment. And it was good when Cyril said,
Cyril. lib. 9. in Ioh.
No man doubts but that when he ascended into heaven, though he be always
present by the power of his spirit, he was absent in respect of the presence of
his flesh. And it was good, when Augustine said, According to the flesh, which
the Word assumed, he ascended into heaven, he is not here: there he sits at the
right hand of the father: and he is here according to the presence of his
majesty. And, He went as he was man, and he abode as he was God: he went by
that whereby he was in one place; he abode by that whereby he was every where.

5. Again, in that we believe the Catholic church, it follows that the
Catholic church is invisible: because things seen are not believed. And the
answer commonly used, that we believe the holiness of the Church, will not
serve the turn. For the words are plain, and in them we make confession that
we believe not only the holiness of the Church, but also the Church it self.

6. Lastly the articles, Remission of sins, Resurrection of the body, and
Life everlasting, contain a confession of special faith. For the meaning of
them is thus much: Symb. ad Catech. l. 4. c. 7. and l. 2. c. 10.
I believe the remission of mine own sins, and the resurrection of mine own
body to life everlasting: and that by the judgment of learned antiquity.
August. says, If thou also believe that thou shall rise again and ascend into
heaven (because thou art sure of so great a patron) thou art certain of so
great a gift. And, Make not Christ less, who brings thee to the kingdom of
heaven, for remission of sins. Without this faith, if any come to baptism, he
shuts the gate of mercy against himself. And, Whosoever faithfully believes,
and holds this profession of his faith ( in which all his sins are forgiven
him) let him prepare his will to the will of god, and not fear his passage by
death. Sermon. 115. de Temp. de doctr. Chri. l. 1. cap. 18. Sermon. 123. de Temp.
And, The whole Sacrament of baptism stands in this, that we believe the
resurrection of the body and remission of sins to be given us of God. And, He
gave these keys to the Church --, that whosoever in his church, should not
believe his sins to be forgiven, they should not be forgiven unto him: and
whosoever believed, and turned from the^ abiding in the lap of the said church,
at length shall be healed by faith and amendment of life. And, That which thou
have heard to be fulfilled in the glorious resurrection of Christ, believe that
the very same shall be fulfilled in thee, in the last judgment and the
resurrection of thy flesh, shall restore thee for all eternity. For unless
thou shall believe that thou art to be repaired by death, thou can not come
to the reward of life eternal. And in ancient time the article of the
resurrection has been rehearsed on this manner, Ruffin in Symb. August. de
Symb. l. 1. c. 6. ad Catecbu. and Enchir. c. 44.
The resurrection of this flesh: and the last applied unto it, To everlasting
life. Hence then two maine opinions of the Church of Rome are quite
overthrown, one that we cannot by special faith be certain of the remission
of our sins, and the salvation of our souls: the other, that a man truly
justified may fall away and be damned. Now this cannot be, if the practice of
the ancient Church be good, which has taught us to believe everlasting life
jointly without remission of sins.

To come unto the Decalogue, first of all it is a rule in expounding the
several commandments, that where any vice is forbidden, there the contrary
virtue is commanded, and all virtues of the same kind, with all their causes,
occasions, furtherances. This rule is granted of all: and hence it follows,
that counsels of perfection, if they have in them any furtherance of virtue,
are enjoined in and by the law, and therefore prescribe no state of perfection
beyond the scope of the law.

Secondly the commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image,
etc. has two several parts. The first forbids the making of carved or graued
images: the second forbids the adoration of them. Now the first part is notably
expounded by Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.16. Take good heed unto your selves, that ye
corrupt not your selves and make you a graven image or representation of any
figure in the likeness of male or female. Mark the reason of this prohibition
in the same place: for (says he) ye saw no image in the day the Lord spoke
unto you in Horeb and v. 15. Ye heard the voice of the words but saw no
similitude save a voice. Now the reason being understood of the image of God
himself: the prohibition must needs be so understood. Again there is no
question; that God directs his commandment against a ^inne in speculation, but
against some common and wicked practice of the Jews, and that was to represent
God himself in likenesses and bodily forms. Esai. 40. 1^. And that was also
the practice of the Gentiles, that were far more gross in this kind then
the Jews. Romans 1.23. This then is plain to any indifferent man, that the
first part of the commandment forbiddes the making of graven images or
likenesses of the true Iehoua: and thus the Roman Catechism understands t^^
words. As for the second part, it must be understood according to them eaning
of the first: and therefore it forbids us, to bow down to any image of God.
Hence then it follows, that to worship God or Saints in, or, at images, and to
worship images with religious worship is abominable idolatry. And common
reason might teach us thus much. For they that adore and worship the true God
in images, do bind the presence of God, his operation, grace, and his hearing
of us, to certain things, places, signs, to which he has not bound himself,
either by commandment or promise: and that is, otherwise to worship God, and
to seek for his blessings, then he has commanded himself to be worshipped,
or promised to hear us. Upon this ground, is plainly overthrown the excuse
which they make, that they worship not images but God and Saints in images:
for neither God nor the Saints do acknowledge this kind of honor, but they
abhor it. Whence it follows necessarily, that they worship nothing beside
the image, or, the devise of their own brain, in which they feign to
themselves such a god as will be worshipped, and receive our prayers at images.
It will be said, that the Papists do no otherwise tie the worship and
invocation of God to images, then God tied himself to the sanctuary and the
temple of Solomon. And I say again, it was the will of God that he would show
his presence, and be worshipped at the Sanctuary, and the Jews had the
warrant of Gods word for it: but we have no like warrant, either by promise or
commandment to tie Gods presence to an image or crucifix. Again, reason yet
further may discover their idolatry. They, which worship they know not what,
worship an idol: but the Papists worship they know not what: I prove it thus.
To the consecration of the host, there is required the intention of the Priest,
at the least vertually, as they say, and if this be true, it follows that none
of them can come to the Mass, or pray in faith, but he must always doubt of
that which is lifted up by the hands of the priest in the mass: whether it be
bread or the body and blood of Christ. For none can have any certentie of the
intention of the priest in consecrating this bread and this wine: but rather
may have a just occasion of doubting by reason of the common ignorance and
looseness of life in such persons.

Thirdly the commandment touching the Sabbath, gives a liberty to work six
days in the ordinary affairs of our callings: and this liberty cannot be
repealed by any creature. The Church of Rome therefore erreth, in that it
prescribes set and ordinary festival days, not only to God but also to
Saints: inioyning them as straightly and with as much solemnity to be observed,
as the Sabbath of the Lord.

Fourthly, the third commandment, or (as they say) the fourth, inioynes
children to obey father and mother in all things, specially in matters of
moment, as in their marriage and choice of their callings: and that even to
death: and yet the church of Rome against the intent of this commandment,
allows that clandestine marriages, and the vow of religion shall be in force,
though they be without, and against the consent of wise and careful parents.

Fifthly, the last commandment of lust, forbiddes the first motions to sin,
that are before consent. I prove it thus. Lusting is forbidden in the former
commandments as well as in the last, yea lusting that is joined with consent:
as in the commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery, is forbidden lusting
after our neighbors wife: and in the next, lusting after our neighbors goods,
etc. Now if the last commandment also forbid no more but lust with consent, it
is confounded with the rest: and by this means there shall not be ten distinct
words, or, commandments: which to say is absurd: it remains therefore that
the lust here forbidden goes before consent. Again, the Philosophers knew that
lust with consent was evil, even by the light of nature: but Paul a learned
Pharise and therefore more then a Philosopher, knew not lust to be sin, that
is forbidden in this commandment, Romans 7. Lust therefore that is forbidden
here, is without consent. Wicked then is the doctrine of the Roman Church,
Mol. tract. c. 27. conc. 4.
teaching that in every mortal sin is required an act commanded of the will:
and hence they say many thoughts against faith and unclean imaginations are no
sins.

6 Lastly, the words of the second commandment. And show mercy to thousands
on them that love me and keep my commandments, overthrows all humane merits.
For if the reward be given of mercy to them that keep the law, it is not
given for the merit of the work done.

To come to the third part of the Catechism: the Lords prayer is a most
absolute and perfect form of prayer. For which cause it was called of
Tertullian, The breuiarie of the Gospel: and Coelestinus says, the law of
praying is the law of believing and the law of working. Now in this prayer we
are taught to direct our prayers to God alone, Our father, etc. and that only
in the name and mediation of Christ. For God is our father only by Christ. It
is needelesse therefore, to use any invocation of Saints, or to make them our
mediators of intercession unto God: and it is sufficient, if we pray only
unto God in the name of Christ alone.

2 In the fourth petition, we say thus, Give us our daily bread. In which
words, we acknowledge that every morsel of bread is the mere gift of God.
What madness then is it, for us to think that we should merit the kingdom of
heaven by works, that can not merit so much as bread?

3 In the next petition, Forgive us our debts, four opinions of the Roman
religion are directly overthrown. The first is concerning humane
Satisfactions. For the child of God is here after his conversion taught, to
humble himself day by day, and to pray for the pardon of his daily sins: now
to make satisfaction and to sue for pardon be contrary. The second opinion
here overthrown, is touching merits. For we do acknowledge our selves to be
debtors unto God, yea bankrupts: and that beside the maine sum of many
thousand talents, we daily increase the debt: therefore we can not possibly
merit any of the blessings of God. It is mere madness to think, that they
which cannot pay their debts, but rather increase them day by day, should
deferue or purchase any of the goods of the creditours, or the pardon of their
debts: and if any favor be showed the^, it comes of mere goodwil without the
least desert. In a word, this must be thought upon, that, if all we can do,
will not keep us from increasing the maine sum of our debt, much les^e shall
we be able by any merit to diminish the same. By good right therefore do al gods
servants ca^t down themselves and pray, Forgive us our debts. The third
opinion is that punishment may be retained, the fault being wholly remitted:
but this can not stand, for here sin is called our debt: because by nature we
owe unto God obedience, and for the defect of this payment, we further owe unto
him the forfiture of punishment. Sin then is called our debt in respect of
the punishment. And therefore when we pray for the pardon of sin, we require
the pardon not only of fault, but of the whole punishment. And when a debt is
pardoned, it is absurd to think that the least payment should remain. The
fourth opinion is that a man in this life may fulfill the law, whereas in this
place every servant of God is taught to ask a daily pardon for the breach of
the law. Answer is made, that our daily sins are venial and not against the
law but beside the law. But this which they say is against the petition: for a
debt that comes by forfiture is against the bond or obligation. Now every sin
is a debt causing the forfiture of punishment: and therefore is not beside, but
directly against the law.

4 In this clause, as we forgive our debtors, it is taken for granted, that we
may certainly know that we are in love and charity with men, when we make
reconciliation: why then may not we know certainly that we repent and believe
and are reconciled to God: which all Roman Catholics deny.

5 In the last words, and lead us not into temptation, we pray not, that God
should free us from temptation (for it is otherwhiles good to be tempted, Psalm.
26.1.) but that we be not left to the malice of Satan, and held captive of the
temptation, for here to be lead into temptation, and to be delivered, are
opposed. Now hence I gather, that he which is the child of God truly justified
and sanctified, shall never fall wholly and finally from the grace of God: and
I conclude on this manner. That which we ask according to the will of God,
shall be granted, 1. Ioh. 5. but this the child of God asks, that he might
never be wholly forsaken of his father, and left captive in temptation. This
therefore shall be granted.

6 This clause Amen, signifies a special faith touching all the former
petitions, that they shall be granted: and therefore a special faith
concerning remission of sins: which the Roman Church denies.

To come to the last place, to the Institution of the sacrament of the Lords
Supper, 1. Cor. 11.23. In which first of all the Real presence is by many
circumstances overthrown. Out of the words, he took and brake, it is plain
that, that which Christ took was not his body: because he can not be said
with his own hands to have taken, held, and broken himself, but the very
bread. Again Christ said not: under the form of bread, or in bread: but This,
that is, bread is my body. 3. Bread was not given for us but only the body
of Christ: and in this first institution, the body of Christ was not really
given to death. 4. The cup, is the new testament by a figure: why may not the
bread be the body of Christ by a figure also? 5. Christ did eat the supper,
but not him self. 6. We are bidden to do it, till he come: Christ then is not
bodily present.

7. Christ biddes the bread to be eaten in a remembrance of him: but signs of
remembrance are of things absent. 8. If the Popish real presence be granted,
then the body and blood of Christ are either severed or joined together. If
severed, then Christ is still crucified. If joined together, then the bread is
both the body and blood of Christ: whereas the institution says, the bread is
the body, and the wine is the blood.

2 Again, here is condemned the administration of the sa^ram^nt under one
only kind. For the commandment of Christ is, Drink ye all of this, Mat.
26.27. And this commandment is rehearsed to the Church of Corinth in these
words, Do this as often as ye drink in remembrance of me. v. 25. And no power
can reuerse this commandment: because it was established by the sovereign
head of the Church.

These few lines, as also the former treatise, I offer to the view and reading
of them, that favor the Roman religion: willing them with patience to
consider this one thing, that their religion, if it were Catholic and
Apostolic (as they pretend) it could not be contrary so much as in one
point, to the grounds of all Catechismes, that have been used in all
Churches, confessing the name of Christ, ever since the Apostles days. And
whereas it crosses the said grounds in sundry points of doctrine, (as I have
proved) it is a plain argument that the present Roman religion, is
degenerate. I write not this despising or hating their persons for their
religion, but wishing unfeignedly their conversion in this world, and their
salvation in the world to come.

FINIS.
THE FOUNDATION OF CHRISTIAN RELIgion: gathered into six Principles.

And it is to be learned of ignorant people, that they may be fit to hear
Sermons with profit, and to receive the Lords Supper with comfort.

Psalm 119. 30. The entrance into thy words shows light, and gives
understanding to the simple. Printed for I.L. and I.P. 1600.

To all ignorant people that desire to be instructed.
Poor people, your manner is to sooth up your selves, as though ye were in a
most happy estate: but if the matter come to a just trial, it will fall out
far otherwise. For you lead your lives in great ignorance, as may appear by
these your common opinions which follow.

1 That faith is a man's good meaning and his good serving of God. 2 That God is
served by the rehearsing of the ten Commandments, the Lords prayer, and the
Creed. 3 That ye have believed in Christ ever since you could remember. 4 That
it is pity he should live which does any whit doubt of his salvation. 5 That
none can tell whether he shall be saved or no certainly: (...) that all men
must be of a good belief. 6 That howsoever a man live, yet if he call upon God
on his deathbed, and say, Lord have mercy upon me, and so go away like a
lamb, he is certainly saved. 7 That, if any be strangely visited, he is
either taken with a Planet, or bewitched. 8 That a man may lawfully swear when
he speaks nothing but the truth: and swears by nothing but that which is
good, as by his faith or troth. 9 That a Preacher is a good man no longer then
he is in the pulpit. They think all like themselves. 10 That a man may repent
when he will, because the Scripture says, At what time soever a sinner does
repent him of his sin, etc. 11 That it is an easier thing to please God then
to please our neighbor. 12 That ye can keep the commandments, as well as God
will give you leave. 13 That it is the safest to do in Religion as most do.
14 That merry ballads and books, as Scogin, Bevis of Southampton, etc. are
good to drive away time, and to remove heart-quames. 15 That ye can serve God
with all your hearts, and that ye would be sorry else. 16 That a man need not
hear so many sermons except he could follow them better. 17 That a man which
comes at no sermons, may as well believe, as he which hears all the sermons
in the world. 18 That ye know all the Preacher can tell you. For he can say
nothing, but that every man is a sinner, that we must love our neighbors as
our selves, that every man must be saved by Christ: and all this ye can tell as
well as he. 19 That it was a good world when the old Religion was, because all
things were cheap. 20 That drinking and bezeling in the alehouse or tavern is
good fellowship, and shows a good kind nature, and maintains neighborhood.
21 That a man may swear by the Mass, because it is nothing now: and byr
Lady, because she is gone out of the country. 22 That every man must be for
himself, and God for us all. 23 That a man may make of his own whatsoever he
can. 24 That if a man remember to say his prayers in the morning (though h^
never understand them) he has blessed himself for all the day following. 25
That a man prays when he says the ten Command^ments. 26 That a man eats his
maker in the Sacrament. 27 That if a man be no adulterer, no thief, nor
murderer, and do no man harm, he is a right honest man. 28 That a man need
not have any knowledge of Religion, because he is not booke-learned. 29 That
one may have a good meaning, when he says and does that which is evil. 30
That a man may go to wizards, called wisemen, for counsel: because God has
provided a salve for every sore. 31 That ye are to be excused in all your
doings, because the best men are sinners. 32 That ye have so strong a faith in
Christ, that no evil company can hurt you.
These and such like sayings, what argue they but your gross ignorance? Now,
where ignorance reigns, there reigns sin: and where sin reigns, there
the devil rules: and where he rules, man are in a damnable case.

Ye will reply unto me thus: that ye are not so bad I would make you: if need
be you can say the Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments: and
therefore ye will be of Gods belief say all men what they will, and you defy
the devil from yours hearts.

I answer again, that it is not sufficient to say all these without book,
unless ye can understand the meaning of the words, and be able to make a right
use of the Commandments, of the Creed, of the Lords prayer, by applying them
inwardly to your hearts and consciences, and outwardly to your lives and
conuersations. This is the very point in which ye fail.

And for an help in this your ignorance, to bring you to true knowledge,
unfeigned faith, and sound repentance: here I have set down the principal
point of Christian religion in six plain and easy rules, even such as the
simplest may easily learn: and hereunto is adjoined an exposition of them word
by word. If ye do want other good direction, then use this my labor for your
instruction. In reading of it first learn the six principles, and when ye
have them without the book and the meaning of them withal, then learn the
exposition also: which being well conceived, and in some measure felt in the
heart, ye shall be able to profit by Sermons, whereas now ye cannot: and the
ordinary parts of the Catechism, namely the ten Commandments, the Creed,
the Lords prayer, and the institution of the two Sacraments shall more easily
be understood.

Thine in Christ Jesus, William Perkins.

The foundation of Christian religion, gathered into six Principles.
The first Principle.
Question. What do thou believe concerning God?

A. There is one God, creator and governor of all things, distinguished into
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Proves out of the word of God.

1. There is a God.
For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are
seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his works, to the
intent, Romans 1.10.
that they should be without excuse.

Nevertheless, he left not himself without witness, in that he did good and
gave us rain from heaven, Act. 14. 17
and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.

2. This God one.
Concerning therefore meat sacrificed to idols, we know that an idol is
nothing in the world: 1. Cor. 8.4.
and that there is none other God but one.

3. He is creator of all things.
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

Through faith we understand, that the world was ordained by the word of God:
Genesis 1.1. Heb. 11.3.
so that the things which we see, are not made of things which did appear.

4. He is governor of all things.
The eyes of the Lord in every place behold the evil and the good. Prou. 15.3.
Mat. 10.10.


Yea, and all the hairs of your head are numbered.

5. Distinguished into the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
And Jesus when he was baptized came straight out of the water, and lo, Mat.
3.16
the heavens were opened unto him, and John saw the spirit of God descending
like a Dove and lighting upon him.

And lo, a voice came from heaven, saying: verse. 17.
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.

For there are three, which bear record in heaven, the Father, the word, and
the holy Ghost, 1. Ioh. 5.7.
and these three are one.

The second Principle.
Q. What do thou believe concerning man, and concerning thine own self?

A. All men are wholly corrupted with sin through Adams fall, and so are
become slaves of Satan, and guilty of eternal damnation.

1. All men are corrupted with sin.
As it is written, there is none righteous, no not one. Romans 3. 10.


2. They are wholly corrupted.
Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, and I pray God that your
whole spirit, and soul, and body, 1. Th. 5.^^.
may be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This I say therefore and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as
other Gentiles walk in vanity of their mind. Ephesians. 4.1^.


Having their cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God.
verse. 18.
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their heart.

Genesis 6.5.
When the Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and all
the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil continually.

3. Through Adams fall
Romans 5.12.
Wherefore as by one man, sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and
so death went went over all men, for so much as all men have sinned.

4. And so are become slaves of Satan.
Ephesians. 2.2.
Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of the world, and after
the prince that rules in the air, even the spirit that now works in the
children of disobedience.

Heb. 2.14.
For as much then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through death,
him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.

2. Cor. 4.4.
In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds, that is, of Infidels,
that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the image of God
should not shine unto them.

5. And guilty of eternal damnation.
Gal. 3.10.
For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse, for it is
written: Cursed is every man that continues not in all things, which are
written in the book of the Law to do them. Likewise then as by the offense
of one the fault came on all men to condemnation: so by the justifying of one,
the benefit abounded toward all men to the justification of life. Romans 5.18.


The third Principle.
Q. What means is there for thee to escape this damnable estate?

A. Jesus Christ the eternal son of God, being made man, by his death upon
the cross and by his righteousness, has perfectly alone by himself,
accomplished all things that are needful for the salvation of mankind.

1. Jesus Christ the eternal son of God,
Ioh. 1.14.
And the word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory thereof,
as the glory of the only begotten (Son) of the Father full of grace and
truth.

2. Being made man.
Heb. 2.16.
For he in no sort took the angels, but he took the seed of Abraham.

3. By his death upon the cross.
But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
Esa. 53.5.


4. And by his righteousness.
Romans 5.19.
For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one, shall many also be made righteous.

For he has made him to be sin for us which knew no sin, that we should
be made the righteousness of God in him. 2. Cor. 5.21.


5. Has perfectly
Heb. 7.25.
Wherefore he is able also perfectly to save them that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

6. Alone by himself
Act. 4.12.
Neither is there salvation in any other, for among men there is given none
other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved.

7. Accomplished all things needful for the salvation of mankind.
And he is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole world. 1. Ioh. 2.2.


The fourth Principle.
Q. But how may thou be made partaker of Christ and his benfits?

A. A man of a contrite and humble spirit, by faith alone apprehending and
applying Christ with all his merits unto himself, is justified before God and
sanctified.

1. A man of a contrite and humble spirit
For thus says he, that is high and excellent, he that inhabiteth the
eternity, whose name is the holy one, I dwell in the high and holy place, with
him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to give life to the^ that are of a contrite heart. Esa. 51.15.


The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit, a contrite and a broken heart, O
God, thou will not despise. Psalm. 51.17.


2. By faith alone.
As soon as Jesus heard that word spoken, he said unto the Ruler of the
Sinagogue, be not afraid, only believe. Mark. 5.36.


So Moses made a serpent of brass, and set it up for a sign, and when a
serpent had bitten a man, then he looked to the serpent of brass and lived.
Number. 21.19.


And as Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man
be lifted up. Ioh. 3.14.


That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life.
verse 15.


3. Apprehending and applying Christ with all his merits unto himself.
But as many as received him, to them he gave power, to be the sons of God,
to them that believe in his name. And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of
life, he that comes to me shall not hunger: and he that believes in me
shall never thirst. Ioh. 1.12. Ioh. 6.35.


4. Is justified before God.
For what says the Scripture, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him
for righteousness. Romans 4.3.


Even as David declares the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness, without works, saying: verse 6.


Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
verse 7.


5. And sanctified.
And he put no difference between us and them, after that by faith he had
purified their hearts. Act. 15.19.


But ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification and redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30.


The fifth Principle.
Q. What are the ordinary or usual means for the obtaining of faith?

A. Faith comes only by the preaching of the word, and increases daily by
it: as also by the administration of the Sacraments and prayer.

1. Faith comes only by the preaching of the word, and increases daily by it.
But how shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed, how shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard: To. 10. ^4.
and how shall they hear without a preacher? Where there is no vision the
people decay, but he that keeps the law is blessed. Prou. 29.18.


Hos. 4.8.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou have refused
knowledge, I will also refuse thee, that thou shall be no priest to me, and
seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children.

2. As also by the administration of the Sacraments.
Romans 4. 11.
After he received the sign of circumcision, as the seal of the righteousness
of the faith, which he had when he was uncircumcised, that he should be the
Father of all them that believe not being circumcised, that righteousness might
be imputed to the^ also.

Moreover brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, that all our
Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, etc. 1. Cor. 10.1.


3. And Prayer.
Romans 10.13.
For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

The sixth Principle.
Q. What is the estate of all men after death?

A. All men shall rise again with their own bodies, to the last judgment,
which being ended, the godly shall possess the kingdom of heaven: but
unbelievers and reprobates shall be in hell, tormented with the devil and his
angels for ever.

1. All men shall rise again with their own bodies.
Ioh. 5.28.
Marvel not at this, for the hour shall come, in the which all that are in the
graves shall hear his voice.

verse. 29.
And they shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of life:
but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation.

2. To the last judgment.
Eccl. 12.14.
For God will bring every work unto judgment, with every secret thing, whether
it be good or evil.

Mat. 12.36.
But I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give account thereof, at the day of judgment.

3. Which being ended; the godly
2. Pet. 2. 7.
And delivered just Lot, vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked.

Ezec. 9.4.
And the Lord said unto him: go through the midst of the city, even through
the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of them that
mourn and cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof.

4. Shall possess the kingdom of God.
Then shall the king say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning of the
world. Mat. 25.34.


5. But unbelievers and rebrobates shall be in hell tormented with the devil
and his angels.
verse. 41.
Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

The Scriptures for proof were only quoted by the author, to move thee to
search them: the words them^elues I have expressed, at the earnest request of
many, that thou may more easily learn them: if yet thou will be ignorant,
thy malice is evident: if thou gaynest knowledge, give God the glory in doing
of his will.

Thine T. S.

THE EXPOSITION OF THE PRINCIPLES.
The first Principle expounded. Question.
WHat is God?

A. God is a Ioh. 4.24.
spirit, or a spiritual substance, most wise, most holy, eternal, infinite.

Q. How do you persuade your self that there is such a God?

A. Besides the testimony of the Scriptures, plain reason will show it.

Q. What is one reason?

A. When I consider Romans 1.20 Act. 14. 17.
the wonderful frame of the world, me thinks the silly creatures that be in it
could never make it: neither could it make it self, and therefore besides all
these, the maker of it must needs be God. Even as when a man comes into a
strange country, and sees fair and sumptuous buildings, and yet finds no
living creatures there besides birds and beasts, he will not imagine that
either birds or beasts reared those buildings, but he presently conceiues,
that some men either were or have been there.

Q. What other reason have you?

A. Romans 2.15. Genesis 38. 10. and 13.14.
A man that commits any sin, as murder, fornication, adultery, blasphemy,
etc. albeit he does so conceal the matter, that no man living know of it, yet
oftentimes he has a griping in his conscience, and feels the very flashing of
hell fire: which is a strong reason to show that there is a God, before whose
judgment seat he must answer for this fact.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. No 1. Cor. 8.6.
more but one.

Q. How do you conceive this one God in your mind?

A. Not Deu. 4. 16
by framing any image of him in my mind (as ignorant folks do, that think him
to be an old man sitting in heaven) but I conceive him by his properties and
works.

Q. What be his chief properties?

A. First, he is Job. 12.13.
most wise, understanding all things aright, and knowing the reason of them.
Secondly, he is Esai 6.3. Exo. 20.5,6.
most holy, which appears in that he is most just and merciful unto his
creatures. Thirdly, he is Esa. 41.4.
eternal, without either beginning or end of days. Lastly, he is Ps. 139.
all.
infinite, both because he is present in all places, and because he is of power
sufficient to do whatsoever he Job 9.4. Deuteronomy. 10.17.
will.

Q. What be the works of God?

A. Ier. 10.12. Psalm. 33. 6.
The creation of the world, and of every thing therein, and the preservation of
them being created by his special providence.

Q. How know you that God governs every particular thing in the world by his
special providence?

A. To omit the Math. 10. 30. Pro. 16.33
Scriptures, I see it by experience: Leu. 26.26. Mat. 4.4.
Meat, Drink, and clothing being void of heat and life, could not preserve
the life of man, unless there were a special providence of God to give virtue
unto them.

Q. How is this one God distinguished?

A. 1. Ioh. 5. 7. Mat. 3.12.
Into the Father which begets the Son: into the Son who is begotten of
the Father: into the holy Ghost, Ioh. 15. 36
who proceeds from the Father and the Son.

The second Principle expounded.
Q. Let us now come to ours selves, and first tell me what is the natural
estate of man?

A. Every man is by nature Ephesians. 2.1. 1. Tim. 5.5.
dead in sin as a loathsome carrion, or as a dead corpse lies rotting and
stinking in the grave, having in him the seed of all sins.

Q. What is sin?

A. Any 1. Ioh. 3. 4. Romans 7.7. Gal. 3.^0.
breach of the Law of God, if it be no more but the least want of that which
the Lord requires.

Q. How many sorts of sin are there?

A. Sin is either Col. 3.9. Psalm. 15.5.
the corruption of nature, or any evil actions that proceed of it as fruits
thereof.

Q. In whom is the corruption of nature?

A. In all men, Romans 3.10
none excepted.

Q. In what part of man is it?

A. In every Genesis 6.5. 1. Th. 5. 23.
part both of body and soul, like as a leprosy that runs from the crown of
the head, to the sole of the foot.

Q. Show me how every part of man is corrupted with sin?

A. First, in the 1. Cor. 2. 14 Romans 8.5.
mind there is nothing but ignorance and blindenes concerning heavenly matters.
Secondly, Tit. 1. 15. Ephesians. 4.18. Esa. 57. 20.
the conscience is defiled, being always either benumbed with sin, or else
turmoyled with inward accusations and terrors. Thirdly, Phil. 2. 13. Job. 15.16.
the will of man only wills and lusts after evil. Fourthly, the Gal. 5. 24.
affections of the heart, as love, joy, hope, desire, etc. are moved and
stirred to that which is evil to embrace it, and they are never stirred unto
that which is good, unless it be to eschew it. Lastly, the Romans 6. 19.
members of the body are the instruments and tools of the mind for the
execution of sin.

Q. What be those evil actions that are the fruits of this corruption?

A. Genesis 6.5.
Evil thoughts in the mind, which come either by a man's own conceiving, or
by the suggestion Ioh. 15. 2. Act. 5.3. 1. Chr. 21.1.
of the devil; evil motions and lusts stirring in the heart, and from these
arise evil words and deeds, when any occasion is given.

Q. How comes it to pass that all men are thus defiled with sin?

A. By Romans 5.12. 26.19. Genesis 3.
Adams infidelity and disobedience, in eating the forbidden fruit: even as we
see great personages by treason do not only hurt themselves, but also stain
their blood, and disgrace their posterity.

Q. What hurt comes to man by his sin?

A. Gal. 3. 10.
He is continually subject to the curse of God in his life time, in the end of
his life, and after this life.

Q. What is the curse of God in this life?

A. Deuteronomy. 28. 21.22. 27. 65.66.67.
In the body, diseases, aches, pains: in the soul blindness, hardness of
heart, horror of conscience: in goods hindrances, and losses: in name,
ignominy and reproach: lastly, in the whole man, bondage under Satan the
prince of darkness.

Q. What manner of bondage is this?

A. This Heb. 2. 14. Ephesians. 2.2. 2. Cor. 4.4. Luke 11.21.
bondage is when a man is the ^laue of the devil, and has him to reign in
his heart as his God.

Q. How may a man know whether Satan be his God or not?

A. He may know it by this, if he give obedience to him in his heart, and
express it in his conversation.

Q. And how shall a man perceive this obedience?

A. If he Ioh. 8. 44. 1. Ioh. 3.8.
take delight in the evil motions that Satan puts into his heart, and do
fulfill the lusts of the devil.

Q. What is the curse due to man in the end of this life?

A. Romans 5. 12
Death, which is the separation of body and soul.

Q. What is the curse after this life?

A. Gal. 3. 10. Romans 3. 10.
Eternal damnation in hell fire, whereof every man is guilty, and is in as
great danger of it, as the traitor apprehended is in danger of hanging,
drawing and quartering.

The third principle expounded.
Q. If damnation be the reward of sin, then is a man of all creatures most
miserable. A dog or a toade when they die, all their misery is ended: but when
a man dies there is the beginning of his woe.

A. It were so indeed, if there were no means of deliverance, but GOD has
showed his mercy in giving a Savior to mankind.

Q. How is this Savior called?

A. Mat. 1.2.
Jesus Christ.

Q. What is Jesus Christ?

A. Heb. 1. 16. Ioh. 1.14.
The eternal son of God made man in all things, even Heb. 5^7. Mat. 13.18.
in his infirmities like other men, save only in sin.

Q. How was he made man void of sin?

A: He was Mat. 1.18.
conceived in the womb of a Virgin, and sanctified by the holy Ghost at his
conception.

Q. Why must our Savior be both God and man?

A: He 1. Tim. 2.5.
must be a man: because man has sinned, and therefore a man must die for sin
to appease Gods wrath: he must be God to sustain and uphold the manhood, to
overcome and vanquish death.

Q: What be the offices of Christ to make him an all-sufficient Savior?

A: He Psalm. 45.7. Luke 4.18. Deuteronomy. 18. 15.18. Luke 1.33. Ps. 100. all.
is a priest, a prophet, a King.

Q: Why is he a priest?

A: To work the means of salvation in the behalf of mankind.

Q: How does he work the means of salvation?

A: Mat. 20. 18. Heb. 7. 25. 26.
First, by making satisfaction to his father for the sin of man: Secondly, by
making intercession.

Q: How does he make satisfaction?

A: By two means: and the first is by offering a sacrifice.

Q: What is this sacrifice?

A: Esa. 53.10.
Christ himself, as he is man consisting of body and soul.

Q: What is the Apoc. 8. 3. Heb. 3.10.
Altar?

A: Christ as he is God, is the Altar on which he sacrificed himself.

Q: Who was the priest?

None but Heb. 5.5.6.
Christ, and that as he is both God and man.

Q: How often did he sacrifice himself?

A: Never but Heb. 9.28.
once.

Q: What death did he suffer when he sacrificed himself?

A: A death upon the cross, peculiar to him alone: for Esa. 55.5. Ioh. 12.2.
Reu. 19. 15. Luke 22.44.
besides the separation of body and soul, he felt also the pang^s of hell, in
that the whole wrath of God due to the sin of man, was powered forth upon him.

Q. What profit comes by his Sacrifice?

A. Gods Heb. 9.26.
wrath is appeased by it.

Q. Could the suffering of Christ, which was but for a short time, counteruaile
everlasting damnation, and so appease Gods wrath?

A. Yea, for seeing Christ suffered Act. 20.28 ^. Cor. 5.16.
God suffered, though not in his godhead: and that is more tha^ if all men in
the world had suffered for ever and ever.

Q. Now tell me the other means of satisfaction.

A. It is the perfect fulfilling of the law.

Q. How did he fulfill the law?

A. By 1. Cor. 1.30 Romans 2. 19. 2. Cor. 5.21.
his perfect righteousness: which consists of two parts, the first, the
integrity and pureness of his human nature: the other, Romans 5.18 Romans 4.8.
his obedience in performing all that the law required.

Q. You have showed how Christ does make satisfaction, tell me likewise how
he does make intercession?

A. He alone does continually To. 8. 34. ^. Pet. 2.5.
appear before his father in heaven, making the faithful and all their
prayers acceptable unto him, by applying of the merits of his own perfect
satisfaction to them.

Q. Why is Christ a prophet?

A. To Ioh. 6. 45. Mat. 3. 17.
reveal unto his Church the way and means of salvation, and this he does
outwardly by the ministry of his word, and inwardly by the teaching of his
holy spirit.

Q. Why is he also a King?

A. That Esaias. 9. 7.
he might bountifully bestow upon us, and convey unto us all the aforesaid
means of salvation.

Q. How does he show himself to be a King?

A. In Act. 10. 30. Ephesians. 4.8. Act. 2.9.
that being dead and buried, he rose from the grave, quickened his dead
body, ascended into heaven, and now sits at the right hand of his father,
with full full power and glory in heaven.

Q. How else?

A. In Esaias. 9. 7. and 30.21.
that he does continually inspire and direct his servants by the divine power
of his holy spirit, according to his holy word.

Q. But to whom will this blessed King communicate all these means of
salvation?

A. He Mat. 20. 16. Ioh. 1.11. 1. Ioh. 2.2.
offers them to many, and they are sufficient to save all mankind; but all
shall not be saved thereby, because by faith they will not receive them.

The fourth principle expounded.
Q. What is faith?

A. Faith is a Ioh. 1. 12. and 6.3.5. Gal. 3.27. Col. 2. 12.
wonderful grace of God, by which a man does apprehend and apply Christ, and
all his benefits unto himself.

Q. How does a man apply Christ unto himself, seeing we are on earth, and
Christ in heaven?

A. This 1. Cor. 1. 12. Romans 8. 16.
applying is done by assurance, when a man is verily persuaded by the holy
spirit of Gods favor toward himself particularly, and of the forgiveness of
his own sins.

Q. How does God bring men truly to believe in Christ?

A. First he prepares their hearts, that they might be capable of faith: and
then he works faith in them.

Q. How does God prepare men's hearts?

A. Eze. 1. 1^. Hos. 6. 12.
By bruising them, as if one would break an hard stone to powder: and this is
done by hambling them.

Q. How does God humble a man?

A. By working in him a sight of his sins, and a sorrow for them.

Q. How is this sight of sin wrought?

A. By the To. 3.20. and 7.7.8.
moral law: the sum whereof is the ten commandments.

Q. What sins may I find in my self by them?

A. Ten.

Q. What is the first?

A. Com. I.
To make something thy God which is not God, by fearing it, loving it, so
trusting in it more then in the true God.

Q. What is the second?

A. II.
To worship false Gods, or the true God in a false manner.

Q. What is the third?

A. III.
To dishonor God, in abusing his titles, words and works.

Q. What is the fourth?

A. IV.
To break the Sabbath, in doing the works of their calling and of the flesh:
and in leaving undone the works of the spirit.

Q. What be the six latter?

A. To do any thing that may hinder thy neighbors V.
dignity, VI.
life, VII.
chastity, VIII.
wealth, IX.
good name, X.
though it be but in the secret thoughts and motions of the heart, unto which
thou give no liking nor consent.

Q. What is sorrow for sin?

A. It is Act. 2.37. 38. Ca^t. 5.4.
when a man's conscience is touched with a lively feeling of Gods displeasure for
any of these sins: in 1. Tim. 1. 15. Luke 15.21. Ezra. 9.6.7.
such wise, that he utterly despaires of salvation, in regard of any thing in
himself, acknowledging that he has deserved shame and confusion eternally.

Q. How does God work this sorrow?

A. By the terrible curse of the Law.

Q. What is that?

A. He Gal. 3.
which breaks but one of the commandments of God, though it be but once in all
his life time; and that only in one thought, is subject to, and in danger of
eternal damnation thereby.

Q. When men's hearts are thus prepared, how does God ingraft faith in them?

A. By working certain inward motions in the heart, which are the seeds of
faith, out of which it breeds.

Q. What is the first of them?

A. When a man humbled under the burden of his sins, does Esa. 55. 1. Ioh.
7.13. Luke 1. 53.
acknoweledge and feel that he stands in great need of Christ.

Q. What is the second?

A. An Reu. 21. 16.
hungring desire and a longing to be made partaker of Christ and all his merits.

Q. What is the third?

A. A Heb. 4. 16.
flying to the throne of grace, from the sentence of the Law pricking the
conscience.

Q. How is it done?

A. By Luke ^5.18, 19. Mat. 15. 22,23. Act. 8.22. 2. Cor. 12.1.
praying, with sending up loud cries for Gods favor in Christ in the pardoning
of sin: and with fervent perseverance herein, till the desire of the heart be
granted.

Q. What follows after all this?

A. God then, Mat. 7. 7. Esa. 65.24. Job 33.26.
according to his merciful promise, lets the poor sinner feel the assurance
of his love wherewith he loves him in Christ, which assurance is a lively
faith.

Q. Are there diverse degrees and measures of true faith?

A. Romans 1.17. Luke 17.5.
Yea.

Q. What is the least measure of true faith that any man can have?

A. When a man of an humble spirit by reason of the Esa. 42.2. Mat. 17. 20 Luke
17.5.
littlenes of his faith, does not yet feel the assurance of the forgiveness of
his sins, and yet he is persuaded that they are pardonable, and therefore
desires that they should be pardoned, and with his heart prays to God to
pardon them.

Q. How do you know that such a man has faith?

A. These To. 8.23, 24. Gal. 4.6. Mat. 5. 6.
desires and prayers are testimonies of the Spirit, whose property it is to
stir up a longing and a lusting after heavenly things, with sighs and groans
for Gods favor and mercy in Christ. Romans 8.9. Ephesians. 3.17.
Now where the spirit of Christ is, there is Christ dwelling: and where Christ
dwells, there is true faith, how weak soever it be.

Q. What is the greatest measure of faith?

A. When a man daily increasing in faith, comes to be Romans 8. 38,39. Cant.
8.6,7.
fully persuaded of Gods love in Christ toward himself particularly, and of
the forgiveness of his own sins.

Q. When shall a Christian heart come to this full assurance?

A. Not 2. Tim. 4. 7,8. Psalm. 23.6. with 1,2,3, 4, verse.
at the first, but in some continuance of time, when he has been well
practiced in Repentance, and has had diverse experiences of Gods love unto him
in Christ: then after them will appear in his heart the fullness of
persuasion: which is the ripenes To. 4.20, 21.
and strength of faith.

Q. What benefits does a man receive by his faith in Christ?

A. Hereby 1. Cor. 1. 30. Act. 15.9. Romans 4.3.
he is justified before God and sanctified.

Q. What is this to be justified before God?

A. It To. 8.35.
comprehends two things: the first, to be cleared from the guiltines and
punishment of sin: the second, to be accepted as perfectly righteous before
God.

Q. How is a man cleared from the guiltines and punishment of his sins?

A. By Christ's Col. 1.22. 1. Pet. 2. 25. 1. Ioh. 1. 17.
sufferings and death upon the cross.

Q. How is he accepted righteous before God?

A. By the 2. Cor. 5. 27.
righteousness of Christ imputed to him.

Q. What profit comes by being thus justified?

A. Hereby Romans 4.17. Apoc. 21.27
and by no other means in the world, the believer shall be accepted before
Gods judgment seat, as worthy of eternal life by the merits o the same
righteousness of Christ.

Q. Do not good works then make us worthy of eternal life?

A. No: for God who is perfect righteousness it self, will find in the best
works we do, more matter of da^uation then of salvation: and therefore Psa.
143.2. Esa. 64.6. Job 9.3.
we must rather condemn our selves for our good works, then look to be
justified before God thereby.

Q. How may a man know that he is justified before God?

A. He need not ascend into heaven to search the secret counsel of God; Romans
1. 3. 1. Ioh. 3.9.
but rather desce^d into his own heart to search whether he be sanctified or not.

Q. What is it to be sanctified?

A. It comprehends two things: the first to be purged from the corruption of
his own nature: the second to be endued with inward righteousness.

Q. How is the corruption of sin purged?

A. By the Romans 6. 4. 1. Pet. 4. 1,^
merits and power of Christ's death, which being by faith applied, is as a
corasiue to abate, consume, and weaken the power of all sin.

Q. How is a man endued with inherent righteousness?

A. Through the To. 6.5, 6. Phil. 3. 10.
virtue of Christ's resurrection, which being applied by faith is as a
restoratiue to revive a man that is dead in sin to newnes of life.

Q. In what part of a man is sanctification wrought?

A. In 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
every part both body and soul.

Q. In what time is it wrought?

A. It is To. 8.23. 2. Cor. 5.2,3
begun in this life, in which the faithful receive only the first fruits
of the Spirit, and it is not finished before the end of this life.

Q. What graces of the Spirit do usually show themselves in the heart of a man
sanctified?

A. The hatred Psalm. 1.19. 113. and 40. 9. and 101. 3. Romans 7.22.
of sin, and the love of righteousness.

Q. What proceeds of them?

A. Repentance, which is Psalm. 119. 57.^12.
a settled purpose in the heart, with a careful endeavor to leave all his
sins, and to live a Christian life, according to all Gods commandments.

Q. What goes with repentance?

A. A continual fighting and struggling against the assaults of a man's own
flesh, against the motions of the devil, and the inticements of the world.

Q. What follows after a man has gotten the victory in any temptation or
affliction?

A. Romans 5. 3. 2. Cor. 1.5.
Experience of Gods love in Christ, and so increase of peace of conscience, and
joy in the holy Ghost.

Q. What follows, i^ in any temptation he be overcome, and through infirmity
fall?

A. After a while 2. Cor. 7. 8,9. Mat. 26.72.
there will arise a godly sorrow, which is, when a man is grieved for no other
cause in the world but for this only, that by his sin he has displeased
God, who has been unto him a most merciful and loving Father. Q. What sign
is there of this sorrow?

A. The true sign 1. Pet. 2. 19.
of it is this, when a man can be grieved for the very disobedience to God in
his evil word or deed, though he should never be punished, and though there
were neither heaven nor hell.

Q. What follows after this sorrow?

A. Repentance 2. Cor. 7. 11.
renewed a fresh.

Q. By what signs will this repentance appear?

A. By 2. Cor. 7. 11.
seven 1. A care to leave the sin into which he is fallen, 2. An utter
condemning of himself for it, with a craving of pardon. 3. A great anger
against himself for his carelesnes. 4. A fear least he should fall into the
same sin again. 5. A desire ever after to please God. 6. A zeal of the
same. 7. Revenge upon himself for his former offense.

The fifth Principle expounded.
Q. What outward means must we use to obtain faith and all blessings of God
which come by faith?

A. The preaching Pro. 29. 18. Romans 10.14. Mat. 21. 19,20. 2. Tim. 3. 16
of Gods word, and the administration of the Sacraments, and prayer.

Q. Where is the word of God to be found?

A. The whole word of God needful to salvation, is set down in the holy
Scriptures.

Q. How know you that the Scriptures are the word of God, and not men's
policies?

A. I am assured of it. First, Ephesians. 1.13.
because the holy Ghost persuades my conscience that it is so. Secondly, I see
it by experience: for the preaching of the Heb. 4. 12. 1. Cor. 14. 25.
Scriptures have the power of God in them to humble a man, when they are
preached, and to cast him down to hell: and afterward to restore and raise him
up again.

Q. What is the use of the word of God preached?

A. First it Romans 1.17 2. Cor. 2. 16 Heb. 4.2.
breeds, and then it increases faith in them which are chosen to salvation:
but unto them that perish it is by reason of their corruption an occasion of
their further damnation.

Q. How must we hear Gods word that it may be effectual to salvation?

A. We Iam. 1.19. Act. 16. 14. Heb. 4.2. Esa. 66.2. Luke 2.51. Ps. 119.11.
must come unto it with hunger-bitten hearts, having an appetite to the word,
we must mark it with attention, receive it by faith, submit our selves unto it
with fear and trembling, even then when our faults are reproved: lastly, we
must hide it in the corners of our hearts, that we may frame our lives and
conuersations by it.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A Romans 4.11. Genesis 17.12. Gal. 3.1.
sign to represent, a seal to confirm, an instrument to convey Christ and
all his benefits to them that do believe in him.

Q. Why must a Sacrament represent the mercies of God before our eyes?

A. Because we are dull to conceive and to remember them.

Q. Why does the Sacrament seal unto us the mercies of God?

A. Because we are full of unbelief and doubting of them.

Q. Why is the Sacrament the instrument of the Spirit to convey the mercies of
God into our hearts?

A. Because we are like Thomas, we will not believe till we feel them in some
measure in our hearts.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two 1. Cor. ^0. ^,2,3.
and no more: Baptism, by which we have our admission into the true Church of
God: and the Lords Supper, by which we are nourished and preserved in the
Church after our admission.

Q. What is done in Baptism?

A. Act. 2. 38. Tit. 3. 5. Act. 22. 16. Mar. 28. 19.
In the assembly of the Church, the covenant of grace between God and the
party baptized, is solemnly confirmed and sealed.

Q. In this covenant what does God promise to the party baptized?

A. Gal. 3. 27. 1. Pet. 3.21
Christ with all blessings that come by him.

Q. To what condition is the party baptized, bound?

A. To Mar. 16. 16.
receive Christ, and to repent of his sin.

Q. What means the sprinkling or dipping in water?

A. It 1. Pet. 1.2.
seals unto us remission of sins and sanctification by the obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Christ.

Q. How comes it to pass that many after their Baptism for a long time
feel not the effect and fruit of it, and some never?

A. The fault is not in God, who keeps his covenants, but the fault is in
themselves, in that they do not keep the condition of the covenant to receive
Christ by faith, and to repent of all their sins.

Q. When shall a man then see the effect of his baptism?

A. At Heb. 10. 20. 1. Pet. 3.21.
what time soever he does receive Christ by faith, though it be many years
after, he shall then feel the power of God to regenerate him, and to work all
things in him, which he offered in baptism.

Q. How if a man never keep the condition, to which he bound himself in
baptism?

A. His damnation Deuteronomy. 23. 21,22. Eccles. 3.4.
shall be the greater, because he breaks his vow made to God.

Q. What is done in the Lords Supper?

A. The former covenant solemnly ratified in Baptism, is renewed in 1. Cor. 11.
23,24,25. and 12.13.
the Lords supper, between the Lord himself and the receiver.

Q. What is the receiver?

A. Every one 1. Cor. 11. 30,31. Mat. 5.22, 23. Esa. 66. 23.
that has been baptized, and after his baptism has truly believed in Christ,
and repented of his sins from his heart.

Q. What means the bread and wine, the eating of the bread, and drinking of
the wine?

A. These outward actions 1. Cor. 10. 16,17.
are a second seal, set by the Lords own hand unto his covenant. And they do
give every receiver to understand, that as God does bless the bread and wine,
to preserve and strengthen the body of the receiver: so Christ apprehended and
received by faith, shall nourish him, and preserve both body and soul unto
eternal life.

Q. What shall a true receiver feel in himself after the receiving of the
Sacrament?

A. 1. Cor. 10. 16, 17. and 11.21.
The increase of his faith in Christ, the increase of sanctification, a greater
measure of dying to sin, a greater care to live in newness of life.

Q. What if a man after the receiving of the Sacrament, never find any such
thing in himself?

A. He may well suspect himself, whether he did ever repent or not: and
thereupon to use means to come to sound faith and repentance.

Q. What is an other meaues of increasing faith?

A. Prayer.

Q. What is prayer?

A. 1. Ioh. 5. 14.
A familiar speech with God in the name of Christ: 1. Tim. 2. 1. Phil. 4.6.
in which either we crave things needful, or give thanks for things received.

Q. In asking things needful, what is required?

A. Two things: an earnest desire, and faith.

Q. Mat. 11. 24.
What things must a Christian man's heart desire?

A. Six things especially.

Q. What are they?

A. 1. Petition I.
That he may glorify God: 2. That II.
God may reign in his heart and not sin: 3. III.
That he may do Gods will, and not his lusts of the flesh: 4. IIII.
That he may rely himself on Gods providence for all the means of this
temporal life: 5. V.
That he may be justified, and be at peace with God: 6. VI.
That by the power of God he may be strengthened against all temptations.

Q. What is faith?

A. A Amen.
persuasion, that these things which we truly desire, God will grant them for
Christ's sake.

The sixth Principle expounded.
Q. After that a man has led a short life in this world, what follows the^?

A. Death, which is the parting asunder of body and soul.

Q. Why do wicked men and unbelievers die?

A. That Luke 16. 22,23.
their bodies may go to the earth, and their souls may be cast into hell fire.

Q. Why do the godly die, seeing Christ by death has overcome death?

A. They die for this end, that Luke 23. 43. Act. 7.70. 1. Th. 4.3. Heb. 2.14.
1. Cor. 15.5.
their bodies may rest for a while in the earth, and their souls may enter
into heaven immediately.

Q. What follows after death?

A. The day of judgment.

Q. What sign is there to know this day from other days?

A. 2. Pet. 3. 11,12.
Heaven and earth shall be consumed with fire immediately before the coming of
the judge.

Q. Who shall be the judge?

A. Jesus Christ the Son of God.

Q. What shall be the coming to judgment?

A. He 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16,17.
shall come in the clouds in great majesty and glory, with infinite company
of Angels.

Q. How shall all men be cited to judgment?

A. At the Mat. 24. 3
sound of a trumpet, the living shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye,
and the dead shall rise again every one with Job 19. 26.
his own body, and all shall be gathered together before Christ: and after
this, the good shall be severed from the bad, Mat. 25. 32,33.
these standing on the left hand of Christ, the other on the right.

Q. How will Christ try and examine every man's cause?

A. The Re. 20. 12. Dan. 7. 10.
books of all men's doings shall be laid open, men's consciences shall be made
either to accuse them, or excuse them, and every man shall be tried by the
works which he did in his life time, because they are open and manifest signs
Ioh. 3. 18. and 5,24.
of faith or unbelief.

Q. What sentence will he give?

A. He will give Mat. 25. 34.41.
sentence of salvation to the elect and godly: but he will pronounce sentence
of damnation against unbelievers and reprobates.

Q. What state shall the godly be in after the day of judgment?

A. They Mat. 25. 34. Apoc. 21. 2.34.11.
shall continue for ever in the highest heaven in the presence of God, having
fellowship with Christ Jesus, and reigning with him for ever.

Q. What state shall the wicked be in after the day of judgment?

A. In eternal perdition and destruction in hell fire.

Q. What is that?

A. It 2. The. 1.9. Esa. 66. 24. Apoc. 21. 8.
stands in three things especially: first a perpetual separation from Gods
comfortable presence: 2. fellowship with the devil and his angels: 3. an
horrible pang and torment both of body and soul, arising of the feeling of
the whole wrath of God, powered forth on the wicked for ever world without end:
and if the pain of one tooth for one day be so great, endelesse shall be the
pain of the whole man, body and soul for ever and ever.

FINIS.
A GRAIN of Musterd-seede: OR, The least measure of grace that is or can be
effectual to salvation.

Printed for Ralph Iackson. 1600.

TO THE RIHGT Honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Margaret, Countess of
Cumberland, Grace and peace.
RIght Honorable, the kingdom of heaven, of which the Scripture speaks so
often, is properly a certain state or condition, whereby we stand in the favor
and love of God, in and by Christ. And this kingdom is compared to a grain of
Musterd-seede, to teach us that a man is even at that instant already entered
into the kingdom of heaven, when the Lord, that good husbandman, has cast
but some little portion of faith or repentance into the ground of the heart:
yea though it be but as one grain of musterd-seed. Of this little grain I
have penned this little treatise, in quantity answerable thereto: and now I
present the same to your La^^ship, not to supply your want (for I hope you are
stored with more grains of this kind) but to perform some duty on my part.
Hoping therefore that your Ladyship will read and accept the same, I take my
leave, commending you to the blessing and protection of the Almighty.

Your H. to command, William Perkins.

A Grain of Musterd-seede: or, the least measure of grace that is, or can be
effectual to salvation.
IT is a very necessary point to be known, what is the least measure of grace
that can befall the true child of God, lesser the^ which, there is no grace
effectual to salvation. For first of all, the right understanding of this, is
the very foundation of true comfort unto all troubled and touched consciences.
Secondly, it is a notable means to stir up thankfulness in them that have any
grace at all; when they shall in examination of themselves consider, that they
have received of God the least measure of grace, or more. Thirdly it will be an
inducement, and a ^purre to many careless and unrepentant persons, to embrace
the Gospel, and to begin repentance for their sins; when they shall
perceive, and that by the word of God, that God accepts the very seeds, and
rudiments of faith and repentance at the first, though they be but in measure
as a grain of musterd-seede. Now then for the opening and clearing of this
point, I will set down six several conclusions, in such order as one shall
confirm and explain the other, and one depend upon the other.

I. Conclusion.
A man that does but begin to be converted, is even at that instant the very
child of God: though inwardly he be more carnal then spiritual.

The Exposition.
IN a man there must be considered three things, the substance of the body and
soul, whereof a man is said to consist, the faculties placed in the soul and
exercised in the body, as understanding, will, affections: the integrity and
purity of the faculties, whereby they are conformable to the will of God, and
bear his Image. And since the fall of Adam, man is not deprived of his
substance or of the powers and faculties of his soul, but only of the third,
which is the purity of nature, and therefore the conversion of a sinner,
whereof the conclusion speaks, is not the change of the substance of man, or
the faculties of the soul: but a renewing and restoring of that purity and
holiness which was lost by man's fall, with the abolishment of that natural
corruption that is in all the powers of the soul. This is the work of God,
and of God alone, and that on this manner. First of all, when it pleases God
to work a change in any, he does it not first in one part, then in an other,
as he that repaires a decayed house by peece-meale: but the work, both for
the beginning, continuance, and accomplishment, is the whole man, and every
part at once, specially in the mind and conscience, will and affection: as on
the contrary, when Adam lost the image of God, he lost it in every part.
Secondly, the conversion of a sinner is not wrought all at one instant, but in
continuance of time, and that by certain measures and degrees. And a man is in
the first degree of his conversion, when the holy ghost by the means of the
word, inspires him with some spiritual motions, and begins to regenerate and
renew the inward powers of the soul. And he may in this case very fitly be
compared to the night in the first dawning of the day, in which though the
darkness remain and be more in quantity then the light, yet the Sun has
already cast some beams of light into the air, whereupon we term it the
breaking of the day. Now then, the very point which I touch, is, that a man
at this instant and in this very state (God as yet having but laid certain
beginnings of true conversion in his heart) is the very child of God, and that
not only in the eternal purpose of God (as all the elect are) but indeed by
actual adoption: and this is plain by a manifest reason. There be four
special works of grace in every child of God, his union with Christ, his
adoption, justification, and conversion, and these four are wrought all at one
instant, so as for order of time, neither goes before nor after other: and yet
in regard of order of nature, union with Christ, Justification, and adoption,
go before the inward conversion of a sinner, it being the fruit and effect
of the^ all, Upon this it follows necessarily, that a sinner in the very
first act of his conversion, is justified, adopted, and incorporated into the
(...) ca^^ body of Christ. In the parable of the prodigal son, the father
with joy receives his wicked child, but when^ surely when he saw him coming a
far off, and when as yet he had made no confession or humiliation to his
father, but only had conceived with himself a purpose to return and to say,
Father I have sinned against heaven and against thee, etc. And Paul says of
many of the Corinthians, that he could not speak unto them as spiritual men,
but as carnal, even babes in Christ. 1. Cor. 3.1.

II. Conclusion.
The first material beginnings of the conversion of a sinner, or the smallest
measure of renewing grace, have the promises of this life, and the life to come.

The exposition.
THE beginnings of conversion must be distinguished, some are beginnings of
preparations, some beginnings of composition. Beginnings of preparation, are
such as bring under, tame, and subdue the stubburnenesse of man's nature,
without making any change at all: of this sort are the accusations of the
conscience by the ministry of the law, fears and terrors arising thence,
co^punction of heart, which is the apprehension of gods anger against sin. Now
these and the like I exclude in the conclusion, for though they go before to
prepare a sinner to his conversion following^ yet are they no graces of God,
but fruits of the law, that is, the ministry of death, and of an accusing
conscience. Beginnings of composition, I term all those inward motions and
inclinations of Gods spirit, that follow after the work of the law upon the
conscience: and rise upon the meditation of the Gospel, that promises
righteousness and life everlasting by Christ: out of which motions the
conversion of a sinner arises, and of this it consists: what these are it
shall afterward appear. Again, grace must be distinguished: it is twofold,
restraining grace, or renewing grace. Restraining grace, I term certain
common gifts of God, serving only to order, and frame the outward
conversation of men to the law of God, or serving to berea^e men of excuse in
the day of judgment. By this kind of grace, heathen men have been liberal,
just, sober, valiant. By it men living in the Church of God, have been
enlightened, and having tasted of the good word of God, have rejoiced therein,
and for a time outwardly conformed themselves thereto; renewing grace is not
common to al men, but proper to the elect, and it is a gift of Gods spirit,
whereby the corruption of sin is not only restrained, but also mortified,
and the decayed Image of God restored. Now then, the conclusion must only be
understood of the second, and not of the first: for though a man have never so
much of this restraining grace, yet unless he have the spirit of Christ to
create faith in the heart, and to sanctify him, he is as far from salvation
as any other. Now then, the sense and meaning of the conclusion is, that the
very least means of saving grace, and the very beginnings or seeds of
regeneration do declare, and after a sort give title to men, of all the
merciful promises of God, whether they concern this life or the life to come:
and therefore are approved of God, if they be in truth, and accepted as
greater measures of grace. That which our Savior Christ says of the work of
miracles, ^f you have faith as a grain of Musterd seed, ye shall say unto
this mountain remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove, must by the
law of equal proportion be applied to faith, repentance, the fear of God,
and all other graces, if they be truly wrought in the heart, though they be
but as small as one little grain of musterd-seede, they shall be sufficiently
effectual to bring forth good works, for which they were ordained. The
Prophet Esaias 42.3. says, that Christ shall not quench the smoking flax, nor
break the bruised reed. Let the comparison be marked: fire in flax must be
both little and weak, in quantity as a spark or twain, that cannot cause a
flame but only a smoke, specially in a matter ^o easy to burn. Here then is
signified, that the gifts, and graces of Gods spirit, that are both for measure
and strength as a spark or twain of fire, shall not be neglected, but rather
accepted and cherished by Christ. When our Savior Christ heard the young man
make a confession of a practice, but of outward and civil righteousness, he
looked upon him and loved him: and when he heard the Scribe to speak
discreetely but one good speech, that to lou^ God with all his heart is above
all sacrifices, he said unto him, That he was not far from the kingdom of
heaven. Therefore no doubt, he will love with a more special love, and accept
as the good subjects of his kingdom, those that have received a further mercy
of God to be borne anew of water and of the spirit.

III. Conclusion.
A constant and earnest desire to be reconciled to God, to believe and to
repent, if it be in a touched heart, is in acceptance with God, as
reconciliation, faith, repentance it self.

The Exposition.
Lust or desire is twofold, natural and supernatural. Natural is that, whose
beginning and object is in nature, that is, which arises of the natural will
of man; and anecteth such things as are thought to be good according to the
light of nature. And this kind of desire has his degrees, yet so as they are
all limited within the compass of nature. Some desire riches, honors,
pleasures, some learning and knowledge: because it is the light and perfection
of the mind: some go further and seek after the virtues of justice,
temperance, liberality, etc. and thus many heathen men have excelled. Some
again desire true happiness, as Balaam did, who wished to die the death of
the righteous: because it is the property of nature to seek the preservation
of it self. But here nature stays it self: for where the mind reueales not,
the will affects not. Supernatural desires are such as both for their
beginning and object, are above nature, for their beginning is from the holy
Ghost, and the object or matter about which they are conversant, are things
divine and spiritual, which concern the kingdom of heaven: and of this kind
are the desires of which I speak in this place. Again, that we may not be
deceived in our desires, but may the better discern them from flittering and
fleeting motions, I add three restraints. First of all, the desire of
reconciliation, the desire to believe, or the desire to repent, etc. must be
constant and have continuance, otherwise it may justly be suspected. Secondly,
it must be earnest and serious, though not always, yet at sometimes, that we
may be able to say with David, My soul desires after thee, O Lord, as the
thirsty la^d. And, as the heart braieth after the rivers of water, so pants
my soul after thee, O God: my soul thirsts for God, even the living god.
Thirdly, it must be in a touched heart: for when a man is touched in
conscience, the heart is cast down, and (as much as it can) it withdrawes it
self from God. For this cause, if then there be any spiritual motions whereby
the heart is lift up unto God, they are without doubt from the spirit of God.
Thus then I avouch, that the desire of reconciliation with God in Christ, is
reconciliation it self: the desire to believe, is faith indeed, and the
desire to repent, repentance it self. But mark how: A desire to be reconciled
is not reconciliation in nature (for the desire is one thing and reconciliation
is an other) but in Gods acceptance: for if we being touched thoroughly for our
sins, do desire to have them pardoned, and to be at one with God, God
accepts us as reconciled. Again desire to believe, it is not faith in nature,
but only in Gods acception, God accepting the will for the deed. That this
doctrine is the will and word of God, it appears by these reasons. First of
all, God has annexed a promise of blessedness, and of life everlasting, to the
desire of grace. Math. 5. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. Ioh. 7.38. If any man thirst let him
come to me and drink. Reu. 21. I will give unto him which is a thirst of the
well of the water of life freely.

Now what is this, to thirst? properly it is, when we are in a drought or
dryness, and want drink to refresh us, to desire it. And therefore by a
resemblance, they are said to thirst after righteousness, that want it and
would have it, and they thirst after Christ that feel themselves out of
Christ, and desire, yea, long after the blood of Christ, that they might be
refreshed with it in their consciences. Here then we see that the desire of
mercy, in the want of mercy, is the obtaining of mercy, and the desire to
believe in the want of faith, is faith. Though as yet thou want firm and
lively grace, yet art thou not altogether void of grace, if thou can desire
it, thy desire is the seed, conception, or budde of that which thou want:
now is the spring time of the ingrafted word or the immortal seed cast into
the furrows of thy heart: wait but a while, using good means, and thou shall
see that leaves, blossoms, and fruits will shortly follow after: Secondly,
the desire of any good thing is accepted of God, as the lively invocation of
his holy name, Psalm. 10. God hears the desires of the poor. Psalm. 145. He
will fulfill the desire of them that fear him. When Moses said nothing, but
only desired in heart the help and protection of God at the red sea, the Lord
said unto him: why criest thou unto me? Exodus 14. And when we know not to
pray as we ought^ Paul says, that the spirit makes request by the inward
groans of the heart. Romans 8.26^ Hence I gather, when a man in his weakness
prays with ^ighes and groans, for the gift of lively faith, the want whereof
he finds in himself; his very prayer on this manner made, is as truly in
acceptance with God, as the prayer made in lively faith. Thirdly to the
testimony of Scripture, I add the testimonies of Godly and learned men, not
to prove the doctrine in hand, but to show a consent, and to prove thus much
that the thing which I avouch is no private fantasy of any man: Psalm. 36.
Augustine says, Let thy desire be before him, and thy father which sees in
secret shall reward thee openly: for thy desire is thy prayer, and if thy
desire be continual, thy prayer is continual. He adds further in the same
place, that the desire is a continual voice, and the cry of the heart, and
the inward invocation of God, which may be made without intermission. Again,
Exposit. Epist. Ioh. tract. 4. de cap. 3.
The whole life of a good christian, is an holy will and desire. And that which
thou desire thou see not: but by desiring art, as it were, enlarged and
made capable, that when it shall come which thou shall see, thou may be
filled. Super can. Sermon. 84.
Bernard says, What, is not desire a voice? Yea a very strong voice. God
hears the desire of the poor, and a continual desire, though we speak
nothing, is a voice continued. Tom. 4. p. 124.
Luther says, Christ is then truly omnipotent, and then truly reigns in us,
when we are so weak that we can scarce give any groan. For Paul says, that
one such groan is a strong cry in the ears of God, filling both heaven and
earth. Ib. fol. 156.
Again, very few know how weak and small faith and hope is under the cross
and in temptation. For it appears then, to be as smoking flax, which a good
blast of wind would presently put out: but such as believe in these combats,
and terrors against hope, under hope, that is, opposing themselves by faith in
the promises of Christ against the feeling of sin, and the wrath of God, do
find afterward, that this little spark of faith (as it appears to reason,
which hardly perceives it) is peradventure as the whole element of fire which
fills all heaven, and swalloweth up all terrors and sins. Ib. fol. 300.
Again, the more we find our unworthiness and the less we find the promises
to belong unto us, the more we must desire them, be^ing assured that this
desire does greatly please God, who desires and wills that his grace should
be earnes^ly desired: This does faith, which judges it a precious thing, and
therefore greatly hungereth and ^hirs^eth after it, and so obtaines it. For God
is delighted to fill the hungry with good things, and to send the rich empty
away. Resp. ad Acta Col. loq. Monpel.
Theodore Beza says, If thou find not thine heart inwardly touched, pray that
it may be touched: for then must thou know that this desire is a pledge of the
fathers good will to thee. Locor. co^par. 1.
Kimnitius says, When I have a good desire, though it do scarcely show it
self in some little and slender sigh, I must be assured that the spirit of
God is present, and works his good work. Catech.
Vrsinus says, Faith in the most holy men in this life is imperfect and weak.
Yet nevertheless, whosoever feels in his heart an earnest desire to believe,
and a striving against his natural doubtings, both can and m^st assure
himself that he is endued with true faith. Again, Wicked men do not desire
the grace of the holy spirit, whereby they may resist sin. And therefore they
are justly deprived of it: for he that earnestly desires the holy Ghost, has
it already: because this desire of the spirit cannot be but from the spirit:
as it is said, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
for they shall be satisfied. Epistle to Careless.
Bradford says, Thy sins are undoubtedly pardoned, etc. for god has given
thee a penitent and believing heart: that is, an heart which desires to repent
and believe: for such an one is taken of him (he accepting the will for the
deed) for a penitent and believing heart indeed. Book of the marks of Gods
children.
Taffine says, Our faith may be so small and weak, as it does not yet bring
forth fruits, that may be lively felt of us, but if they which feel themselves
in such estate, desire to have these feelings (namely of Gods favor and love)
if they ask them at Gods hand by prayer; this desire and prayer are
testimonies that the spirit of God is in the^, and that ^^ey have faith
already: for is such a desire, a fruit of the flesh, or of the spirit? It is
of the holy spirit, who brings it forth only in such as he dwells in, etc.
Then these holy desires and prayers being the motions of the holy Ghost in us,
are testimonies of our faith, although they seem to us small and weak. As the
woman that feels the mooning of a child in her body, though very weak,
assures her self that she has conceived, and that she goes with a live
child: so if we have these motions, these holy affections, and desires before
mentioned, let us not doubt but that we have the holy Ghost (who is the author
of them) dwelling in us, and consequently that we have also faith. Again he
says, If thou have begun to hate and flee sin, if thou feel that thou art
displeased at thine infirmities, corruptions: if having offended God, thou
feel a grief and a sorrow for it: if thou desire to abstain: if thou thou
auoidest the occasions: if thou trauailest to do thy endeavor: if thou
praiest to God to give thee grace: all these holy affections proceeding from
none other then from the spirit of God, ought to be so many pledges, and
testimonies that he is in thee.

Psalm. 6.
Master Knokes says, Albeit your pains sometimes be so horrible, that you
find no release nor comfort, neither in spirit nor body, yet if thy heart can
only sob unto God, despair not, you shall obtain your hearts desire. And
destitute you are not of faith: for at such time as the flesh, natural reason,
the law of God, the present torment, the devil at one do cry, God is
angry, and therefore there is neither help nor remedy to be hoped for at his
hands: at such time I say, to sob unto God, is the demonstration of the secret
seed of God which is hid in Gods elect children: and that only sob is unto
God a more acceptable sacrifice, then without this cross, to give our bodies
to be burnt even for the truths sake. More testimonies might be alleged, but
these shall su^fice.

Against this point of doctrine it may be alleged: that, if desire to
believe in our weakness be faith indeed; then some are justified and may be
saved wanting a lively apprehension and full persuasion of Gods mercy in
Christ. Answer. Justifying faith in regard of his nature is always one and
the same, and the essential property thereof is to apprehend Christ with his
benefits, and to assure the very conscience thereof. And therefore without some
apprehension and assuranee there can be no justification or salvation in them
that for age are able to believe. Yet there be certain degrees, and measures
of true faith. There is a strong faith, which causes a full apprehension and
persuasion of Gods mercy in Christ. This measure of faith the Lord vouchsafed
Abraham, David, Paul, the Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs of God. It were a
blessed thing, if all believers might attain to this height of lively faith,
to say with Paul, I am persuaded, that neither life, nor death, nor any thing
else, shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ: but all
cannot; therefore there is another degree of faith lower then the former, and
yet true faith, called a little or weak faith, and it also has a power to
apprehend and apply the promise of salvation, but as yet by reason of
weakness, it is infolded (as it were) and wrapped up in the heart, as the leaf
and blossom in the budde. For such persons as have this weak faith, can say
indeed that they believe their sins to be pardonable, and that they desire
to have them pardoned: but as yet they cannot say, that they are without all
doubt pardoned. And yet the mercy of God is not wanting unto them ^or in that
they do, and can desire, and endeavor to apprehend, they do indeed
apprehend; God accepting the desire to do the thing, for the thing done. This
which I say, will the better appear if the grounds thereof be considered.
Faith does not justify in respect of it self, because it is an action, or
virtue: or because it is strong, lively, and perfect: but in respect of the
object thereof, namely, Christ crucified, whom faith apprehends as he is
set forth unto us in the word and sacraments. It is Christ that is the author,
and matter of our justice, and it is he that applies the same unto us: as for
faith in us, it is but an instrument to apprehend and receive that which Christ
for his part offers and gives. Therefore, if faith err not in his proper
object, but follow the promise of God, though it do weakly apprehend, or at
the least cause a man only to endeavor and desire to apprehend, it is true
faith, and justifies. Though our apprehension be necessary, yet our salvation
stands rather in this, that God apprehendes us for his own, then that we
apprehend him. Phil. 3.12.

Out of this conclusion springes another, not to be omitted, that God accepts
the endeavor of the whole man to obey, for perfect obedience it self.

THat is, if men endeavor to please God in all things, God will not judge
their doings by the rigor of the law: but will accept their little and weak
endeavor, to do that which they can do by his grace, as if they had
perfectly fulfilled the law. But here remember I put this caveat, that this
endeavor must be in and by the whole man; the very mind, conscience, will, and
affections, doing that which they can in their kinds: and thus this endeavor,
which is a fruit of the spirit, shall be distinguished from civil
righteousness, which may be in heathen men. The truth of this conclusion
appears by that which the Prophet Malachi says, that God will spare them that
fear him, as a father spares his child: who accepts the thing done, as well
done, if the child show his good will, to please his father, and to do what
he can.

IV. Conclusion.
To see and feel in our selves the want of any grace, and to be grieved
therefore, is the grace it self.

The Exposition.
Understand this conclusion as the former, namely, that grief of heart for the
want of any grace necessary to salvation, is as much with God as the grace it
self. When being in distress, we cannot pray as we ought, God accepts the
very groans, sobbes, and sighs of the perplexed heart, as the prayer it
self. Romans 8. 26. When we are grieved, because we cannot be grieved for our
sins, it is a degree and measure of godly sorrow before God. Con. 4. lib. 1.
ad Simplic. in fine.
Augustine says well: Sometimes our prayer is lukewarm, or rather cold and
almost no prayer: nay sometime it is altogether no prayer at all, and yet we
cannot with grief perceive this in our selves: for if we can but grieve,
because we cannot pray, we now pray indeed. Hierome says, Lib. 1. contract.
Pelagium.
Then we are just when we acknowledge our selves to be sinners: Again, this
is the true wisdom of man, to know himself to be imperfect: And (that I may
so speak) the perfection of all just men in the flesh is imperfect: Augustine
again says, That the virtue which is now in a just man is thus far forth
perfect, that unto the perfection thereof there belongs a true acknowledgeme^t
and an humble confession of the imperfection thereof. A broken and a contrite
heart after an offense, is as much with God, as if there had been no offense
at all, and therefore so soon as David after his grievous fall, in heaviness
of heart confessed his sin, saying in effect but th^s much: I have sinned,
the prophet in the name of the Lord, pronounces t^^ pardon of his sin in
heaven, and that presently.

V. Conclusion.
He that has begun to subject himself to Christ and his word, though as yet
he be ignorant in most points of religion: yet if he have a care to increase in
knowledge, and to practice that which he knows, he is accepted of God as a
true believer.

The Exposition.
Sundry persons by the Evangelists are said to believe, which had only seen
the miracles of Christ, and as yet had made no further proceedings but to
acknowledge Christ to be the Messiah, and to submit themselves to him and his
doctrine, which afterward should be taught. On this manner the woman of Samaria
believed, and many of the Samaritans upon her report: and a certain ruler, by
reason of a miracle, wrought upon his son, is said to believe, and all his
household, Ioh. 4.42.52. when our Savior Christ commends the faith of the
Apostles, tearming it a rock against which the gates of hell should not
prevail, it was not for the ple^tiful knowledge of the doctrine of salvation:
for they were ignorant of many articles of faith, as namely, of the death,
resurrection, ascension, and kingdom of Christ: but because they believed him
to be the son of God, and the Savior of mankind, and they had withal
resolved themselves to cleave unto him, and the blessed doctrine of salvation
which he taught, though as yet they were ignorant in many points. The holy
Ghost commends the faith of Rahab when she received the spies. Now this her
faith was indeed but a seed and beginning of lively faith: for then she had
only heard of the miracles done in Egypt, and of the deliverance of the
Israelites, and was thereupon smitten with a fear, and had conceived a
resolution with her self, to join her self to the Israelites, and to worship
the true God. Now these and the like are termed believers, upon just cause:
for though they be ignorant as yet, yet their ignorance, shall be no continuing
or lasting ignorance: and they have excellent seeds of grace, namely, a
purpose of heart to cleave to Christ, and a care to profit in the doctrine of
salvation.

VI. Conclusion.
The foresaid beginnings of grace are counterfeit, unless they increase.

The Exposition.
THe wickedness of man's nature, and the depth of hypocrisy is such, that a
man may and can easily transform himself into the counterfeit and resemblance
of any grace of God. Therefore I put down here a certain note whereby the gifts
of God may be discerned, namely, that they grow up and increase as the grain
of Musterd-seede to a great tree, and bear fruit answerably. The grace in the
heart is like the grain of Musterd-seed in two things. First it is small to see
to at the beginning: secondly, after it is cast into the ground of the heart,
it increases speedily, and spreads it self. Therefore, if a man at the first
have but some little feeling of his wants, some weak and faint desire, some
small obedience, he must not let this spark of grace go out: but these
motions of the spirit must be increased by the use of the word, sacraments and
prayer; and they must daily be stirred up by meditating, indeuouring, striving,
asking, seeking, knocking. The master delivering his talents to his servants,
says unto them, occupy till I come: and not hide them in the earth, Math.
25.26. Paul uses an excellent speech to Timothy: I exhort thee to stir up
the gift of God which is in thee, namely, as fire is stirred up by often
blowing, and by putting to of wood, 2. Tim. 1.6. As for such motions of the
heart that last for a week or month, and after vanish away, they are not to
be regarded: and the Lord by the Prophet Osea complains of them, saying, O
Ephraim, thy righteousness is like the morning dew.

Therefore considering, grace unless it be confirmed and exercised, is indeed
no grace; I will here add certain rules of direction that we may the more
easily put in practice the spiritual exercises of invocation, faith, and
repentance: and thereby also quicken and revive the seeds and beginnings of
grace.

1 In what place soever thou art, whether alone or abroad, by day or by night,
and whatsoever thou art doing, set thy self in the presence of God, let this
persuasion always take place in thy heart, that thou art before the living
God, and do thy endeavor that this persuasion may smite thy heart with awe
and reverence, and make thee afraid to sin. This counsel the Lord gave
Abraham, Genesis 17.1. Walk before me and be upright. This thing also was
practiced by Enoch, who for this cause is said to walk before God. 2 Esteem
of every present day as of the day of thy death: and therefore live as though
thou were dying; and do those good duties every day, that thou would do if
thou were dying. This is Christian watchfulnes and remember it. 3 Make
catalogues and bills of thine own sins, specially of those sins that have
most dishonored God, and wounded thine own conscience: set them before thee
often, specially then when thou have any particular occasion of renewing thy
repentance, that thy heart by this doleful sight, may be further humbled. This
was David's practice when he considered his ways and turned his feet to Gods
commandments, Psalm. 119.57 and when he confessed the sins of his youth,
Psalm. 25. This was Jobs practice, when he said he was not able to answer one
of a thousand of his sins unto God, Job 9.1. 4 When thou first openest thine
eyes in a morning pray to God, and give thanks heartily: God then shall have
his honor, and thy heart shall be the better for it the whole day following.
For we see in experience, that vessels keep long that taste of that liquour
wherewith they are first seasoned. And when thou lie down let that be the
last also: for thou know not, whether fallen asleep, thou shall ever rise
again alive. Good therefore it is that thou should give up thy self into
the hands of God, whilst thou art waking. 5 Labor to see and feel thy
spiritual poverty, that is, to see the want of grace in thy self, specially
those inward corruptions, of unbelief, pride, self-love, etc. Labor to be
displeased with thy self: and labor to feel, that by reason of them thou
stand in need of every drop of the blood of Christ, to heal and cleanse
thee from these wants: and let this practice take such place with thee, that if
thou be demanded, what in thy estimation is the vilest of the creatures upon
earth? thine heart and conscience may answer with a loud voice, I, even I, by
reason of mine own sins: and again, if thou be demanded, what is the best
thing in the world for thee? thy heart and conscience may answer again with a
strong and loud cry, One drop of the blood of Christ to wash away my
sins. 6 Show thy self to be a member of Christ, and a servant of God, not
only ^n the general calling of a Christian, but also in the particular calling
in which thou art placed. It is not enough for a Magistrate to be a christian
man, but he must also be a christian magistrate: it is not enough for a master
of a family to be a christian man, or a christian in the church, but he must
also be a christian in his family, and in the trade which he follows daily.
Not every one that is a common hearer of the word, and a frequenter of the
Lords table, is therefore a good Christian, unless his conversation in his
private house, and in his private affairs, and dealings be suitable. There is a
man to be seen what he is. 7 Search the Scriptures, to see what is sin, and
what is not sin in every action: this done, carry in thy heart a constant
and a resolute purpose, not to sin in any thing: for faith and the purpose of
sinning can never stand together. 8 Let thine endeavor be suitable to thy
purpose: and therefore exercise thy self to eschew every sin, and to obey
God in every one of his commandments, that pertain either to the general
calling of a Christian, or to thy particular calling. Thus did good Josias, who
turned unto God with all his heart, according to all the law of Moses, 1. King.
25.25. and thus did Zachary and Elizabeth, that walked in all the
co^mandeme^ts of God without reproof. Luke 1.6. 9 If at any time, against thy
purpose and resolution, thou be overtaken with any sin little or great, lie
not in it, but speedily recover thy self by repentance, humble thy self,
confessing thy offenses, and by prayer entreating the Lord to pardon the same,
and that earnestly, till such time as thou find thy conscience truly
pacified, and thy care to eschew the same sin increased. 10 Consider often of
the right and proper end of thy life in this world, which is not to seek
profit, honor, pleasure, but that in serving of men, we might serve god in our
callings. God could, if it so pleased him, preserve man without the ministry
of man, but his pleasure is to fulfill his work and willing the preservation
of our bodies, and salvation of our souls, by the imploiment of men in his
service, every one according to his vocation. Neither is there so much as a
bondslaue, but he must in and by his faithful service to his master, serve the
Lord. Men therefore do commonly profane their labors and lives, by aiming at
a wrong end, when all their care consists only in getting sufficient
maintenance for them and theirs, for the obtaining of credit, riches, and
carnal commodities. For thus men serve themselves, and not God, or men: much
less do they serve God in serving of men. 11 Give all diligence to make thy
election sure, and to gather manifold tokens thereof. For this cause observe
the works of Gods providence, love, and mercy, both in thee and upon thee,
from time to time: for the serious consideration of them, and the laying of
them together when they are many and several, minister much direction,
assurance of Gods favor and comfort. This was the practice of David, 1. Sam.
17.33. Psalm. 23. all. 12 Think evermore thy present estate whatsoever it be,
to be the best estate for thee: because whatsoever befalls thee, though it be
sickness or any other affliction, or death, befalls thee of the good providence
of God. That this may be the better done, labor to see and acknowledge a
providence of God as well in poverty, as in abundance, as well in disgrace as
good report, as well in sickness as in health, as well in life as in death. 13
Pray continually, I mean not by solemn and set prayer, but by secret and
inward ejaculations of the heart, that is, by a continual elevation of mind
unto Christ, sitting at the right hand of God the father, and that either by
prayer or giving of thanks, so often as any occasion shall be offered. 14
Think often of the worst and most grievous things that may befall thee either
in life or death for the name of Christ: make a reckoning of them, and prepare
thy self to bear them; that when they come, they may not seem strange, and be
borne more easily. 15 Make conscience of idle, vain, dishonest, and ungodly
thoughts: for these are the seeds and beginnings of actual sin in word and
deed. This want of care in ordering and composing of our thoughts, is often
punished with a fearful tempt^tion in the very thought, called of Divines,
Tentatio blasphemiarum, a ten^tion of blasphemies. 16 When any good motion or
affection rises in the heart, suffer it not to pass away, but feed it by
reading, meditating, praying. 17 Whatsoever good thing thou go about,
whether it be in word or deed, do it not in a conceit of thy self, or in the
pride of thy heart, but in humility, ascribing the power whereby thou do
thy work, and the praise thereof to God; otherwise thou shall find by
experience, he will curse thy best doings. 18 Despise not civil honesty: good
conscience and good manners must go together: therefore remember to make
conscience of lying, and of customable swearing in common talk: contend not
either in deed or word with any man: be courteous and gentle to all, good and
bad: bear with men's wants and frailties, as hastines, frowardnes,
selfe-liking, curiousnes, etc. passing by them as being not perceived: return
not evil for evil, but rather good for evil; use meat, drink, and apparel
in that manner and measure, that they may further godliness; and may be as it
were signs in which thou may express the hidden grace of thy heart. Strive
not to go beyond any, unless it be in good things: go before thine equals,
in giving of honor, rather then in taking of it: make conscience of thy word,
and let it be as a band: profess not more outwardly then thou have inwardly in
heart: oppress or defraud no man in bargaining: in all companies either do
good, or take good.
FINIS.

