AMBITION SCOVRGE.

DESCRIBED IN THE MORALE FICTION OF IXYON, BY Sands Penuen.

Qui desiderium suum c^ausit, cum^oue de Foelicitate contendit. Senec. LONDON,
Printed for John Helm, and are to be sold at his shop, in S. Dunston^
Churchyard in Fleetstrecte. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT ^^Rshipfull, Sir Michaell Sands, of Throughley in Kent, Knight.
IF what is truly Moral, serious, grave,
May (clad in Rimes) but gracious favor have:
From your Right worthy self, then am I crowned,
As if with Laurel, for in you abound
All that make man complete; to is you therefore
That my Muse for her Patron does implore:
It Was by your means that I was first instructed
In Grammar learning, since which time inducted
To some more knowledge, I most humbly pray
You, to accept this Tributarie pay,
From him (who though his Muse) be yet unnoted,
Vows all her studies are to you devoted.
Nor should it be a blemish to your Fame,
To have these Pages wait upon your Name.
Your worships to command, Sa: Penuen.

The Author to the Press. Epigram.
THe Press for Print, is worse then that for Death;
For that stops ill, and this vent's stinking breath.
Sa. P.

To his Friend, Sa: Penuen, on his Ixyon.
IT seems Apollo leads thee to the spring,
Where thou may hear the learned Sisters sing:
For by thy lively vvittes Invention,
Thou shevv'st Ixyons leaud intention.
He has his merit, punishment and shame,
Take thou thy merit, it is a living Fame.
C. R. Gent.

R. D. Esquire, to his respected Friend, Sands Penuen.
IF only he might read, that knew to write,
Whose Censure void of Ignorance as spite:
Might cherish free, or check: not he whose brain
Is lighter then his feather, whose chief strain
Of wit, consists in's neat composure, fraught
With nothing but ill face, can me^e, cry naught.
(As best comporting with him) then thy Muse
Might something hope, but midst these times abuse,
To publish ought (of good) were to suppose,
Gallants might something mind (save their spruce clothes
Which were enough to damn theee, wherefore friend,
Henceforth, or leave to write, or hope, or send
Thy Papers to the Counter, in whose Treasure
(Reserved) our Brauers with more wit, more leisure
Hereafter may peruse them, and extract
This Moral from thy work, that as the act
Of vain Ixyon Centaures got of Clouds,
So vapor infaire show, foul Monsters shrowdes.
Sanabimur si separemur a Coetu. R. D. Esquire

Ixyon.
RAre's the Conjunction, the concorda^ce swee
When with endeavor, wit and Art do meet:
When true Promethean fire does warm the brain
Then Industry lifts up her high sung strain,
Still soars, still mounts (regardles of base things)
As high as Fame does on her golden Wings:
But out alas, Learning and Art refuse
To shead their influence on my ruder Muse.
Nor could she ever sweetly move her wing,
Only as Carters whistle, so I sing.
They (to delight themselves) do rudely chaunt,
And that I please my self, I only vaunt.
For in all actions, man's delight him draws,
And Appetite is senseless of all Laws.
Then mount low verse, to sing Ixyons Fate,
And to thy help, the Muses invoke.
Ye sacred Deities, you I implore,
Whom sage Memoria bred, and nursed of yore:
Lend your assistance to my feeble scull,
With your Pierean vigor make me full.
Ye glorious Sisters of Parnassu hill,
Your holy fury into me distill.
You, the Pegasian Fount that daily haunt,
And on the brimme do most divinely chaunt:
Now send your Influence, and me inspire,
Highly to sing the Justice of your Sire.
Ixyon, (sometime) the Thessalian King,
Whose high Ambition flewe on horrid wing:
And checked each virtuous motion that did rise,
To intercept (his bloody enterprise)
Soon after he his marriage rites had done,
And quite dissolved his wives white virgin Zone.
Thinks with himself, that well it might agree,
To keep the fruit, and yet to burn the Tree:
The saples truncke bore on his withered top,
A sparkling Dyadem, a golden crop.
Which to possess, Ixyon strange plots lays,
(Longing to guild his brows with borrowed rays)
The Crown he aims at (senseles of remorse,)
Not by the Ladders help, but axes force.
Nor will he by Succession hope to clime,
Nor rest content the fruits maturing time.
But ceaze it strait (regardles of all right)
Will is pure Justice when it speak from might.
Eyoneus (that as a bar did stand,
TO Ixyons hopes) must by some polliticke hand
Be snatched away, Ixyon plots the means,
His thoughts are actors in most tragic Scenes
And now his Genius prompteth him to war,
On some forged cause to move a public Jar.
To enter King Eyoneus fertile Land
With warlike troops, and with an armed band.
With horses hooues to furrow up the plain,
And sow the field with blood, in steed of Grain.
On this waits danger, his close hope replies:
So this plot quickly borne, as quickly dies.
And (like the flower of flax that fades in the womb)
This proiectes birth is now become it is tomb.
Because (quoth he) his daughter is my wife,
It Would blast my Fame, if I should seek his life
By open Arms, therefore (how'ere I work)
This is no course, my hate must closely lurk.
And it were preposterous to wast his land,
Whose person now is (dreadles) in my hand.
Besides, I think this Axiom not vain,
"They that get much by blood, but little gain.
These thoughts (intruding thus) do yet want might
For to extinguish his still growing spite:
But new inventions from his brain do flow,
As fast as Iuy sprouts, or Mushromps grow.
Restles Ambition, whether do thou tend,
Thy still fresh Labors? to what horred end dread?
Fraught'st thou Ixyons euer-working head,
With naught but thoughts of horror, blood, and
He Is now thy Slave, obaies thee at each nod,
And thou (foul feend) art now become his God.
Lead on blessed Saint (says he) and still direct me,
While thus with richest Epethites I deck thee.
Then as some Rymesters of these latter days,
Bedawbe black Dowdes with brightest Angels praise
Swearing the Graces dwell within their cie,
And that each part is some pure Deity:
So gins Ixyon to extol his Saint,
And with rich colors this black piece to paint.
Thou art (quoth he) th'incyter to great deeds,
For by thy only breath our honor breeds.
Thou only do distinguish man from beast
And lift'st whom thou possessed boue the rest:
Thou take from us that Elementall earth
Nature with the other three mixed ere our Birth
And in that room fresh air thou do infuse
Which makes us mount above the sprightly Muse
Thou art indeed that selfsame loving fire,
Whose stealth infused in the Gods such Ire
Against Promethius: burn clear bright flame,
To add another title to my Name:
A single scepter cannot poize my hand,
But I Will join Thrace unto my native Land.
Then warm my brain with thy caelestiall fire,
For till my stars eclipse me I Will aspire,
Usher mine actions, still make good my hate,
Eyoneus grave mounts me to best of fate.
By this the Sun (eclip'st with dust and sweat,
B'gan in the Sea to quench his thirsty heat.
By this Apollo with descending beams,
Began to pierce the silver sliding streams:
And (though half tir'de with travail) sprightly ran,
To drench his tresses in the Ocean.
Now that the fiery Plannet, God of Light,
Had t'ane his beams hence, and given place to Night
Night with broad sable wings did fan the Sea,
Taking her rice from off the watery Lea.
And in her pitchie mantle sittes on hie,
Naild with a thousand Stars upon the sky.
Now shine Oryon and the Pleiades,
While Phoebus rays do guild the Antipodes,
And Cynthia in long disheueld hair,
With silver Cressent does adorn her Sphere:
Now toile-dissoluing Night with silent charms
Welcome's Ixyon in her sable arms.
Dull Icelon hangs on their eyes like Lead,
And summons all the family to bed.
Where all enjoy sweet, pleasant downy rest,
Except Ixyon whose still-troubled breast,
Cannot admit of wit-refreshing sleep,
But with his murtherous thoughts strickt watch does keep.
Yet (not forgetting Hymencall rights, harm,
He hugges his wife with fained appetite. warm:
She gentle Queen, pure, dreadles of all
With her soft twines his hate child blood does
And feasts him with rare Iunkets and such sweetes
In whose fruition all delights do meet. case,
Ixyon soon, her, and himself does please,
Which done, she sleeps, Delights o'retane by
Me thinks the fruit yielding such pleasant taste
Such lively sweets that yet vnperish't last,
Might well extinguish that same blood-fed flame,
That in the trees dust inter's the fellers fame.
But naught preuailes, Eyoneus needs must fall,
"No sweetes can sweeten a corrupted Gall.
For now I hear Ixyon thank his Fate,
For means how to produce th'ffects of Hate
Which Night (well suting with his blacker (thought)
Into his mind has firm, yet quickly brought:
And now he spends the remnant of the Night
Only in wishing for the approaching Light:
Yet he with horror means to cloud the day,
Thirsty Ambytion cannot brook delay.
And now Aurora with flow stately pace
Distills her pearly drops on every place.
Which Phoebus seeing (vsher'd by that Star,
That still conducts him to his burning Carre)
Comes forth in state, to take from earth again
What his Love gave, to enrich each fertile plain.
Ixyon rises, and with quickest speed,
Sends to Ericthoe, whose dam'nd help he needs,
Strickly commanding, that she strait puruay
Some Hell-charm'd fogge to cannopie the d(...):
And by her a Sorcerie storm to rear,
Whose noise might make both men and Gods to fear:
Ericthoe in a Cave of Thessaly,
That vnderpin'd a lofty promontorie
Had her abiding, there no spark of Light,
Did ever peep, it was there eternal Night.
Save only that some sparkles did arise,
From her half buried, euer-fiery eyes.
Her hayreles scalpe was like a statues head,
Each side with a huge elselocke furnished:
Of color like a blacke-roane horses tail,
All which a kercher of Bats wings does veil:
Her facelike Mars, his front wrinkled with ire
Or parchment leaves, late scorched by the fire:
She once had teeth and lips, but truth to say,
Time now has worn, both teeth and lips away.
She, scarnell backed, and hollow is her breast,
Her legs are crooked, and deformed the rest:
All parts with one another angry be,
Only her nose and chinne do still agree,
And (lovingly) do always kiss each other,
Which her breath envying with horrid smoother
Seeks to disioyne them, but yet (wanting might)
Does only blast both, with her cruel spite,
And makes them look of such a swartie red,
As does corrupted flesh by Art made dead:
Thus lives Ericthoe, and by Sorcerie
Does clogge the soul, with damned impiety.
Hold gentle Muse, do not thus loosely stray,
But with high wing trace thy proposed way:
Now draw the Curtains, and unmask a deed
May wonder-strike the world, and humane seed.
Ixyon (having to Ericthoe sent)
Salutes Eyoneus with fair complement,
And him inuites, (the Morn yet being clear)
To hunt the savage Bore, or timorous Dear:
And after that, be pleased to acept
A customarie thing the Ancients kept:
Which was, that every Son in Law did give
Gifts to his wives Sire, and that use did live
Religiously observed through many ages,
Reuerenc't of all, confirmed by learned Sages:
Those gifts (when as their sport is ended quite,
And exercise has sharpened Appetite)
He says he would present him at a Feast,
Where only he should be his Princely Guest:
He condiscends, so ride they to their sport,
And for Field-game, change the delights of Court.
Scarce had the Dear bin rowzed by their hou^ds
(Whose noise with Echoes made the hills rebound)
When black Ericthoe by her Sorcerie,
Had much distemperd the day-guiding Sky:
It seemd that love, (moved with some noise on earth
To confound that, had given his Thunder breath.
For now it spoke loud (mixed with hail and rain)
And Pallid Lightning blasts the hopeful grain:
Segestaes son (bound by Ericthoes charm)
Now cannot keep the winds from doing harm,
Nor yet confine them in their lowe-built Cave,
But that for passage boy strously they rave,
Forcing their freedom, with as awful power,
As if they meant to tear their marble Tower:
And as swift Currents, long restraind from vent,
Grow rougher through their forced imprisonment.
And with the clamorous roaring that they make,
Do force the Herds, the fertile Banks forsake:
Even so the winds (rushing from forth their den)
Bring sudden terror, on amazed men:
Here Turrets tremble, there huge Steeples shake,
Some (storm-torne) tu^ble, most their place forsake
Strange, strong effects of a bad mixed potion,
To give things sensles, such quick sudden motion?
Cost on fair buildings laid, was laid amiss,
For what but now had form, a Chaos is:
The Coniurde Tempest, makes the Thickets nod, storm
(Such hellish power dwells in Ericthoes rod)
Trees, whose strength could not but oppose this
By opposition loose both life and form:
And they that bore their tops most high,
Are now the meanest underneath the Sky.
Nothing but Shrubs are safe, who low in State,
Are not yet ripe for such preposterous Fate.
But yet Eyoneus, like a L^wrell bough
(Untouched, save with the horror of this show)
Did cheerfullie advance his reverent head,
Which in Ixyon most amazement bred:
For on this Storm which took this ample scope,
Stood the firm Bases of his bloody hope.
Whereon like a Collossus he might stand,
(By Murder propt) and govern either Land:
Murder he thinks no Sin, knowing few frown
On deeds (though nere so black, who^ th'eue^ts crown,
And had Eyoneus here endurde the worst,
It Would have seemed accidental that forced,
And had this Tempest ruinde him and all,
What was inhumane, had seemed natural.
This Tempest (missing this intended wrack)
Somewhat of her late force began to slack,
And in far calmer terms her rage to spend,
For now Ericthoes Charm took solemn end.
And as a route of rude vntutor'd Hyndes,
Whose best bad senses, causeless Fury blindes,
In mad confused manner move some Jar,
(Making Trade-engines instruments of War)
One bears an Axe, the other a Hammer brings,
" Fury can make weapons of any thing:
And (weakly armed with swords) but strong in Ire,
Consume the Neighbor villages with Fire:
Knowing they are Traitors, naught can them assuage
But on all things, they execute their rage:
Their lives being forfeit, aim at things most fair
"He that for naught ca^ hope, should noght despair:
Yet from the Prince, if some grave man be sent,
To promise pardon, if they be content
To cease their mutiny, and to submit
To him that wears the awful Coronet:
At first, a busy murmur's only heard,
As if some unknown Stratageme they feared,
But (soon resolved) their Arms they cast away,
And in most grateful terms proclaim their joy.
Even so the winds (freed from Ericthoes Charm)
Seem to repent their lately rash done harm,
And quietly (being manacled beneath)
Does only Fan the World, with mildest breath:
The Thunder hushed, and Jove's late fiery fumes
Their proper Element do reassume.
The rayne's appeasde, and Iunoes Nuntius
Is to the world seen as propitious,
And in her several colors richly dight,
(Arching the Sky) does promise purer Light.
Ixyon faines himself with joy overcome,
To see Eyoneus had escapt the storm,
And presently conducts him, as to take
These Spowfall gifts, where he must all forsake,
T'a Lodge, (for murder acted) thither goes,
"A fained friend's worse then ten open Foes.
There come, and seated, Ceremonious rites
Promise fair Welcome, seasoned with delights:
When in deep silence, full of expectation,
Noting Ixyons formal Celebration,
And seeming dutious zeal, Eyoneus Chair,
Gins to sincke with him, to some lower staire:
He (dreadles) sits, and presently does slip,
Through some few sticks, into a fiery pit:
Whose low, close, seruent heat, and dismal fume,
Did in an instant, his lives strength consume.
Slaves take him up, but ere with him they rise,
His Soul (being better winged) was boue the Skies.
Thou most unworthy, both of name and being,
How could thou act this thy unjust decreeing,
And under show of Love (composed of dirt)
Kill, whom a hellish storm thought Sin to hurt?
What breach of holy Hospitality,
Of open kindness, and Friends loyalty,
Have thou herein committed? Oh these ils
Would put rough teeth, into the smoothest quils:
Had thou given notice of thy hates condition,
Or had it been in Hostile opposition,
Less had thy scandal been, but with fair face
To shrowde such deeds, is as abhord, as base.
Dissimulation! Oh, there is nothing worse,
It Is Treasons mother, of all ills the Nurse.
A false glass to the Soul, that still presents
Things in fair forms, nere crowned with good events:
The fire that burns gives warning by his flame
T'auoide the ill his pointed angles frame,
But that in ashes raked, vnfear'd, unseen,
Is the most dangerous minister of spleen:
The Sea whom Aeolus does move to anger,
Does by some sign foretell the flowing danger:
And all things that bode peril unto man,
Have tokens that pregoe the hurt they can;
The Sun (declining) tells us t'wil be dark,
And though some curre do bite before he bark
Yet in the spacious world was never found
A dog that (fawning) ere was known to wound;
But man that should be best, is Lord of all,
As goods, so vices to his share do fall:
For this (in knowing creatures) has been ever
To see the best, yet in the worst persevere.
Vain men that Deifide themselves, do deem
When Tytles timpanize them, then they seem
Like bladders puffed, or like a strutting Player
(He daubed with kingly form, they stuffed with air,)
And (seuer'd from the multitude by name)
Think they are blessed with never dying Fame.
Yet Fame (though nere so worthily atchieu'd)
We see is or abortiue, or short lived,
And unto no man any comforts brings,
But flies above us with inconstant wings.
Oh why did not the Heavens by grave foresight
Ad to the winds strength their revenging might
To ceaze Ixyon? but they are content
By sparing to increase his punishment:
And scourge him when he is in greatest state,
" Vengeance is full grown, falls in height of Fate.
Ixyon (stained with the rich blood he spilt)
Untouched in every place, save with his guilt,
Wishes his Senses had not muffled bin,
To lead him blindfold to so foul a sin:
And that Eyoneus death had been prevented,
Which as it was quickly done, was soon repented:
Curses his Fate, and in repentant sort
Conuaies Eyoneus breathles corpse to Court:
Where when he came, the care-bethronged Queen
Soon as her father liuelesse she had seen,
Ask't whose black deed that was, Ixyon strait
(Weeping) acknowledged it was his deceit,
And what he closely acted, did reveal,
"(Murther's a Sin no Conscience can conceal)
Which very words extinguish't her lives fire,
For at the sound thereof she did expire.
Time, that with sharpest Sith, and purple wings
In his swift race to Dissolution brings
The great'st and worthiest monuments on earth,
Whose end is dateles, like his unknown birth,
Has now with Fate so leagueally agreed,
As in Ixyon discontent to breed,
His Conscience is his scourge, he feels thereby
A smarting fence of his impiety:
The funeral tapers that adorned their hearse
Shall give safe conduct to my mournful verse,
Which (not extinct with sighs) did clearly burn
Over their twofold, timelesse, filled Vrne,
Until the latest obsequies were done,
And they both laid under one marble stone.
Ixyons cleerer judgment then exhalde
Those mists of horror which his Senses vailde:
And gave him leave to look into his Soul,
Which (charged with great accounts) did strait control
All his delights on earth, they being fled,
Hop keeps him living, Passion strikes him dead:
And both together with their several darts,
Wound and torment all his interior parts:
Hope bids him live, and cancel care at length,
But in mean time his Care consumes his strength
Vnmarroweth his bones, vnsappes his veins,
And keeps him full of disagreeing pains:
And thus he lives in deepest passions drowned,
His present griefs all future Joys confound:
All men abhor him for his ill urged gall,
"He is most wretched, none lament at all.
And thus (accompanied by none but grief)
He leaves his kingdom like a midnight thief,
And like a wanderer straies about the earth,
Cursing his Fate, exclaiming on his birth:
Wishing that day wherein he first drew breath
Had by his funeral proclaimed his death,
That when he crept out of his mothers womb
He Had (wailed) gone into his latest Tomb,
And then a sullen silence in him breeds
He only with his tears his sorrow feeds:
Still they distill apace yet are not don,
His eyes are springs that never cease to run:
One drop, another room does strait supply,
Yet nere exhaust's the current of his eye:
At last his grief with care his breast o're-fraughts,
The^ (tirde with thinking thus, he vents his thoughts:
Furrow my cheeks salt tears, plow up your way,
You are a tribute that mine eyes must pay:
In time the deaw of Heaven does pierce the flint,
And you should run till you have made a dint
On either cheek, nor then should take your rest
But with moist offerings keep them still possessed:
You did direct me in my cruelty,
Therefore I Will drown you both until you die:
Which since my tears (your natural rhewme) refuse
Deep sighs I Will make tempestuous to that use,
The which shall never cease till you they wrack,
But move rough billows on my tears smooth back:
But whence proceeds this childish idle flood?
Whence? from lasting crime of shedding blood:
Which to wipe off, I strive with as vain hope
As they that hourly wash an Aethiope:
Nor all the Scas in the world (though on me spilt)
Yet could not cleanse me of his leapours guilt:
Then why do these slight drops fall from mine eye?
To feed my griefs Lamps that would else be dry:
Oh that contrition, offerings, or these tears
(Self conquering trophies which my sorrow bears)
Or all that is, or may devised be,
To make a guilty Soul with peace agree,
Could but redeem the Glory I have lost,
How would my Soul (though ever weeping) boast?
But none of these can e're inter my shame,
(Now King) of nothing but a large defame
Which will live ever, and wax huger still,
" Report does (going) grow of good or ill:)
Nor set me in my pristine Innocence,
"There is no sting like that of Conscience:
Yet these (though bootles) here I vow to spend,
Till Time conspire with Fate to work mine end.
These and the like from a vast Sea of woes
That in Ixyons guilty breast still flows
He still repeates, and carelessly does stray,
"He that is poor, is never out of his way:
At last with weary limbs, and bared sealpe
He in's progression mounts the frozen Alps,
And (by despair) almost to madness drouen
His long neglected hands he reares to Heaven,
And (wanting means for other sacrifice)
Thus on his knees bespake the Deities:
Ye still-agreeing powers, empty of Iarres,
That in your daily motion tread on Stars,
You that over look this our terrestrial Ball,
Whose influence gives form and life to all,
You that in Characters, subscrib'de by Fate,
Record the worlds vast frame, and utmost date,
Oh let a mortals prayers, and tears entreat
Safe pass for some few words, to Jove's high seat,
And when (clad all in air) they mount on high,
Be pleased dread powers, to let them pierce the sky
Great son of Saturn, everliving Jove,
By whose permission every thing does move,
Eternal essence that with awful mace
Do rule all things in Heaven, and humane race,
Whose only smile can save, or frown ca^ spoil,
Whose very breath does make the Ocean boil,
Whose every action filles the world with wonder
Whose eyes dart Lightning, and whose voice is Th^^^,
Whose glorious Throne the Zodiac vnderbaries
That out-shin'st all, clad in thy roabe of Starr^s.
Oh if a man, whose guilt speaks in his face,
Whose Sins exclude from all good hope of grace
May dare attempt, with blood-polluted hands
To touch thy Pedestell, whereon there stands
Wrought by divine Art, such a world of Glory,
As to all worlds shall be an ample story:
Then et Ixyon (rich in naught but shame,
And all the adjuncts to a vast defame)
With tears petitionarie thee desire,
To purge his Sins with thine immortal fire,
Cleanse what is corrupt, make pure what is most foul
And of my speckled, make a glorious Soul:
The more my Sin, the greater is thy Fame,
If thou do purge it with thy hallowed flame:
Will not you crystal stellified gate
Open, and with mild aspect adorn my Fate?
Hear me dread Jove, or if thou will not hear,
Yet take some notice of these penitent tears,
Could my tongue speak as loud as does my Sin
With my shril prayers ere now, thou had rowzed bin:
Yet still i will pray, and with my dismal cries,
Fan open thy Glories Curtain, the blew Skies,
And till my sins with mercy be commixt,
A kneeling living Statue here be fixed.
At this th'appeased Heavens began to smile,
And this great Deity that had all this while
With an attentive care observed the prayers
Ixyon spent, his penitence and tears:
(Prompted by pity) does resolve once more
To make Ixyon happier then before:
And for his kingdoms loss, he means to give
A place of residence, where he shall live.
Mating himself (above in the arched Sky,
There sporting with the Gods eternally:)
To this great work, he summons instantly
His Son, and Herald (winged Mercury)
With his gold plumes through the air to make quick flight,
And be a welcome Nuntius to this wight:
Inioyning Hermes on the Alps t'appeare,
(From whence Ixyons prayer pierced his care)
And whom he found there (weeping in Despair)
To Usher him through the yielding air:
What needed more to him of wit that is God?
To The wise one word's enough, to him Jove's nod:
Hermes with speed quicker then thought of mind
Lights on the Alps, as was by Jove assigned,
And there (with hands vpreard) Ixyon found
Kneeling, his knees even grown unto the ground:
VVho^ (when he sees) he with his rod him charms,
Bids him be dreadlesse of all future harms,
And fro the cold earth (moystned with his tears)
To rise and follow him empty of fears:
(Which said) through the air his silver Rod he moves,
And executed so the will of Jove
Ixyon now above in Heaven is placed,
VVelcom'd by Jupiter, and by him graced,
And now Ixyon would my Muse might leave thee,
But of that hope, thy worst Fate does bereave me:
Had been contented when thou were so blessed
Thou Had still been happy, and my Muse taken rest:
But thy Ambition causde thy so great fall,
And that of all ills is original.
But why tax I thee for such loss of glory,
That dare with so young Muse attempt thy story?
I should have left it to some learned Pen
That had been deeply steept in Hippochrene:
As thou in thy attempt, I must fall too,
Though my fall cannot be so great, and low:
Yet were my ruin just as near as thine,
It Is honor to have attempted things divine:
Then on my Muse in this thy forward race,
Usher thy servant with thy best of grace
To end this little work, and here I swear
Some worthy Trophie to thy name I Will rear.
Ixyon (seated thus by Jove's consent)
Saw those most enuyed were most eminent,
For his great height did in some Gods infuse
A kind of hate, which yet they durst not use:
First Icelon, cause from him he extorted
Much time, which he with so black thoghts consorted,
Next Aeolus, for by a Witches rod
He Had made him seem a Tyrant and no God:
Hymen was also swollen with much despite,
Because his holy Laws he so did slight:
Rhamnusia inly vexed, and much did rue,
Because her punishment, which was his due
Was not (as yet) inflicted on his head,
That was by Vice into such horror led:
In others (too) much spleen which known to Jove
He with his frown does check, and so remove.
Thus by the Gods, finding this sweet relief,
Purged of his Crime, as also of the grief
His Crime brought on him, he begins to swell,
Man's highest rice is nearest step to Hell:
For now Ixyon does retain no sense
Of his late guilt, or sting of Conscience:
But as a Letcher in the Surgions cure,
Vows (if once well) to be no more impure,
And swears he will never clippe his Whore again,
(And means so too, as long as he feels pain)
Yet is no sooner cured of his harms,
But he strait leapes into his Harlot, arms:
Even so Ixyon (purged from this sin)
To attempt a greater far does thus begin:
Jove's wife and Sister, whether by her eye
Or by the power of Cupids Deity,
I Will not distinguish, struck him so in love,
As to Heavens Queen, his Lust-suite he durst move:
And (warmed with much more then Promethea^ fire)
Juno he courts to sat his leaud desire:
Oh the unbounded Lust, and pride of Man,
That in their bloods height no one reason scan,
But abuse favors that have them rewarded,
Nor p^ritie of States is then regarded,
Princes neglected, nay the Gods profan'de
To get a pleasure lost, e're fully gained:
For Reasons light, clear as the lamp of day,
Shines in each Room of this our house of clay,
Save those that serve our lust, and they are left,
Of all but sensual appetite bereft:
No light shines there, and Poets works importune,
Our Lust makes us more blind then they feign fortune
Ixyons heat keeps him from being mute,
And prompts him thus to move his loathed suit:
Immortal greatness, Deity most pure,
Whose name, and glory ever shall endure:
Vouchsafe to what I here present in fear,
To lend a willing, and a gracious care:
Nor let my boldness any anger move,
Since faults are no faults, that are done by Love:
From style of all presumption, that does free
My great attempt, my suite, my name and me:
The Gods have laid aside their great estate,
To court fair Shepheardesses, Love and Fate
Are above all, Love reigns in every part,
Mars (clad in arms) was wounded by his dart:
And as his power can take from Gods, even so
It can add worth to us that are below:
Then by this rule I Am worthy of thy Love,
Made great by that which has abased Jove:
Which let me but possess (perfections Queen)
And I Will be dreadles of your husbands spleen:
Nor shall his Cyclops in me possions move,
"The flames of Aetna match not those of Love:
And never shame with me to act Loves deed,
Since Gods have often mixed with humane seed.
At this the incensed Queen, whose silver brow,
Beauty and Dread (in several forms) did show:
In an amazed majesty thought good,
To cure with Vengeance this disease a'th blood:
Yet knowing in Jove's thoughts he sat so high,
Omitt's revenge, and makes this sharp reply:
And is this then the tribute that you pay,
To him breathed Heavenly fire in earthly clay?
Are these the offerings due unto his shrine,
That did thy clew of misery untwine,
And when Despair sat heavy on thy breast
Removed thy torments, gave thy sorrows rest*
Has then great Jove, (my dreaded Lord and brother
In pardoning one sin, thus produced another?
This then I see for truth shall still endure,
'Pittie in Gods makes men to sin secure:
I Will answer thee as once Latena did,
Her nightly wandering daughter, that vnhid
Does with her virgin body Lamp dark night,
Once grieved to be so seen to humane sight,
She of her mother presently requested
To be with some rich proper roabe invested,
Which she might ever wear to hide her shame,
Preserve her modesty, and secure her fame:
Latona wisely answered again,
That thy request is idle, fond and vain;
For sometime thou art so big, no robe can hide thee,
Sometime so little, we can scarce epsy thee:
Then since thou art so subject unto change,
Thou 'bout the Zodiac still shall naked range:
And that is the cause Luna abhorres the light,
And never is seen to us but in the Night:)
Thou (more then she her form) do change thy mind,
Thy vast desires are in no bounds confin'de:
Sometime thy thoughts are humble as the earth
Which thou were made of, and which gave thee birth,
Sometime (as now) thou do as vainly swell,
As he that for his pride was cast to Hell:
Then what one thing can fit thy disposition,
That Is of so strange and various a condition?
From thy abhorred Lust I will be free,
As she her daughter, so I Will answer thee:
Which is immovable, cease to dispute,
Luna could get no gown, nor thou thy suite.
Yet (says Ixyon) hear me e're you go,
Let not cold chastity benumne you so:
As to contemn my love, be my Loves mate,
Though not to crown my love, to quite your hate:
'le not desist for this your first reply,
Who (faintly) craves, instructs to deny:
Know mighty Queen, Jove does you so much wrong,
As you are not just, if you Revenge prolong:
Changing himself into a golden shower
He did force open Acrisius brazen tower
To enjoy Danae, and on her begot,
One that by's valor did race out the blot
His bastard birth brought on him, like a Bull,
He with Europa made his pleasure full:
In a Swans shape, on Laeda he begot
Two, twofold eggs, in one of which were shut
The fatal sparks that set the brand on fire,
Which in Troyes raines did to the clouds aspire:
These are the meanest of his lustful Scapes,
Made monstrous by the many several Rapes
He has besides committed, and can you then
Be less vindictiue then we silly men?
Our blood mixed with our gall, does inly boil,
To act revenge we do refuse no toil:
But to all dangers do our lives expose,
Of private Treasons, and of public foes:
Delight shall usher yours (renowned Queen)
Pleasure shall crown Revenge, and sweeten spleen:
That with your self you shall dispute at leisure,
Whether were sweetest, your revenge, or pleasure.
Know selfe-abusing man ( Juno replies)
Thou art too base to mix with Deities:
Yet were thou each way worthy of my Love,
Or could there be a greater power then Jove?
With notes more sweet then music of the Spheres,
To charm my Senses, or delight mine ears:
All should not move me, loyal I Will remain,
"Unlawful pleasure, brings a lawful pain:
Thou that do sugar poison, and do say,
Revenge is pleasant, there will come a day
When with bedewed cheeks thy self shall tell,
" Revenge on earth, buies a Revenge in Hell:
From Jove's dread will, my thoughts shall never start,
"Revenge is treason in a subjects heart:
I am his Subject, so more Honor lies
In bearings wrongs, then quitting injuries.
Which said, with stately speed from him she moves,
To tell Ixyons Lust and Pride to Jove,
Which he already knew, and was inuenting,
To plague Ixyon with some strange tormenting.
That might into his very Soul intrude,
And wound him deep for his Ingratitude,
And now the more Ixyon to annoy,
He Will first delude, and afterward destroy:
An empty cloud he fashions like his wife
Induing it with beauty, form, and life,
So like as he himself for once did miss,
And did the cloud in steed of Juno kiss:
With this same seeming, Juno he presents,
Lust-fraught Ixyon, who with an intent
Not to it the least accent to afford,
(Knowing they will do the deed, deny the word)
Silent he hastes unto this borrowed shape,
As did the Byrds to Apelles painted grapes;
But with more appetite, and bold intrusion,
They did scarce, touch, he tastes of this delusion,
And joyfully he does himself beguile,
Since the true frown was now a fained smile:
In utmost height of Lust, and amorous twines,
He clippes this seeming Juno, that now shines
Bright in his thoughts, as t'vs the eye of Day,
When (clad in flames) be trottes the milky way:
For in this act of Lust he much does toil,
But selfe-consuming Lamps, that want their oil
Must leave their wished light, "sated Desire
"Is like the Glowormes ineffectual fire:
But yet Ixyon on this seeming Fair,
(Which was indeed naught but delusiue air)
Begot the Centaures, that rebeld against Jove:
The mixture monstrous, so the effect did prove:
But of Ixyons issue, write who will,
Monsters in mind (not Nature) move my quill,
This act of lust and Horror ended thus,
Jove (brooking ill a man so vicious
As was Ixyon should in Heaven remain,
In Justice fixed him on the earth again:
Thus he that (purged) among the Gods did live,
May now on earth such loss of Glory grieve,
And ever mourn to bear so great a cross
"We truly nere taste joy, but by the loss,
Which yet he cannot relish, his dull taste
Is like one's forced to feed that feeds his last,
And can no whit distinguish (wanting power)
But thinks what is bitter sweet, and what sweet sower:
He having clipped this shape of eminence,
Applaudes the act in his deluded sense,
And (swollen with glory of so great a deed)
Proclaims Heauens-Queene a whore, to humane seed,
Vowing to Jupiter he was unjust,
And that her breasts were pillowes to his Lust,
That he in heat had clipped that world of wonder
In spite of Jove, and his three-forked Thunder:
Which to revenge, Jove with his Lightning struck,
This birth-curst monster to Hells lowest nooke,
And makes him there this heavy torment feel,
Ever to turn a neuer-resting Wheel:
Which to his Oblique sense, his crime does show
In Serpents Charracter'd unto his view,
Which as he turns, he reads, and ever turns,
And round about the poisonous Sulphur burns:
Tha'rt in a place where thou must ever be,
From whence no Time or Fate can ever rescue thee:
For when on earth no man shall have a brother,
And the Elements shall one deface each other.

