A C(...)N AND (...)E TREATISE OF THE manner and order of Predestination, and
of the largenes of Gods grace.

FIRST WRITTEN IN LATIN by that Reverend and faithful servant of God, Master
William Perkins, late Preacher of the Word in Cambridge.

AND CAREFVLLY TRANSLATED into English by FRANCIS CACOT, and THOMAS TVKE.

Romans 8. verse. 29. 30. For those which he knew before, he also predestinate
to be made like to the image of his Son, that he might be ^he first borne
among many brethren.

Moreover, whom he predestinate, them also he called, and whom he called, them
also he justified, and whom he justified, them be also glorified.

AT LONDON Printed for WILLIAM WELEY, and Martin Clarke. 1606.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Peter Buck, Knight: And to the virtuous Lady his
Wife, Grace and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
RIght Worshipful, amongst the manifold points of Christian Religion, the
truth of the Doctrine concerning Predestination is worthy serious and sober
study for the sound understanding thereof. For first, it is something difficult
and obscure. Secondly, because it is by some eagerly impugned, as a frivolous
and forged invention of man's brain. Thirdly, diverse opinions have passed from
diverse me^ diversely about this one point; whereas notwithstanding there is but
one truth, and one definite and constant sentence to be found in holy writ
concerning it. Fourthly, this one doctrine does give very good evidence, and an
ample demonstration of Gods infinite mercy and exact justice. Fifthly, it
affords some taste of his profound and impenetrable counsel. Sixthly, it does
notably manifest his admirable wisdom and policy, and the incorruptible
purity of his nature, who wisely disposes all things, and uses even evils
without injustice, and the least receipt or infusion of corruption; and all for
the manifestation of the glory of his Name, and of the splendor of his
renowned properties. Seventhly, it confounds the common cavil of many
desperate and infatuated Atheists, who would make Gods predestination the
pillar of their sensual security, and secure sensuality. Lastly, it
ministers exceeding comfort unto those, who renouncing the kingdom of Sin,
do live like Saints in the kingdom of Grace. First, because it is not possible
for any such to sin with full consent of heart. Secondly, because no
personal merits are required of them. Thirdly, because the Spirit of God
abides in them, who is busy within the hiue of their hearts as a Be, and
works them like wax. Fourthly, because God has eternally predestined them
to eternal joys, and those also incomprehensible and ineffable. Fifthly,
because God has in abundance vouchsafed that to them being but an handful,
which he has denied to whole heaps besides. Sixthly, for that they being
elected, can in no wise perish, for the counsel of the Lord shall stand for
ever, Psalm. 33. 11. And he loves them with an everlasting love, Jeremy 3. 4.
Though a Mother should forget her Child, yet he will not forget them, for he
has graven them upon the palm of his hand, Isay 49. 15, 16. therefore he
will confirm them unto the end, 1. Cor. 1. 8. and by his power keep them unto
salvation, 1. Pet. 1. 5. He will love them constantly, though he visit their
transgressions with rods, Psalm. 89. 32, 33. He will never turn away from them,
though he Iere. 32. 40. Ioh. 16. 12.
take them by the neck (as Job speaks) and beat them, though he cut their
reins and break them, and though he powers their gall upon the ground, and
runs upon them like a Giant. Joseph did affect his brethren entirely, though
he spoke roughly to them. He may also sometimes let them fall, as a loving
Nurse may her child, but he will lift them up again; therefore howsoever they
may fall, yet they shall not fall away. Indeed Piptein.
they may leave their first love, as the Ecpiptein
Church of Ephesus did, but they shall never leave to love at all, if ever they
loved Reu. 2. 4.
truly. For (as Paul says) Love does never fall away, it may be lessened, but
it cannot 1. Cor. 13 8.
be lost. In like manner, their faith may be covered, as the Sun with a
duskie cloud in a gloomy day: or as the trees are with snow sometimes in
winter; but yet it continues firmly fixed (though now and then eclipsed) in
the sphaere of the heart, and keeps sap in the root. For the righteous man
is as a tree planted by the rivers of waters, Psalm. 1. 3. and is built by that
great builder of heaven and earth upon a rock, Math. 16. 18. These comforts
will this one doctrine afford, being thoroughly pondered and understood. And no
doubt these and the like considerations moved that holy and learned man of
blessed memory, to publish this present treatise for the benefit of the Church,
and the same have also incited us to turn it out of the tongue wherein he wrote
it, into the English, for their profit who are ignorant in the other; and the
rather, because it is contrived and penned very plainly, soundly, and
succinctly, as the subject will permit. The which (Right Worshipful) assuring
our selves of your unfeigned love unto the truth, we do present and dedicate to
you, in token of deserved gratitude for undeserved kindness, not doubting of
your courteous and kind acceptance. And thus we humbly take our leaves,
recommending you and all yours to the protection of Iehoua. Rochester, this 19.
of February. 1605.

Your Worships in all duty, Francis Cacott, and Thomas Tuke.


To the Right Worshipful Master John Hayward. Mayor: And the Worshipful
Iurates his Brethren: And the whole Communalti^ of the Town and Liberty of
Fauersham.
RIght Worshipful, as many other wholesome and heavenly doctrines grounded upon
the word of God, have been and are to this day contradicted and impugned: even
so it fares with the divine and deep doctrine of Gods Predestination; a
doctrine not more heavenly, then wholesome, nor more commodious, then
comfortable, and yet as heavenly and as commodions, as any doctrine whatsoever,
which the Scriptures do afford. The Pelagians held, that God predestined men
to life or death, as he did foresee that they would by their natural free will
receive or reject grace offered. They taught, that it was in man's power to
believe, or not to believe: they placed the causes of salvation in men
themselves out of God, and held, that the Elect might fall from grace and
perish.

Others hold, that albeit the Lord electeth some of his mere mercy without
respect of any thing in them, that yet he rejects those which are rejected,
because he did foresee that they would reject his grace offered unto them in
the Gospel. Some Vbiquitaries hold, that Adams fall came to pass without Gods
decree, or any ordination of (...): secondly, that no decree of God depends
upon his sample will, concerning the salvation of the godly, or the reiection
of the Reprobate: thirdly, that God does utterly nill the reprobation of
(...)y: fourthly, that the Reprobate may be converted and saved: (...)ly, that
Christ dyed for the reprobates, and that it is the purpose and will of God
simply, that all men without exception should be saved. Some do subject
Election unto Gods eternal decree, but not Reprobation. Others, putting no
difference between Reprobation and Damnation, do think, as God does pass by
some men of his mere pleasure, that he does in like sort damn them of his
mere will and pleasure, whereas indeed sin is the cause why men are damned.
Many of the Romish synagogue do teach, that men are elected for their foreseen
faith, and meritorious works. And it is the common opinion of all Papists, that
the Elect cannot be certain and sure of their election, unless it be
extraordinarily by some special revelation, and singular privilege. Many also
there are, which would not have this doctrine publicly taught by the Minister;
but without good reason. For first, as the Minister must not search the secrets
of God which are not revealed, so he must not suppress or hide that which is
revealed. For things Revealed, belong to Deu. 29. 29.
us and to our children for ever, as Moses teaches. Therefore as we may not
search into those things which God will have kept secret, so we may in no wise
be wholly ignorant of those things which he has revealed unto us. But this
doctrine of Predestination, is very plentifully and perspicuously revealed and
delivered unto us in the Scriptures. Secondly, as the word of God omitteth
nothing which is needful to be known, touching the salvation of our souls,
so we must know, that it teaches nothing but that which is profitable, and
worthy to be learned of all. For that speech of Paul to the Romans is true of
all the writings of the Prophets and Apostles also, Whatsoever things were
written, were written for Romans 15. 4
our learning. But the word of God does teach this doctrine of Election and
Reiection, as is evident by many places therein: therefore it is necessary and
fit to be taught of the Minister, and to be learned of the people. Thirdly, it
is the duty of all faithful Ministers to teach all the counsel of God, as
Paul says Act. 20. 27.
he did: but Predestination is a part of Gods counsel: therefore it ought to
be delivered of us unto the people of God; always remembering, that we apply
our selves to your capacities, and teach it orderly (as occasion serves)
keeping our selves in all sobriety within the limits of the Word. Fourthly,
Christ commands the Gospel to be preached Mark. 10. 15.
to every creature: but this Doctrine belongs to the Gospel, and therefore
is to be preached unto the unlearned, as to the learned. Lastly, all Ministers
are bound to keep back nothing which is profitable, but to show Act. 20 20.
it as Paul did: But the doctrine of Predestination is very profitable. For
first, it lets us see the omnisciencie, the omnipotency, the soueraignetie,
and immutable nature of God. Secondly, it serves to increase and confirm our
faith and hope, concerning the eternal felicity of our souls and bodies;
seeing it is not founded upon our selves, or upon any sandy foundation, but
upon the constant and unchangeable good pleasure of God. Thirdly, it teaches
us not to wonder at the small number of believers, and at the hardness and
blindness of many men's hearts and minds. For it shows, that God has elected
but a few, and has Math. 20. 16.
passed by many, leaving them unto themselves, and delivering them up into the
hands of the Devil. Fourthly, it serves to strengthen and comfort us in all
afflictions, and to arm us against all the fiery darts of the Devil, and the
fury of his lims. For it shows, that nothing can separate us from the love of
God, and that all things Romans 8. 28, 39.
work for the best unto them that love God, even unto them that are called of
his purpose. All storms and waves of woe shall pass over, and in the end we
shall rest in the quiet haven of everlasting happiness. Fifthly, this doctrine
stays us from taking offense at the Apostasy of many professors: for it
shows us, that all is not gold which glisters, and that some stand for a
time, and some stand fast for ever. If they had been of us (says John) they
should have continued with us. Sixthly, it teaches (...). John 2. 19.
us to acknowledge Gods singular goodness toward us, who of his mere good
will toward us, has elected us unto eternal life, and the fruition of
immortal glory in the heavens. Seventhly, it serves to teach us humility, and
to beat down the pride of our hearts. For it shows, that Gods grace, and not
our goodness, is the originary cause of our welfare and salvation. The cause,
which moved God to choose us rather then many others, was not our foreseen
preparations, or meritoriou^ works, but his own love, and free good will
toward us. Lastly, (to (...) sundry uses which might be made of this one
doctrine) it teaches us to ascribe the glory of our salvation to God alone,
and to walk thankefully before him, manifesting the gratitude of our hearts by
our religious, righteous, and sober lives. To conclude, some are so far out of
love with this doctrine, that they can scarce with patience endure to hear it
spoken of. And many licencious and profane persons do very wickedly abuse it,
to take unto themselves liberty of lasci(...)us and loose (...). For (say they)
if I be ordained to (...)ed, I cannot be damned, (...) if damnation be my
destiny, I can never be saved: And therefore it skilleth not how I live; for if
God have appointed me to be saved, I shall be saved, though I do just nothing:
and it he have determined that I shall be damned, I shall never escape it,
though I live never so well. For Gods decree is constant, his appointment shall
stand, whosoever says nay to it. But these men forget, that God does
predestinate men as well to use the means, as to atteine unto the end. As he
has appointed a man to live, so he has appointed the same man to use those
means which preserve life, as meat, drink, rest, recreation, labor,
physic. Even so, as he has appointed a man to be saved, he has appointed
him to use the means, and to walk in the way of salvation, as to bele^ue: and
therefore the scripture says, So many as were ordained to everlasting life
believed, Act. 13 48. And Paul show(...), that those God does call, (...) be
has predestined, and justifies those (...) 8. (...)
(...) (...) does effectually call, before he (...) (...) them. And in his
Epistle to the Ephesians he teaches, that (as God has chosen us unto life
eternal, so) he has Ephesians. 1. 4.
also chosen us in Christ, that we should be holy, and without blame before him
in love: and that as he has ordained us unto salvation, so he has created
us in Christ Ephesians. (...). 10.
Jesus unto good works, which he has ordained that we should walk in them.
As the Scripture teaches us that God has elected us unto salvation: so it
does also teach us, that he sent his Son to save us. As God had determined
that Christ should not dye in his infancy (as the event declared) so he did
appoint his father in law Joseph to take him and his Mother, and to fly into
Egypt, when Herod Math. 2. 13.
sought to destroy him. By which we see, that as GOD has predestined the end,
so he has also predestined the way and means thereunto. He therefore that
desires to be saved, must use the means which God has appointed. His
damnation may not without cause be feared, who following the sway of his
carnal affections, contemns o^ neglects the means of grace, and will not
1. Sam, 2 25.
walk in the way which leads unto glory. But we (Beloved) rejecting all the
fancies and fantastike inventions of man, must rectify our judgments by the
rule of Gods word, and with discreet diligence and sobriety we ought to labor
for the true knowledge and right understanding of this celestial and solacious
doctrine of Gods eternal Predestination; (...) doctrine not so profound as
profitable, and not so ^bstruse and intricate, as many do imagine. A notable
furtherance hereunto this treatise following will afford; penned pithily,
concisely, and perspicuously by a very learned and judicious Divine. Now (my
Brethren) amongst many other things which belong to this doctrine, there be two
things which I do commend to your Christian consideration. First, the
privileges of Gods elect and adopted children. Secondly, the notes of Election
unto salvation, and the practice of those things, whereby a man may come to be
in his conscience soundly persuaded, that he is a chosen vessel predestined
to eternal life. For the first; Many and excellent are the prerogatives and
immunities, wherewith the Elect are privileged and adorned: therefore the
Psalmist says, Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of Psalm, 8^. 3.
God. And yet as glorious and numerous as they be, they are not easily
discerned and acknowledged of the world: first, because their disgrace is
common and public, by reason of the spiteful and inueterate malice of the
Serpent and his ^eed, whereby it comes to pass, that the faithful in all
ages have acted a part longer or shorter, in a doleful tragedy upon the stage
of the world, so as that of all men they have always for the most part seemed
most miserable, and least respected of man, and privileged of God. Secondly,
because sundry slips and sins have bin observed in them. Thirdly, the upright
Pro^. 2^. 27.
man is such an abomination to the wicked, as that through his cankered spite,
his spiteful and rancorous hatred, he cannot behold and fancy his sweet and
lovely condition. Fourthly, the principal ornaments of the Godly are dark and
spiritual, as the Psalmist says, The Kings daughter Psalm. 45. ^3.
i^ all glorious within; and their outward estate is usually obscure, course,
and ragged; not much unlike to the Curtains of the Tabernacle, whose outward
couerings were of Goats hair, Rams skins, and Badgers, but the inward were of
fine twined linen, blue silk, purple and skarlet, with the most exquisite
embroydering of Exodus 26
the Cherubins upon them.

The World, unto Gods Children is as a Stepmother, and may be termed Gods
Schoole-house, in which he trayneth up his Children as Scholars under the
cross, often correcting them with his rod of affliction. Whence it is, that
the world accounts them unfortunate, and being unable to judge of colors,
through the dimnesse of her sight, thee considers and commends none but
such as are light, though they wear and lose their brightness, whiles she is
poaring on them. But although the World be blea^e-eyed and di^sighted, yet
those which are elected out of the world, do feel, and see, and can say much.
And the word of God conteyneth in it many royal and notable privileges and
dignities, properly belonging unto those whom God has elected and adopted,
some whereof I will briefly and plainly here set down.

The first dignity is their glorious and Priuil. 1.
honorable styles and titles. They are called in the Scriptures, The people,
the redeemed, the sons, the building, the husbandry and household servants of
God, the brethren, the spouse, the members, the seed and the sheep of Christ,
the temples of the holy Ghost, the seed, the sons and the daughters of
Abraham. They are called lively stones, a spiritual house, heirs of the
promise, Saints, faithful, Kings, Priests, yea an holy and princely
priesthood, a peculiar people challenged of God, a chosen generation, and an
holy nation.

The faithful and chosen children of Priuil. 2.
God alone have true title to all the outward blessings of God, for they only
believe, Isa. 1. 19 1. Tim. 4. 3.
and they are only Gods obedientiaries. Reprobates are butindeed usurpers of
them in his sight. We lost them in Adam, and we receive right neither in them
nor to them, but by Christ. His passions have purchased our possessions.

The Elect only can use Gods blessings Priuil. 3.
to a right end and in a right manner. For they only are pure (being purged in
the blood of Christ) and they only can pray with a true faith. The wicked make
their riches their own ruin, and Gods benefits their own bane, and either
abuse them, or use them not as he commands them, and causes his own
children by his grace to use them.

God has appointed his holy Angels, Priuil. 4.
which for their strength and fortitude are called Gods, to guard and protect
his Psa. 8. 5.
people. The Angel of (...): Lord (says David) pitcheth round about them that
foare him. ^sal. 34. (...).
And the Apostle says, that they are all ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for their sakes which shall be beires of salvation. The Lord has
honored his Elect, and Priuil. 5.
no doubt, yet does and will (when it pleases him) by preserving them, and
providing for them very effectually, and sometimes ^er^. 36. 26.
also very wonderfully. He saved Noah from drowning, Lot from burning, ^lias
from famishing, Mordecai from murder, and Paul from those bloody Votaries, by
providing for them very kindly. He saved Samson miraculously from perishing by
thirst, and Daniel from the teeth of the Lions. David says, The Lord drew him
out Psalm. 18, 16, 48, 50.
of many waters, and delivered him from the cruel man, and gave him great
deliver anc^s. He did often and strangely also preserve our late Queen of holy
and happy memory, from the desperate and malicious attempts of Popish Traitors,
set a work by the Devil to murder her. He prolonged her days, he held the
Crown on her head, and kept the Scepter in her hand with peace and
prosperity, the time and tyranny of Paul. 4. Pius 4. and 5. Greg. 13. Sixtus.
5. Urban. 7. Greg. 14 Innoc. 9. Clemon, 8
nine or ten Monsters her mortal enemies, though their slaves continually
plotted and practiced against her, and thought the Prince of the air thundered
against her in his Pius 5. Greg. 13. Sixtus (...).
Lieutenants (as it were from the clouds) with curses and cursed
Excommunications. Lately also he has vouchsafed an admirable deliverance to
his Anointed our gracious King, and to us all, from a most barbarous and
horrible confusion. And of this kind of favor and favorable dealing used of
the Lord, we may read plentifully in Divine and Ecciesiasticall stories. And
no doubt, the wicked have sometimes fared the better for the Electsake, as
Laban did Genesis 30. 27. Genesis 39. 5. Act. 27. 24. Genesis 18. 32. Job. 22. ^0.
for Jacob, and Potiphar for Joseph, and those which say led in that dangerous
voyage to Rome, for Paul, who was in their company. God told Abraham, that if
there were but ten righteous persons in Sodom, he would not destroy it for
their sakes. Eliphaez says, that the innocent shall deliver the Island;
meaning, that God does often deliver a whole country from peril, for the just
m^ns sake.

For his Elect GOD has altered the course of nature. He divided the waters
Priuil. 6.
of the red sea, that his people might pass dry-shod through it. He caused the
Sun Exo. 14. 22. I^sh. 10. 12.
to stay, and the Moon to stand still, till his people had avenged themselves
upon their enemies. For Gideons sake he caused the dew to fall only upon a
fleece of wool, and kept it from falling upon the ground: Iud. 8. 38, 40.
and afterward, at his request he let it fall on the earth, and kept the
fleece dry. For Hezekiah his sake he brought the shadow in the dyall of Ahaz
ten degrees Isa. 38. 8
backward, by the which degrees the Sun was gone down.

GOD does often preserve his chosen Priuil. 7.
children from pe^^is then, when he does persecute the wicked. Many sorrows
Psalm. 32. 10.
((...) David) shall be fall the wicked, but he that trusts in the Lord,
shall be compassed of mercy. Noah was delivered, when the wicked were drowned.
The Israelites Genesis 19. 16.
passed, when the Egiptians perished. When Sodo^ was burned, Lot was brought
forth. When Ierico was sacked, Raha^ was saved. When Abab was slain,
Iebosaph^t escaped. When Jerusalem was to be destroyed, the Lord commanded
Ezekiel. 9. 4.
the godly to be bra^ded, that they might be preserved. Moreover, when the Lord
delivers his own people, then he does sometimes thrust the wicked into their
dangers. The righteous (says Solomon) Pr^^. 11. 8.
escapes out of trouble, and the wicked shall come in his stead. And as he
does usually cross their cursed counsels, so he does often times curse their
malicious and bloody enterprises, and cracks them upon their own crowns, and
breaks them upon their own backs. Haman was hanged on that galowes which he
himself Hest. 7. 9
had prepared for Mordecai, whom the King did greatly advance. Daniel was
brought^om the Lions, and his accusers Dan. 6. 23, 24.
being cast into the den amongst them, were devoured of them. God preserved
Shadrak, Meshak and Abednego in the hot Dan 3. 22.
fiery furnace, and ^lew the men with the flame of the fire, that brought them
forth to be burned. The Lord delivered good Ieh^shaphat, and caused his enemies
that 2. Chron. 20. 23.
came against him, to help forward their own destruction. The Lord has
delivered us from their barbarous and bloodthirsty Catholics, and has for
the honor of his mercy pulled the rotten house of their devilish muentions
upon their own heads. His name be praised for ever and ever, Amen.

Christ has altered the nature of affsictions Priuil. 8.
unto his elect and faithful members. For whereas they are cast upon the
wicked, as punishments due unto them for their sins wherein they live, they
are inflicted upon the Godly by Psalm. 8^ 31, 32. Hab. 12. 6.
God, as a merciful Father that desires the amendment of his children.
Because our hearts are drossy, the Lord, as our most skillful founder, casts
us into the furnace of afflictions, that he might refine us. Because we are
subject to transgress and go astray, the Lord imparketh us within the pales
of adversity, and hedgeth us about with the thorny quick-set of the cross,
that we might be kept in some compass. David says, Psa. 119 67.
Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I keep thy word. Because we
are by nature untoward to that which is good, the Lord uses the cross as a
Schoolmaster to instruct us. Therefore David says, It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, that I may learn Psa. 11^ 71.
thy Statutes. Because we are by nature inclined to the love of the world, the
Lord, as our Nurse, does weane us from the love thereof, by affliction, as the
Mother or Nurse drives her Child from the breast, by rubbing it with some
bitter thing. To be brief, the Lord by afflictions ex(...)eth our faith and
patience, ^^a^neth us humility, and teaches (...) to esteem of prosperity. By
aff(...)s be makes us to take experience or his love, and of those graces
which he has given us. By afflictions he learneth us to be merciful unto the
miserable. for the sense of sickness, and the feeling of poverty through Gods
blessing, is a notable means to make us pity the poor and the sick. The
Apostle says, Our light affl^ction, which is but for 2 Cor. 4. 17.
a moment, works unto us a far most excellent, and an eternal weight of
glory; though not as a cause procuring it (for we are Ephesians. 2. 8. Romans 6. 23.
saved by grace: and everlasting life is the free gift of God in Christ) yet as
a way and means directing and leading us thereto. Christ has two Crowns, the
one of thorns, the other of glory: he that will be honored with the last,
must be humbled and tried with the first. Thus it is evident, that God shows
himself a Father, in afflicting his Children. But as for the Reprobate, his
erosses are curses, and his afflictions are forerunners of further judgments
inflicted and sent of God as a severe and dreadful Judge.

God has altered the nature of death Priuil. 9.
unto all the elect. For Christ by his death has been the death of death, and
the death of sin, which is the sting and strength of death. First of all, God
by death teaches us to detest sin, and to acknowledge the seu(...)ty and
sharpnes of his anger against it. Secondly, by death he delivers us utterly
from the body of sin. Till death we attain not unto perfection, and at death
sin is wholly con(...)ed. When we dye, sin dies. For sin is so nething
like ^uy, which falls down and dies, when the tree on which it hanged is
cu^ d(...). Thirdly, the Lord does sometimes take away his children by death,
that they should not see those evils which he h(...) purposed to plague his
enemies withal. Merciful men are taken away (says Is^* 57. (...).
(...)) and no man vnderstand^th that the righteous is taken away from the
evil to some. So the Lord took away good Josiah, (...). Chr^n. 84. 28.
that his eyes might not see all the evil which he purposed to bring upon
that place Yea such is his love unto his Saints, that he cannot do that to the
wicked which he would, so long as they live amongst them. As the Angel told
Lot, that he could do nothing till he was gone out of Sodom: even so it may be
^en. 19. ^2.
truly said, that Gods love is so fervent toward his chosen, as that it
sometimes keeps him from scattering his judgments in those places wherein
they live. Therefore he does often remove them by death, that he may more
freely pour out the vials of his wrath upon the ungodly, Fourthly, by death
God learneth us to seek a place of rest, and to alie^ate our affections from
the world; which being like unto bird-lime, would otherwise more easily belime
our affections, that they could not soar up to the heavens the place of our
home. Fifthly, by death the Lord humbles us, and teach^th us, not to pra^ke and
plume up our bodies like Peacocks, as if we meant to live ever. Sixthly, the
Lord by their deaths occasioneth their exper^^c^ and feeling of the virtue of
Christ's resurrection. Lastly, as death is the complement of mortification, and
ends the battle between the flesh and the spirit; so it fully finisheth all
earthly calamities, and as a ^erry-(...) it transporteth us over the
tempestuous and broad Ocean of tribulations and afflictions, into the calm and
quiet haven of endless happiness. But as for the Reprobate, it is to them as
a boat, to carry them out of a river of earthly miseries, into a restless and
bottomless sea of infinite and ineffable torments. And because their felicity
(if any) consists in the finite fruition of worldly prosperity, God in his
appointed time, by death as by (...) knife, cutteth asunder the thread of life,
and so casts them out of their paradise, and sends their souls to the
place of the damned, where they shall continue terribly tormented, till that
doleful and dismal day of vengeance.

God has ordained the writing of his ^ri^^l. 10
word, the preaching of it, the administration of the Sacraments, and his
dispensers of them principally and properly for the be^^fit of the Elect.
Sa(...) Paul says, Whatsoever things are written aforet^me, are written for
our learning, that we ^om. 15. 4.
through patience and comfort of the Scrip(...)s, might have hope. John says,
he wrote that we might believe in the name of 1. Ioh 5. ^3.
Christ. Therefore his writings properly belong to the children of God, And the
Apestle writing to the (...)ans, says, that Christ gave some to be Apostles,
and some Prephets, and some ^uangelists, and some Pastors and Doctors. But to
what end? For the reparation of the Saints, and for the edification of Christ's
Eph^^. 4. ^2.
body. And this is no small prerogative. for the Sacraments are signs and
seals of Gods grace. The preaching of the Gospel is the power of God to
salvation to all that do believe. In his word he has recorded his will. And
his Ministers are as it were his Trumpeters, which do sound in our ears the
trumpets of his Law and Gospel, and instruct us when to stand still, when to
retire, and when and how to march forward. They are through his assistance our
spiritual Fathers, by whom he does procreate and beget us unto himself, for
our good and his own glory. Now all these things profit the Reprobate nothing
at all, but do indeed through the rebellions corruption of they^ hearts, harden
and stiften them, as the Sun does clay.

The Lord has united all his elect and Priui. 1^
de^re children unto Christ, by his Spirit, and by a true and lively faith. And
by reason of this union, they are after a sort united to the whole Trinity,
Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Yea hence it is that we are partakers of Christ's
benefits. For as the members of the body have neither sense nor motion, unless
they be united to the head: and as the science or griffe receives no
nourishment, except it be set in the stock and grow up with it: Fuen so,
unless we be united unto Christ our stock and spiritual head, we have no
spiritual life and motion, neither are we actually partakers of his benefits.
But being once united and knit unto him, we receive sense and sap, life and
motion.

All the elect and faithful people of God, are partakers of the prayers of all
Priuil. 12.
the Godly throughout the world. The children of God have fellowship one with
an other, as with Christ their head. Whereas on the contrary, they pray for the
confusion and final destruction of his and their impenitent, pestilent, and
irreconciliable enemies, and can not but hate and abandon those, whom they see
to walk peruersly in wicked and reprobate courses, without remorse of
conscience, and all show of repentance. For GOD has put a secret antipathy and
mortal en^^y between his seed, and the seed of the Serpent. Therefore Solomon
says, A wicked man is an abomination to the just, and he that is upright in
his Prou. 29 27.
way, is an abomination to the wicked. And as David says, The wicked
practices against Psalm. 37. 12.
the just, and g^a^^^eth his t^^th against him. So he also says thus of
himself, Psalm. 3^^ 6.
I have hated them that give themselves to deceitful vanities. And again, Do
not I hate them, O Lord, that hate Psa. 139 21.
thee? I hate them with the perfection of hatred, as if they were mine utter
enemies. And in the fifteenth Psalm, contemning Psalm. 15. 4.
of a vile person, that is, of a wicked wretch, and the honoring of the Godly,
is made an infallible note of a faithful member of the Church. By which it
appears that there is no sincere and solid communion between Gods children
and the slaves of the Devil. And therefore it is one of our privileges and
peculiar dignities, to enjoy the love, and lovely communion of the Saints.

Faith, by which we walk and live, Priuil. 13.
by which we are justified and adopted, without which it is impossible to
please GOD; this faith, which is a supernatural Heb. 11. 6. Act. 13. 48. T^^.
1. 1.
gift of God above corrupt and created nature, this faith (I say) is peculiar
and proper to the Elect: therefore Saint Paul ^alieth it, The ^aith of the
Elect: and teaches the Thessalonians, (...). These. 3 2.
that it is not common to all men. Secondly, Hope is an excellent gift of God,
for it makes not ashamed, and by Romans 5. 5
it the Apostle says we are saved, that is, by hope we expect and wait for
that salvation, Romans 8. 24.
which by faith we apprehend, and assure our selves of, for the ^^ualuable
merits of Christ. Now, this grace is not given to any besides the Elect. For
how can the Reprobate hope to be saved, seeing they are appointed for the day
of evil, and are reserved to the day Prou. 16. 4. Job. 21. 30. (...). Tim. 1 5,
of destruction, and shall be brought forth to the day of wrath? Thirdly,
Love, which springs out of a pure heart, and flows from a good conscience
and faith unfeigned, is given only to Gods Elect. For it is not possible for
the Reprobate to love God, to that end and in that manner which God requires;
seeing he has cast them off from all eternity, and purposed not to give them
any saving grace; considering also that they are by nature void of pu^itie, and
do live and dye in sin. Now this privilege is the greater, because this
grace is very rare and excellent. Love is (as it were) a knife, wherewith faith
shareth and cutteth out the duties which we do owe unto God and man, in some
good and acceptable manner. Love is the cock which lets out the water of
Gods graces out of the cisterne of our hearts. Love is the nurse of humanity,
the mother of equity, the maintainer of virtue, the daughter of faith, the
preserver of piety, the mistress of modesty, the badge of Christianity, the
bane of discord, the staff of concord, Col. 3. 14. Job. 13. 35. 1. Cor. 1^ 13.
the keeper of the Crown, the bond of perfection, and the note of a true
disciple. Saint Paul in some sort prefers it to faith and hope, when he says,
Now abides faith, hope and love: but the chiesest of these is Love. By which
we see, that the Lord has highly honored us, in that he conferreth this
glorious grace unto none but us. Lastly, that filial Prou. 9. 10. Prou. 1^ 27.
fear, which is the beginning of wisdom, and the wellspring of life, to
avoid the snares of death, and which makes a man to keep the golden rule of
mediocritie, is given only to Gods Elect. For how can the Reprobate, who do
love sin, and do not love God, how (I say) can they fear to displease him,
because they hate sin, and love him? or how can the Reprobate, who are all
ordained to inevitable and eternal perdition, be said to fear God as a Son
fears his loving Father, seeing they be slaves, and considering that the word
of God pronounces him happy and blessed, who stands Psa. 112 (...).
in awe of GOD, and fears to offend him? If the Reprobate be blessed, then of
all men the Elect are most accursed. But we shall say that those are blessed,
whom the Lord has accursed, if we shall say, that the Reprobate do fear God
with that fear whereof I now speak. Priuil. 14. (...). Chron. 14. 11. Nahum.
1. 9. Act. (...). 4


GOD accounts those injuries as done unto himself, which the wicked offer
unto his faithful servants. Saul persecuted the true professors of Christ, yet
Christ told him from heaven, that he persecuted him. The afflictions of Gods
children, are called in the Scriptures, Col. 1. 24
Christ's afflictions. For such is the union and communion betwixt the head and
the members, that if any of Revel. 11 8.
them smart, the head is partaker of the grief. If any part be crazed or
annoyed, the heart is ready to mourn, the head to consult, the tongue to
bewail and utter it, the foot to run to the Surgeon, and the hand is ready to
do her duty. Even so it is between Christ and his members. If any of them be
injuriously vexed and troubled, he takes the wrong as done unto himself. And
so Christ may be said to be crucified in that great city, which is mystically
called Sodom and Babylon, that is, Rome, because he is there put to death in
his members, and is in them (as it were) slain continually by Romish authority
is either heathenish, or Popish, Christ died by the former, but in hi^ members
he has died by both, and yet does by the latter. Zach. (...). 8. Math. 25
Romish authority, as he was by it (if we speak properly) crucified and put
to death. So in like manner the Lord says, He which touches you, touches
the apple of mine eye. And as Christ esteems of those good deeds which men do
unto them, as done unto himself: even so he accounts the bare neglecting,
and the not relieuing of them in their wants, as if the wicked had been in this
kind of duty faulty unto himself.

God will shorten the World, and hasten the coming of his Son for the Priui.
15
Elect. And so that speech of Christ may be understood, For the Elects sake
those Math. 24 22.
evil days shall be shortened. Moreover, such is the patience and good will of
God unto his Elect, as that he stays his coming for a time, because he
would (as Peter affirms) have none of them to perish, but come unto
repentance, 2. Pet. 3. 9.
that when he comes, they may be welcome unto him, and he to them.

God does effectually call the Elect, and none besides them, and they alone
Priui. 16
are justified in his sight. For he does pardon them alone, and they only are
Romans 8. 30.
clothed with the spotless roabes of Christ's perfect righteousness. Therefore
the Prophet says, The ch^stisement of our Isa. 53. 5 6.
peace was upon him. The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. For
the (...).
transgression of my people was he plagued. By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant 11. 12. Math. 1. 21. John 17. 9.
justify many. He bare the sin of many. He does not say all. For he came to
save his own people only from their sins. He did not so much as pray for the
Reprobate. Now this is a very great and admirable privilege, and honor, that
God should send his only Son to dye for us few despicable wretches, and that
Christ should lose his life, and shead his heart blood for us only, whereas it
was in Act, 20. 28.
it self (being the blood of God) sufficient to have redeemed a thousand
thousand worlds of sinners. If a man had a medicine able to cure all diseases,
and would not give it any saving some few, they were wonderfully indebted to
him. The blood of Christ is able to heal all our soule-sicknesses, and to
deliver us from all our sins: and it has pleased him to wash us alone in it,
and to withhold it from the far greater part of mankind. By which we see, how
highly he has honored us, and how deep we are in his debt. If three men were
in danger of drowning or burning, and a man should come and deliver one of
them, and leave the other two to the danger, all men might well say, that he
favored him more then the other. By our sins we were all in danger to be
drowned in that sulphury lake, and to be consumed with the fire of Gods wrath,
as well as the Reprobates. Our sins deserve it. But Christ has set himself
between his Father and us. He has taken no notice (as it were) of them: and
us only, who are elected, he has redeemed. As the Lord drowned the Egyptians
only in the Sea, so Christ has overwhelmed our sins only in his blood. And
as the Propitiatory covered the Ar^e and the Decalogue: so Christ covers his
Elect with his blood, and hides them, yea them alone, from the wrath of God,
and therefore Paul calls him, The savior of his body. By which we see, his
grace and good Ephesians. 5. 23.
will is far greater to us then to them.

It is impossible through the virtue of Priui. 17
Gods decree and Christ's merits, that any of the Elect should fall into the
sin against the holy Ghost, into which some Reprobates have rushed.

The Elect being once actually redeemed, Priuil. 18. (...) Luke 1. 74.
have liberty to serve and worship GOD without fear of any evil. They serve
him chiefly for his love, and for conscience of his commandments. The wicked
seem to serve him oftentimes, but it is for some sinester respect, as for
fear of damnation (as the slave obeys his Master for fear of the whip) or
for fear of imprisonment, or an ill name, or else for the love of lucre, or
the desire of glory or credit with men.

The elect alone do merit at Gods hands, Priuil. 19.
for they being alone partakers of Christ's meritorious righteousness, do also
alone, it being accounted as their own, merit everlasting life of God. Now is
not this an exceeding great favor, that we being but worms, should deserve
everlasting Job. 25. 6
happiness of so high a Majesty? It does greatly commend the love of God to us,
and the rather, because he has graced us only with the inestimable merits of
his Son, refusing to impart them to many millions of men, as noble, as wise,
as learned, as beautiful, as mighty, and as wealthy as our selves.

The Elect being once effectually called, do sin thenceforward only of
infirmity. Priui. 20
Therefore Saint John says, that Whosoever is borne of God, sins not, that
is, with full consent of will. For so farfoorth 1. Job. 3. 9.
as he is regenerate, he does not sin. Wherefore Paul in the person of all
true believers says, If I do that I would not (meaning evil) it is no more I
that do Romans 7. 20.
it, but the sin that dwells in me. But on the contrary, wickedness (as Job
shows) is sweet in the wicked man's mouth, ^ob. 20. 12.
he hides it under his tongue, he favors it, he will not forsake it, but
keeps it close in his mouth. His sin is as his soul, and therefore Solomon
says, he can not sleep except he have done evil, And the Prophet Isaiah
shows, that Prou. 4. 16.
the wicked is so soldered to his sin, as that he will not learn
righteousness, though mercy be showed unto him: in Isa. 2^. 10.
the land of vprightnes, where true religion is commanded, countenanced and
professed, he will do wickedly; neither respecting Gods merciful dealing, nor
the good ensamples of the Godly. Whereas the faithful detest and abhor their
corruptions, and struggle against them, striving and desiring to be delivered
of them, as a prisoner of his bolts, or as those which are troubled with the
disease Ineubus, called the Nightmare, desire or struggle to be rid thereof.

The Scriptures do teach, that God has Priuil, 21
made peace betwixt the creatures and his children. The stones of the field are
Job. 5. 23.
in league with them, and the beasts of the field are at peace with them. The
Lord by his Prophet Hosea says, that he will make a covenant for them with
Hos. 2. 18
the wild beasts, and with the fowls of the heaven, and with that which
creeps Exodus 11. 7. Exodus 14. 22, 28,
upon the earth. Do we not read, that the Sea made way to the Israelites, and
overwhelmed their enemies which pursued them? Do we not read that Ravens fed
the Prophet Eliah? Do we not read^ 1. King. 17. 6,
that the hungry Lions favored Daniel, and that the fire spared the three
Children? Did not a Star conduct the wise men to the place where our Lord
lay? Math. 2. 9
Did not the Lord make a covenant for his servant Jonah with the Whale, whose
Job. 41. 5, 22.
teeth (as the scripture says) are terrible, and by his might he makes the
d^^th to boil like a pot? And did he no^ make a bond of peace for Paul with
the venomous Viper, when she b^ing upon his Act. 28. 5, 6.
hand he received no hurt, though the Barbarians waited when he should have
swollen, or fallen down suddenly dead? On the contrary, we read that he drowned
the wicked world with water, and burned the filthy Sodomites with fire. He met
with ambitious Absalom with a 2. King. 2 24.
tree, and slew those wicked children which mocked the Prophet Elisha with
Bears. He made the dogs to eat the flesh of wicked Iezabel, and destroyed
Herod, that 2. King. 9 36. Act. 12. 23. Exodus 8.
cruel and vainglorious king with worms. He plaged the Egyptia^s with frogs,
flies, and lice. Yea, the Lord has all creatures in heaven and earth ready
(when it pleases him) to run upon the wicked and reprobate, as a gray hound
upon his game when the leash is taken off, which he manifests when he says
by Jeremy, I will etc. Iere. 15. 3. Priuil. 22.


The Elect being once forgiven of God, and accepted unto everlasting life for
the merits of Christ, have joy unspeakable, and that peace which passes all
understanding. The kingdom of God (says the Romans 14. 17.
Apostle) stands in peace and joy in the holy Ghost. If the health of body be
such a thing, as is rather with comfort inioyed, then in words to be expressed;
how great shall we think is the peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost?
It may be tasted, but it can not be expressed. The malefactor has great peace
and quietness with himself, when the King has granted him his pardon: even so
the elect should have Romans 5. 7.
great peace and tranquillity of mind, when as God, the great King of heaven and
earth, has pardoned their sins, and received the^ to favor. But on the
contrary, the Reprobate and irreconciliable sinners, that sell themselves to
work wickedness, and drink iniquity like water, have either no peace at all,
but are like the raging Sea that cannot rest, whose Isa. 57. 20.
waters cast up mire and dirt, or else are senseless like stocks, laboring of
a spiritual apoplexy, and a devilish dead palsy, being sunk into the gulf of
security, and having made a league with death and a covenant with hell.

The Elect have an Altar, whereupon Priuil. 23
if they lay all their prescribed sacrifices, they shall be accepted of God, as
smelling sweetly in his nostrils. But the Reprobate, and all their sacrifices
are odious and abominable in his sight. They want our Altar Christ Jesus, who
should purge and sanctify their offerings, and by whom they should offer them
unto the Father: and therefore their goodly sacrifices are but goodly sins.

God gives his holy Spirit to his Elect only, who in Gods appointed time
makes Priuil. 24
his habitation in them, who does also sweep the floores of their spirits with
the hand of his grace, and the beesome of his word, and trimmeth up the houses
of their hearts with the sweet and pleasant flowers of his spirit, and adorneth
them with the costly tapestry and precious ornaments of his orient and
excellent graces He perfumeth them (as it were) with frankincense and coals of
Juniper. He builds windows within them, that they may receive the bright and
beawtifull beams and lovely light, which do shine from the Sun of
righteousness. He constituteth a kingdom within them: he rules them with the
strength of his arm, and the scepter of his word. He stablisheth his throne
with justice and mercy: he fostereth the part regenerate, he bridleth and
tameth the rebel, even the rebellious corruption of the heart, and by little
and little consumes it. As for the Reprobate; their hearts are the dens of the
Devil, and the cabins of sin, stinking loathsomly like a dead carryon.
There is indeed a kingdom within them: but the Devil is the King, Sin is
the Queen. His Throne is wickedness, his Scepter is iniquity, his Laws are the
liberty of the flesh, his rewards are death, and they are his slaves and
vassals.

As the Elect may have Grace, so it is possible for the^ to grow in grace:
therefore Priuil. 25. 2. Pet. 3. 18. 1. Pet. 2. 2.
Peter exhorts us, To grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Christ, and
shows also how we may grow. But for the Reprobate; as they are void of all
true lauing grace, so they grow not there in, for they can not increase in that
which they want. A man cannot grow in bigness, unless he have a body. A man ca^
not grow rich, unless he have ^iches. They may increase in sin and grow in
wickedness, as clay does in hardness when the weather is dry, or as the rivers do
in depth and breadth when the tide comes. Again, whereas the Lord does very
often give the reins to the Reprobate, and suffers them to rush headlong into
horrible enormities, as the Gadarens Swine did into the Sea; he does
mercifully preserve his own people, and graciously keeps them oftentimes
from declining and falling; and whenever they either stumble or fall, they
may recover themselves by serious and sound repentance. But God has not
vouchsafed the gift of godly sorrow and true repentance to the Reprobate. It
belongs only to Gods Elect. We may read of David's repentance, of Peter's
falling and rising, of Paul's conversion: but we never read of any true ^o
turn truly, is to return from all sin unto God.
turning that ever any reprobate made. If any of them repent, it is but for
fashion sake, or for fear of punishment. It is not for love to God, or for the
hatred of sin for sin, or for the consideration of Gods love unto them. As
lead being cast into the water, can not but sink, so the Reprobate can not but
sin. And as a Millstone lying in the bottom of the Sea, can not come up, so
the Reprobate being overwhelmed in the bottomless pit of iniquity, can not
repent. Though it were possible to remove a Mountain out of his place, yet it
were more impossible to remove a Reprobate from his corruptions. He may move,
but he will not remove. He may turn, but he cannot return. As it is
impossible for him to revive, who is ordained to perpetual death: so it is
impossible for him to revive from sin, whom the fountain of all life has
righteously forsaken, and delivered for ever unto Satan, to hold captive in
the grave of sin, and in the dark and deadly dungeon of iniquity.

The children of God have the spirit of prayer, and with boldness may approach
Priuil. 26.
unto the throne of his grace, and put up their suites unto him. The King will
permit a true subject to come into his presence and speak unto him, when a
rebel or traitor shall find no such favor. A Kings son may speak unto
his father, when others are not permitted so to do. We are the sons of God,
and the servants of his son; therefore we may boldly in the name of our elder
brother, present our selves before him, and put up our supplications to him;
and the rather, because he knows and approoueth us. For as the Apostle says,
The foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows who
are 2. Tim. 2 19.
his. But the Reprobate and their prayers are abominable in his sight. They
want the spirit of prayer, and either can not pray at all, or not in the right
manner. Neither can they approach with boldness unto GOD, seeing they have no
part in Christ, nor Christ in them. They cannot pray with confidence to be
heard; seeing they are destitute as well of faith, as of the favor of God.

GOD accepts the sincere will and Priuil. 27.
fervent desires of his faithful and elect children to believe, repent and
obey for faith, repentance and obedience. For As Psa. 103 13.
a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on them
that fear him. He will spare them, as a man Mala. 3. 17.
spares his own son. But fathers use to take in good part their childrens
works, so they do them with care and diligence, though not so perfectly and
exactly as indeed were meet. In like manner, if we will and with an honest
heart desire to do well, though we do it very weakly, God does notwithstanding
take all in good part, and regards not the imperfection of the work. A
desire of grace is one degree of grace, and a will to do well, is with God
accounted doing well. Therefore Paul says, If there be a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man 2. Cor. 8. 12.
has, and not according to that he has not. That which he says of giving
alms, is true in the performance of all other duties. If there be in a man a
ready and willing mind to believe, repent, and obey, though he do not these
things perfitly, or so well as many of his brethren do; yet God, for the merits
and intercession of his Son, accepts both of him and his imperfit works,
and in mercy rewards him. David, besides his daily infirmities, did thrice
grievously offend God, and yet he told Solomon, that if he (...). Chron. 7. 17.
would walk before him as David his father, he would establish the throne of
his kingdom, so as that he should not want a man to be a Ruler in Israel. And
albeit in that place he requires that he should do according to all his
commandments, whereby he may seem to exact perfect (and therefore impossible)
obedience; yet if we consider all things well, it will plainly appear, that
he means no other thing, then that he should labor and seek to please him
in all things: because he sets his father David before his eyes as a
pattern to follow, and because elsewhere we read that he makes the same
promise unto him, only requiring of him, To endeavor himself to do hi^
commandments, 2 Chronicles. 28. 7.
as he had begun. Now this is a very comfortable doctrine. For when a man
considers that GOD respects his weak obedience and honest heart, and
accounts the will to do, for the deed done, his heart is eased, his
conscience is appeased, his mind is settled, and beholding the infinite love of
God, he is ravished with joy, and provoked to magnify his mercy, and to
struggle against the corruption of his heart, to please him in doing all things
which are pleasing in his sight. Now, lest we should beguile our selves (for
man's heart is a mine of subtilty) in thinking we desire, and will to believe,
repent and obey, when as we either do not at al, or do but as a reprobate may
do; I will set down some rules, which as the touchstone tries gold, and as
Salomons sword found out the right mother, so these may serve to discover the
truth of our desires, and to deserte the goodness of our wills. First of all, if
we be grieved that we can desire and will no better then we do: secondly, if we
do desire and will to do these things for the glory of God, and because we are
persuaded that both these things and the willing of them are pleasing unto God:
thirdly, if we strive to increase in willing and desiring, and if we feed^ them
with the diligent hearing of Gods word, with holy meditations, with often
prayers, and with setting before us the ensamples of excellent men, as the
Priests kept the fire upon the altar, and fed it continually, and suffered it
not to Leuit. 6. 12.
go out: fourthly, if to our wills and desires we join reformation of our
lives, and in our several callings labor accordingly to serve God: fifthly, if
in our hearts we prefer eternal serving of God in heaven, before all momentany
profits and pleasures whatsoever. Sixthly, if we had rather live in a continual
cross all our life long, but yet pleasing God, and being in his favor, then
spend the same in sinful pleasures, continually displeasing his Majesty.
Seventhly, if we desire and will to s^rue him, and to return home unto him
from (...) sins, though we were verily persuaded that there were no hell.
Lastly, if (...) had rather please God, his rod of correction being always
exercised upon us, then live without remorse of conscience against our
knowledge, in profitable and pleasant sins, continu^lly (...)ing and
displeasing GOD our gr^cious Father; though we were certainly (as it were by
oracle from heaven) assured that we should at the last gasp repent, and be
saved, notwithstanding our former rebellion, and horrible disloyalty. If we
desire and will to believe, repent, and obey, and find these things in us, then
our desires will go for current, God will accept of them, and approve them.

The Lord indeed suffers his children Pri(...). 28.
to fall, but it is to let them see that their standing is by his grace, and to
show them that he is not obliged with any bond of their merit^ (which are just
none) to sust^ine and uphold them: he dot^ it also, to make the^ cling the
closer about him, and to seek more earnestly for his assistance as the little
child skrec^^th one for (...) (...) it is fallen, and lies (...) (...)wling
upon the ground: be does it to hi^ (...) the and to abate their natura^l ^rid^
and as (...) lets the^ ral^^^ love, so by their f^l^ he mani^esteth his wisdom
and ^^tegrity, and shows his admirable co^p(...) and humanity, in forgiving
and in raising them up again. But the falls of the reprobate kindle the coals
of Gods weath against them, and further their full and final perdition: they
serve to increase their (...), and consequently their pains: they serve for
punishments sometimes of former offenses: and by committing one sin in the
neck of an other, they put out the light of nature, they harden their hearts,
and sit themselves for further wickedness, even as the stithy becomes the harder
by striking. I grant indeed, that oftentimes they are grievously galled and
perplexed with their sins. But it is not a sorrow that causes repentance unto
salvation never to be repented of, And usually it ^areth with them, (...) it
does with young Hat-makers, or such as use to play at Stoole-ball. In the
beginning their fingers may blister, and their hands may ache, but after a
while, their hands become ^ard and brawny, and are well armed for such works,
and the more they practice, the less pain they feel: so the custom of
sinning takes away the sense of the sin. And as y^ dropsy man, the more he
drinks, the drierhe is: so the reprobate, the more he falls, the more he
^^nsieth falling.

It is not possible that any of the Elect Pri^i. 29
should be damned, or that any of them being soundly converted, should ^holly
for a time (much less for ever) fall away from God and perish. For Gods decree
of 2. Tim. 2. 19.
Election is constant, and his Isa. 46. 10.
counsel shall stand. John 6. 37.
Him that comes unto me, (says Christ) I cast not away, that is, I do not
cast off or eiect him, that embraces me with the hand and arms of a lively
faith, and testifies the same with the fruits thereof. And whom God has
predestin^ted, called and justified, them Romans 8. 30.
he will also glorify. For his covenant with them is an Iere. 32 40.
everlasting covenant, and his gifts are w^^hout Romans 11. 29.
repentance. Cant. 8 6.
Love is strong as death: much water can not q(...)h love, neither can the
floods drown i^. Pretty, which (...), was never pretty. And true faith (though
as small as a grain of must^^d seed) cannot altogether vanish and be
extinguished: For God will (...) it, he will not Isa. 4^. 3.
break the bru^ed reed, nor quench the smoking flexe. Indeed faith may be
shaken, but it can not be shiuered in pieces* it may be moved, but it can not
be removed: it may (...) and wax dry, but it can not wear away quite and die:
Satan may si^t and towze it, he may lay siege against it, but he cannot sack
it, he shall never destroy it. The Sun may set and for a time lie hid, but it
remains in the heaven: and faith may be covered (as fire with ashes) but yet
it continues in the heart. The fish may be in the water, though she floate not
always aloft. There is sap in the root, when the leaves are feign off, and
the top naked, and in appearance withered. So faith lives, though it have lost
some signs of life. The S^^ne and the Moon may be indeed eclip^e^^ even so
the eye of faith may be dimmed. But as the Sun and Moon do not perish in their
eclipses, nor lose their light for ever; even so faith does not perish when it
is eclipsed: It may indeed receive a buff^t, whereby it may (as it were) reele
and stagger and fall to the ground, and there for a time lie like a man in a
^woone, or fit of the falling sickness, but it cannot dye; because God, the
wel^p^ing as well of spiritual life, as of natural, will never forsake it.
The Th^m^s may suffer an ebb, but it is not st^rke dry at any time: so faith
may come to a very low ebb, but yet it will have water al^^yes in the bottom.
As a great river may befrozen over with hard ice for a time, and so covered
with snow, as that it seems rather a Rock then a River, or like to other
ground; even so faith may be (as it were) frozen over with thick y^e, and so
hild with the snow of sin, as that it may not be seen at all for a time.
But as there is water in the River which is deep; notwithstanding the frost,
though it be not seen: even so there is life in faith, though for a time it do
not appear. But when the weather is broken, when the holy Ghost begins to make
a thawe, with the fresh fire of his grace, when the South wind blows hard, and
when the Sun of righteousness has melted the ice, then Faith will appear,
and flow amayne, as a River after rain, and as the waters do after a thawe.
Then grace, which was covered before, will shine bright and clear, as the
Sun does after a shower, as is evident by the repentance of David and Peter.
Moreover, our Savior says, that his sheep shall John 10. 28.
never perish. The Isa. 40. 11.
Lord (says Esaias) shall feed his flock like a Shepherd: he shall gather the
Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom. He Psalm. 23. 2.
makes them to rest in green pastures, and leads them by the still waters.
Psa. 41 12.
He vpholdeth them in their integrity, and does set them before his face for
ever. As Zach. 4. 9.
Zerubbabel laid the foundation of the Temple, and did finish it: so Phil. 1.
6.
God that has begun his good work in the temple of our hearts, will finish it
unto the end. They can not be taken from him by strong hand. John 10 29, 30.
For he is greater then all, and his will to save them is answerable to his
power: therefore he says, John 10 28.
He gives unto them everlasting life; adding also, that none shall pluck them
out of his hands. Master Tinda^ says well: Christ is thine, and all his deeds
are thy deeds; neither can thou be damned, except he be damned with thee.
They cannot perish by seduction; for the Elect cannot be Mat. 24. 24.
seduced, Neither can they of themselves fall away. For Iere. 32. 40.
God has put his fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from him. A
man may for a time cease to laugh, but he cannot lose the faculty of laughing.
The drunkard loses sometimes the use of reason, but the faculty never; so the
graces of God may be crazed, but yet they are not utterly abolished. Finally,
God forsakes not them, For his love is ^^re. 31. 3.
everlasting: those whom he loves once, he Ioh. 13. 1.
loves to the end. Romans 8. 39.
Nothing can separate us from hi^ love. It is like the Deuteronomy. 29. (...).
Israe^ites shoes, which waxed not old. It is like the tree of life: he that
once truly t^st^th of it, shall not dye eternally. As a Father does not reject
his Child when he has broken his face by falling, but rather seeks a
plaster: he will (it may be) lash him, but he will not leave to love him. Even
so our heavenly Father deals with his Children. For he has said, that he
will Iere. 32. 40.
never depart from them to do them good: he Heb. 13 6.
will not fail them nor forsake them: but 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23, 24
will sa^ctifie them throughout, and keep them s^fe unto the coming of
Christ. Indeed our enemies may wound us, but they shall not win: they may vex
us, but they shall not vanquish: they may perhaps press us, but they shall not
oppress us: they may cut us, but they cannot kill us. For GOD, who is greater
then all, will not suffer us to be 1. Cor. 10. 13. Psa, 127 4. Priuil. 30. Ioh.
1. 12 Math. 14 31. Romans 4. 20. 2. Cor. 5. 1.
tempted above our power, and is very vigilant for us. For, he that keeps
Israel, neither slumbereth nor sleeps.

The Elect may assuredly be persuaded in this life, that they shall be saved in
the life to come. For a special and certain persuasion of Gods mercy, is the
very heart and marow, the life and soul of true faith. Therefore Paul says,
We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a
building of God, that is, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. Furthermore, if it be not possible for men to know that they shall be
saved, how could Saint John say, These things have I written unto you that
believe in the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal
life. To conclude, if it were impossible for a man to be in his conscience
assured, that he is the elect and faithful servant of God, effectually called
in time, and orde^ned to glory before time; to what end should David inquire
who of all professors are the true members Psalm. 15.
of the Church mili^a^t on earth, and shall be of the Church triumphant in the
heavens? and to what end should he set down y^ marks, whereby they may be
discerned? And to what purpose should Paul exhort us to prove our selves
whether we are in the faith? Or why should he speak after this manner unto us,
Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
2. Pe^. 1. 10.
except ye be reprobates? And wherefore should Peter bid us be diligent to make
our calling and election sure? It remains therefore as an undoubted truth,
that the elect may be truly assured of their election, and may assuredly know
(without special revelation) that they shall be saved. Now this is a very
great prerogative, and the greater; first, because it may be iuioyed to the
end: secondly, because the longer it is inioyed, the better we are assured:
thirdly, it brings with it wonderful joy. For what greater joy can a man here
enjoy, then to be assured of eternal joy? Fourthly, this assurance makes a man
more wary, and more unwilling to displease God by sin, whereby nothing is
deserved but damnation. Fifthly, this privilege is the more excellent, because
they whi^^^ want this knowledge altogether, can have no solid consolation. And
as for the Reprobate; they have no more to do with this certenty, then they
have with salvation. As it is impossible for them to be saved, so it is
impossible for the^ to be truly assured of their salvation. He that dreameth,
may think he walks, eats, talks, sees, when he does not: and he may
think he is awake, when he is not. So these dreamers may think that they shall be
saved, and may sooth up themselves as if they were cock-sure, but they are
deceived. He that is in a swoone, does sometimes persuade himself that he sees
many strange sights, but his persuasion is false: so the Reprobates may think
all things run round, they may persuade themselves they are in Gods favor
and shall be saved: but as the things are false whereof they do persuade
themselves: so their persuasion must needs also be as ^alse. It is but a
spiritual swoone, or d^u^l^sh, dreaming, or dizzinesse, that does so blind
their eyes, and beg^^le them.

The Elect only shall be raised up of Christ as a Savior and Redeemer. And
Pri^i. 31
when all people shall be gathered before him, he will separate his Elect from
the Reprobate. The Elect shall be placed on his right hand, and upon them he
Math. 25
will pronounce the white and comfortable sentence of absolution. On the
contrary, he will raise up the Reprobate, as he is a terrible and dreadful
Judge, he will set them on his left hand like Goats, and pronounce against
them the doleful and black sentence of condemnation. And more also, which may
increase their grief; he will use the Elect for the approbation of his
judgment upon them, and upon the wicked Angels also. They shall attend upon
him, as Justices do upon the Judge at the Assizes, and shall approve his
sentence; and this Saint Paul teaches, when as he 1. Cor. 6. 2, 3.
says, that the Saints shall judge the world and the wicked Angels. Now as
this is a great honor unto the Elect, to sit as Judges upon the wicked: so it
must needs minister no small grief unto them, to be (as it were) judged of
those whom they before have derided, condemned, nicknamed, and persecuted.
Thus we have seen many notable privileges of Gods elect and faithful
children. If Balaam prophesied of the Israelites, when he looked upon them
dwelling according to their tribes, saying, How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob,
and thy Nu^. 24 5.
habitations, O Israel; we may well conjecture, that God will exceedingly
manifest his love unto us hereafter in the heavens, seeing h^e has honored us
so highly in this vale of misery, and will grace us so much after the
resurrect^^^, in our entrance into heaven, as that we shall judge the World and
the Angels.

The last privilege of the Elect, whereof Priuil. 32.
I will entreat, is, that God will give them the kingdom of heaven and
everlasting life. Fear not, little flock (says Luk 12. 32.
our Shepherd) for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom. And
Paul says, that God does glorify those whom Romans 8. 30. John 10. 28.
he has predestined, called, and justified. Our Savior says, that he
gives eternal life unto all his Sheep. As Joshua brought the children of
Israel into earthly Canaan: so Christ Jesus our Joshua, will one day bring all
true Israelites into celestial Canaan, and will crown the^ with immortal
glory. To describe this blessed estate perfectly, surpasses man's capacity,
whole knowledge is as yet imperfect. For Paul out of Esaias says, that the eye
has not seen, and the ear has not heard, neither (...). Cor. 2. (...)
(...). 64. (...)
came it into man's heart to think of those things which God has prepared for
them that love him. Nevertheless it may in part be described, according as God
has revealed it in his word to us. In this estate the Elect shall be delivered
and set free from all wants and miseries, from sin, and from all the
temptations of Satan. (...). ^1 4.
They shall have perpetual fellowship with the blessed Trinity, and the holy
Angels. They shall have perfic knowledge, and they shall perfectly love God, 1.
Cor. 13. 12.
who will be all in all unto them. Their hearts shall be full fraught with
endless and unutterable joys. Their toungs shall continually sound out the
praises of God. They shall celebrate an everlasting Isa. 66. 23. Phil. 3. 21.
Sabbath, serving God most purely for ever and ever. Their bodies shall be like
to the glorious body of Christ; bright and beawtifull, nimble, and full of
agility, preserved and sustained by the immediate power of God, without meat,
drink, sleep, labor, physic; and therefore Paul calls the^ 1. Cor. 15. 44.
spiritual. Lastly, to make up their happine^; the place of their abode shall be
in the highest heavens, where there is no pains 2. Cor. 5. 1.
but pleasures, no woe but weal, no sin but serving of God, no grief but
glory, no want but wealth, no sickness but health, no death but life, no iarres
but joys, no wars but peace, no treachery but truth, no fighting but
triumphing, and no change, but everlasting continuance. When a man has lived
so many thousand thousand years in all y^ pleasures of paradise, as there are
hours in a M. millions of years, he shall not atteine unto the end, for the end
is endless, and the time is without time. But on the other side, the Reprobate
are severed from the solacious sight and comfortable presence of God. Their
fellowship is with the Devil and his angels in ^ell fire, where they are
unspeakably tormented in soul and body, with endless, easelesse, and
remediless torments. Their life is death, and their death is life, a dying
life, and a living death. When they have spent so many years in pains, as
there be stars in the Sky, moats in the Sun, sands on the shore, and fishes
in the seas, they shall be as far from the end, as they were the first day:
for the time is infinite, their damnation is everlasting, and their death shall
never be put to death: their worm shall not dye, their fire shall never be
Isa. 66. 24.
put out, neither shall they be put out with it. But as the Salamander is
always in the fire, and never wastes: so the wicked shall be continually
scorched in hellfire, and yet shall never be consumed. Lo^ then (Beloved) you
see the Charter of the Saints in part. No earthly Monarch can grant such a one
unto his Subjects, as God has given freely to his Elect. All the Countries,
Kingdoms, and Cities that have been, are, and shall be, can not show such
dignities, such royalties, and such immunities given them by man, as I have
showed to belong to Gods Elect, and obedient children. The consideration of
these benefits and privileges should move us, First, to acknowledge and lawd
Gods infinite love. Secondly, in way of thankefulnes to dedicate our souls and
bodies, and all that we have, unto GOD. Thirdly, to admire the condition of
Gods children. Fourthly, to be afraid to disgrace them, whom the Lord does so
grace and countenance. Fifthly, to undergo courageously all adverse blasts, and
all the crosses of this life. Sixthly, to alienate our hearts from the world.
Seventhly, to roll our care upon God, and to rely upon his providence. Eighthly,
to desire the coming of Christ, and not to fear death too much: The sooner we
dye, the sooner we come to our crowns. Lastly, the consideration of these
benefits and privileges, should stir us up to seek by all means to be
enrolled amongst them, and never to rest, till we be in some measure certain,
and certainly persuaded, that we are elected, and preordained to salvation.
When Ahashuerosh had honored Mordecai, and showed favor unto the Jews, the
Scripture says Hest. 8. 7
that much people of the land became Jews. So, seeing the Lord has thus
dignified the Elect, let us behave our selves like them, and labor to be
accounted of their company. Claudius Lysias gave a great sum of money for the
freedom Act. 22. 28.
of the Romans; how much more ought we to seek for these freedoms and
royalties, which do more surpass the other, then the heaven does the earth,
and the precious pearl does the poorest pibble. They are not indeed to be
named, or compared together, and yet these may be had without money, though
they can not be had by money. And thus much for the Privileges.

I come now briefly to set down the notes of Election unto life, and to show
how a man may come to be truly persuaded in his conscience, that he shall be
saved. Let a man that would attain to the knowledge of his election unto
salvation, 1. hear the word of God often and attentively. For faith, whereby
we Romans 10. 17.
are persuaded of Gods special grace unto us, is ordinarily wrought by hearing
of the word preached. 2. Let him wage war with his infidelity, and let him
not listen to Satan tempting him to doubting, or desperation. 3. Let him
beware of pride and presumption, neither trusting to his own goodness, nor
obliuious of Gods infinite justice. 4. Let him often and earnestly pray for
this benefit, and desire that GOD would give him his Spirit, which may witness
with him that he is the chosen child of God. 5. Let him reverently receive
the Sacrament, and meditate often of his Baptism. For the Sacraments are
pledges of Gods love, and serve to increase our faith. He that receives them
with an honest and humble heart, may assure himself of the remission of his
sins, and of the salvation of his soul. Lastly, let him expend and duly 6.
Consider diligently Gods ^atherly d(...)g with thee.
cons^der the notes of Election to eternal life, by the which a man may know
that he is ord^ined to be saved. No^e, (...) (...) (...). The Iaylour
demanding (...) Paul and Silas what he should do to be ^^^ed; they made him
(...), (...), Be^eeue in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.
Secondly, Act. 16. (...).
^^ue o^ our (...) for their (...)ty: We know (say^h John) that we are
transl(...)d from death to life, because we (...). John 3. 14.
love the brethren. Thirdly, the fear of God, where^y we are loath to offend
him, chiefly, because we love him, and (...) (...). Blessed is the man that
fears Psa. ^12 1.
the Lord; (...) Blessed, then Elected. (...)y, h^rty confe^sion, and lothing
of (...) s^nnes. He that confesses and forsakes Prou. 28 13.
his sins, shall find mercy But God vouc^^afeth his special mercy only to
his (...) people, Fif^ly, confidence and affianc^ in God, O Lord of hosts,
blessed is Psalm 84. 12.
the man that (...) in thee. The condition of Reprobates is cu^^ed. ^he Apostle
says, Our confidence has great Heb. 10. 35.
recompense o^ reward. Sixthly, sincere and true calling upon the n^me of God.
For Paul says, Whosoever shall call upon Romans ^0. 13.
the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. Seventhly, careful and constant
indeu^uring to keep all ^he commandments of God. ^o^, Blessed are they that
do h^^ Revel. 22. 14.
commandments, that their right may be in the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gates into the ^ity. As the Lord promised to establish the kingdom
of Solomon, if 1. Chron. 28. 7.
he did constantly endeavor (...) keep his commandments: so the (...)e Lord
will establish us for ever in the kingdom of heaven, if we will endeavor
constantly to serve and obey him. Eighthly, p^^ient bearing of affliction for
the truths ^^ke. Blessed are they (says Christ) which suffer Math. (...). 10.
persecution for righteousness s^k^: for theirs ^s the kingdom of heaven
Nint^^y, (...) (...)nest and hearty desire to be w^^hed in the blo^d of Christ,
and to be inu^sted in the white robes of his righteousness. Blessed Math. 5.
(...)
are they which hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be filled.
To him that Revel. 21. 6.
is a thirst, I will give of the well of the water of life freely, Tenthly,
Christian humility, and poverty of spirit, when a man seems naked and base
in his own sight, and ascribes all to Gods grace. Blessed are the poor in
spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Eleuenthly, a lusting Math. 5. 3
and longing after the coming of Christ. Paul says, that the righteous Judge
will give a crown of righteousness 2. Tim. 4. (...).
unto all those that love his appearing. Twelfthy, David in the 15. Psalm
asks the Lord who shall dwell in his tabernacle, and rest on his holy
mountain? and received answer as it were by oracle from God, that he shall,
who walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth from his
heart. And Peter having commanded us to make our election and calling sure,
adds, saying, that if we do These things, we shall never fall, but shall be
sure and certain. Now 2. Pet. 1. 10.
what these things are, he shows, to wit, that we adorn our hearts and lives
with 2. Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
virtue, knowledge, te^perance, godliness, and love. To conclude, he that is
sure of his Adoption, may be also certain of his Election: for none are
adopted, but such as are elected. Now a man may know his Adoption, if he find
in himself the properties of an obedient and loving son. I will set down
some. 1. Property. As a little child, whether in learning good, or leaving
evil, is either won by a fair word, or awed by a check, or feared by a
frowning look, or allured by a trifling gift, or stilled by seeing an other
beaten before him, or else quieted by a rod; eue^ so Gods children are either
affected by his promises, or allured by his mercies, or awed by his threats, or
skared by his frowning cou^tena^ce, or humbled by his correcting of others, or
by his rod which is upon their own backs. 2. A good and wise child is very
desirous to know his fathers mind or will, that so he may best know how to
please and humor him; and such is ye disposition of Gods child. Job makes it
the note of a wicked man, to affect y^ ignorance Job. 21. 14.
of Gods ways. 3. A good child knowing that he has unjustly grieved his
father, will not be quiet till they be good friends again. 4. He labors to
resemble his father in his rare and excellent virtues. 5. He will bear a blow
at his fathers hands, (though he skorne to put it up at an other man's,) and
when his father has chidden or corrected him, he will not run for comfort to
his fathers desperate and sworn enemies. 6. He ^^ui^th not a servant or
brother that is (...)ore laborious and circumspect in his fathers business,
then himself is. 7. He caryeth a thankful heart toward his father for his
fatherly gifts. 8. He is glad to know his fathers p^^ro^ati^es, his lands and
lea^es (if there be any) specially if he be an h(...)e. 9. He longs to se^
his father, and to hear often of him in (...) absence. 10. He makes much of
those loue-tokens which his father has given him to keep for a remembrance of
him, or for a sign of his love. 11. He cannot without grief endure to see his
father in^ured or abused by any. 12. He has a sp(...)all regard of his fathers
credit. 13. He rejoices at his fathers prosperity. 14. He ^^keth his fathers
company, he listeneth to his words, and loves to talk unto him. 15. He loves
his mother entirely, he affects his brethren and sisters, though it be but
for his fathers sake. 16. He hates the fellowship of his fathers inturious and
unjust enemies, be is a friend to all his fathers faithful friends, he
contemn* not the^ companies. 17. He cle^^eth unto his father in the time of
tro^ble, and does not cast him off. These are properties of gracious, wife, and
godly children, (...) being applied to the purpose in (...), ^hey are so many
infallible notes of God^ dutiful and loving child. Those which find them in
their hearts and lives, may truly and infallibly assure themselves and know,
that they are the sons and daughters of God, elected before the foundation of
the world, to everlasting life and happiness. Those which after diligent
search find them not to be in them, must not despair, though they may justly
indeed suspect and bewail their estates; but let them fly to the throne of
grace with hungry hearts, and incessantly desire fa^our, remembering also to use
all means whereby all these foresaid graces and gracious conditions may be
generated, nourished, and augmented in them.

These things (right Worshipful and Beloved) I have here set down as a
Preface to the treatise following, for your furtherance and encouragement, and
being the first fruits of my labors, in this kind I do present and give them
unto you, in testimony of mine hearty love, and earnest desire of your
Christian progress in knowledge and in godliness. The God of peace, that
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the
sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in all
good works, to do his will, working in you that which is pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ; to whom be praise for ever and ever, Amen. Fauers-ham.
June. 20. 1606.

Your Worships in Christ Jesus. Thomas Tuke.

Master Perkinses Epistle to the Reader.
THE doctrine of Predestination and Gods Grace is to be founded upon the
Written Word of God, and not upon the judgments of men. For as Hilarie says
well, God cannot be understood but by God: And De Tri^. lib. 5.
again, We must learn of God, what we are to understand of God, because he
is the only author of our knowledge of him. It is also requisite that this
Doctrine agree with the grounds of common reason, and of that knowledge of God
which may be obtained by the light of nature; and such are these which follow.

1. GOD is always just, albeit men do not understand how he (...). must.

2. GOD is not governed of, much less does he depend upon second causes, but
does ^ustly order them, even then when they work (...).

3. GOD work^th (...)ly, to wit, propounding unto himself is certain end: he
is ignorant of nothing: he does not (...) or (...) that which he cannot effect:
he does not ^dly behold what (...)ll be, or what may be done, but he
dis(...)th all things unto his glory; and therefore he has (...) to do so.

4. GOD is not changed: and those things which are changed, are not changed
(...) his ^^changeable decree, all circumstances being certain and sure.

5. The (...) and unsearchable judge(...)s of GOD are to be honored and
acknowledged. Augustine: It (...) me (thou say) that he per^sheth, and
another De verb. Apost. (...). 11.
is baptized, it (...)oueth me, it mo^ueth me as as man. If thou will hear the
truth, it also (...)th me, because i am a man, nut of thou b^^st (...) man, I
am also a man: let us both hear him that says, O man! Verily, if we be
therefore moved because we are men, the Apostle speaks to humane nature it
self being weak and feeble, saying; O man! Who art thou which pleadest against
GOD? Romans 9. 20.
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?
If a beast could speak and did say to God, Why have thou made him a man, and
me a beast? might thou not justly be angry, and say, O beast, who art thou?
and thou art a man, but in comparison of God, thou art a beast.

6. No good thing can be done, unless GOD does absolutely will and work it:
and we do that which is good, so farre-forth as God does work in us more or
less.

7. No evil can be avoided, unless GOD do hinder it: and we avoid evil, so
farre-forth as God does more or less hinder it.

8. The will of GOD is known, not only by the written word, or by revelation,
but also by the event. For that, which comes to pass, does therefore come to
pass, because God has willed that it should come to pass.

9. A man does not that good thing which by grace he is able to do, unless God
make him do it, as he has made him able to do it if he will.

10. Not a part only, but the whole government of the world, and the execution
of justice, is to be ascribed to God, as to the author.

I do now exhibit unto thee a view and picture of this Doctrine, composed of
these principles, and do publish the same, that I might, to my power, help out
Theologia fludi^ses.
those that stick in the difficulties of this doctrine of Predestination: and
that I might clear the truth, that is (as they call it) the Caluinists
doctrine, of those reproaches which are cast upon it: and that I might mitigate
and appease the minds of some of our Brethren, which have been more offended
at it then was fit. For I do willingly acknowledge and teach universal
redemption and grace, so far as it is possible by the word. My mind is to
pursue after peace, which is departing from us: and I would have all men so
interpret my fact.

I allege the testimonies of the ancient every where, not but that even one
evident and perspicuous sentence of sacred Scripture, concerning any point of
Doctrine and Faith, is of more value and force, then all the testimonies of the
Doctors and Schoolmen: but because I hold it necessary, that there should be
had an example of consent and concord in that doctrine, which is expounded in
holy books, and is propagated to all posterity. And I hope, I shall
sufficiently persuade an indifferent judge, that these things have not been
lately hatched at home, which we deliver in our Congregations and Schools,
but that we have also derived and fetched them from the Fathers themselves.

William Perkins.

THE ORDER OF PREDESTINATION, as it is collected out of the Scriptures by the
Author.
PRedestination is the counsel of God touching the last end or estate of man
out of this temporal or natural life. For as touching 1. Co^. 15. 46
natural life we are all alike: and this kind of life is in the counsel of God
only a preparation and step unto the spiritual and heavenly life. The supreme
end of predestination is the manifestation of Gods glory, partly in his
mercy, and partly in his justice. And this has bin the doctrine of the
Fathers. S. Austen says, that one of those two societies De Ciuit. ^Dei lib. 1^
of men, which we mystically call two cities, is that which is predestined
to reign eternally with God: and the other to suffer eternal punishment with
the devil. Fulgentius says also, That in Gods predestination there Ad
Monymum. lib. 1.
is prepared either a merciful remission of sins, or a just punishing. And
Gregory says, That God being a just Creator unto all after Comment. in 1.
Reg. Cap. 4.
an admirable manner, has foreelected some, and forsaken others in their
corruptions. And the more learned Schoolmen use to say, that God for the more
full manifestation of his perfection has predestined some in manifesting his
goodness by the rule of mercy, and damned others, in representing his
perfection by the rule of justice.

The common means of accomplishing this counsel is twofold; the creation,
and the permission of the fall. Creation, is that by which God made ye whole
man of nothing according to his own image; but yet changeable, and endued with
a natural life. The permission of the fall is, whereby God did justly suffer
Adam and his posterity to fall away, in that he did not hinder them when he
was able; as being indeed bound to none to hinder. And God is said not to
hinder evil, when he cease after a sort from his operation, not illuminating
the mind, and not inclining the will to obey his voice. This permission of the
evil of fault is by Gods foreknowledge and will, but yet only for the greater
good of all: which would be hindered if God did not suffer evil. For if there
were not sin, there should be no place for the patience of Martyrs, and for
the sacrifice of Christ offered upon the cross, which does infinitely exceed
all the sin of the whole world. Augustine says well: God has judged it
better to do Enchir. cap. 27.
good with evils, than to permit no evil to be. In like manner Gregory says:
In his severe Expos. (...). Reg. cap. 4.
judgment he suffers evil to be done, but withal he does in mercy
forecast, what good things he may bring to pass, by these evils, which he
does ordain by his judgment. For what greater sin is there than that by
which we do all die? and what greater goodness than that by which we are
delivered from death? And doubtless but that Adam sinned, our Redeemer should
not have taken our flesh upon him --. Whiles God was to be borne man, the
Almighty did foresee that he would make of that evil, for which they were to
die, a good which should be greater than that evil. The greatness of which
good what faithful man is there who does not see how wonderfully it does
excel? Surely great are the evils, which we suffer by the desert of the first
fault: but what faithful man would not rather endure worse, than to be without
so great a Redeemer? And in this respect elsewhere he calls the fall of Adam,
foelicem culpam, a happy fault. That In benedict. Cerci Pasc.
which I have said of the permission of the fall, I do also say of the fall
permitted; saving that the permission is a means of the decree by it self,
but the fall is a means (of accomplishing the decree) only by the ordination
of God, who draws good out of evil.

This fall permitted comes not to pass but God being willing, neither does
it come to pass contrariwise or otherwise than God permits, neither can it
any further be than he does permit. Yet the will of God is not the cause of
the fall, but the will of man left unto it self by God, and moved by the
suggestion of Satan; which will appear by this similitude: I build a house
subject to change and falling, which notwithstanding would continue many
years, if it might be free from the annoyance of winds: yea, if I would but
underprop it, when the storm comes, it would continue stable. But as soon
as the winds begin to rage, I do not underprop it, and it is my will not to
underprop it, because it is my pleasure so to do, thereupon the house being
weatherbeaten falls down. I see the fall, and in part I will it, because now
when I could very easily have hindered the fall, yet I would not. And although
thus far I do will the fall, in so much as it is my will not to hinder it:
yet the cause of the fall is not to be imputed unto me, that did not
underprop it, but to the winds which cast it down. So God leaving Adam unto
himself, that he might be proved by tentation, and that it might appear
what the creature is able to do, the Creator ceasing for a time to help and
guide, is not to be accounted the cause of this fall. For he did not incline
the mind to sin, he did not infuse any corruption, neither did he withdraw
any gift, which he did bestow in the creation: only it pleased him to deny or
not to confer confirming grace. The proper cause of the fall was the devil
attempting our overthrow, and Adams will, which when it began to be proved by
tentations, did not desire Gods assistance, but voluntarily bent it self to
fall away.

Predestination has two parts, the decree of election, and the decree of
reprobation, So Isidore says: There is a double predestination, either of the
elect unto rest, or of the reprobate unto death: and both are De summo bo. lib.
2. cap. 6.
done by God, that he might make the elect always to follow after heavenly and
spiritual things, and that he might suffer the reprobate, by for saking them,
to be delighted always with earthly and outward things. And Angelome says:
Christ by his secret dispensation Jn lib. 1. Reg. cap. 8.
has out of an unfaithful people predestined some to cuerlasting liberty,
quickening them of his free mercy: and damned others in everlasting death, in
leaving them by his hidden judgment in their wickedness.

The decree of election is that whereby God has ordained certain men to his
Ephesians. 1. 5.
glorious grace in the obtaining of their salvation and heavenly life by Christ.

In the decree of election according These acts are usually called the decree
and the execution of the decree.
to Gods determination there is (as we conceive) a double act. The former
concerns the end, the latter concerns the means tending to the end. This the
holy Ghost seems to me to have taught very evidently, Romans 9. 11. That the
purpose which is according to election might remain. Here we see that Paul
distinguishes Gods eternal purpose and election, and places in his decree a
certain election in the first place before the purpose of damning or saving.
And in Romans the 8. 29. 30. Those which he knew before, he also predestined to
be made like to the image of his son --.Whom he predestined, them also he
called --.In which words Paul distinguishes between the decree, and the
execution thereof, which he makes to be in these three, Vocation,
Justification, and Glorification. Moreover he distinguishes the decree into
two acts, foreknowledge, whereby he does acknowledge some men for his own,
before the rest: and predestination, whereby he has determined from eternity
to make them like unto Christ. In like manner Peter teaches, 1. Pet. 1. 2,
where he says, that the faithful are elected according to the foreknowledg of
God the father unto sanctification of the spirit. If any man shall say that by
foreknowledge in these places we must understand (as many would) the
foreknowledge or foreseeing of future faith, he is manifestly deceived. For
whom God foreknew, them he did predestinate that they should be like to
Christ, that is, that they should be made just, and the sons of God: for
Paul adds, Romans 8. 29. That he might be the first borne among many brethren.
But those, which are predestined to be just, and to be the sons of God, are
also predestined to believe, because Adoption and Righteousness are received
by faith. Now we cannot rightly say, that God does first foreknow that men will
believe, and afterward predestinate the^ to believe; because that God has
therefore foreknowne that those shall believe, whom he did foreknow would
believe, because he did decree that they should believe. So Justin Martyr
calls Cont. ^riph.
those elect, who were foreknowne that they should believe. And Lumbard: Whom
he Comment. in cap. 8. ad Rom: Cognosc^. scio.
has foreknowne, them he has predestined, that is, by grace conferred he
has prepared that they should believe the word preached. Moreover the word
(know) when it is given unto God speaking of the creature, does very often
signify to embrace or approve. Psalm. 1. 6. The Lord knows the way of the
righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish. Matthew. 7. 23. Depart from me
ye workers of iniquity, I never knew you. Furthermore, the prescience and
purpose of God are by the holy Ghost put for one and the same thing. 2. Tim. 2.
19. The foundation of God remains sure -- the Lord knows who are his: Romans
11. 2. Those whom God foreknew are said to be elected according to the election
of grace, verse. 5. And therefore the foreknowledge mentioned by Paul does not
signify the foreknowledge of faith, or of any other virtue in those which were
to be elected. It is also the judgment of Augustine, that predestination De
perseu. sanct. lib. cap. 18. Romans 11. 1. 2
is sometimes understood by prescience, even in the foresaid place. Has God
cast away his people which he knew before? And he says that, Those are sons
in Gods foreknowledge, whose names are written in their fathers register, so as
they shall never be raised out. Cyrill says also that Christ knows his
sheep, electing and foreseeing them Expos. in Ioh. 7. cap. 6
unto everlasting life. As the Apostle says Romans 11. 12. God has not cast
away his people which he knew before. For as the Lord is said not to know
those, whom he does reject: as when he answered the foolish virgins saying,
Matthew. 25. 12. Verily I say unto you, I know you not: so he is said to know
those, whom he does predestinate and fore-appoint unto salvation. And Thomas
expounds that place in the 8. to the Romans after Idem Hugo de sanct. ^ict.
in annot. in Romans et Ioachim. in Revel. par. 1.
this sort: Whom he foreknew in his knowledge of approbation, these he has
also predestined: And he will also have an effectual will of conferring
grace to be included in the knowledge of approbation.

In the decree of election the first act is a purpose, or rather a part and
beginning 1. Pet. 2. 9. People which God challenges unto himself (...).
of the divine purpose, whereby God does take certain men which are to be
created unto his everlasting love and favor passing by the rest, and by taking
makes them vessels of mercy and honor: and this act is of the sole will of
God, without any respect either of good or evil in the creature. And God does
wrong none, although he choose not all; because he is tied to none: and
because he has absolute sovereignty and authority over all creatures. We
that are but men give leave unto men, especially unto our friends, to do at
their pleasure in many things as they themselves list, and to use their own
discretions. The rich man is kind to which poor person he pleases; and of
beggars he does adopt one, and will not adopt another, and that without offering
any injury. Now that liberty, which we yield unto man, must much more be
granted unto God.

The second act is the purpose of saving or conferring glory, whereby he does
ordain or set apart the very same men, which were to fall in Adam, unto
salvation and celestial glory. This act is in no wise to be severed from the
former, but to be distinguished in the mind (for orders sake and for the
better unfolding of it) for as by the former men were ordained unto grace: so
by this latter the means are subordained whereby grace may be conferred and
manifested: and therefore this latter makes a way for the execution and
accomplishing of the former. Moreover, this act has no impulsive cause over
and beside the good pleasure of God: and it is with regard to Christ the
Mediator, in whom all are elected to grace and salvation; and to dream of any
election out of him is against all sense: because he is the foundation of
election to be executed, in regard of ye beginning, the means, and the end.
Lastly, this act is not of men to be created as was the former, but of men
fallen away. Therefore in this act God respects the corrupted mass of mankind.

Furthermore in this second act there are five degrees, the ordaining of a
Mediator, the promising of him being ordained, the exhibiting of him being
promised, the applying of him being exhibited, or to be exhibited, and the
accomplishment of the application. It is not unlike which Bernard says, The
kingdom of De verbis libri sapientiae.
God is granted, promised, manifested, perceived. It is granted in
predestination, promised in vocation, manifested in justification, perceived or
received in glorification.

The ordaining of a Mediator is that whereby the second person being the Son
of God, is appointed from all eternity to be a Mediator between God
himself and men. And hence it is that Peter says, that Christ was foreknowne
before 1. Pet. 1. 20 (...).
the foundation of the world. And well says Augustine, that Christ was
predestined to be our head. For howsoever as he is ((...)) the substantial
word of the Father, or the Son, he does predestinate with the Father, and the
holy Ghost; yet as he is the Mediator, he is predestined himself.

The promising is that, whereby Christ being from eternity ordained for the
salvation and spiritual life of men, is revealed and offered unto them,
together with grace to be obtained by him: this promise is universal in
respect of all and every one that do believe. Ioh. 3. 16. God so loved the
world, that he has given his (...).
only begotten son, that every one that believes in him should not perish.
Ioh. 6. 47. He that believes in me has life everlasting. Matthew. 11. 28. Come
unto me all yea that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Mark. 16: 16.
He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not
believe shall be damned. Act. 10. 43. That thorough his name all that believe
in him, shall receive remission of sins. Act. 13. 39. By him every one that
believes, is justified. Romans 1. 16. The Gospel is the power of God to
salvation to every one that believes. Romans 10. 4. Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness unto every one that believes. Gal. 3. 22. The Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should
be given to them that believe.

With the promise there is joined an exhortation, or commandment to believe:
which is more general than the promise; because the promise is made only to
believers; but the commandment is given to believers and unbelievers also. For
the elect are mingled with the wicked in the same assemblies: and therefore the
Ministers of the Gospel ought indifferently to exhort all and every one to
repent, considering that they are altogether ignorant, who, and how many be
elected, and be to be converted; moreover God by exhortations to repentance,
means to leave those without excuse, whom he does see will never repent. So
Abbat Ioachim says: It behooves In Revel. p. 3. l. 2.
them to preach for the elects sake, and to declare unto men the words of life,
that their light may shine before men, and that they may fatten the hearts of
the elect, by anointing them with the oil of spiritual doctrine: but for the
reprobate, ligare aquam coelo, to (...) the water in the clouds. And again,
Lest the reprobate should have excuse, and for the Part. 4. t. 7.
elect which are among them, the messenger himself shall be sent, who does
not only preach this in secret as it were for fear, but cries also with a
loud voice, which may be heard far off, and of all men also. Some are wont
to say, that Gods commandment by this means does overthwart his decree:
because he commands that, which he wills not to effect. But I answer,
first that God in his commandments and promises does not utter whatsoever he
has decreed, but does in part only so far forth propound his will, as he
knows it expedient for the salvation of the elect, and the governing of all.
By his commandments therefore he shows what he likes, and what he wills
that we should do to him, not what he will do to us or in us. And God who
wills not all things alike in all, does will conversion in some only in
respect of approbation, exhortation and means: in others he wills it also as
touching the decree of working it. Here is no disagreement in the wills, but
sundry degrees of willing in regard of us, according to which God is said both
to will and to nill.

Secondly I answer, that the revealed (...).
will is never contrary to the will of his good pleasure, or to the decree of
God, (with the which it does always agree both for the beginning, as also in
the end and scope) but that it is notwithstanding often diverse, and that in
show it seems sometimes contrary if we consider the manner wherein it is
propounded. God commanded Isaiah to declare unto Hezekiah his death: and he
did also denounce Esa. 38.
destruction unto the Ninevites Ion. 3. 4.
within forty days: and yet he had decreed to put neither of them both in
execution. The humane will of Christ did with Mat. 26. 3.
an holy dissension in some sort will deliverance from the agony of death,
which notwithstanding the divine willed not. Abraham Genesis 28.
prayed without doubt by divine inspiration, and therefore with faith that the
Sodomites might be spared, and yet he knew that in Gods decree they were
appointed to destruction. Neither must this seem strange; for one good thing
as it is and remains good, may be different from another thing that is good.
Thirdly, thou biddest thy debtor pay his debt, though in the mean time thou
do not make him able: why may not God therefore for just causes command that,
which he himself will not do?

The exhibiting of the Mediator is that, whereby the Son of God being borne
(...).
man in the fulness of time does pay the price of redemption to God for the sins
of men. The virtue and efficacy of this price being paid, in respect of merit
and operation is infinite; but yet it must be distinguished, for it is either
potentiall or actual. The potentiall efficacy is, whereby the price is in it
self sufficient to redeem every one without exception from his sins, albeit
there were a thousand worlds of men. But if we consider that actual efficacy,
the price is paid in the counsel of God, and as touching the event only for
those which are elected and predestined. For the Son does not sacrifice for
those, for whom he does not pray: because to make intercession and to
sacrifice are conjoined: but he prays only for the elect and for believers,
Ioh. 17. 9. and by praying he offers himself to his Father. verse 19. For
(as Illyricus has well observed) this whole prayer in the 17. chapter is
indeed (as he speaks) an oblatory and expiatory prayer, or (as the Papists
call that blasphemous form) a Canon or rule of sacrifice, by which Christ has
offered himself a sacrifice to the Father for the sins of the world.
Therefore the price is appointed and limited to the elect alone by the Fathers
decree, and the Sons intercession and oblation. Secondly Christ bare their
person, and stood in their room upon the cross, for whom he is a mediator:
and consequently, whatsoever Christ did as a redeemer, the same did all Ephesians.
1. 6. Coloss. 3. 1.
those in him and with him which are redeemed: Christ dying, rising again,
ascending and sitting at the right hand of the Father, they also die with him,
rise again, ascend and sit at the right hand of God. Now that all these things
can be truly said of the elect only, and of such as believe, I prove it thus.
To say that any one of the wicked, which are to perish for ever, is raised up
in Christ rising again, is flat against the truth: because the raising up of
Christ is (that I may so speak) his actual absolution from their sins for
whom he died: for even as the Father by delivering Christ to death, did in very
deed condemn their sins imputed unto Christ, for whom he died; so by raising
him up from death, even ipso facto he did absolve Christ from their sins, and
did withal absolve them in Christ: but being absolved from their sins they
shall not perish, but be saved. Therefore that wicked man which perishes for
his sin, cannot be said to have risen again with Christ: and therefore Christ
did not bear his person upon the cross. Thirdly the expiatory sacrifice
sanctifies those, for whom it is a sacrifice, as the holy Ghost plainly and
absolutely avouches, Heb. 9. 13. 14. The sacrifice and sanctification
appertain to the same persons: and Christ is their perfect Savior, whom he
saves not only by meriting their salvation, but also by working it
effectually. But Christ does sanctify only the elect and such as believe:
therefore he was a sacrifice only for them. And this was the judgment of the
ancient Church in this point. Augustine says, He which spared not his Jn
Johan. tract. 45.
own Son, but gave him for us all, how has he not also with him given us
all good things? but for what us? for us which are foreknown, Tract. 2.
predestined, justified and glorified. Again, Those whom he pleased to make
his brethren, De recta fide ad Regin. In Joan. lib. 11. cap. 14.
he has released and made fellow heirs. Cyril says, If God who is most
worthy, was in the flesh, he was of right sufficient to redeem the whole
world. Again, The Lord Jesus separating his own from those which were not
his, says, I pray only for those which keep my word and carry my yoke. For he
does make them alone, and that justly, partakers of the benefit of his
mediation, whose Mediator and high Priest he is. Gregory says, The author 2.
Hom. in Ezekiel. lib. 1.
of life gave himself to death for the life of the elect. Again, The Lord
will redeem In Psalm. 33.
the souls of his servants, to wit, with his precious blood, because he which
believes rightly In Ephesians. cap. 1.
in him, is redeemed from the due thraldom of his sins. Sedulius: All things
are restored, which are in the earth, Or when.
seeing that the men themselves, who are predestined unto eternal life, are
renewed from the corruption of the old man. Beda: The flesh of the Hom. in sab.
post reminise.
Lord is furnished with spiritual virtue, that it might be a sweet savor
sufficient for the salvation of the whole world. Again, Our Lord Hom in vigil.
P^s^.
and redeemer to the elect-whom he knew to be placed in his flesh: yea and to
us also, whom he foresaw should believe in the last times, he Jn Revel. part. 1.
has procured the remedy of salvation by his death and resurrection. Ioachim
the Abbat: The word All, which for the most part is universal, does not
always signify so much as it seems, as in that place, When I shall be lift
Col. 1. 19. 20
up I will draw all things to my self. And by him he has pleased that all
things should be reconciled in him. It seems that in these In 2. Reg. cap. 7.
places Elect Things only are understood. Angelomus: What other nation is
there in the earth besides the elect people, for which God the Son of God
vouchsafed to come into this world, as it were into Egypt, that taking upon
him the form of a servant, he might with the merchandise of his blood redeem
unto himself an acceptable people zealous of good works. Ruper^us: In that
hour he washed those only from sin, whom his death Jn Exodus lib. 2. cap. 6.
finds faithful, whether dead or living. Again, The passion of Christ is
the judgment In Joan. cap. 12.
of the world, that is, salvation seuering the whole number of the elect, which
were from the beginning of the world to the hour of the same passion, from the
reprobate. And the casting out of the prince of this world, is the
reconciliation of the nations of the elect. Again, I will draw all things to
my self: what all things? namely All Elect Things, as all the members follow
their head. Haimo: Christ has taken away in the Elect not only original, In
cap. 5, ad Romans
but all actual sins also, and has over and besides given them eternal life.
Radulphus: The blood of the high Priest Christ, was the purgation of all
believers. Innocentius: In Leuit. lib. 17. cap. 2 Lib. 4. de Mist. Missae. cap.
4.
Christ blood was shed effectually for those only who are predestined, but
for all men in regard of sufficiency: for the shedding of the blood of that
just one for the unjust, was so rich in price, that if every one had believed
in the redeemer, none at all had been held captive of the devil. Arnoldus
Carnotensis: He redeemeth none but those whom he calls Ben(...)allis tract.
7. de verbis Domini.
and washes by grace; neither does the Spirit sanctify Any but Those, who are
cleansed and dead to sin: Redemption, washing away, and sanctification are
partakers together.

The Application is, when as Christ is given unto us of God the Father by the
Spirit, in the lawful use of the Word and Sacraments; and is received of us by
the instrument of a true faith. And Christ being given, is made unto us of God
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. 1. Cor. 1. 30.


The accomplishment of the application is Glorification, whereby God shall be
all in all by Christ in all the elect.

By this which has been said, it is apparent, that the decree of election is
the cause and foundation of all good gifts and works in men. From hence is
true faith. Act. 13. 48. As many as were ordained unto eternal life believed.
And calling: Romans 8. whom he predestined, them he called. And: who are called
of his purpose. Hence Adoption: Ephesians. 1. predestined to Adoption. And
sanctification: Ephesians. 1. He has chosen us that we should be holy and
blameless. Hence good works: Ephesians. 2. Which he has prepared, that we should
walk in them. And perseverance: Ioh. 6. All that the Father gives me, shall
come unto me, and (...). 6. 37. 39
him that comes to me I cast not away. Again, And this is the Fathers will,
that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing. 2. Tim. 2. 19. The
foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, the Lord know^te who are
his. Excellent is that saying of Augustine: He did choose no man worthy, but
by choosing he made him worthy. Again, Cont. Iul. Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 3. In
Psalm. 41.
It is the grace of God, whereby he does elect me, not because any worthiness is
in me, but because it does vouchsafe to make me worthy. Again, And did not
they also afterwa^ds choose him, and prefer him before all the good things of
this life? but they did choose him because they were chosen; they were not
chosen, because they chused him. And thus much of the decree of election.

The decree of reprobation is a work of Gods providence, whereby he has
decreed to pass by certain men, in regard of supernatural grace for the
manifestation of his justice and wrath in their due destruction: or, it is his
will, whereby he suffers some man to fall into sin, and inflicteth the
punishment of condemnation for sin.

It has in like manner two acts. The first is the purpose to forsake some
men, and to make known his justice in them. This act has a final cause, but
no impulsive cause out of God. For it arises of Gods mere good pleasure, no
respect had of good or evil in the creature. For the will of God is the cause
of causes: therefore we must make our stand in it, and out of or beyond it no
reason must be sought for: yea indeed there is nothing beyond it. Moreover
every man (as Paul Romans 9. 21.
auerreth) is unto God, as a lump of clay in the potters hand: and therefore
God according to his supreme authority does make vessels of wrath, he does not
find them made. But he should not make them, but find them made, if we say
that God willed in his eternal counsel, to pass by men only as they are
sinners, and not as they are men for causes most just, though unknown to us.
Thirdly, if God did reject men, because he foresaw that they would reject him,
reprobatio^ should not depend upon God, but upon men themselves. And this is
all one, as if a man should say, that God foresaw that some would choose him,
and others refuse him. And the contempt of the Gospel does not befall infants,
which die out of the covenant of the Gospel. Fourthly, Paul, who was a most
skilful defender of Gods justice, does exclude all works in the first place,
out of this wonderful election of one from another, made in the counsel of
God: Not by worke^, says he; and therefore excludes all respect of sin;
then Romans 9. 11.
afterward being ravished with admiration, he quieteth himself in the alone
will of God, Who has resisted his will? But, O man, who art thou which
pleadest against Romans 9. 19. 20. Romans 11. 33
God? Again, O the deepenes of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God: how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! To
conclude* if it be demanded why God created this world and no more, we must
have recourse (...) ^he mere will of God: and why must we not do so, if it be
demanded why God electeth this man, and forsakes that man or another? Author
de vec. gent. A part of mankind is redeemed, a part perishes. But who can
tell, why God does not pity them, and pitieth these? the reason of the
distinction is unknown, but the distinction or separation it self is not
known.

The second act is the ordaining of them to punishment or due destruction. This
ordination in respect of the diverse consideration thereof, may be
distinguished: and so it is either simple or comparatiue. The simple ordination
is that, whereby this man, suppose Peter or John, is ordained to punishment. And
this ordination is of the most just will of God, yet not without respect of
original and actual sins. For as men are actually damned for sin: so God
has decreed to damn them for the same sin. Yet notwithstanding sin is not
the cause of the decree of reprobation, but in regard of order it goes before
in Gods foreknowledge, not that former, but this latter act. The ordination
which stands in comparison is that, whereby one man and not another, and this
man rather then that being in the like condition, is ordained to punishment.
This serves to show the liberty of Gods will, in the dispensation of
supernatural benefits. For in that God chooses this man and not that, it
declares the liberty and very great perfection of God: and therefore under
the name of an householder, he challenges the same unto himself, when he
says: May I not do^ Man. 20. 15.
with my own what I list? And verily though God destroy and condemn all those
whom he does forsake, yet should he not be iniust. For we our selves in the
daily killing and slaughtering of beasts will not be counted unjust, neither
indeed are we: and yet in comparison of God we are not so much worth, as a fly
is in respect of us. If it be lawful for thee to receine in, or to thrust out
any out of thine house, because thou will; it were a point of desperate boldness
to take the same right from God in his house.

The cause of this comparatiue ordination, is the sole will of God, yea even
without respect of any sin at all. So Augustine: God delivers no man but of
his free mercy, and condemns no man but m^st righteously. Now why he
delivers this man rather then that, let him search, who can diue into the
great depth of his judgments. Again, why is it thus to this man, and
otherwise Lib. 1. ad Simpl. q. 2.
to this? O man, who art thou that thou dare dispute with God? And Gregory:
Let Expos. in Joan. ca. 37.
no man desire to search, wherefore one should be elected when another is
rejected* because his judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding
out. In this second act of reprobation there be two degrees, a just desertion
or forsaking, and damnation for sin. So Fulgentius: In such (says he) Lib.
a^ Mo^.
God begins his judgment by forsaking, and ends it in ^ormenting. Divine
desertion is twofold. The first is that, whereby God does forsake man, only in
regard of his assistance and strengthening, by omitting the confirmation of the
creature, and by not conferring the second grace, whereby the first might be
made effectual to resist temptations, and to persevere in goodness. Desertio
explora^i^nis.
This is the desertion of trial, and may happen to them, who have not
themselves as yet forsaken God. For it was in the first man Adam, who received
of God power to do that which he would, but not will to do that which be could.
So Augustine: He received (says he) power if he willed: De correp. and great.
cap. 11.
but he had not will answerable to his power, for if he had had he should have
perseuered. Again, He was able also to persevere; if he would: and in that he
would not it proceeded offree will, which then was so free, that he was able to
will well and ill. The cause of this desertion was, that Adam and his posterity
might know that they could fall by themselves, but that they could not stand,
much less rise again: and therefore that they should wholly depend on Gods
mercy. Here also it must be remembered, that between this desertion and Adams
sin, there came also Adams will, whereby he being left to his own strength,
did by and by perceive the very same, his conscience telling: and yet for all
that he willed his own fall by the free motion of his will.

The second desertion is a privation and leesing of the gifts, wherewith the
mind is adorned, and a delivering into the power of Satan, that he may seduce
men, and more and more lead them into sin. This is a desertion of punishment,
and therefore Desertio poenae.
it follows sin. And of this desertion, and not of the former, is the rule
to be understood, A Deo deserti Deum priores deserunt, those which are forsaken
of God, do themselves first forsake God.

And this is our doctrine of Predestination, which sauoreth neither of the
errors of the Manichees, Stoickes, Pelagians, nor of Epicurisme, but is (as I
am persuaded) agreeable to the truth, and orthodoxall: but yet it is oppugned
by sundry criminations, or false accusations, which I will strive with all my
strength to overthrow, and that briefly.

The first Crimination is,
That we teach, that certain men and those but few are elected.
Answer. Certain men we say. For all the elect are known unto God, and their
number can neither be increased nor diminished. Few we do not say, but after a
prescript and certain manner. For (to omit the Angels) if you consider the
elect by themselves, they are many. Matthew. 8. 11. I say unto you, that many
shall come from the East, and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. Revel. 7. 9. I beheld and lo a great
multitude, which no man could number of all nations, kindreds, people and
tongues, stood before the throne and before the Lamb, cl^athed with long white
robes, and palms in their hands. Yea there is as it were a world of elect.
Augustine: The Church which is De doctr. Chr. lib. 3. cap. 34.
without spot and wrinkle, and gaethered together out of all nations, and which
shall reign with Christ for ever, even she is the land of the blessed, and the
land of the living. Again, The reconciling world shall be delivered out Tract.
in Jo^n. 111. Hist. lib. 4. (...) 15.
of the maligning world. Eusebius: Christ suffered for the salvation of the
world, of those which are to be saved. The Author of the book de vocat. genesis
lib. 1. In those which are elected, foreknowne and severed from the multitude
of men, there is a certain special universality counted, that the whole
world may seem to be delivered out of the whole world, and that all men may
seem to be taken out of all men. Beda calls those a world to (...) Tobiam.
be enlightened and healed, who were predestined to eternal life. Thomas: The
crew light enlighteneth those, who come into the world of In Catena in 1. Joan.
ex Orig.
virtues, not those which come into the world of vices.

Nevertheless, if those same elect be compared with them that are justly
damned, we say according to the Scriptures that they are few. Matthew. 7. 13.
14. The gate is narrow and the way straight which leads unto life, and few
there be which find it. Again, Many are called, but few are chosen, Matthew. 20.
16.

The second Crimination is,
That we teach, that God ordained men to hell fire, and created them to the end
that he might destroy them.
Answer. Here the distinction of the double act in reprobation must be
repeated and retained. First therefore I answer, that reprobation in regard of
the former act is absolute, that is, in regard of the purpose to forsake the
creature, and to manifest Justice in it: so we teach, and believe. For we
cannot so much as imagine a cause in the creature, why it was Gods will to pass
by it, and to suffer some to fall finally from their blessed estate. Yea sin
is it self after the desertion and just permission of God: and therefore it
can by no means be the cause of the permission and desertion. Whence it is
that Lumbard the Lib. 1. did. 41.
Master of all the Schoolmen says, that God has rejected whom he would, not
for any future merits which he did foresee, but yet most righteously, though we
cannot conceive the reason thereof. And Jerome long before him dothd thus
expound y^ place of Paul, Ad Hebid. quaest. 10.
Romans 9. 11. (Ere the children were borne, and when they had neither done good
nor evil) If Esau (says he) and Jacob were not yet borne, neither had done
good or evil, whereby they might win^^ Gods favor or offend him, and if their
election and reiection does not show their several deserts, but the will of
the Elector and Reiector, what shall we say? Afterward: If we grant this, that
God does what soever he will, and that he either chooses or condemns a man
without desert and works: it is not therefore in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Again: Therefore it is in vain
asked --, seeing that it is in his power and will either to choose or to refuse
a man without good and evil works. Anselmus: It Comment. in Math. c. 11.
is not ours to know why God demeth grace to them which would gladly receive
and consent to grace, and neglects another, that would so well consent unto
it. This is only In Romans cap. 11.
known ^^to God. Again, No creature is able to search out why he is merciful
to this man rather than to another. The same do other Sum. 1. par. quae. 23.
art. 5.
Schoolmen affirm in ^e midst of Papacy. Gregorius Ariminensis lays down
six conclusio^s concerning Predestination. First, that there is no body
predestined for the well using of freewill, which God for^knew that he should
have. Secondly, that no man is predestina^ed, because he was foreknowne to
continue to the end without Cont. Gent. lib. 1. c. 44.
any let of habitual grace. 3. That whomsoever God predestined, ^^m he did
predestinate freely, purposedlie and of his pure mercy. Fourthly, that no man
is rejected for the evil using of freewill, which God foresaw he would be
tainted with. Fifthly, that there is not any rejected, because he was
foreknowne to have finally an impediment of divine grace. Sixtlie, that
whomsoever God rejected, him he did reject without any cause in him. The very
same conclusions has Petrus de Alliaco, lib. 1. sent. quaest. 12. art. 2. and
Marsilius of Inghen, lib. 1. did. 42. q. 4. Some of whose words I will set
down: He is predestined (says he) to whom God has purposed to give
everlasting life. And he is rejected, on whom God has determined not to bestow
the same, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 9. Again: No man, that is
predestined, is predestined for any thing, which should be in him in time
to come: so also there is no reprobate rejected for any cause, which was to be
in him in time to come. And every one that is predestinate, is predestined
only by grace, and by Gods merciful disposition, not for any cause either
actual or privative to be found in him, whiles he lives. Again, To reject
is to nill to show mercy, and this is not for the evil works of In sent.
lib. 1. quae. 22. art. 2.
any creature, for how holy soever the works were, God would show mercy as he
listed. So also Francis. Mar. lib. x. q. 31. art. 2. 3. says, that there are
four signs necessary for the understanding of the proceeding of
predestination and reprobation: First, in which Peter and Judas are offered to
the divine will, as to neither of the^ both. And ^hen the divine will (...)
preordaine P^ter unto gl^^ie, but it had no posi^ne act about Judas, according
to ^u^ustine. The second s^gne is, in which he preordained Peter to grace: and
the^ he had ^o posi^^ue act as yet about Judas. The th^^d sign (...). in which
they are left to themselves, and bot^ o^ them do fall into sin. The fourth
s^gne is that, in which Peter rises again, ^or he cannot continue, because he
is predestined by the first sign. But Judas rises not again, because he
has not God to raise him up, therefore he is rejected. D. Bannes in 1. Thom.
q^. 23. The cause and reason of the whole work of reprobation cannot be said
to be in the reprobates, for sin it self cannot be the cause of that
pennission of sin, for which a man is damned, whether it be original or
actual, as it appears in infants who die only with original sin: which
verily, howsoever it may be the cause why infants are forsaken in it, yet
nevertheless it cannot be the cause and reason, why the whole nature of man
should be suffered to fall in Adam. And Ferrariensis (in Thom. cont. Gent. page
603.) says, that four things are found in a reprobate; to wi^, a sufferance
to fall into sin, the sin it self, Gods forsaking not raising him from sin,
and the punishment or damnation. Now reprobation is not alike but diversely
affected to all these. For if we consider sin in it self, reprobation is not
caused by i^ --.Although nothing on our parts, to wit, no work of ours be the
cause of the whole work of reprobatio^ (for of al these together, namely, of
the permission, forsaking and punishment, the manifestation of Gods justice is
the alone cause, considering that no work of ours is the cause of the
permission) yet notwithstanding our wicked working or sin is the cause why
we are damned and punished. Again, We deny that God is cruel, for we say
that God does not punish and torment the reprobate for the fulfilling (as it
were) of his own fancy, but for sin eternally foreknowne, which he
determined so to dispose of by punishing of it, that his justice might be made
manifest.
Thomas: Why he ele^teth these unto glory, and rejects those, he has ^o
reason but the divine will. Again, The difference of those which are to be
saved, from them that are to be damned proceeds from the principal ^^^ention
of the first Ag(...) Again, We (...) not enquire why he conuerieth these and
not those. For this comes of his own mere will. And Augustine upon John:
Why Lib. 3. c. 161.
he draws this man, and not that, do not desire to judge, if thou would
not err.

Nevertheless reprobation in regard of the second act, that is, in respect of
the purpose to damn, is not absolute but for sin. For no man perishes but
thorough his own default; and no man is absolutely ordained to hell or
destruction, but for his sin; having also received before in Adam power,
whereby he was able to live holily and happily, if so be that he would. And
therefore I say that that which they allege is a very calumny.

Secondly I answer, that God did not simply create man to destroy him, but that
he might manifest his judgment by the just destruction of the sinner. Now it
is one thing to will the destruction of a man as he is man; and another thing
to will the deserved destruction of a man as he is a sinner. Here also the
judgment of Camerace^sis a judicial Scholeman is to be heard and observed.
According to the Scripture (says he) although God should punish or afflict
some creature eternally, or utterly abolish it without any sin in it, yet he
should not deal unjustly or cruelly with it. Whence it is, Wisdom 12. 12.
Who dare accuse thee, if the nations perish which thou have made? -- God is not
bound to laws created, as if any thing were just before God did will i^,
whereas indeed the contrary is true.

The third Crimination is,
That the Stoicall predestination and fate is brought in by us, because (as
they say) we teach that all things come to pass by the necessary and (...),
Powerful in working.
energetical decree of God, yea even the fall of Adam, the which (say they) God
according to our opinion did decree and will.
Answer.

We say that Adams fall came to pass God not only foreknowing but also willing
and decreeing it: and that without blasphemy, if thou will friendly and
courteously give leave to show how far forth and in what manner. The will of
God is twofold, general and special. The special will (which the scripture
calls, Cephets) is that by which God does both approve and effect a thing: or
else it is Gods good pleasure, whereby taking delight in some thing he does
will it simply, both as touching the doing of it, as also in respect of
approbation. The object of this will depends on the will, and follows it as
the effect follows the cause. And by this will our judgment is, according to
the word of God, that God wills that which is good, and ^illeth that which is
evil as it is evil. Psalm. 5. 4. Thou art a God which willest not iniquity.
And of this kind or rather manner of will are these sentences of Austi^ to be
understood. God has foreknowne, but he did not f^reappoint the works
Hyp^gnost. lib. 6. lib. 80. q. 9. 2.
of ungodliness. And, He does only foreknow, and not preordaine evils. And,
It is all one to say God is the author and God wills. The general will is
that whereby God wills a thing not to be, (for that, which is not, therefore
is not, because he wills it shall not be) and for certain causes also he
wills not to hinder some things, and consequently wills that they shall come
to pass; which things notwithstanding he does not simply approve. Or, it is
the decree of God, whereby he wills some thing, not in respect of
approbation and effecting of it by himself, but only in respect of suffering it
to be done by others. And here the thing which is to be done does not depend
upon Gods will, but only upon the will of the creature which falls away: and
with this will we say that God willed the fall of Adam, yet not simply but
only that it should come to pass. Now it is one thing to will a thing by it
self, and another thing to will it as touching the event. Moreover he wills
the event of sin, not by effecting it himself: but by forsaking or not
hindering when he might if he would. And if we enquire of the order of willing,
it is this, first and properly God does will not to inhibit, and not to hinder
sin: and by consequent only he wills the event of sin. For that which
God does nor hinder, does therefore come to pass, because he does nor hinder
it: and as no good thing can either be or come to pass, unless God make it:
so no evil thing can be avoided, except God do hinder. And there is not the
least thing which may be done without this will; unless we will say that Gods
providence is idle; which to say were wicked. The reasons of this our judgment
are many. The first reason I will draw out of most evident testimonies of
Scripture. Act. 2. 23. Him I say being delivered by the determinate counsel
and foreknowledge of God, after you had taken, with wicked hands you have
crucified and slain. Act. 4. 27. 28. They gathered themselves together, to do
whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel had determined before to be done. Here
it is to be observed, that not only Christ's passion but also the works which in
respect of the Jews were wicked, do come under the decree and will of God: to
wit, so far forth as God willed that they should come to pass for just ends.
This very thing Augustine signifies when he says, When the father delivered
the son, and Christ Epist. ad Vnio. 38.
his body, and Judas his master: In this delivering wherefore is God just and
man guilty, but because in one thing which they did, there is not one cause for
which they did it? And there is no reason yr it should seem harsh unto any, if
speaking of Ada^s fall we follow the holy scripture on this manner. When Adam
did eat of the forbidden fruit, he did eat that, which the hand and counsel
of God had determined before to be done. This is that very thing which we say:
This is the language of the Apostles and of the Church, which therefore we may
use without the least suspicion of blasphemy. But to the former testimonies I
will add one place out of Peter, 1. Epist. 3. 17. It is better (if the will of
God be so) that ye suffer for well doing, than for evil doing. But to punish
men so(...) well doing, in respect of men, it is f^a^ly to transgress the law
of God. Furthermore God is said to bid Shimet 2. Sam. 16. 10.
to curse David, that is, to have ordained and decreed, for God bids and
commands a thing two ways, first by his revealed will; and this he does by
his word de^iuered unto men. Secondly, by his secret will, which is his
providence or hidden decree, by which he does so govern all things, that
nothing can be done without it or against it: as in these places. ser. 34. 22.
I will command and call back the Assyrians against this city. Lam. 3. 37.
Who is he then that says, and it comes to pass, and the Lord commands it
not? Job. 37. 6. He says to the snow, be thou upon the earth: likewise to the
small rain, and to the great rain of his power. By which it appears that it
may well be said, that God decreed that Shimei should curse David: and it is
the like kind of speech to say, that God did not decree Adams fall simply, but
in (...).
some respect. The second reason follows: it is the common opinion of all men
that God does will to suffer sin, but to will to suffer it, is to will not to
hinder it, and to will not to confer grace. Now he which foreknoweth some
future evil, and wills not to hinder it when he might, and not to confer
confirming grace, he does indeed will that the same should come to pass.
Therefore we do not place that will, whereby we say that God does will that
sin should come to pass and be in nature, either without or beyond the
divine permission, but we do enwrap and enfold it in it. And this is that
which Calvin says and no other: It In Genes. cap. 3. ver. 1.
often offends some ^e^s ears to hear that God willed the fall of man. But
I pray you what other thing is his permission besides will, who has authority
to hinder, and in whose power the matter stands? The same affirms Beza: If
any man hear that some Ad acta. colloq. Mampelg. page 152
things come to pass, which indeed are done against his will, that is, against
his liking, not because he cannot, but because he will not hinder the^: I
answer, that it is all one as if a man should say that they come to pass he
being willing they should. For those things, which he could surely hinder if he
would, must needs come to pass, because by not hindering of them he wills
that they should come to pass. And whatsoever God does not hinder, he does
therefore not hinder it, either because he wills that it should be done, or
because he does utterly nill that it should be done, or because he does not will
it should be done, or else because he cares not: that is, he neither wills
nor nilleth that it should come to pass. If you grant the first, I have my
desire. The second is absurd; namely that God does not hinder evil, because
he does utterly nill that it should be done. For this is to make God
inco^stant. The third, Lumbard and the schoolmen affi^me. For they say that
God in respect of sin has no positive act, neither of willing nor of
nilling, but only a negative act of not willing to hinder it. But by this
means a great part of those things, which are done in the world should come to
pass God being either ignorant or negligent. The very permission also is a
certain will and not a pure negation: for no^to will to hinder, that is, to
suffer, is indeed to will not to hinder. If thou will say the fourth, thou
do wickedly make an idle and Epicurish god, therefore we must needs retire
unto the first, viz. that God' does decree that evil should come to pass in
such sort as I have declared. Yet the fault must not be for all that
translated unto him, because he does justly and holily decree that which men
do wickedly.

Thirdly, we know that Adams reuolting is now past and done; therefore we
must say that God did will that it should be done; unless we shall say that
his providence is not in all, and every thing. Thou will say that an evil
work is ordained of God, that is, disposed to Gods glory, the salvation of
the godly, and the destruction of the wicked. I grant it, but not this only.
For the providence of God is over the world and every thing therein: both in
respect of the end, as also of the beginning of every action: Satan and the
wicked do not only not finish, that which they would, but they do not so
much as begin it, unless God wills and gives leave. It seems impious to
think that any thing, though as little as may be, does either exist or come to
pass besides that, which God being always holy and inst has willingly from
all eternity decreed.

Fourthly, let us hear the judgment of the ancient Church. Augustine, We must
De praed. and great. c. 15.
know that all things are either perfi^^d the Lord helping, or permitted the
Lord forsaking, that thou may know that nothing is at all admitted the Lord
being unwilling. Again: There is nothing done but that Enchir. c. 95 101.
which the Almighty wills to be done, either by suffering it to be done,
or by doing it himself. Again: Sometimes a man wills a thing with a holy
will, which God wills not. Again: It is possible that a man should will this
with an evil will, which God wills with a good will. So much difference is
there twixt what is fitting for man to will, and what is fitting for God to
will, and to what end every one refers his will, so as that it may be
allowed or disapprooued. And again: Know that whatsoever falls out here
contrary to our will, happens not but by the In Psalm. 148.
will of God, his providence, ordinance, appointment and decrees. Tertullian:
God has foreknowne all things by disposing them, and Cont. Marcel. lib.
disposed them by foreknowing them. Jerome: Shall I say that any thing is done
In Abacuc. cap. 1.
without thee, and that the wicked can do so much against thy will? Surely it
were blasphemy so to imagine. And again: What good or evil things soever are
in the world, In Ierem. 12. cap.
they happen not by casual chance, and without the providence of God, but by
his pleasure. Hugo says: Men may well endure Lib. de sacra. 1. c. 1^. par. 14.
the hearing of this, and it may be said without any scruple or trouble of
conscience, God wills that which is good. But if it be said, God wills
that which is evil, it is a thing very grievous to be heard, and a religious
mind does not easily conceits of that which is goodness it self, that it
wills evil: for then it seems to be said that the good loves that which is
evil, and approves that which is bad, and therefore a godly mind rejects
this, not because that which is said is not well said, but because that which
is well said is not well understood. But after what sort it ought to be
understood, he himself in the self same place explaneth. This (says he) is
only said, and yet another thing is meant and understood, because God wills
that evil be, and yet wills not the evil, And again: He will that evil
be, and yet Lib. 1 c. 7. part. c. de sa^^.
he will that therein be nothing but that which is good. And again: When he
does good and suffers evil, his will appears in this, because he wills that
to be which he does or permits. And again: The will of God is his good
pleasure, and his will is his working, and his Will is his Permission.
Catharinus In ep. (...) ad Romans
says: We need not be afraid to confess that God wills sin, as blessed
Augustine says also, not because he wills sin as it is sin and evil,
but as it is good, to wit, as it is is the punishment of sin and vengeance in
the reprobate (for that is Gods purpose, and it is good and not evil) or as
sin it self is an occasion unto good in his beloved and elect.

But they use to object thus: To will that evil be done is proper and
belonging to an evil will which is delighted with evils, or would use them to
good, contrary to the rule: That no evil should be done that good might come
thereof. To this I answer: That here are two grounds to be laid. The first
is, that the object even of man's will is good, and therefore much more of Gods
will, and the object of the will cannot be evil by it self but by accident:
for if the will wills evil, it wills it not as it is evil, but as it is
good. The second ground is, that there is a certain summum bonum or sovereign
good with which there is no evil conioynd; because there is a certain thing
infinitely good, namely God: but there is not any absolute evil, because there
is nothing so evil, but it has some good joined therewith, and therefore it
is good that sin should be and come to pass. So says S. Augustine: Although
Enchirid. (...). 98.
therefore those things which are evil, so far forth as they are evil are
not good, nevertheless it is good that there should be not only good things,
but also evil. For unless this were good, that there should be also evils,
they should (...) ^o means be suffered by the Almigh(...) (...)o is goodness
it self. Thus therefore I answer: That sin in the causes and circumstances
thereof fully and exactly weighed, is two ways to be considered. First we
consider sin not as it is sin, but so far forth as it has some respect
unto good with God which decrees it. And this way taking sin, although God
wills it not simply and by it self, yet he decrees it and wills it as
touching the event. Moreover sin has respect unto God two manner of ways,
first, because it is in that which is good: secondly, because it tends to
that which is good. I say it is in that which is good; because every evil is
in that which is good as in the subject. Now in respect of the subject, that
is, as sin is a motion, an inclination, or an action, God both wills and
effects the same. Moreover sin tends to that which is good, because God
ordains it to good, and from thence draws the good either of trial,
chastisement, or punishment. And we say that God is so far forth willing
that sin should come to pass, as he is able and will by his wonderful
wisdom from thence to draw forth that which is good.

Secondly, we consider sin according God did not decree the fall of Adam, nor
any sin as it is (...) unto God.
to the property and natural being thereof, that is, sin as it is sin;
And this way also we weigh sin either so far forth as it is sin in it self
in regard of men, or as it is sin to God. But God himself neither wills,
nor approves, nor effects sin, as it is sin in it self in regard of the
creatures that offend; and yet he wills as touching the event, not simply,
as those things that are good in themselves, but only by willing to permit that
it may be. For there is a threefold action of Gods will, the first is that
whereby God wills any thing by willing it, that is, when he wills it with
his whole and absolute will, as Tertullian says, and this way he wills that
which is good in it self. The second action is that, whereby he nilleth any
thing by nilling it, as that which shall never come to pass, because God does
utterly nill the being thereof. The third and last action is remiss and in the
midst between both, whereby he wills some thing by nilling it slackely or
remissely, that is, when he partly wills it and partly nilleth it, or else
so far forth wills it, as that for just causes he nills it. And after this
sort we say, that God wills the event of evil, as it is evil in it self
in respect of men; because evil as it is evil after this sort, is not
absolutely evil: and God draws good out of evil as it is evil in the
nature thereof or in it self: as he brought forth light out of darkness,
even as it was darkness in it self. And if so be that evil were absolurely
evil, as God is absolutely good, he would in no wise will the event of evil,
neither should there be any evil existent at all. For that which God utterly
nilleth, has not any being or existence. But sin as it is sin to God, (now
that is a sin to God which is in it self sin, in his decree whereby all
things are ordained as it considers sin) he neither wills it, nor
approves it, nor works it, no in this respect he does not so much as permit
it. I do not deny but that God permits and suffers evil, as it is evil
in it self, (otherwise there were not evil properly and naturally) but I
deny that he permits it, because it is evil. For God never suffers evil
for it self, but for the good that is therewith conjoined. And this is the
meaning of that saying of Beza: The Lord never permits sins, as they are
sins, ^ib. cont. Castle. de pr^dest.
yea rather be evermore forbids and hinders them. And again: Sins so
far forth as they are permitted by God being thereto willing, are not sins
but the punishments of sin. And thus using this exposition is the mind and
judgment of Master Calvin of blessed memory to be understood, where as he
says that all the sons of Adam did fall away by Gods will: And again, that it
was decreed by God that Adam should perish by his own falling away. Instit.
lib. 3. cap. 23. 5. 4. and 5. 7.
And again, it was the secret counsel of God, in which the fall of man was
ordained. And again: Adam did not fall away but according to Gods knowledge
and ordinance. Opu^^. ^05. 8. 616.
In these and such like manner of speeches his purpose was, to overthrow the
opinion of the Schoolmen, who would have his permission severed from his will:
It were good therefore for them better to consider of the matter, who without
either chatitie or humanity do with the blasphemies of the Manichees slander
and belly this holy man.

Secondly they use to object, that God wills things contrary, if he will
that that should come to pass which he forbids in his law. Answer. It is
true indeed, if he should will one and the same thing to come to pass and not
to come to pass in one and the same respect and manner: but God forbids
evil as it is evil, and wills it to come to pass as it has respect unto
good. Hereupon Aquinas says, That evil be and that evil be not, are
contradictorilie opposed; but that Sum. q. 9. art. 9.
God wills evil to be, and that God wills evil not to be, are not
contradictorily opposed, seeing both are affirmative.

Thirdly, they object thus: That thing which being granted, another thing
necessarily follows, is the cause of that self same thing that does follow;
but this being granted that God willed the fall of Adam to come to pass, the
same came to pass necessarily and infallibly. Therefore the will of God was in
this respect the cause of sin. Whereto I answer, that the first proposition
of this argument is not general, for in admitting the creation of the world,
both the place and the time or continuance thereof are infallibly and without
doubt also to be admitted, and yet the creation of the world is not the cause
of the continuance thereof, and of the place, where it now consists. And that
this proposition may be true, it is thus to be framed: That thing which being
granted, another thing infallibly follows (no other cause coming between)
is the cause of the very same thing that follows. And the second proposition
also sitted to this former is untrue. For this being granted that God wills
sin to happen, sin shall not come to pass immediately, but by the means of
man's free will; and although it come to pass infallibly on Gods part which
decrees it, yet it comes to pass freely on man's part, for it had been
possible for man not to have sinned when he did sin if he had would. As may
appear by this Similitude. God forsakes man by not conserring and bestowing
on him necessary and sufficient help for the avoiding of sins; now man
being forsaken by him, sins necessarily; And yet the fault is not to be laid
on God, because that in this his forsaking him the will of man comes
between. For God forsakes man being willing to be forsaken, and not against
his will and mind.

Secondly, I answer to the aforesaid reproach of our doctrine, that we say
not, that sin is from the decree, or of the decree of God, as from the
efficient, material, formal, or final cause. But we do teach and au^rre
that sin comes to pass according to the providence, or decree of God, as
the sole consequent thereof. For we assuredly think and judge that the decree
of God does so go before the sin of man, as that it has no respect unto any
cause, unless it be of such a one, as is a failing and deficient cause. So
says Augustine: Therefore truly the great works Enchir. cap. 101.
of the Lord are exquisite in all his wills, so that after a wonderful and
unspeakable manner, that is not done beside his will, which notwithstanding is
done contrary to his will.

Again it is objected. He that says that the decree of God is the
energeticall operative beginning of all things, necessarily makes the decree
of God, the beginning also of sin. Whereunto I answer, That the holy Ghost
himself says that the decree of God is the beginning of all things being and
existent; Ephesians. I. cap. II. verse: God works all things after the counsel of
his own will. And again in the 17. of the Acts, In him we live, we move, and
have our being. Augustine says: The will of God is the very cause of all
things which are. Hugo De gene, cont. Manic. lib. (...). c. 2
de S. Vict. says: There is no cause of the will of God, which is the cause of
all things. And this very thing common reason will teach us, because there must
first some certain ground be laid, from whence every thing should have or take
the being and existence thereof; and this ground is even the very will of God.
For a thing is not first, and then afterward God wills it to come to pass;
but, because God has decreed that a thing should come to pass, or be done,
therefore it is; And yet shall not God therefore be the cause of sin:
because sin is not properly a thing, action, or being, but a defect only: and
yet nevertheless it is not therefore nothing. For whatsoever has a being, is
either E^s Real^ and Rationale.
Really and positiuely, or else in Reason only. And under those things which
are in Reason, are contained not only notions and relations, but also
priuations: because they have not a real matter and form out of the
understanding. But sin has not a positive and real being, and yet it has a
being in Reason (as they terre it.) For so far forth it is in the nature of
things being, as it may cause a true composition in the mind: and although it
do not exist positiuely, that is, by matter, or form created; yet it is
priuatiuely: because (...).
that by the remove or taking away of original righteousness, that does
immediately and truly follow and exist. Neither does it follow, as some other
natural habit, or as a pure negation, but as a certain thing between both,
that is, a want and absence of the contrary good.

Some use to object that we do teach, that God does incline unto sin and
that he does positiuely harden the heart. Whereto I answer, that we allow
not a bare permission severed utterly from his will, neither do we atribute a
positive or natural action unto God, as though he did infuse corruption and
sin: and yet we say that he does actiuely harden the heart. The action of
Gods Providence (as says Suidas) in the works of men is threefold. The first
is according to his good pleasure, whereby God wills any work, (...).
allows it, effects it, and is therewith delighted: this action is only in
good works, which have their beginning in us from the holy Ghost. The second
action of Gods providence is of sustaining, whereby (...).
God vpholdeth and maintains, the being, and all the faculties, motions,
actions and passions of nature which offends. Act. 17. 28. In him we live,
and move, and have our being. And although God do sustain nature offending,
and the action of nature, yet is he free from fault; because he vpholdeth the
creature, only as it is a creature, not as it is evil. For the second cause,
as the will of man, can by it self do euilly and corruptly: yet it can do
nothing by it self, unless the effect thereof be reduced to the first cause.
As may appear more plainly by this similitude: A man does hault by reason that
his leg is out of joint: now here are two things to be considered, the very
walking or motion it self, and his haulting: the haulting proceeds only from
his leg out of joint, the walking both from his leg and also from the
faculty of moving. In like manner a man sinning, in that he does it is of God,
but in that he does euilly, it is of himself. We must therefore here know that
God does uphold order as it is of nature, but furthereth not the will violently
breaking out against the order of the moral law. The third (...).
action of Gods providence is according unto concession, whereby God in the
evil work of man works some things holily; and this last action is
threefold. The first is permission: whereby God forsakes especially the wicked
by withdrawing from them his grace, and by leaving them according to their
deserts unto their own wickedness, which he had before restrained, that it
might not break forth to so immoderate liberty. And we use commonly to say,
that he which permits, does and effects some thing: as when the rider
gives the reins unto his wanton and sporting horse, we say that he does
move and encourage him; and we say that the hunter does put his dog on the
game, when as he lets him slip. The second action (as I may so term it) is
occasional, whereby God by proffered occasions, in themselves good or
indifferent, outwardly draws forth, stirs up, and brings out sin in
those who of themselves openly run into wickedness; to the intent that he
may either justly punish their known impiety, or else discover it being
closely shrouded. The like have we ordinarily even among our selves: for the
Physician by his preservative medicine, stirs up, inflameth, and draws
forth the humors out of the corruption of the body. Admit a house be weakly
timbred, which being almost now already fallen wilere long fall; and that I do
not with any engines or instruments throw or beat down the same, but only
take away the outward hindrances, and on every side as it were open a way for
the downfall, to the intent, that when it falls, it may by the greater fall
be broken in pieces. After this sort deals God with the wicked: and hereupon
is it that the law is said to stir up and increase sin in Paul, Romans 7. 8.
This action is done many manner of ways, as when the hindrances of sin are
taken away: when as the way is opened to the committing of one especial sin,
and not of another: when as objects are offered, which the ungodly use as
instigations unto sin. These objects, are commandments, threatenings,
exhortations, and cogitations either good or indifferent put by God in the
minds of ungodly men, from the which the wicked by reason of his wickedness
does greedily take an occasion to do ill. And this is the manner and way
truly, whereby we say that God stirs man unto evil, without infusing the
least drop or jot of evil. For as in the middle region of the air the heat
grows stronger by the antiperistasis or repulsion on every part, from whence
proceeds the thunder and lightning: and by the heat round encompassed, the
clouds are condensated and made thick: even so the wicked and ungodly when
they are stirred up by wholesome precepts, do grow more ungodly: and evil does
so much the more begin to delight them, by how much the more they know that it
is less lawful for them: according to the saying of the Poet: Nitimur in
vetitum semper cupimusque negara: We still endeavor things forbid, and covet
that's denide. The third action is a disposing, whereby God through the evil
work of an evil instrument, finisheth his own work justly and holily. As
for example: The sale of Joseph in his brethren was sin: the just action of God
in this evil work was the foresending of Joseph into Egypt for the common
good and benefit of Jacobs family. And from this disposing proceeds it, that
God uses the sins of men ^olily, that he provoke them holily, and ordreth
them as the Physician for a medicine ordreth poison, contrary to the nature
thereof: that he ordreth them holily both according to the causes, and
beginnings, and also according to the ends and issue: as when he disposes the
work of the devil infusing corruption, either to the punishment of correction,
vengeance, or trial. But concerning these let us rather give care to ancient
writers. Clemens Strom. lib. 1
Alexandrinus says: It belongs to Gods wisdom, virtue, and power, not
only to do good, which is the nature of God, but also especially to bring
unto some good and profitable end, that which has been invented by those which
are evil, and use profitably those things which do seem evil. Augustine
says: God makes and ordains just men: De genesis ad. lit. imperf. cap. 5.
but he makes not sinners as they are sinners, but ordreth them only. And
again; As God is the most excellent creator of good De ciuit. Dei lib. 11.
cap. 17. Enchir. ad Laur. c. 101. De cor. and great. c. 14.
natures: so is he the most just disposer of evil wills. Again: God verily
fulfilleth certain of his good wills, by the evil wills of evil men. Again:
God by those men which do those things which he will not, does himself those
things which he will. And again: God using well even those that are evil as
being himself absolutely good: so far forth as in them lay they did that
which God would not; In this very thing that they did that which was contrary
to Gods will, even by them his will is done. and again: Who would not tremble
at these judgments of God, whereby De great. and lib. arb. c. 21
God does in the hearts of evil men what soever he will, giving unto them
according to their deserts* And again: It is plain that God works in the
hearts of men to incline their wills whither soever he will, either unto those
things that are good for mercy, or else unto those things that are evil for
their deserts, sometimes verily in his open judgment, sometimes in his secret
judgment, but evermore in his just judgment. And again: God makes not evil
wills, but uses them as Cont. Iul. lib. 5. cap. 3.
he list, because he cannot will any thing that is unjust. Fulgentius says:
Although God be not the author of evil thoughts; yet he is the disposer of
evil wills; and out of the evil work of every one, he does not cease to work
that which is good.

In respect of these diverse actions concerning sin, it comes to pass that
we find it said in the Scripture, That God does harden, does make blind, does
deceive, 2. Sam. 12. 12. and 16. 10. and 24. 1
does command a work that is evil, yea and does the same, and that he
delivers over to beastly affections, etc.

Thirdly I answer to the aforesaid reproach of this our doctrine, that we do
utterly abhor and detest the Stoicall Fate, because it appoints an inherent
necessity in things themselves, which should bind even God himself, and all
other things, and make them subject thereunto. For howsoever we do believe
that the very decree of God is immutable and therefore necessary, yet in God
himself it was most free (for he could either not have decreed that which he
did decree, or else otherwise have decreed it: I and he adds to the second
causes placed out of God a certain necessity, but yet so free a one, as that
it is rather to be termed a liberty, then a necessity. And this shall easily
appear to be as I say, if I shall first show, what sorts of necessity there
be, and how far forth it is agreeable unto things. First therefore, a thing
is necessary two ways, absolutely and conditionally. That is obsolutely
necessary which cannot be otherwise, or else whose contrary is impossible, as
that God is omnipotent and just. And that is conditionally necessary, which
cannot be otherwise, but yet not simply, but by the granting of one or many
things: and this kind of necessity is either by nature, or the commandment,
or decree of God. That is necessary by nature, which comes to pass
constantly and immutably by reason of that order which God has set in the
nature of things: after this sort is it of necessity, that fire do burn,
that the earth is carried downward, and the heaven moved. That is necessary
by commandment, which is necessarily to be done because God has commanded
it. After this fort it is of necessity that one undergo the office of a
magistrate. Romans 13. 5. That is necessary by the decree of God, which is so,
because God has foreknowne it, and willed either to effect it, or at the least
to permit it. After this sort every thing in respect of God is necessary, and
the will De ciuit. Dei lib. 5. (...). 8. q. 10. and de genesi ad lit. l. 5. c.
15.
of God (as Augustine says) is the necessity of things. Secondly, necessity
is either of compulsion or infallibility. Necessity of compulsion, is that
which infers violence to things by some cause working without, and forciblie
constrains that they do either this or that. And this indeed is the Stoicall
necessity, that a man Tull. de Finibus.
should do any thing against his will being compelled by force and necessity.
There is also such a like kind of necessity of the Manichees, condemned by the
fathers, who taught that there was no violence or necessity offered unto the
will by God, nor that it was forced by necessity to sin. The necessity of
infallibility is that whereby a thing according to the event shall certainly
and immutably come to pass: yet so, as if we consider the cause of a thing by
it self, it may either not come to pass, or else come otherwise to pass. Of
this manner of necessity we must understand that principle: Every thing that
is, when it is, is of necessity. And thus is necessity distinguished: now will
I show how far forth it is agreeable to several things. The events of all
things have reference either to the second causes, or to God, who is the first
cause. Now some things in respect of the second causes are necessary, othersome
contingent. From causes which are necessary, must needs proceed that which is
necessary, from those that are free, that which is free, from those that are
natural that which is natural; and to be brief, such as are the next causes
aforegoing, such also is the event of things. But in respect of God, all things
whatsoever, are partly changeable, and partly necessary. In respect of Gods
liberty, which does that which it does freely, all things are contingent and
mutable: howsoever according to nature and the order of the next causes, they
be necessary and immutable. In respect of Gods decree, the second causes and
the effects of them are all necessary, howsoever in themselves they be
uncertain and conti(...)nt. And yet they are not absolutely necessary, but
by the supposition of Gods decree, neither are they necessary by the
necessity of compulsion, but of infallibility only, because God ordained
before that those things which should come to pass should be. And this kind of
necessity takes not away the contingencie and liberty of second causes, but
rather establishes and confirms it. For that which is free works freely,
and that which is contingent, works contingently, by the necessary decree of
God. Neither does liberty and necessity mutually overthrow each other, but
liberty and compulsion. It is manifest therefore that Gods decree causes an
immutabilitie to all things, of which notwithstanding some, in respect of the
next causes, are necessary, and othersome contingent; but all of them in
respect of Gods liberty mutable. And as the mutabilitie which things have from
Gods power, takes not away the necessity which they have from the second
causes: so the necessity of immutabilitie by Gods decree consequently coming
to pass, takes not away the contingencie which they have from the next causes
and Gods liberty. Moreover we say, that Gods decree ordains the second
causes, and the very liberty it self also of man's will, not by compulsion,
as if a man should violently throw a stone, but by inclining and gently
bending them, by objects outwardly offered to the understanding (even as a
sheep is said to be drawn, when grass is showed her being an hungry) that a
man August. de verb. Apost. ser. 2.
may choose by his own free motion, or refuse that which God has justly
decreed from all eternity.

These things being granted, it is manifest also what we ought to think
concerning the fall of Adam. Which truly according to the event is necessary
by the necessity of infallibility by reason of the forcknowledge and decree
of God: yet so as that God is not guilty of any fault; because the decree of
God howsoever it was necessary in it self, yet it planted nothing in Adam,
whereby he should fall into sin, but left him to his own liberty, not
hindering his fall when it might; and the same fall in respect of man's will
(which does that freely that it does) came to pass contingently and most
freely. But, you will say, that Adam could not withstand Gods will, that is,
his decree; whereto I answer, that even as he could not, so also he would
not. But, you will say again he could not will otherwise. Which I confess to
be true, as touching the act and event, but not as touching the very power of
his will, which was not compelled but of the own free motion consented unto
the suggestio^ of the devil. But to the intent that these things may more
plainly be understood, we must make distinction between three times, the
time going before his fall, the present time of his fall, and the time after
his fall. In the first moment of time the fall of Adam was necessary in a
double respect: First, by reason of the foreknowledge of God: for that which he
foreknew would come to pass, must needs of necessity come to pass.
Secondly, by reason of the permissiue decree of God, that fall was according to
the event necessary immutably. Honorius Augustodunensis says, It cannot
otherwise Dial. de praed. citat. in Catalogo Illyrici.
^e but that al things must come to pass, which God has predestined and
foreknowne, seeing that he only either does all things or permits them to
be done. Hugo de S. victore says: Sin follows of necessity by Quaest. in
Romans 44.
the withdrawing of grace. And the reason hereof is very easy, because evil
permitted must come to pass, and cannot otherwise come to pass than God
permits. For to permit evil, is not to stir up the will, and not to
bestow on him that is tempted the act of resisting, but to leave him as it were
to himself: and he whose will is not stirred up by God, and to who^ the act of
resisting is not conferred, howsoever he may have power to withstand: yet can
he not actually will to withstand, nor persist for ever in that uprightness
wherein he was created, God denying him strength. I confess truly that this
kind of necessity as touching the liberty of man's will, was altogether
euitable and to be avoided: and yet according to the event of the action it was
inevitable. Yet I would not that any man should think that this necessity did
any way proceed from the decree of God, which did only follow the decree
being granted and admitted; and Adam in his temptation being destitute of the
help of God, cast himself of his own accord into this same ensuing necessity
of sinning. In the second time, his fall being present, there was another
necessity thereof: because when it was it was of necessity. In the third
time, man drew unto himself by his fault, his nature being now corrupted,
another necessity of sinning, insomuch that he made himself the servant of
sin. Bernard says: I know not after what evil and strange manner, the will it
self corrupted or changed to worse makes a necessity to sin: and yet the
necessity although it be voluntary is not able to excuse the will: nor the
will, although it be enticed, to exclude necessity.

If any man shall say, that by this our platform many are tied by an
inevitable necessity to be damned; I would have him give care to Augustine,
who says: Hold this most steadfastly, and doubt not in De fide ad Pet. cap. 35.
any wise that any can perish whom God before the creation of the world, has
of his free goodness made vessels of mercy, -- or that any of them whom he
has not predestined to eternal life, can by any means be saved. And yet I
say that the decree of reprobation does not cause a necessity of damnation in
any man. For the first act thereof, which is a purpose not to show mercy,
causes not this necessity in men, but goes before it as an antecedent: and
man himself verily has brought upon himself this necessity with his own
most free, yet rebelling will. Now the second act of Reprobation, which is a
purpose of condemning, causes not any necessity of damnation, but by the
sin of man coming between. Moreover, the necessity of damnation follows
after the same manner by the foreknowledge of God: and yet this never seemed a
thing strange unto any one. But some will say, that the foreknowledge of God
does never cause in men any necessity of damnation, although it do assuredly
foresee the same. And I say also, that Reprobation does either not at all cause
damnation in man, or that it does not cause it, but for sin. But it may be
objected: They that are predestined unto damnation, cannot be freed by
repentance, although they would. Whereto I answer with Augustine: As they did
fall by their will, so by their will they are content to lie: and he that
turns himself Ar^. 15.
away from God, has both deprived himself of will to do that which is good,
and also of power. It does not therefore follow (as they imagine which object
such things) that God has taken repentance from those to whom he gave it not,
and has thrown down those, whom he has not taken up.

Moreover, the self same necessity follows of their hypothesis, who affirm
a bare permission. For that which God permits, the self same thing will he
not hinder* and evil, if God hinder not, cannot be avoided: and that which
cannot be avoided, shall come to pass infallibly. And therefore evil,
permission being once granted, of necessity comes to pass, although most
freely on man's part. Whereupon it is plain, that the decree of God is not more
inevitable, than is the very permission separated from the decree. I do wish
that they would well weigh and consider this, who object unto us either the
Stoicall fate, or the do^ages of the Manichees. For we differ from them as much
in certain judgment and opinion, as whosoever do differ most. For first, the
Stoickes do tie God unto the second causes, so that he cannot do otherwise,
then the nature of them will suffer: we on the other side, do hold that all
second causes do depend upon and are ordered by God. Secondly, the Stoickes
say, that neither God nor second causes can do otherwise by their nature than
they do: we say that some second causes, are by Gods ordinance mutable,
othersome immutable; and that God himself, can either not do, that which he
does, or else do it otherwise. But now to come to the Manichees, who make two
coeternall gods; we but one. They of their two Gods, make one good, and another
evil: we say, that there is one absolutely good and just God. Thirdly, they
will have one of their Gods to be the cause and worker of good things, and the
other of evil: we make one true God the creator and ruler of all things, and
working nothing but that which is most good and most just. Fourthly, they say
that they which are created by their good God cannot sin: we say, that God
does most freely convert whom he will, and when they are converted, they can
never in this life perfectly be free from sins, but do sometimes run into
such sins, as do grievously wound the conscience. Fifthly, they say, that
they that are created by the evil God simply cannot be converted: we say, that
unclean spirits and men were created both good and holy, but yet they fell by
their own will and fault, and not by any fault but the just permission of the
Creator, and brought upon themselves a necessity of sinning. And although it
be true, that man cannot withhold himself from sinning, unless God give him
that grace, yet does he not sin of necessity, that is, of compulsio^, but
willingly. And the will has sufficient liberty if by it self or the nature
thereof it be inclinable to the contrary of that which it chooses, and does of
the own accord choose that which it chooses; although the same liberty be
governed and one way limited by God. Wherefore I am flat of Anselmus opinion,
who says: Although Lib. de concor. great. and lib. arbitr.
it be of necessity that those things do come to pass which are foreknowne
and predestined; yet some things foreknowne and predestined do not come to
pass by that necessity which goes before a thing, and causes is, but by the
same necessity which follows a thing. For God does not cause, although he
does praedestinate them, by forcing the will, as by resisting it, but by
leaving them in the power thereof. And I am also of Gaudentius his opinion; who
says: The Jews Ser. 3. ad Neophy.
were willing to do that evil which they did. And verily, if they had bin
unwilling to do it they had not done it. And it is a gross sin, but to
think that God, who is not only good and righteous, but also goodness and
righteousness it self, does either command, or compel any thing to be done,
which he condemns when it is done. But that I may in a word fully deliver my
opinion, if it be demanded, how the will of God carries it self to good or
evil, I answer: that in a good act God carries himself positiuely. For
first he determines the event of good, by willing effectually to work it; and
secondly, he inwardly inclines the will of the creature, to do that good
which it does. Thirdly, he sometimes lays a necessity of immutabilitie on
him that does well, but yet it is joined with an exceeding freedom. After this
sort the elect Angels do necessarily obey God, yet not by constraint, but
greatly coveting, and with all the strength of their will desiring it, not
being thereunto compelled. In an evil act, I say that God carries himself
priuatiuely; not by a logical, but a natural privation foregoing the habit. For
first he wills that evil come to pass, not by doing it himself, but by
willing not to hinder it to be done by others. Secondly, he does not inwardly
incline the will to do evil, but he forsakes, and outwardly offers objects
which are good in themselves. Thirdly, God lays not on us any necessity, but
a desertio^, or want of grace, to which being imposed, follows the necessity
of sinning, not as the effect does his cause, but as the defect does him that
forsakes. And this I am resolved on, that Gods decree does altogether order
every event, partly by inclining and gently bending the will in all things yt
are good; and partly by forsaking it in things that are evil: and yet the will
of the creature left unto it self, is carried headlong of the own accord, not
of necessity in it self, but contingently that way which the decree of God
determined from eternity. We therefore (thanks be given unto God) do with
all our hearts renounce the doting follies of the Stoickes and the Manichees.

The fourth Crimination is,
That we do teach, that the greatest part of mankind is deprived of Christ
and all saving grace.
Answer. 1.

It might happily seem a rigorous course that some should be deprived of
Christ, if so be that they had never at any time nor any where received saving
grace. But all and every one received holiness and happiness in Adam,
together with ability to persevere and remain in the some holy and happy
estate, if they had would. But Adam would not; but did of his own accord cast
away that grace which was bestowed on him by his Creator: for which being lost,
it is a wonder, that all without exception are not damned. And therefore it may
seem the less strange to any one, if grace by Christ be again bestowed upon
one, and not upon another.

Secondly I answer, that we do acknowledge with glad minds that Christ died
for all (the scripture auerring so much): but we utterly deny, that he died for
all and ever one alike in respect of God, or, as well for the damned as elect,
and that effectually on Gods part. For first let us weigh well the words of
Christ: I never knew you: depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Matthew. 7. 25
Now to know with God is to acknowledge; and therefore, whom Christ never knew,
he never acknowledged for his. And those whom he has not sometime
acknowledged, he never bought or redeemed with the price of his blood. And
therefore well says Gregory: Not to know with God is to reject. Again, if al
and every one be effectually redeemed, al and every one are reconciled unto
God. Because that the forgiveness of sins and the satisfaction for the same
are inseparably joined together. Yea and Paul places Ephesians. 1. 7. and Col. 1. 14.
redemption in the remission of sins, where he says: By whom we have
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. Very well
therefore says Prosper: As it is not sufficient for the renewing Lib. 1. resp.
pro Aug. object. 9.
of men, that Christ Jesus was borne man, unless they be renewed also in the
same spirit, whereof he was borne: so it is not sufficient for man's redemption
that Christ Jesus was crucified, unless we die together and be buried with
him in baptism. Of these premises therefore I frame this assumptio^: But al are
not reconciled unto God, neither do all receive remission of sins: for then
all men were blessed; and it were not possible, Psalm. 32. 1.
for them to perish: which thing to affirm of all and every one, is very
gross. Thirdly, Christ gave himself that he Tit. 2. 14. (...).
might^ sanctify unto himself a people peculiar, that is, as a precious
treasure and his own gotten good selected and chosen from among other:
therefore it was not Christ's purpose, to give himself for a ^ansome for all
and every one alike. Fourthlie, for whom redemption it ordained, to them al is
given on Gods part the making of them sons by Christ: but the making of
sons, or Adoption is not granted to all and every one, even on Gods part.
For John. 1. 12.
the power of the Adoption whereby a man is made of the child of wrath the child
of God, is only given to those y^ believe and De Correp. and great. c. 9.
apprehend Christ. They are (says Augustine) the children of God, who are not
as yet so unto us, and yet they are so unto God; because that by believing they
should afterward be so through the preaching of the Gospel: and yet before
this was so, they were engraven the children of God, by a steadfast and
immutable stabilitie, in the register of their father. And again there are
some which in respect even of some present or temporal grace which they have
received, are said by us i^ be the children of God, and yet are they not so
unto God. Fifthly: None are truly redeemed on Gods part, but they who are freed
from sin, both according to the power that it has to cause damnation, and
also according to the power that it has to reign in them. In this do the
ancient fathers agree: for Augustine says: By this mediator God shows that
he De Corre^. (...) great. c. 11
does make them of evil men eternally good, whom he has redeemed with his
blood. And again: Those whom he would make his brethren, he freed and made
them fellow heirs. Tr^ct. in Ioh. 2. and 7. 7
And again: Christ will have no partaker in that which he has bought, but
will possess it wholly to himself, and to that end gave he so great a price,
that he might only possess the same. Isychius says, Christ ^n Leuit. lib.
1. c. 23. In Psalm. 64.
who suffered for us, has freed us from sin and the bondage thereof.
Remigius says: Thou art the reconciler, thou art the reconcilement, and
blessed shall they be for whom thou shall make reconciliation. Out of these I
thus conclude: all and every one are not redeemed according to both the
aforesaid powers of sin. For let us grant that on Gods part they are freed
from damnation: yet they are not in such measure endued with grace, as that
sin shall no more reign in them. Christ therefore is but only the half
redeemer of these; and for that cause not a redeemer. Lastly, let us diligently
consider the judgment of ancient writers. Ambrose says: If thou beleeuest De
fide ad Gratian.
not, Christ came not down for thee, Neither did he suffer for thee. Augustine
says: Every one that is generated is damned, and no one is freed unless he be
regenerated. Ser. 14. de verb. Apost. and ser. 20. de verb. Apost.
And again: It is well said, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy.
For if the whole world being in thraldom, and in the power of sin, and most
justly ordained to punishment, be nevertheless in part by Gods mercy freed:
who can say unto God, why do thou condemn the world? And again: He that
has bought us at so dear a price, will not that we whom he has bought should
be Sermon. 109.
destroyed. God has given a great price and bought those who^ he quickneth.
And again: Of whose mercy is it but of his who has sent Jesus Christ into
this world to save sinners, Denat. and great. cont. Pel. cap. 5.
whom he has both foreknowne and predestined, and called, and justified, and
glorified. Bernard says: Christ needed none of Ser. 4. de natali.
these: neither did he any of these things in regard of himself, but rather
in regard of the elect --:they were not directly the Jews to whom he was sent,
but the Elect for whom he was sent. Haimo says: Even as by one man death and
sin came generally to our condemnation: Comment. in Romans c. 5.
so by the one justice of man, which is, of Christ, to all men elected and
predestined to eternal life came grace to the justification of life. And
again: He took not away in the Ibid.
elect only original, but also actual sins: and therefore grace and the
gift through grace did (...) down unto the elect. Aquin as Summa de verit.
M^t. 26 q 7.
faith: Christ merit according to the sufficiency carries it self
indifferently to all but not according to the efficacy. Which happens, --
partly by Gods election, through which the effect of Christ's me, its is
mercifully bestowed on some, and partly by the just judgment of God withdrawn
from other some.

Object. I. Against this it is thus objected: The Scripture affirms that
Christ redeemed the world. Whereto I answer: That this word (world) in the
writings of the Apostles does not signify both all and every man that
descended from Adam, but all nations in this last age of the world. God (says
Paul) was reco^ciling the world unto him in Christ. What means 1. Cor. 15.
cap. 18.
this word world in this place? Surely not all men of al ages, but the Gentiles
which were to be called after the ascension of Christ, as Paul plainly
explaining his own mind shows, Romans 11. 12. Wherefore if the fall of them be
the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the
Gentiles, how much more shall their abundance be? And again in the 15. verse:
If the casting away of them, (that is, of the Jews) be the reconciling of the
world; what shall the receiving be but life from the dead? In these very words
he plainly shows, that the reconciliation of the world is the reconciliation
of the Gentiles after the casting away of the Jews. And hereby it is most
manifest, that all the like places of Scripture, which many do think to make
for the universal redemption of all and every one, are to be understood of
some men to be called but of every nation and country after the death of
Christ. And hereunto also let us join the answer of Augustine: He calls
oftentimes even the Tract. 87. in Joan.
Church it self by the name of the world^ according unto that, God was
reconciling the world unto himself in Christ: and again, the Son of man came
not to judge the world, but that the world might be saved through him. And John
says in his Epistle, We have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the
just, and he is the reconciler of our sins, and not only of ours, but also
of the whole world. Therefore the whole world is the Church, and the whole
world hates the Church. Therefore the world hates the world, the malignant
world the reconciled world, the damned the saved, and the defited that which is
cleansed. But this world, which God in Christ reconcileth unto himself, and
which by Christ is saved, and to which all sin is through Christ pardoned, is
elected out of the malignant, damned, and defiled world. Rupertus says: The
world surely, which God Comment. in Joan. lib. 3. cap. 3. In (...). Cor. (...).
loved, we understand to be mankind, that is, the living and the dead: the
dead, which in faith looked for his coming; the living, who should believe in
him, whether they were of the Jews or of the Gentiles. For so he says without
any distinction either of Jew or Gentile universally, that every one that
believes in him shall not porish, but have life everlasting. And the common
gloss expounds the world, those that be the elect of the world.

Object. II. Saint Paul says, that God 1. Tim. 2. 4.
will that all men be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth. I answer,
first, that the place is not to be understood, of all the posterity of Adam,
but properly of those which live in the last age of the world. This I prove by
co^ferring of the like places, wherein Paul does plentifully show his meaning.
Act. 17. 30. And the time of this ignorance God regarded not, but Mark well the
rest^aining form of speech, for it is as much as if he had said, God now
wills that all me should repent.
Now he admonishes all men every where to repent. Romans 16. 25. -- by the
revelation of the mystery which was kept secret since the world began. 26. But
Now is opened and published -- for the obedience of faith among all nations.
Coloss. 1. ^6. The mystery which was hid since the world began and from all
ages, is Now made manifest unto the Saints. 27. To who^ God would make known
Christ --;whom we preach, admonishing every man and teaching every man, that we
may present all men perfect in Christ Jesus. And in the second epistle to the
Corinth. the 6. chap. and the second verse, he expounds that place of Isaias,
where it is said: In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of
salvation have I helped thee, and I will preserve thee: and will give thee for
a covenant of the people that thou may raise up the earth, -- that thou may
say to the prisoners, go^ forth; after this fashion: Behold, Now, says he,
the accepted time, (that is, the time of the new Testament) behold Now the day
of salvation. Saint Peter says: Salvation 1. Pet. 2. 20.
ordained to be declared in the last times: concerning which the Prophets
which did prophecy of the grace which should afterward come to you, have
searched and inquired. And Christ himself says most plainly of all, When I
shall be lifted up from Ioh. 12. 32.
the earth, I will draw all things unto me. I therefore grant, that God wills
that all should be saved: but that God both wills, and that he has Always
willed that all men in all ages should be saved, I utterly deny, neither has
Paul said so much: and among the ancient writers they which seem to affirm so
much, do notwithstanding in these kind of speeches doubtfully affirm it: I
do imagine that it may with reason and religion be believed: Auth. de vocat.
gent. l. 2 cap. 8. Bellar(...) de great. and lib. arb. lib. 3. cap. 5.
I do not think it irreligion to believe it: It may propably and religiously
be believed.

Secondly I answer: That God will that all men be saved, that is to say, of
those that are saved. So says Augustine: Even as it is said: that all shall be
quickoned in Ep. 107 ad Vitalem.
Christ, although very many be punished by eternal death: because all
whosoever they are that do receive eternal life, do not receive it but in
Christ: so is it said, that God will have all men to be saved, although he will
have many not to be saved: because all who are saved, are not saved but by him
willing it. And again: When we read in the holy Scriptures, that God will
have all men to be Enchir. ad Laur. c. 103.
saved, although we know assuredly that all (...)en are not saved, yet ought
we not therefore to de^^gate any thing from the omnipotent will of God: but thus
to understand that which is written, Who will have all men to be saved, as if
it should be said, that no man was saved, but he whom God would have to be
saved: not that there is no man whom he will not have saved. Hay(...)o says:
God will have all men to be saved. Let us then ask In c. (...). ep. 1. ad Tim.
what is the reason why all men are not saved. To which, answer must be made,
that that saying in the Psalm is true, He spoke the word and they were made. In
like manner he will save all men who are saved, and who by his mercy desire to
be saved. For the Apostle put the whole for the part, as it is in the Gospel
where the Lord says, If I be lifted up from the earth, I will draw all unto
me. For he has not drawn neither does he draw all men unto him, but All that
are elect, and of all sorts, and nations.

Thirdly I answer, that God will not have every one of every kind, but the
kinds of every one to be saved; that is to say, of every estate and condition
some. Augustine says: This very saying, Who will Euchir. ad. Laur. c. 103
have all men to be saved, is so said, not because there is no man whom he
would have damned, who would not do any powerful miracles among them, who he
says would have repented if he had: but that we by all men, may understand
every sort of men, by what differences so ever distinguished, whether they be
Kings or subjects, noble or ignoble, high or low, learned or unlearned, strong
or weak, witty, dull spirited or foolish, rich, poor or mean men or women,
infants or children, youths or young men, middle aged men or old men, in all
languages, in all trades, in all conditions, in all professions, in the
innumerable variety of wills and consciences, and what other differences soever
there is among men. These things says he, very truly and rightly, for this
word, All, is sometime taken distributiuely, and then it signifies every
several and particular person: and Paul to the intent that he might signify
2 Thessalonians. (...). 3
this, joins the word every one with the word all. It is also often taken
collectiuelie, (...).
and then it signifies any, and not eueone: as when Christ is said to have
healed every disease, that is, any disease. The Matthew. 9. 35
double signification of this word Aristotle also observed. This word All
(says he) is Pol. lib. 2. cap. 2.
taken two ways, first for every one -- and secondly the word Al is used, when
it does not signify every one: It is plain therefore that the word All has a
doubtful (...). Comment. ad Ephesians. c. 1.
signification. And of this mind also is Saint Jerome: It is like unto that
(says he) which is in the Psalm: -- every man is a lier. If every man be a
lier, then is he also a lier which speaks it, and if he be a lier which
speaks it, then is not that true which he speaks, namely that every man is
a lier. But, if this saying be true, these words Every man does lie, are (as I
said before) to be understood after this sort, A great part of men are liers.
And the Apostle writes elsewhere, Teaching every man: and again, Admonishing
Comment. ad Romans c. 5.
every man: not that he taught all men, (for how many are there yet at this day
which have neither heard of the Apostles doctrine, nor yet so much as his
name?) but that he should teach and admonish all that are in the Church.
Sedulius also says: Many In epist. ad Romans 6. 5.
and all in Paul are one.

Fourthly, S. Paul speaks in this place according to the charitable judgment
of Christians: and not according to the judgment of secret and infallible
certainty. Like unto this, is that also that he calls the faithful in
several Churches men elected; amongst whom there were many which afterward
fell away from the faith. And yet is not the Apostle deceived; for it is one
thing to speak, according to his own affection: and another thing to speak,
as the matter is according as it is indeed. Augustine says: We ought so
charitably to be affected, as to De Correp. and great. c. ^5
wish that all men be saved: as men that know not who appertain to the number
of those that are predestined, and who do not. And again: We must as much
as in us has, Cap. 1^.
being unable to distinguish those that are predestined, from those that are
not, desire that all men be saved, and use sharp correction unto all with an
intent to heal them that they perish not.

Hence it appears what we ought to think of Damascene his opinion, who
divides the will of God into his precedent and consequent will. He calls
that his precedent will, whereby God, as he that is absolutely good, wills to
bestow all good things, yea blessedness it self upon the creature; and by this
will he affirms, that God wills that all men should be saved, and attain
unto his kingdom: because he made us not to punish us, but that he might make
us partakers of his goodness, as being good himself. But his consequent will
is that, whereby for some certain circumstances of the creature, he absolutely
wills this or that: and by this will, he says, that God wills that man
should be damned for sin, because he is inst. And indeed this distinction in
it self is to be allowed, but that is not a very fit example, which he has
set down or alleged, concerning his precedent will. For there seems not to
be in God such a will, or (as they Optatiua voluntar.
use to term it) such a wishing will, whereby he will indefinitely and upon
condition, that all and every man of all ages should be saved. For first, it
argues a finite power and insufficiency in him that wills. For whatsoever
any one desires and earnestly wills, that will be bring to pass, unless
he be hindered. As for example: The Merchant desires and earnestly wills to
save his ware: but being forced by a tempest, to the intent that himself may
escape, he does absolutely will to cast them into the sea. Yea indeed this
kind of will seems to argue weakness, because God wills that, which shall
not come to pass. But you will say, that this will is conditional; that is,
that God will that they be saved, if they shall believe. And I say first, that
the will of God stands doubtful, until the condition be fulfilled, and that
the first cause is by this means held in suspense by the second causes:
moreover there is given unto men a free will either to believe or not to
believe: that is, flexible and inclinable both ways, either by grace, or by
nature: both which things are false, as I will afterward show. And therefore,
this will is rather a humane will than a divine. Hear what Anselmus says: The
will of God is taken four manner of ways by the principal Doctors: first,
for Lib. de volunt. Dei.
the knowlddge of God: then for the will of the Saints, who will in charity
that even the unjust should be saved: again, for humane reason: and lastly for
Gods Commandments. Secondly, this conditional will seems idle and
unnecessary, especially in him whose power is infinite; because if he
earnestly willed, he would verily do a thing, when he might without
hindrance. Thirdly, Gods will is not such concerning the Angels, whereby he
wills that all of them should be saved: therefore, it may well be demanded,
whether his will be such concerning man. Fourthly, if God will that all men,
as they are men, be saved: in like manner he will that all sinners, as they
are sinners, be damned; which is absurd. Fifthly, that will which cannot be
resisted, is absolute: but Gods Antecedent or first will cannot be resisted:
Romans 9. 19. For there Paul speaks of the will that goes before all causes.
Therefore, the precedent will is absolute. And this will I make manifest after
another manner: the will of God is that some should believe and persevere, and
that othersome should be forsaken either not believing or not perseuering. You
will ask me happily how I know this. I answer, by the event. For as touching
the event some believe, and some do not believe. But to believe and to
persevere is a certain kind of good action; and on the contrary not to
believe, or not to persevere is an evil action. And every thing that is good,
is, through the effectual will of God; and so far forth as there is, or
existeth that which is good, so far forth God wills it, and makes it to
exist by willing it. And that evil, which comes to pass, comes to pass,
God not hindering it; and because God will not hinder it, therefore consequently
it comes to pass. Hereupon, it is certain, that God wills that some
should believe, and persevere unto the end, and that othersome do not so; yea
even without any condition: and no reason can be rendered, wherefore he wills
this. Therefore this will is both absolute and first: and therefore that
universal precedent will concerning the salvation of all and every one in
Christ, is counterfeite and fained. Sixthly, the ground of this opinion, is that
foresaid place of Paul, which I have already showed to be misunderstood. And
yet, that place lays not down unto us any conditional but an absolute will.
For there it is first affirmed, that God will have all men to be saved:
afterward, that he will have all men to come to the knowledge of the truth,
that is, unto faith, because by applying faith to the word of God we
acknowledge the truth. Where is now the^ that condition of faith? Lastly,
against Damascene I oppose Augustine: who to the Pelagians urging this Hypog.
lib. 6 cap. 8.
place of scripture, God will that all men be saved, makes a double answer:
first he denies that it is not generally to be understood of the
universality of men, and that by this argument: That which God wills he
effects: but he does not generally save all men; therefore he wills not.
Secondly, he faith that the place is to be understood of them which are
actually saved: because all men which are saved, are saved by the will of God.
Again, I oppose against him Prosper also, who says: If the will of God
concerning Respon. pro August. lib. 1 (...). 8.
the universal saving of mankind, and the calling them to the knowledge of
the truth, is to be affirmed so indifferent throughout all ages, as that it
shall be said to ouerpasse no man in what place soever, Gods impenetrable and
deep judgments receive a great blow. And again: We cannot say that there is
the calling of grace, whereas there is as yet no regeneration of the mother the
Church. And again: He forbad the Apostles to preach the Gospel unto some
people; and now as yet he suffers some people to live out of his grace. Also
I oppose Thomas Aq^ina^ Quest ^3. in su^, art. 3.
against him, who says: But such some man, God loves all men: Whereto I
answer, that it is true so far forth as he wills some good to all: and
yet he wills not every thing that is good to all, that is eternal life: and
therein he is said to hate and reject them. To conclude, I oppose against Him
Hugo de sanct. vict. Who will (says he) that all men be saved, according
Annot. in 1. Tim. cap. 2.
to Ambrose, if they themselves will. But are there not many who would be
saved, and yet are not saved? -- or thus, he offers grace unto all, by which,
if they will, they may be saved. But how is this solution true, are there not
and have there not bin many, which never heard so much as a word of preaching?

Object. III. That which every one is bound to believe is true: but every one
is bound to believe that he is effectually redeemed by Christ: therefore it is
manifest that every one even the reprobate is effectually redeemed by the death
of Christ. Whereto I answer: that the termini or parts of the proposition are
to be distinguished: that which every one is bound to believe, is true
according to the intention of God that binds: but it is not always true
according to the event. Jonas preached, and therefore he was bound to believe,
Yet forty days, and Niuiue shall be destroyed: but this was not true
according to the event. The assumption also must be distinguished. Every one
in the Church, by Gods commandment (Believe the Gospel) is bound to believe
that he is redeemed by Christ: yea even the reprobate as well as the elect, but
yet notwithstanding in a diverse and different respect. The elect is bound to
believe that by believing he shall be made partaker of election: the
Reprobate, that by not believing he may be made inexcusable, even by the
intention of God. For God sometimes gives a commandment not that it should be
actually done, but that men may be tried, that they perform outward
discipline, and that they may be convicted of their natural infidelity, and
be made inexcusable of all their sins before God in the last judgment. For
thus I distinguish of Gods commandment: there is a certain commandment of
obedience, the performance whereof God wills in all: hither are referred the
commandments of the moral law. There is also a certain commandment of
trial, as the commandment of sacrifysing Isaac: Genesis 22. (...)
whereas God wills not the act it self, but only the manifestation of
obedience. And therefore God must not be said to mock men, if by the word
preached he do outwardly call those, whom he will not have to be saved: for
by this means he shows unto them the riches of his grace, and declares
that they perish by their own fault, because they will not receive salvation
offered. But you will say they cannot: I confess as much, but that inabilitie
whereby they cannot, is voluntary, and borne together with us, not infused
into us by God: and therefore it cannot be excused. Very well therefore says
Bernard: The master knew well, that the weightinesse of the commandment
exceeded Ser. 40. in Cant.
the strength of man: but he thought i^ expedient even in this, that it put
them in remembrance of their own insufficiency, -- Therefore by commanding
things impossible, he makes not men s^arners from the truth, but humbles
them that every mouth may be stopped. So says Augustine de great. and lib.
arbit. cap. 43. Secondly, I answer: that that which every one is bound to
believe is true, unless any one shall by his own unbelief hinder himself;
this does the reprobate by his own inborne infidelity. Thirdly I answer, that
the argument does follow twice affirmatively in both propositions. For the
termini or parts of the proposition are thus to be turned: That is true, that
every one is bound to believe, but every one is bound to believe that he is
redeemed by Christ. Therefore that is true.

Object. IIII. The fathers which believed aright do affirm that Christ
redeemed all and the whole world. Ans. Whereas they write that Christ redeemed
all men and the world, their meaning is, that he did it according unto
sufficiency, and the common cause, and common nature of all, which Christ did
take upon him: and not effectually on Gods part. This very thing does Prosper
make plain: All men (says he) are rightly said to be redeemed, in respect of
the one nature of all, and the one Resp. ad object. vin. l. (...). ob. (...).
cause of all, which our Lord did truly take upon him: and yet all are not
delivered from captivity: The propriety of redemption without doubt belongs
unto them for whom the prince of the world is sent abroad: -- whose death was
not so bestowed for mankind, as that it should also pertain unto the
redemption of them, who were not to be regenerated. And again he says: Our
Savior may fitly be said to be crucified for the Ad Capit. Gall. cap 9.
redemption of all the world, both in respect that he truly took upon him the
nature of man, and also in respect of the common or general perdition in the
first man: and yet he may be said to be crucified only for those, unto whom his
death was available. Moreover the fathers speak of the universality, and of
the world of believers. So says he that is the Author of the calling of the
Gentiles. The people of God (says he) have their Lib. 1. cap. (...)
fullness?

And thus much for the efficacy and greatness of Christ's death: Now as
concerning grace: I say, that that is diversely distinguished. For first, it is
either restrayning, or renewing. The restrayning grace is that, whereby the
inbred corruption of the heart, is not thereby utterly diminished and taken away,
but in some is restrained more, in some less, that it break not violently
forth into action: and it is given only for a testimony unto man, and to
preserve order amongst men in a politic society: and this kind of grace is
general, that is, belonging to all and every man, amongst whom some do
exceed othersome in the gifts of civil virtues: and there is no man, in whom
God does not more or less restrain his natural corruption. Now renewing or
Christian grace (as ancient writers do usually call it) is that whereby man
has power given him to believe and repent, both in respect of will, and power:
and it is universal in respect of those that believe, but indefinit in respect
of all and every man. Thus we teach, thus we believe.

Secondly, Grace is either natural, or De praed. sanct. cap. 5.
supernatural: as Augustine himself teaches. Natural grace is that, which is
bestowed on man together with nature: and this is either of nature perfect or
corrupt. Perfect, as the image of God, or righteousness bestowed on Adam in
his creation. This grace belonged genenerally unto all, because we all were in
Adam: and whatsoever he received that was good, he received it both for
himself and his posterity. The grace of nature corrupted is a natural
inlightning (whereof John speaks: He enlightneth every man that comes into
the world) yea and every Ioh. 1. 9.
natural gift. And these gifts truly by that order which God has made in
nature, are due and belonging unto nature. But that Grace which is
supernatural, is not due unto nature, especially unto nature corrupted, but is
bestowed by special grace, and therefore is special. This the ancient writers
affirm. Augustine says: Nature is common to al, but not grace: and he only
acknowledges De verb, Apost. ser. 11.
a twofold grace; namely that common grace of nature, whereby we are made men:
and Christian grace, whereby in Christ we are again borne new me^. And he is
of opinion, that some that do not believe in Christ, do not sin: which is a
thing notwithstanding very ungodly and untrue, if grace be as general as
nature. Let us well weigh his words: In that he has (says he) added: Now they
are Tract. 89. in Johan.
inexcusable for their sin: it may move men to ask: whether those unto whom
Christ has not come nor spoken may have any excuse for their sin. -- To this
question according to my understanding I make answer: that they cannot be
inexcusable for every sin which they have committed, but for this sin that
they have not believed, unto whom Christ did not come, and unto whom he did
not speak. But they are not in this number unto whom he has spoken in his
disciples, and by his disciples, which he also now does. For he came unto the
Gentiles by his Church, -- It remains for us to demand, whether they can have
this excuse, which have bin or are prevented by death, before Christ came in
his Church to the gentiles, and before they heard his Gospel. I answer that
without doubt they may, but they cannot therefore escape damnation: for
whosoever have sinned without the law shall also perish without the law. Again
he says: Only grace distinguishes Enchir. c. 99
those that are saved, from those that, are damned, who were enwrapped in one
lump of corruption by one common cause from the beginning. Chrysostom says:
The grace of God comes unto every one, but it remains Lib. de compun^^.
cord,
with them who do worthily fulfill those things which are in their power:
departing quickly from them, which do not well behave themselves: neither does
it at all come unto those, who do not so much as begin to turn unto the Lord.
Gregory says: The Gentiles did not any way worship God, neither showed they
any sign or token of any good work* for indeed they were But if grace be
universal, there had always been some Church among the Gentiles, although
secret and hidden: for it is not likely that all had cast away grace or that
they had used it ^uilly. Expos. in 1. Reg. cap. 14.
forsaken. Amongst who^ because there was no lawgiuer, nor no one that did
according to reason seek after God, there was not as it were a man, but all
lived as it were like beasts. And afterward he says: When our redeemer came
he so received the calling of grace, as that there was not before in it the
life of prophecy. And again: Teachers holding their tongues, the devils go
into their place: because none do perish by the silence of the pastors, but
they who are not predestined unto eternal life. For they are places for the
devils, because in Gods foreknowledge they are not preordained unto Gods
taber^acle. Hereupon is it said that when the P^stours did preach: as many as
were predestined unto eternal life did believe. And hereupon says Paul,
whom he has predestined, those has he called. Herevpo^ it is, that the
Apostles desirous to go into Asia, were forbidden by the holy Ghost. They
therefore, which are not predestined, whether they hear the words of the
preachers, or whether they do not hear them, cannot be called unto Gods
tabernacle. And again* Sometimes the preachers are silent by Gods
dispensation, that they holding their peace, they which are not the Lords, may
be received of evil spirits. Beda says: He goes to Lib. 1. in Is^i. cap. 1.
visit and enlighten their hearts whom he has predestined to eternal life,
forsaking those whom he kneweth to be none of his own. Anastasius says: The
Church in the former Lib. 1. contemp. in Hexam, l. 10
state of error being without eyes and blind, did neither see from the
beginning, neither was it seen a^ all by God. And again: All other kinds of
faith which are in the world are dead as ^^so the motions of those people and
gentiles which are dead, as they which had not in them him who said, I am the
life. Neither do they regenerate and quicken their people and children, by the
womb of water and the spirit; but are fruitless, and bere^^ of the well of
life, and not enjoying the water which is lively and streameth unto eternal
life. Therefore that Church which is his is only termed the life and mother of
all the living. Hugo de Sanct. vict. says: In I^^* (...). ^5.
Some of those who were before the coming of Christ, if they had not had some
other sin, they should no have been damned, for that they did not believe in
Christ, because they have an excuse for that sin. And again: What if thou
should enter into In Soli^oquio dearra (...).
consideration how many and how excellent in comparison of thee are cast
awaies, which could not attain unto this grace which is given unto thee?
Surely thou have heard how many generations of men from the beginning even
until this day have passed away, who are all without the knowledge of God and
the price of his redemption tumbled down into the gulf of everlasting
destruction. Thy red^emer and lover has preferred thee before all those, in as
much as he has given thee this grace, which none of them was worth^e (...)*
receive. And what will thou say? wherefore do thou think that thou are
preferred before them all? have thou been more valiant? have thou bin more
wise? have, thou ^inne more noble? have thou ^in more rich then they, all?
because thou have obtaitained this spee^all favor above them all? how many
valiant men? how many wise men? how many noble men? how many rich men have
there bin, and yet they are all forsaken, and have p^^^shed like cast
(...)ayes. Thou only (...) received before them all; and yet thou can^^ ^ot
find out any cause why thou should thus be (...) withal, besides the free
fa^our of thy Saniour.

Hithe^^^ I have opened and defended our opinion of pred^stination. I will now
^ri^fely examine another di^^enting with this in many things, having taken it
with as much diligence as I could, out of the public writings of many ^^en:
and to this end, I do thus briefly propound it.

First, God created all and every man in (...) to eternal life.

Secondly, he foresav^ the fall.

Thirdly, because he is by nature gentle and good, he does ^eriooshe will that
all men after the fall should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth:
and therefore wills to give all the furthe^ances both of nature and grace
that they may be saved; but yet indefinitely, if they themselves shall believe.
This will of God (they say) is predes^ination, and the same with the written
Gospel: The rule of this will is; Whosoever shall believe shall be saved; He that
will not beleeus shall be d^mned*

Lastly, Election is according to the foreknowledge of future faith, (which
notwithstanding may be lost utterly for a time, as some say; or finally and
for ever, as some others will) and reprobation is according to the
foreknowledge of infidelity, or the contempt of the Gospel.

This platform is in very truth (so far as, I can judge of is by the
scriptures) a mere invention of man's wit: which will appear by the manifold
errors therein contained.

First, by this platform or groundwork Error 1.
there follows a certain universal reprobation, and that a very absurd and
strange one. For if there be (as they do affirm) an universal election,
whereby God wills that all men shall be saved in definitely, if they do
believe: he wills also by the like reason that all and each one should be
damned if they do not believe. But this reprobation is no where to be found in
the scriptures. Yea hence refolloweth that God being alike affected to all, and
seriously willing the conversion and salvation of all, does neither choose nor
refuse any man.

From hence also it follows, that God Error 2.
has in vain propounded with himself the supreme and absolute end of his
counsels, which is to communicate his goodness in true selicitie even to enery
man. For if we consider the cuent, he does not communicate his goodness and
eternal life unto very many, which is otherwise than he purposed, namely unto
those that are damned. But we are in no case to say that the supreme end of
Gods counsels, either have an uncertain event, or are in vain propounded.

Thirdly, this platform attributed unto God a certain ordered and fitted
will, Error 3.
which does wholly depend on man's will. Thou say that God wills that all men
whatsoever should be saved by Christ. Very well: Tell me therefore why they
are not saved. They themselves will not, thou first. Yea wis. What is this but
to set the creature in the throne of almighty God the Creator, against the
order of nature and of all causes? For the first cause, which indeed is Gods
will, ought to order and dispose the act of the second cause. And therefore we
must not give unto God a will that is ordered by the will of the creature;
especially considering that all order in heaven and in earth whatsoever
proceeds from him. That which orders all things, is ordered of none.
Moreover, men after this sort are elected of themselves, by receiving of Gods
grace being offied, by the assistance of common grace: and are also rejected of
themselves by refusing of grace offered: and men themselves shall be the makers
and framers of their own election and reprobation: and God who chooses is not
so much to be praised, as the men that do receive and embrace the blessing
offered.

Fourthly, this platform lays down a determinate spreknowledge about the
Error 4.
evil of fault, without any decree going before concerning the event of the
fault; which cannot be. A definite foreknowledge is not the cause of that thing
which is to be, but the thing which shall be is the cause of the foreknowledge
thereof. For the thing which shall be follows not the foreknowledge of it, but
foreknowledge follows the thing which shall be, as Justinius taught. For God
does first decree a Quaest. 58. Orthodox.
thing as touching the event: then afterward he does foreknew by his definite
foreknowledge that it shall be. And Anselme: In that (says he) a thing is said
to be foreknowne, it is by that pronounced that Depraed. sanct. c. 14.
it shall be. And Augustine before his time affirmed, That God does foreknow
that which shall be. Hence it follows that a thing must oxist with God,
before it can be precisely and definitly known before. And every thing
existeth and is, because God did will and decree to do it if it be good, or to
suffer it to be done if it be evil; have respect always to the good that is
joined with it. Unless we shall hold and grant this, it will follow that
something has being of it self, that is, that something is a God. Therefore
the existencie or being of things does not go before, but out of all doubt
follows the decree of God. For first of al, there is a foteknowledge, or (as
it pleases others) a knowledge Scientia intuitiua.
of beholding, whereby God beholds and sees what is possible to be, and
what not: Then follows the decree either of Gods operation, or of his
voluntary permission, and consequently of the event of the thing. And this
decree being once laid down, the definitive foreknowledge is conceived, whereby
it is known what shall come to pass infallibly.

The fifth desect in this platform is, that it teaches that Christ for his
part Error 5.
has redeemed and reconciled all and every man to God, and that very many of
them for all that as touching the event are damned, which is very absurd. For
if this were so, sin, Satan, death and hell should be more mighty than
Christ the Redeemer, and (as Augustine says) Vitio humano vincitur Deus: God
is overcome by man's sin. If thou will say that God is De cor. and great. cap.
7.
not overcome; yet I say, and that according to this platform, that he is
altered: for he has decreed and seriously willed to save all men, and yet not
withstanding, another sentence being given, he wills to destroy those which
will not incline and bend themselves to this counsel.

This platform makes saving grace (which indeed is supernatural) to be
altogether Error 6.
vninersall. But this opinion (to speak no hardlier of it) is a plausible
deulse of man's brain. For first of all hereby the special covenant made with
Abraham, and the greatness of Gods metcies toward the Gentiles is abolished:
And there is no mystery of the vocation of the Gentiles, if all and every
particular man were by certain means called unto Christ from the beginning;
For those, which shall by the help of common grace, which they shall receive,
give assent unto God calling them, whether it be by extraordinary instinct, or
by the ministry of the word preached; they shall be accounted among the
members of the Church, and shall belong to the special covenant of the Gospel.
Moreover if the first grace be universal, it is either faith actually or in
power. For without faith it is impossible to please God, and to attain
salvation. But actual says is not common to all. The power of faith is
double, the first is that whereby thou have received power to be able to
believe if thou will. But this is not sufficient unto salvation: because now
after Adams fall free will in spiritual things is wanting, especially in the
conversion of a sinner: and therefore further grace is required whereby a man
may he able to will to believe; No man can come to Christ but (...) (...) is
Ioh. 6. 44.
drawn of the (...). N(...), they are not drawn (...) to believe if they will
(...) of men willing a^^ ma^^ (...) ^^lling. The second power is that (...) by
a man has received power to ^^ll to belee(...) but this is not common to all
men. (...) you (says Christ to his discipl^s) it (...) gi^^^ (...) know the
mysteries of the Kingd^^e of heaven but Mat. 1^. 15.
not so (...) sho(...), because the Father has ^idd^ them from the wise.
Again: Therefore could they not beleaue, because Isa(...) foretold this. Ioh.
32. 39.
Furthermore, if this power were common to all and to each person, faith were
common to all. For the will and the deed sloweth from one and the self same
grace. Phil. (...). 13. It is God who works (...) yo^ the will and the deed,
even of (...) good Preposition.
pleasure. John (...). Wh^s^^uer has heard and learned of the f^ther, (...)
unto (...).
Christ. But whosoever has power to will to believe has heard and learned, as
being drawn of God: therefore whosoever has power to will to believe, comes
unto Christ. Well says Ausien: It follows not that he which can come, does
De^at. (...) great. (...). Pelag. c. 5.
come, unless he both will (...) (...) do^ i^ (...) every one that has
learned of the father has not only power to come, bu^ also he does (...) where
now there is and possibili(...), profect(...), and (...) affectus, and effectus
est. So it appears that to will to believe and actually to believe are most
nearly conjoined: yea seriously to will to believe, is i^ very deed to
believe. The publican^ and ha(...)ts and those which are held captive at the
devils will do repent and are converted: and therefore they do not only
receive power if they will, but of ^illers and st^bbor^e r^pugners they are
made actually willing.

Thirdly, there are and have been many nations, which have had no knowledge of
the faith, or which have not kept it, and without this knowledge there is not
any saving grace. Answer is wont to be made, that man receiving natural light
is not to be excused for the want of supernatural knowledge: because if he
would do by Gods assistance that which liech in him, God would enlighten him
with supernatural grace. For thus the sch^olemen do usually speak; Although
no man is able by Greg^^d Va^.
the ministry of men to know the nature of faith of ^e never heard any thing of
it; yet he may by Gods help, if he live morally according to Gods law so much
as in him lies to do. For then God will succor him either by himself or by
some other, to wi^, either man or Angel by propounding of faith unto him. For
as in natural things, so in supernatural God does minister grace when man is
not wanting to himself. I answer, that this is false. For if grace be given
to him which does that which lies in him to do by the strength of nature, it
is given either by merit, or promise. Not by merit, because there is no merit
before faith; and we do nothing acceptable unto God before we have faith.
Augustine: Thou bring in a kind of men, which can please God without the
f(...)th of Christ, by the law of nature. This is Cont. Jul.
the cause why the Christian Church does especially detest you. And it is not
given by promise, because there is no promise or divine law to be found in the
scriptures, that grace should by and by be given unto him that does that which
lies in him to do. It is also false to say, that God does minister all things
that make for the felicity of nature or this present life. For some are borne
lepr^us, blind, foolish, very poor, unmeet for this temporary felicity;
neither do they ever attain unto it. This opinion also is against experience:
because many die in their infancy, and many are foolish and mad all their life
long, upon whom we cannot say that this vu(...) fall grace is bestowed (...)
also co^^rary to most plain places of (...) ture. Salvation is not in him that
wills (...) in him that runs, but in God that s^^weth mercy. And, he has
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. It is g(...) uen to the
disciples to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not
given: Mat. ^3. (...).
The wind blows not in all, but where it Ioh. 3. 8.
lists: The son does not reveal the father Ioh. 6.
unto all, but to whom he will. All do not believe, but those which are drawn
and predestined Acts 13. 49.
unto life: All do not hear, but those to whom ears are given for to hear.
Furthermore it is some impayring of effectual and Christian grace, so to place
it in man's power, that he may, if he will, receive it: and that he may also,
if he will not, refuse and despise it: and to say that God has given unto men
no other grace, then that against which the flesh or perverse will may prevail
in all men, and against which it does prevail indeed in the greatest part of
mankind, because God will not restrain it. To conclude, let us also hear the
restimonies of the fathers. The author of the calling of the Gentiles says
thus: If so be that the grace of the sa^er do pass by some (as we see it
does) it is to be referred to the hidden judgments of divine justice.
Augustine: Nothing delivers us from this wrath whereby we are all under
sin, saving the grace of Lib. de p^^. ^erit. c. 21.
God by Jesus Christ. Why this grace comes to that infant, and not unto this,
the cause may be unknown, but not unjust. Again: It was by divine
dispensation that Pharaoh did not tractably consent, but obstinately resist:
because that there was not only In Ex^d. qu^st. 18.
a just punishment, but a just punishment evidently prepared for such a heart,
whereby those which fear God may be corrected. Again: The judgments are
unsearchable, wherefore of two wicked men being of years Lib. de hon. ^ers.
cap. 8.
aged one should be called so, as that he should follow the caller, and the
other should either not be called at all, or not called so as that he should
follow him that calls him. And again: He gives to who^ he will, because he is
merciful: Cap. 12.
which though he should not give, yet he is just. Again, he does not give to
the to whom he will not, that he might make known the riches of his glory
upon the vessels of mercy: for by giving unto some, wh^ deserve nor, he will
have it to be his free, and by this also, his true grace and fa(...)r. Again:
Whosoever are set apart from original Ibid. cap. 7.
damnation through the boun^^e of Gods grace, it is no doubs, but that it shall
he procured for them to hear the Gospel, and to believe when they hear it.
Again: We know that Gods grace is not given unto all men. Epist. ad Uital.
107. Lib. de spirit. li^. c. 34.
And again: Why one man is so exhorted that he is persuaded, and why it is not
so with another; O the depth of the riches! Thomas: As he does not open the
eres of all that C^n^. gent. lib. 3. c. 161.
are blind, nor cure all that are crazie: that in those his power might
appear, and that in the other the order of nature might he preserved: even so
he does not by his help prevent all that ^inder grace, but some in whom he
wills that his mercy should (...)* so also that the order of justice should
be manifested in others. Isidore: Spiritual grace Sent. lib. 2. cap. 5. and 6.
is not distributed to all, but is only given to the elect. Again: It is given
to him, because he is evil that would be good: another neither wills,
neither is it given him that he might be good. Cameracensis: Although God be an
universal agent over all, so as that In lib. sent. 1 q. 12. art. 2.
he gives unto all some gifts of grace, as being, life, knowledge, etc. yet he
gives some gifts of special grace unto one, which he gives not to another,
as namely faith, and the grace which makes us gracious and such like which are
the effects of predestination. Finally Augustine and almost all the Scholemen
make two kinds of infidelity, the one negative in those which never heard the
Gospel: the other privative in those that refuse and contemn the message,
which they have heard of Christ. And it is to be noted that by this distinction
they do consesse that God has not vouchsafed so much as an outward calling to
every man.

Object. I. The promise of the seed of the woman is made in Adam to all and to
every man, Answer. It is made to Adam's posterirle, indefinitely, not
universally. When salvation is promised to all men, all De vocat. gent.
statuit. lib. 1. cap. 3.
men are named for a part of men. The heads of the nations Cain, Cham, Esan,
etc. knew the promised Messiah, but those which came after knew him not,
neither had they the means how to know him. So says Isaias: Me have they not
known, of me have Jsai. 52. 66.
they not heard. The nations also next adjoining to the Jews peradventure
heard something and had Proselytes, but the nations a fat off seated in the
uttermost parts of the earth had no affairs with the Jews, and no Proselytes.
And therefore it is false which some affirm; to wit, that the choosing of the
people of Israel was only a kind of greater courtesy showed to this nation, or
a more gentle entreating of it, and no peculiar and diverse favor, whereby he
showed himself to be their father and redeemer only. And to make or maintain
a hidden and invisible Church among the Gentiles before the coming of Christ,
is altogether to contend against y^ word. God is only known in Judah. The
Israelites only are called my Psalm. 76.
People in Hosea: And they only were Hos. 1.
Christ's sheepfold: because Christ when he Ephesians. 2. 14. Job. 10. 16.
came made one sheepfold of the Jews and Gentiles.

Object. II. There is infolded in Gods providence that care of God touching all
those things which concern the blessedness of man. But the Gentiles knew this
providence of God, and that his goodness was so great, that he would pass by
nothing which might make for the happiness and salvation of man. Therefore the
Gentiles did after a sort, obscurely and by an infolded knowledge know the
doctrine concerning the redemption of mankind. Answer: This faith of things
unknown is a ^^cere siction. For faith of the own nature is a certain
knowledge. Moreover, although the general do include in it self the species
or kinds, and the whole his members, yet he which knows the general and the
whole, does not by and by know all the kinds and parts thereof. The mind may so
know the general, that yet for all that it may in the mean time be ignorant
of the special kinds thereof. We must therefore beware of the Schoolemens
opinion, who say that salvation was given before Christ's coming, for the
implicit or infolded faith concerning the redeemer in general, namely when
men did believe that there is a God, and that he is a rewarder and the giver
of all gifts which concern the good either of soul or body, especially the
remedy of sin: But, this is nothing else, then to imagine a certain saving
faith and Church, which has no word of God at all either written or any other
way revealed. Furthermore, this is to accuse Paul of falsehood who teaches the
1. Cor. 1. 21.
contrary in these words. Seeing the world by wised^me know not God in the
wisdom of God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them
that believe. It is also most certain that we ought to know Christ the
redeemer in special. This is Job. 17. 3.
life eternal that they know thee to be the only very God and whom thou have
sent, Jesus Christ. The same affirm the ancient fathers. Ireneus: They being
ignorant of that Lib. de haeres. 3. c. 21.
Emmanuel who is borne of the Virgin, are deprived of his gift, which is life
eternal. Hietome: We cannot be his sons before, Jn Ephesians. 1,
unless we receive the faith and understanding of his son Jesus Christ.
Augustine says, that those which were just in old time, whatsoever they were,
were delivered only by that faith, whereby we are delivered; to wit, by the
faith of Christ's incarnation. Again: What truth soever thou sa^^t was in
those which Lib. 2. cont. 2. epist. Pel. cap. 21.
were just in old time, the faith only of the mediator saves them, who shed
his blood for the forgiveness of sins.

Object. III. Proposition.
The power of God is known unto the Gentiles. Romans 1. A^^i^mptio
Christ is the power of God. Conclusion
Therefore Christ is known to the Gentiles. Answer: I distinguish of the
proposition. The power of God is either the power of creation or of redemption:
The power of God in the creation was known unto the Gentiles: but not the
power of God in the redemption, which is Christ himself, the preaching of whom
is foolishness unto the world.

Object. IIII. The fathers say that saving grace is universal. First I
answer, that the sayings of the fathers are to be understood of the grace of
the last time, which is common to all men and nations. Ireneus. The Lord has
reconciled us in the De haeres. lib. 5. cap. 17
last times by his incarnation, being made a mediator between God and man,
reconciling the father unto all: -- giving unto us that conversion which is to
our Creator. Origin says: God has a greater care to save Hom. 20 in Number.
men, then the devil has to destroy them. -- The only begotten, the son of
God himself (I say) is present with us, he defends, keeps, and draws us
unto himself: -- for he says in another place, When I shall be lifted up I
will draw all things unto me. Chrysostom: Grace is shed abroad over all: it
passes by and disdayneth neither Jew, nor Grecian, nor Barbarian, nor
Soythian, it is alike affected unto all, it shows it self gentle unto all,
it calls all with equal honor; and lee those, who neglect the help of
grace, ascribe this their blindness unto themselves. For considering that a
way to enter in lies open unto al, and is forbidden to none, some desperately
wicked do refuse to enter, through their own corruption. Cyrill says: He is
the true Lib. 1. in Job. cap. 15.
light, and sends forth his brightness unto all: but (as Paul says) the God
of this world has blinded the minds of unfaithful men, that the light of Gods
knowledge may not shine in them. Ambrose: The earth is full of Sermon. 8. in
Psalm. 1 18.
the mercy of God, because pardon of sins is given unto all. The mystical
son of righteousness is risen unto all, is come unto all, has suffered for
all, and has risen again for all. And if any believe not in Christ he
depriues himself of this general benefit. -- He shuts out the grace of
common light from himself. Gregory says: The ^edioine which In Job. l. 35.
cap. 14.
is from God meets us in every place; because he has both given unto man
commandments not to sin, and has also given remedies to him that sins,
lest he should despair. T^eodulus Presbyter. He has said that both Jews
and Gentiles should be Comment, in Romans cap. 3.
partakers of grace, yet not all, but those that believe: and because grace is
common to all, not without cause.

Secondly, they speak of natural vocation, Answer. 2.
or of the grace of nature consisting in the relics of natural light and
understanding, in the common gifts of virtues and outward blessings, which are
testimonies of Gods providence and goodness. The Author of the calling of the
Gentiles: Lib. 2. c. 14.
For this cause verily the nations may be excused, which being aliants from
the common wealth of Israel, void of hope, and without God in this world, have
perished under the darkness of ignorance, because this abundance of grace,
which does now water the whole world, did not slow so pentifully before; For
there is evermore showed unto all men a certain measure of doctrine from
Chrysosto^ says, that the preserving in the Atke is superna gratia, grace from
above.
above, which albeit it proceed from a more sparing and hidden grace, yet it
is sufficient (in the Lords judgment) for a For the outward reformat^^ of the
life. Horn. 25. in Genesis Lib. 2. 6. 4.
remedy unto some, and a witness unto all. Again: who may not easily perceive
that he never denied his divine goodness to the posterity of this brother
slayer, if he consider how profitable so long patience of God, such plentiful
store of temporal blessings, and such an universal increase of multiplied
fruitfulness might have been unto them? which benefits, although they wrought
^o cure and emendment in those whose hearts were hardened, ^et they prove that
their apostasy was not caused by God. Again: In the farthest parts of the
world there be some nations, unto which the light of saving Lib. 2. cap. (...).
grace has not as yet dawned: -- unto whom that paercell of general assistance
is not denied, which is always from above granted unto ad men: Although the
nature of man has received so sharp a wound that it is not possible for any
man to come to the knowledge of God by the help of his own voluntary
contemplation, unless the true light dispell the darkness of the heart, which
the tust and good God in his unsearchable judgment has not so shed abroad in
times past, as he does in these last days.

Thirdly, the fathers speak of the universal aptness, whereby man's will
being by Gods ordinary dispensation prevented and helped by the holy Ghost,
may believe and be converted: which notwithstanding, a stone, stock, or beast
cannot. Augustine: Apossibilitie to have faith Depraed. (...). 5
is given of nature. Again he says, that man's nature is capable of
justification by the grace of the holy spirit. Again: Men may Con^. ^ul. l. 2
keep Gods commandments and believe in God if they will; because that light
enlighteneth every man which comes into this world. Prosper: To be able to
have faith is De genesis contra Manich. lib. 1. cap. 3.
the nature of men; but to have faith, is the grace of the faithful.
Augustine: This difference there is betwixt wicked men and the devils, that men
though they be exceedingly Ad art. Sibi falso imp. 6.
wicked, may be reconciled, if God will show mercy; but there is no
conversion reserved for the devils.

Now as concerning Christian grace, whereby a will to be converted, and to
believe actually in Christ is given unto men, The fathers have not so much as
dreamed, that it is common unto all, and every one: which notwithstanding some
are not For they say that God has given every ^a^ without exception power to
believe if he will himself.
now afraid to affirm in their writings.

Error 7.
This platform teaches that Gods foreknowledge of our faith and iusidelitie
is the rule of predestination; which is utterly false. For first of all, the
very will is a rule unto it self, and the divine counsels. Ephesians. 1. 5. 11. We
were predest^^ated according to his purpose, who works all things after the
counsel of his own ^^ll. Secondly, Gods election is the rule of faith that is
to be give or not given. Romans 17. 5. A resoruation is made according to the
election of grace. Thirdly, the foreknowledge of faith and infidelity does not
extend it self so far as predestination, which belongs unto all men
whatsoever, many of whom notwithstanding never so much as heard of Christ: now
these Aug. de cor. and great. c. 10 and 12.
cannot have faith not contempt of the Gospel.
privative infidelity, but only a negative. The same I say of those which die
in their infancy being within the cou^nant, who we believe are saved by the
^^nour of the same covenant: who for all that are neither elected for says,
nor according to faith, which they as yet had not. But if the foreseeing of
faith were the rule or square of election or reprobation, the thing foreseen
should belong to all men without exception; for the rule must not be (...)ter
than that which is ruled by it. Fourthly, foreseen faith is the effect of
election, therefore it it is not the rule of it. Ephesians 1. 5. Who has
predestined us unto Adoption by Christ: and therefore also to faith, which
receives the benefit of adoption. Augustine: Let us therefore (says he)
vnderstand' that ^ib. de praed. c. 17. c. 5. * God, will it the first rule in
contingents. Cling. in loc. com. l. 1. c. 6. And Francis Maronis says, that
Gods will is the principal in continge^ts, and that it is ruled and directed
of none. Lib. 1. ais^. 4^. q. (...). Lib. (...). did. 4^
calling whereby they are chosen* who are choson not because they did believe,
but that they should believe: for if they were for that cause chosen because
they did believe, they themselves verily had chosen him before by believing in
him, that they might deserne to be chosen. Again: Lest any man should say, My
faith or some such like thing, does distinguish me from other men, the teacher
of the Gentiles meeting with such conceits asks, What thou have that thouhast
not received, and of whom but of him, who distinguishes thee from him, to who^
he has not given that which he has given to thee. Lumb. God has elected
those whom it pleased him to elect of his own free merc^^, not because they
were to be believers, but that they should be believers. Again: Grace is the
effect of predestination. Fifthly, if God did elect according In epist. (...)
Romans cap. 8.
to foreseen faith, tell me why he did foresee faith in one man rather then in
another, tell me I say? for here whether thou will or no, thou must have
recourse to the mere will of God. For God does foresee nothing which is good
in any, besides that which he himself of his pleasure will first make. And
what is the cause why he foreseeth faith in one man rather than in another? but
only because it is his will to give one man faith, and not an other. Lastly,
the rule is uncertain, for faith, as appears by this platform, may be
utterly lost: and therefore the thing ruled, to wit, predestination is made
uncertain. This a certain Author plainly confesses in his exposition of the
epistle to the Romans: where he teaches unadvisedly that Gods decree may be
changed, and that election and reprobation have recourse one to another:
because (as he says) they depend upon the condition of faith and infidelity.

Furthermore, this platform teaches that true and saving faith, may perish
and Error (...).
be lost either wholly or for ever: which notwithstanding is not true. Reason.
1. Matthew. 16. 18. Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it. Here three questions must (...).
be asked: what the rock is? what is meant by building on the rock? and what
is that which is promised to those which are built upon it? The rock is either
faith it self, or Christ apprehended by faith. Chrysostom: Upon this rock:
that is (says he) upon the faith of confession. Again: He sets Homil. in
Matthew. 55. and Psalm. 32.
our feet upon the rock, that is, upon faith: for faith in Christ^ may well
be said to be that which cannot be broken. Again: Christ being wise has
built his house, that is, In com. imperfect. in Mat. cap. 7.
his Church upon a rock, that is, upon the fortitude of faith, or a strong
faith. Now if faith be a rock, it remains constant and immovable. To be
built upon the rock, is to perceive the doctrine of the Gospel, to embrace
Christ our Savior with a true faith, and to cleave fast to him with the heart.
For the Cori^thians are said to be Paul's building, because he brought them to
the faith. And the Ephesians are said to be built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets; because Paul came and preached unto them the Gospel of
peace. The certainty and firmness of the doctrine of the Gospel may also be
called a Rock. Epiphanius: They shall not prevail against the rock, that is
Lib. haer. 74.
to say, against the truth. Hilarie: This is thy blessed rock of faith, which
Peter has De Trin. l. 3
confessed with his mouth. Augustine: Upon this rock which thou have
confessed, I will build my Church. Now no man can be built upon the confession
and upon the truth, but by faith. Hence I do conclude thus: Those that are
built upon the rock cannot fall away utterly: but those which truly believe
are built upon the rock: therefore those which t^uly believe, do not utterly
and wholly fall away. Thirdly, the promise made to them that are built upon
the rock is, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against them. From
hence it follows necessarily, that the Devils can but make a slorish, and
show their strength and power against the faith, and that they (...).
shall never be able to overcome and conquer. Let us here also weigh the
judgments of the fathers. Cyprian: Lord to whom shall we go: -- signifying
that the Epist. 1. 3.
Church, which believes in Christ, and which keeps that which it has once
known, does at no time altogether depart from him, and that they are the
Church who do abide in Gods house. But that they are not of God the fathers
planting, whom we do see to be void of the stedfastnes, and massy soundnes of
corn, and like to chafe vanned or blown about with the wind of the winnowing
enemi^: of whom also John speaks in his 1. Epistle saying, They went out from
us, but they were not (...). Ioh. 2. 19.
of us: for if they had bin of us, they had surely remained with us. Augustine:
Love which may be lost was never true. Again: To believe Dec^. de poe^it. d.
2. c. 2. Tract. 116. (...) Ioh.
truly, is to believe constantly, steadfastly, valiantly, and firmly, so as
that thou may not now return unto thine and forsake Christ. Again: Those
which are truly saints being predestined to reign with God De cor. and
great. c. 12.
by his grace, have not only given them now a power to pers^^ere if they will,
but perseuera^ce (...) self. Again: He which makes men good, ^aketh them to
persevere in that which is good. And again: The Church loses none on the
earth but those which are wicked, Epist. 163.
and admits none into heaven but those that are good. Again: As the a^ke
was Quaest. 52. ad O^osium.
built of foure-square timber, so the Church is builte of saints; for that
which is foure-square will stand steady on which side soever you set it: And
the saints continue steadfast in every temptation. Chrysostom: This is the
property of faith, that howsoever Hom. 1 in 2. Tim. 1.
things may fall out contrary to the promises, yet it never falls away
utterly, and is Penitus, omnino.
never wholly confounded. Again: Let us keep faith which is a firm and sure
rock, for neither the floods, nor the winds can do us any hurt, though they
drive hard against us, because we stand stedf^st upon a rock: so also if in
this life we will choose that true foundation, we shall abide without any
detriment or loss. Again: Thou can not overcome Hom. de expuls. Chrysostom.
one faithful man: O Devil, thou know not what the Martyr have done unto
thee, -- the flesh often faints in the torments, and the strength of faith
fails not. Hence it is that in ye same place he speaks after this sort: If
thou make war with man, thou shall, it may be, overcome, or perhaps thou
shall be overcome: but no might can overcome the Church. Furthermore: The
Church Hom. 25. in Genesis
is far stronger than the earth, yea and stronger than heaven. Again: Faith
in God In 7. cap. Ioh
is a certain secure anchor. Gregory: Because the light of the elect is not
extinguished by temptation, we do not say there is a night made but an
evening; namely because temptation does oftentimes hide the light of
righteousness in the hearts of the elect, but it does not put it quite out: it
makes it as it were twinkle and look wanne, but it does not extinguish it.
Angelome: The observation of Gods commandments, being established In lib. 3.
Reg. cap. 7.
in the hearts of the elect by faith, hope, and love of that heavenly
recompense, can by no let of temporal things be dissolved. Again: The hearts
of the elect are compared Ibid. cap. 5.
to a foure-square figure, which have learned so to remain in the strength of
faith, that they cannot be removed from the certainty of their estate, by any
repugnancie of those things they meet with, no not by death it self. Andreas:
Those are found to be abortiue Epise. Capp. in Apoc. com. cap. 32.
or untimely borne children, who have departed from the true light, which is
Christ. Thomas: If we by the revelation of our heavenly ^atena in 16. Mat. ex
Orig.
father shall then confess, namely when our conversation is in the heavens,
that Jesus Christ is the son of the living God, and if it shall be said unto
us, Thou art Peter, -- for every one that follows Christ, is a rock; but he,
against whom the gates of hell prevail, is neither to be termed the rock
whereon Christ does build his Church, neither the Church, nor a part of the
Church which Christ builds upon the rock. And again: Although thou must be
lifted a little, yet thou have the In L^c. 22. (...) Theoph.
seed of faith hidden in thee: though the leaves be blown down with the
temptors wind, yet the root is fresh.

Second reason: Matthew. 6. 13. Lead us not into temptation, etc. that is, do
not utterly forsake us and deliver us up to Satan. Augustine: God leads a man
into De temp. sermon. 36.
temptation, when he suffers him to be tempted, that he may try him, and not
destroy him --: And he delivers from evil, when he suffers us not to be
tempted beyond our power. Gregory: The grace of the holy (...) Ioh. l. 39.
Ghost qualifies the temptations of the adversary by dispensation, that those
which may be may but scorch with their heat, and not burn up with their fire.
Hence I thus reason: Whatsoever we ask according to Gods will, it shall be
given us: but we ask according to Gods will, that we may not be utterly
forsaken in temptation: for our Advocate taught us so to pray. Therefore that
we be not utterly forsaken in temptation, shall be given of God. Now whom God
does not utterly forsake, he does not utterly fall away. And this Christ takes
for granted in the elect: Matthew. 24. verse. 24. So as that, if it were possible,
they should deceive the very elect.

Third reason: If there be a total or utter falling away from a true faith,
then is there also required a second ingrasting into Christ, and consequently a
seal of the second ingrafting, baptizing anew, that is to say, a^abaptisme:
for so often as we are borne again, we are to be baptized. This is Augustines
ground: As the Tract. in Ioh. 11. c. 1^
carnal generation is one, neither can a man enter into the womb again: even
so is spiritual regeneration: for we are once borne, and we are also once
borne again. Therefore also it is requisite, that the sacrament of
regeneration be once received. If it chance to fall out by sin, that some
are weakened who are regenerated, they have need of cure by repentance, and
not by baptism. But those that do utterly or wholly fall away from faith and
grace, are the second time to be ingrafted into Christ: and consequently, they
are not once regenerated but again: and therefore they are oftener than once to
be baptized.

Fourth reason: 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Whosoever is borne of God commits not sin,
because his seed remains in him. We must here mark that he says his seed
remains in him, that is to say, that it does not depart nor vanish away; And
this seed is the very word of God, which remains in us by says, and does
not remain, says being utterly lost. This seed also is immortal, because it
will never perish, if it be truly sown in our hearts.

A fist reason is taken out of the sixth to the Romans, Proposition.
If Christ having once died cannot die any more, then we which are his members
being dead together with him, shall not die any more in sin. Assumptio^.
But Christ having once died cannot die any more. Conclusion
Therefore we which are his members shall not die any more in sin. The
proposition is in the eight verse: and has a manifest ground. For by the
virtue of the mystical communion, which is had with Christ by faith, his
spiritual life, which cannot perish, flowing into his members, makes them in
like manner that they die no more in sin. The Assumption is in the 9. and 10.
verse; the conclusion in the eleventh. Moreover, those which are the members of
Christ's body, shall grow up unto a perfect man: Ephesians: 4. 12. 13. and 1. Ioh. 2.
29. but all those which have a true faith, are members of Christ's body,
therefore those which have a true saving faith shall grow up unto a perfect
man: and therefore those which do truly believe shall not perish but obtain
salvation.

For the better understanding of this doctrine, two things must be sought for;
first, whence it is that faith perishes not? Answer: If we consider faith by
it self, that is, in the own nature, it may perish and be lost; but if we
consider the confirming grace, which God has promised to them that bleeue,
saving faith does not perish. It is by reason of the second grace freely
promised, that the first grace does not perish. To you it is given for Christ,
Phil. 1. 39.
that ye should not only believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. One of
these (says Augustine) belongs unto the beginning, the other to the end: but
both are Gods gift, because both are given. A Christian man's beginning is to
believe in Christ, and the best end he can make is to suffer for Christ. Ier.
32. 40. I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will never depart
from them, to do them good (lo the everlasting forgiveness of sins) and I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me (behold
the perseverance of faith, and regeneration that shall never be lost) Phil. 1,
6. He that has begun this good work in you will finish it unto the end.

Secondly, it may be demanded how far^e forth the faithful lose grace and
the holy spirit? Answer: Distinguish the saithfull, and disti^^^ish grace:
There be four sorts of believers; The first are they which hear the word and
understand it. The second are they which do hear, understand, and for a time
approve it. The third, are those who do hear, understand, approne and bring
forth some fruits; The fourth are such as do hear, understand, approve, bring
forth some fruits, and lay hold upon Christ the redeemer by the hand of a
li^ely faith unto salvation. These are true be^eeuers and cannot utterly
either fall away from God, or perish: howsoever all other besides these, both
may, and use to fall away and perish. Furthermore, (...) is either the first,
or second. The first, is the free favor of God who embraces those that are
his being in Christ unto everlasting life. From this grace the faithful are
said to fall after this fashion. As soon as they have committed some heinous
sin against the law of God, they do grievously offend him: God being
offended changes the effects of grace, into ye effects of a certain hatred,
not against the faithful themselves, but against their sins; and this both
within, and without. Within, when he makes them to feel an accusing
conscience, and witnessing that God is displeased, and that they are made
guilty of death by their sin. Without, when they taste of Gods anger against
them in the outward chastiseme^^s of the body. And thus far they fall from his
^^herly love, and are become the enemies of God after a sort: I say, A^^er a
sort, because God does not lay down his fatherly affection: and does not
alter his purpose of Adoption and eternal life. Although the faithful do fall
away, so much as (...)h in them, yet God remains a father in Christ; and they
also as touching right unto eternal life, remain sons. Ioh. 10. 28. They
shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. Here some do
say, that the sheep cannot be plucked out, but yet they may of their own
accore s(...)cke away; but without reason, for the sheep which reuolteth is
plucked away by the devil, when it does revolt. And as he which continues in
Christ's word is verily his disciple: so he that does not fall away, but abides
a sheep, is verily a sheep. Romans 8. 35. Who shall separate us from the love
of Christ? Romans 10. 29. The gifts and calling of God are ((...)) without
repentance. 2. Tim. 2. 19. The foundation of God remains sure, and has this
seal, the Lord knows who are his,

Second grace is either imputed or inherent: imputed is in justification, a
part whereof is remission of sins. And this remains and shall foy ever
remain sure as touching sins passed. That saying of the Schoolmen is most
true: Sins once forgiven continue so always. But when that any faithful man
shall fall grievously, the pardon of that fall is granted in Gods decree;
notwithstanding no pardon is actually given of God, nor received of man until
he do repent: yea if he should never repent (which notwithstanding is
impossible) he should be damned as being guilty of eternal death by this
offense. For there is no pardon of any new sin, without a new act of faith
and repentance.

Inherent grace, is either faith, or the gift which follows faith; In saving
faith we must consider, the act, and the habit. The act of faith is the very
action of (...).
apprehending, or an unfeigned apprehension of Christ. Now this faith may be
lost according to some act: The very habit also or power of faith, may in it
self be lost; but by reason of confirming grace faith does not perish as
touching the essence thereof, but it is lesned and abated according to some
degree. And hence it follows that our communion with Christ may be
diminished, but that our union cannot be dissolved. There remained in David
after his fall, the seed of true faith and regeneration: as appears by his
words, Psalm. 51. 11. Take not thy holy spirit from me. It is also the judgment
of the Greg. lib. 25 in lob. and in Eleb. Homil. 15. Tertull. lib. de Persec.
Chrysoft. hom. 2^. in Math.
ancient fathers, that the root of faith in Peter's fall was not taken away
and abolished, but only moved, and that it did as it were wax dry, that it
was only shaken and trodden on, and that it did not utterly vanish. Here also
we are to give ear a while to Gratian, who consents with us, and to this
purpose has gathered many testimonies together out of the fathers. Has love
(says he) taken root? be secure: no evil can proceed. Again: Love does
utterly Decret. 2. pars. c. 33. q. 3. sine de poenit. d. 2.
estrange the mind, wherein it has once taken possession, from the delights
of the world. Again: Love is joined -- to God and united inseparably; and is
always inui^cible in all. Again: Love is an inu^sible v^ction; which sta^ds
as it were in stead of a root to him, in whom s^^uer it shall be, which cannot
wither though the s(...)e do parch: whatsoever is r(...)d is nourished with
the heat of the (...) and does not w^rher. Again: He looks back after the
plough, who after that he has begun to do good works, returns to euil^,
which he did forsake. Which in no wise befalls to the elect. Again: All the
elect do so go forward unto good things, that they do not return to the
committing of evil. And again: The fitting and moving of the spirit may be
thus understood. For as touching some virtues it does always abide in the
hearts of the Saints: but according unto other it comes as that which will
return; and ^eturnes, as purposing to come. For as c(...)ning faith, hope, and
charity, and other graces, without which it is not possible to come to that
heavenly country, (as namely, humility, Chastity, justice, and mercy) it
never forsakes their hearts that are upright. But as touching the virtue of
prophecy, the eloquence of doctrine, and working of miracles, it is sometimes
present with the elect, and sometimes it withdrawes it self.

The Schoolmen allege Augustine to the contrary opinion, where he says, De
cor. and great. cap. 6. and 8.
That doubtless if the man which is renewed and justified do fall back by
his own will unto an evil life, he cannot say I have not received; because he
has by his own free will unto evil, lost the grace of God which he did
receive. And again: That God does not give the gift of perseverance unto some
of his Cap 9.
children whom he did regenerate in Christ, and to whom he gave faith, hope,
and love. But he speaks not these things of those which are indeed the
sons of the promise, but of those which are so called of us, and which bear
the name and profession of sons. Furthermore, he speaks of such as have
faith and love in opinion and imagination, and truly also as (...).
touching outward practice ^or Augustine in the same place has so expounded
his meaning: We must believe that some of the Cap. 13.
sons of perdition --: do He speaks of the justice of life, and not of the
inward righteousness of the heart. Tract. 5. in Job. epist.
begin to live, and for a time faithfully and justly in the faith that works
by love, and afterward fall --. Thirdly, he speaks of faith and love as they
are imperfect virtues, and as it were lately sprung up: and not as they are
sound, perfect, and true, to wit, as touching the truth of their essence. So
Augustine: Love is sprung up within thee, but it is not yet persi^ed: do not
despair, but nourish it lest it be sti^^ed. And Gratian: This love which was
an herb in Peter before his denial Ibid. cap. 24
and which springs up in every one, is lost and repaired, before it be
strengthened and made perfect. And indeed for the manifesting of the truth of
faith and love there is required perseverance, by which it might be known
that these and such like virtues have taken deep root in the heart, and are
grounded upon an earnest and constant affection, that they may never be
overcome of temptations.

Object. I. Sin and the grace of the holy spirit cannot stand together. Ans.
This is true of the sin that ra^gneth, or which is committed with full
consent of will, but the regenerate do not sin with a whole or full will. And
I lay this foundation of this our judgment. In tentation we must consider two
things, the beginning or ground, and the degrees. The ground is our own
concupiscence, that is, our inbred corruption. The subject thereof is the whole
man, but especially the faculties of man's soul, the mind, will, and
affections. And in these it does immediately exist and reign alone before a
sinner be converted. And a man being not regenerated, be he what he will be,
he is flesh every jot of him. But after that a man is regenerated, the flesh is
no more alone, or severed by it self, but mixed with the spirit, and the
spirit with the flesh: although both these qualities remain as touching nature
distinct in one subject: as in the twilight the light does not appear alone,
but with darkness, and darkness is not alone but with the light. And the
man that is regenerated is not only flesh, nor only spirit, nor flesh in one
part, and spirit in another, but the whole man is flesh in every part, and the
whole man is spirit in every part. And because those things which are contrary
cannot consist together in the highest degrees, therefore albeit the whole man
be flesh, yet he is not flesh in the highest degree, nor spirit in the highest
degree: but in remiss and lower degrees, partly flesh, and partly spirit: as
lukewarm water is remissely and indifferently cold thoroughout, and
remissely also hot thoroughout. Hence it follows that concupiscence may exist
and be with the grace of the holy spirit, so that it bear not rule. The
degrees of tentation are, as James teaches, in number sine. Iam. cap. 1. 14.
15. (...).


The fi(...), Abstraction or drawing away, when the mind receives a thought
cast into it about the committing of evil, and by this means suffers herself
to be drawn away from her duty to other things.

The second is inescation or entising, when the mind conceiueth a morose (...).
thought for the committing of sin together with a certain delectation of
the affection: as when fishes delight themselves with the bait hanging upon the
hook. Thus far all Divines think a regenerate man may come; and it is most
certain. For hence it is that Paul complains that he was held captive of
Romans 7. 23.
sin.

The third degree is conception, namely (...).
when there is a will, consent and a purpose to commit evil. And when
corruption does come thus far, there be some that say that all repentance
and faith is driven out and gone: but not truly. There is indeed in the
unregenerate in whom sin reigns, a full consent: but in the regenerate, in
whom the flesh and the spirit are two contrary foundations of actions, the
consent is more remiss and imperfect: for they do so will, as that they nill,
and so nill as that they will. As Paul has taught by his own example.

The fourth degree is birth of sin, (...).
when after consent an evil is actually committed. And in this act the same
man being regenerate, does at the same instant both sin and not sin. He
sins only according unto the flesh: and in that part, wherein he is
renewed, he does not sin, but before and after the fact detesteth his sin.
And as when the spirit prevails, the action is not free from all pollution of
the flesh: so when the flesh prevails the action is not so corrupt in the
regenerate, as it is in those, in whom sin reigns. Nevertheless I confess
that in every grievous fall the flesh does get the masterie, and that the gift
of true faith, after the receipt of the wound, lies flat and in a swoone for a
time, but that it is not for all that abolished and quite put out.

The last degree is perfection, namely (...).
when sin being perfited and ripened by often iteration and custom, grows
as it were unto a habit. So says Gregory: Sin always is finished in a work
by those same Moral lib. 4 cap. 27.
four ways. For first the sin is committed closely after that it is
discovered in the sight of men without blushing at the fault: then it is
brought into a custom. And at the last either it is nourished with the deceit
of vain hope, or with the obstinacy of wretched despair. And Isidore: Action
brings forth custom, and custom necessity: And so a man being fettered
with these linkes, lies fast bound as it were with a chain of vices. This
last degree befalls not the regenerate, and if it did, says and the holy spirit
should be shaken out and banished.

Object. II. Adam when he was void of corruption sell wholly away: therefore
much more they, who being borne and regenerated after Adam shall believe. Answ.
The reason is unlike: For we have De eor. and great. c. 11.
(says Augustine) by this grace of God, in the receiving of that which is
good, and in the constant keeping of the same, not only power to do that
which we will, but also will to do that which we can, which Adam wanted. For
one of these was in him, but the other was not. For to receive good he wanted
not grace, because as yet he had not lost it. But to continue in it he wanted
the help of grace, without which he was not able at all to do it: and he
received power if he would, but he had not will answerable to his power, for if
it had been in him he should have perseuered.

Object. III. Proposition.
The member of an harlot cannot be the member of Christ: Assumptio^.
But he which believes truly who is actually a member of Christ, may be the
member of an harlot: Conclusion.
Therefore one that truly believes, may come to be no member of Christ. Ans.
The member of Christ is diversely distinguished: for there is either a true or
an apparent member. An apparent member is that, which is not a member according
to election, nor in it self, but in show only, that is, judged by means of
outward profession to be in the visible Church. And it is like a wooden leg
fastened to the body by art. A true member is either by destination and
appointment, or now actually one. Members by appointment are all those who are
elected, although they be not as yet regenerated or borne. An actual member is
either one that is lively, or half dead. A lively member is that, which is
according to election, and in very deed ingrafted into Christ, and ruled by
his spirit. That is an half dead member, which does indeed belong to Gods
election, and is ingrafted into Christ: but yet being hurt by some grievous
fall, has so much as in it is, lost the grace of the holy spirit. Now I
answer to the Proposition. First, a member of Christ in show may be the m^mber
of an harlot, as a wooden foot, which is indeed the member of some image,
may be an apparent member of a man's body whereto it is fitted by art.
Secondly, a member of Christ by appointment (in Gods decree) may be the member
of an harlot, as Paul Gal. 1. 15.
who was separated from the womb, was for a time a member of Satan persecuting
the Church. Thirdly, he which is a lively and active member of Christ and so
continues, cannot be the member of an harlot: but a member that is crazie and
half dead may be. For howsoever he remains in Christ in respect of
incorporation and the mystical union, yet he is out of him as touching the
force and efficacy of the spirit, which for a time through his own default
he does not perceive, until he do repent. A leg that (...).
is troubled with the pals^e, or receives no nourishment, is a true leg,
because in respect of union it is incorporated into the body, howsoever it
has almost lost all communion and fellowship with the rest of the members.
Neither must this which I say seem strange, that the member of Christ may in
some sort be the member of an harlot: because the conjunction is not of the
same kind. The conjunction with Christ is spiritual, but that which is with
an harlot is corporal.

This platform gives unto every man ^rror 9.
a free will flexible and inclinable to both parts by grace, and teaches that
it is in man's will to apply himself to grace being given, by the help of
universal grace, or to reject the same through the weakness of corrupt nature.
But this is false: for the first universal grace is not effectual, unless it
be confirmed by the second grace following it. As for example: If a man shall
receive power to believe if he will, yet he shall never actually and indeed
believe, except there be also given the help of the other grace, which
brings the former into act. But this second grace is not given to all and
every one. Moreover, this opinion is repugnant to very plain places of
Scripture. Iere. 32. 40. I will make an everlasting covenant with the^, that I
will not turn away from the^ to do them good, and I will put my fear in their
hearts that they shall not depart from me. Again, 1. Cor. 1. 8. 9. God shall
confirm you unto she end blameless: God is faithful by whous ye are called
unto the fellowship of his son Jesus Christ our Lord. It is also contrary to
Christ's speech: Ioh. 6. 45. E^eery man that has heard and has learned of the
Father comes unto me. This grace (says Augustine) which is secretly infused
into Cant. 1. 3.
men's hearts by Gods liberality, is refused of no hard heart. And afterward:
If it had De praed. sanct. cap. 8.
pleased the Father to teach them to come unto Christ, who accounted the word
of the cross foolishnes, without all doubt, they also would have come --: why
does he not teach all? If we shall say, because they will not learn, whom he
does not teach: it will be answered us: and where is that which is said unto
him, Thou O Lord, conuertest and quicknest us. Again: The effect of Gods
mercy cannot be in man's power so, as that he should show Ad Simplic. lib. 1.
q. 2.
mercy to him in vain if man be unwilling, because if he would have mercy on
them, he could call them so, as they should be fitted to move, understand, and
follow. And again: God shows mercy to none in vain, but unto whom he
shows mercy, him he calls so, as he knows to be sitting for him, that
he may not reject him who calls him. Neither do I here respect the
distinction of sufficient and effectual grace: for I acknowledge no grace
sufficient for the conversion of a sinner, which is not effectual, as I have
already said before: because free will is altogether wanting in spiritual
things. We are stark dead in sins, and our sufficiency is wholly from God.
Therefore there is in us beside the want (...).
of original righteousness a three fold impotencie. The first is that,
whereby we are unable to receive or desire supernatural grace offered by God.
The second is that, whereby we are unable to use it lawfully: The third is
that, whereby we are unable to retain and keep it. And therefore there are
certain degrees of grace to be bestowed in the true conversion of a sinner,
in respect of which Augustine makes a fiuefold grace, preventing, De great. and
lib. arb. c. 17
preparing working, coworking, and the gift of perseverance. Preventing grace
is that, whereby God inspireth into Praeueniens.
the mind of the sinner that is to be converted good thoughts, a good purpose,
and a desire of supernatural grace. The means whereby preventing grace is
given, is the voice and preaching of the Gospel, by the which being heard and
thought upon, the holy Ghost does show forth his efficacy and power. For hence
it is that the Gospel is called the ministry of the spirit, 2. Cor. 36. And
that, faith is said to be by hearing, Romans 10. 17. Therefore they, which are
out of the Church do want the preventing grace, unless it be extraordinarily
co^ferred, which yet is very seldom done. Preparing grace is that, Praeparans.
whereby it is given us to consent unto God offering grace, or whereby the mind
and will are prepared, that they may yield assent and obedience to the holy
spirit. For as all supernatural grace in respect of Gods donation, is
altogether from him: even so we obtain our consentment and power to receive
grace conferred no otherwise then by the gift of God. Working grace is that,
whereby we are delivered from the dominion of sin, and Operans.
are renewed in mind, will and affection, having received power to obey God.
Coworking grace is that, whereby God conferreth and perfitteth, the grace of
renewing Cooperans.
being received. And without this grace following, the first is unprofitable.
For when grace is given by God, and received of us by the second grace, we do
not use it lawfully, but by this third grace. Augustine says well: If in so
great weakness of this life the will De cor. and great. cap. 12
renewed should be so left unto the regenerat, that they may remain in Gods
help if they themselves will, and if God should not make them for to will,
among so many and so mighty temptations the will would faint by reason of the
weakness thereof. Man's weakness therefore is relieved, that through the
grace of God there should be will inseparably annexed to the power: and
therefore the will though it be but weak, yet should not for all that faint
and be overcome by adversity. Again: Therefore that we may will he works
without us: but when we will, and so will, that we De great. and lib. a^b. c. 17
^l^e also, he coworketh with us. Yet notwithstanding without him working that
we may will, or coworking when we do will, we have no power to perform the
good works of godliness. Donum per(...).
The gift of perseverance is that, whereby, after that we have received the
grace of renouation, we do also receive a will to persevere and continue
constantly in that good which we can do. Hierome: That suffices me not, which
he has once bestowed. Epist* ^tesiph.
I ask that I may receive, and when I shall receive, I ask again. These five
graces speken of even now, being taken severally and asunder by themselves, are
not sufficient unto salvation (for the preventing grace is nothing available
without the preparing grace, and the working grace without the coworking grace)
yet being joined together they are sufficient. And hence it plainly appears,
that there is not any grace truly sufficient unto the salvation of a sinner
that is stark dead in sins, the which is not also effectual. If so much
strength we^^ given to one, that would lift up a mighty burden, as were
sufficient, that is, so much as did exceed the weight of the thing that is to
be lifted up, out of al doubt motion would follow, it would come up: so if God
do give so much grace, as is sufficient, that is, as would overcome the
hardness of the heart, the corruption thereof could not possibly hinder it
from being converted. Moreover, if these five graces do concur in the
conversion of a sinner, the regenerate person shall not have free will flexible
alike either to good or evil: neither shall it be in our choice to obey or
resist the motion of the spirit. Yea from hence it follows that it
multiplieth grace, and that the will is so effectually ruled by it in those that
are truly converted, as that they follow faith and godliness with an inflexible
and steadfast affection. The spirit promised us of God does not enable us to
walk if we will, but makes us walk indeed. Those which are drawn have not
only power to run if so be that Ezec. 36. 37
they themselves will, but they run indeed after Christ. He which is borne of
God (...). Ioh. 3. (...).
sins (...): yea he cannot sin. Furthermore, perseverance in faith does
wholly depend upon Gods will, as these words of Paul do show: I have reserved
unto my self seven thousand men, which Romans 11. 4.
have not bowed the knee unto Baal: And those which do truly believe, have
received of God both power to persevere in grace, if they will, and also will
to do that which they have power to do. So Augustine: There is in us by this
grace of God (which is by Christ) in receiving of good, and in the constant
keeping of the same not only power to do that which we will, but will to do
that which we have power to do. Therefore those that do truly believe cannot
but persevere.

Object. I. Isaiah 5. 3. O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and ye men of I^dah, judge
between me and my vineyard: what could I have done any more unto my vineyard
that I have not done unto it? Why have I looked that it should bring forth
grapes, and it brings forth wild grapes? These Jews therefore had the help
of God which was thoroughly sufficient unto conversion and the leading of a
life acceptable to God. Answer: Go (...)eaketh in this place of the So Hierom
on this place, ^oquitur de sufficientia externorum m (...)rum, non inter(...)
gratiae.
sufficiency of outward means, that is, of the preaching of his word, of his
benefits, and chastisements whereby they were sufficiently invited and lead
unto salvation, but that they were of such p^^^ish and perverse dispositions.
God therefore did that to this wicked vineyard, which if he had done in a good
vineyard, it would have brought forth the fruit of obedience. And here he
speaks not of the sufficiency of inward grace, whereby an evil vineyard
might be changed into a good vineyard. Thou w^lt say, that God then has no
just cause to expostulate with the Jews, that they brought not forth fruit;
because he gave them not grace to repent and bring forth fruit which could by
no means be had, if he do not give it. I answer, that God could not justly
have expostulated with the Jews, if he had owed them grace, and being bound
to give it had not guen it: if they had not cast away the grace which they
reciued in their first parents by which they might have brought forth fruit
beseeming repenta(...): if he had denied them being anew desirous to receive
the grace which now is lost: But God is bound to no man: and we have cast away
that grace which was bestowed in Adam; And we do not desire nor care for it
being cast away: therefore God does most justly expostulate with us, if we bring
not forth fruit.

Object. II. Matthew. 23. 37. How often would I have gathered thy children
together, and thou would not. How did Christ will, and so will that he
complains of those who would not, if he had not through his help made them
able will, whom he knew could not will? Answer. Christ is here said to have
willed to gather them together not by the will of his good pleasure, Voluntate
ben^placi^i. volu^^. signi.
which may never be resisted, but by his signifying or revealed will. For he
is said to will to gather all unto himself, because by the preaching of the
word he calls all in commune unto salvation, and prefixeth to himself this
end of preaching, that they should commit themselves to his protection and
fidelity. By this will therefore he may will to gather the Jews together,
though in the mean time he do not help them, that they themselves may be
able to will. And he does also justly complain of those that will not, because
men's impotencie to that which is good, and their bondage under sin, whereby
they are made to nill, and unable to will that which is good, comes not from
the Creator, but from him who of his own accord fell away from the Creator.
Secondly, I say that Christ is here said to have willed, not as he is God
effectually mollifying and converting the hearts of men, but as he was a
minister of the circumcision, whiles he sought the Romans 15. 8,
conversion of the Jews by preaching. A place altogether like is in Act. 7.
51. where the Jews are said to have rushed against or resisted the holy Ghost.
But these words are (...).
to be understood, not in regard of the inward and effectual operation of the
spirit, but in respect of the outward ministry of the Prophets. It pleased
Lumbard also to interpret this place: How often would I have gathered thy
children, and thou would Lib. 1. did. 16.
not? thus: So many as I have gathered together, I did it by my effectual
will, thou being unwilling.

Object. III. Revel. 3. 20. I stand at the door and knock, if any shall open
it unto me I will come in unto him. Therefore all, at whose door Christ
knocks, have sufficient grace whereby they are able to open if they will. He
is unwise that knocks at the door, if he know assuredly that there is no
body within that is able to open it. Answer: This place favors not
universal grace, for these at whose door Christ knocks are chose which
believe and are converted: and he knocks at their hearts, partly by his
word, partly by afflictions, that he might stir up their languishing faith,
and increase and confirm his fellowship with them. You may read the like in
Cant. 5. 1. 2. Open unto me my sister, my love, my dove?

Tenthlie, this platform disagreeth with it self. For it says that God does
Error 10.
confer unto all men all the helps of nature and grace, and that he is not
wanting to any so, but that he may obtain salvation. But I say, and that out
of this platform, that God is wanting to some offenders; because he gives
them only a power to persevere in faith if they will: or (if you had rather) a
power to will to persevere; Posse velle perseuerare.
and makes the^ not to persevere actually and indeed. And unless this grace
be given, it is not possible, that any should obtain salvation by
perseuering. For it is a most sure rule: A man does not that good thing, which
by grace he is able for to do, unless God make him to do it, as he has made
him able to do it if he will. Therefore he, to whom the very act of
perseverance is not given, being smitten with the violence of some grievous
temptation, without delay will fall away from faith and shall be damned.

Lastly, this hypothesis or platform is Error 11.
but the varnishing and fresh trimming over of certain opinions, which the
Church in former ages did condemn. The Pelagians taught that all men were
redeemed Aug. cont. Iul. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 3.
by Christ, but not made free: because god distributed his gifts according to
the capablenes of the^ which came to receive them. The same did Faustus the
Pelagian also affirm: How has God (says he) redeemed Lib. degrat. and lib.
arb. 1 cap. 16.
all the world? do we not see men to line still in their sins. How shall
we think that they are ransomed whom we do see still to continue captives?
Let us gather that which is here men's by using a similitude; as for example: If
any ambassador or priest purposing to make intercession for a city taken by
war, shall bestow a very great ransom, and set free from his servitude who
is the chief Commander, all the multitude which is in captivity, in so much
that they are altogether delivered from all constraint on necessity of
bondage: and then if happily either their usual delight, or some soothing
slave, shall so instantly urge some of the captives, as that every one turning
servant and slave to his own will, shall refuse that freely bestowed benefit:
shall we^ say that the contempt of the unthankful captive has lessened the
estimation of the ransom? or that he which refuses liberty, does any way
diminish the good will of him that ransometh? surely no. For even as he which
returns may be well accepted with him that does ransom him, so is he
guilty of contempt who did not return. Thus we see that the Pelagians did
forge or frame a redemption through Christ, without deliverance. And what else
do they who publish in their pamphlets, that all and every one on Gods part
are redeemed, but not saved, because they will not believe? And now let us
hear the confutation of this opinion. Augustine says: You say they are
redeemed, Cont. Iul. lib. 3. cap. 3.
but they are not delivered; they are washed, but they are not cleansed --:
these be your monstrous opinions --: these are the paradoxes of the Pelagian
heretics, etc. but I pray thee tell me how can this redemption be understood,
if he do not redeem from evil, which redeemed Israel from all their sins?
for wheresoever we make mention of redemption, there also is understood a
ransom: and what is that but the precious blood of the imma^ulate lamb Christ
Jesus? and concerning this ransom, why should we ask any other, wherefore it
was given? let him that gave the ransom, let him that paid the price make the
answer. This is, says he, my blood which is shed for many for the remission
of sins. Proceed, I pray proceed, and as you say in the Sacrament of our
Savior, men are baptized, but they are not saved: they are redeemed, but they
are not delivered: -- so say you also; Christ's blood is shed for them for the
remission of sins, but they are cleansed by the remission of no sin. They
are wonderful, strange, and untrue things which you affirm. Council. Valent.
Anno 85^. cap. 4.
Concerning the redemption of Christ's blood, by reason of the exceeding errors
which have grown in respect thereof, in so much that some, even as their own
writings do witness, do hold that it was shed even for those ungodly ones,
who from the beginning of the world until the passion of our Lord, were dead
in their ungodliness, and punished with eternal damnation, contrary to that
saying of the Prophet: O death, I will be thy death, and thy sting O Hell: we
do decree that it ought simply and faithfully to be held and taught, according
to the Evangelical and Apostolical truth, that we judge that this ransom was
given for them, of whom the Lord himself says: Even as Moses lifted up the
Serpent in the wilderness: so must the Son of man be lifted up, that every
one which believes in him may not perish, but have eternal life. So God loved
the world that he gave his only begotten son, that every one that believed
in him might not perish, but have everlasting life. And the Apostle says,
Christ was once offered for the taking away of the sins of many.

Prosper ascribes this platform of general Spist. ad August.
grace unto the Pelagians. This is (says he) their very opinion and
profession: That Adam sinning, every man sinned, and that no man is saved by
his own works, but by the grace of God in regeneration. And yet that the
reconcilement which is in the sacrament of Christ's blood, is without exception
offered unto all men, so that whosoever will come unto faith and baptism may
be saved, and that God did foreknow before the creation of the world, who
should believe, or who should remain in that faith, which must afterward be
propped and helped by his grace, and that he predestined them unto his
kingdom, who being freely called, he foresaw that they would be worthy of
election, and that they would depart out of this life making a good end. And
that therefore every man is provoked to believe and do good by godly
institutions, that no man may despair of the attainement of eternal life,
seeing that there is a reward prepared for a voluntary devotion. The
difference I confess consists in this, that the Pelagians do either wholly
ascribe unto nature the ability to do well, or else partly to nature, and
partly to grace; but this platform ascribes all things wholly unto grace,
which indeed is very right: but whilst they go about to ordain universal
grace, they do not free themselves, but are rather more entangled. For most
true is that saying of Peter Martyr: Whilst these men make grace so common to
all, they turn grace into nature. And I would willingly Io^. Com. class. 3. c.
1.
be certified, whether they who have received this grace, be regenerate or no:
if they be regenerate, then all men are regenerate: if they be not regenerate,
then have all men power to believe and to attain salvation if they will, yea
even whilst they remain unregenerate. But this power, if it be in man before
his conversion, will not differ much from nature. And if so be that grace
extend as far as nature, we must not pray more for grace than for nature:
neither need we any more pray for the conversion of unbelievers, because it
is in their own power, by reason of general grace, to be converted if they
will. Prosper also ascribes this platform to the Pelagians in these verses:
Lib. car. de ingratis.


Thus we determine of that grace that makes
Us Gods own people, and to him full dear:
But ye affirm that no man it forsakes,
But that the world from sin it freeth clear
And passing none, does proffer mere salvation
To all without exception; yet they come
Guided by their own list to this vocation,
And motions of the mind, directing some,
To the embracing of that offered light
Which unto all that will, does clear the sight.
But afterward he condemns it in this sort:

Lets see how you can prove, that Christ his grace
Prossers Gods kingdom and true blessedness
To all men borne, letting none ouerpasse,
To Whom it grants not this happiness.
When even at this time thorough the whole worlds frame
And compass of the earth, wherein we live,
Christ Gospel is not known, nor yet his name;
I cannot say but that he could it give
Even at the first, to all that breathe on earth
Or ever in this world received birth.
And again he says:

If no man be whom he will not redeem,
No doubt but that his will shall be effected,
But of a great part he makes no esteem,
Who in infernal darkness live rejected.
Now if the diverse motions of the mind,
And a peculiar perfect liberty
Do make a different cause, to all mankind,
Gods will most free from inabilitie
Either receives strength, from humane pleasure
Or wants strength, when will attaines that treasure.
And again; he answers the Pelagians, who say that by willing it we are
able to attain Gods grace, or else to resist it by nilling it, after this
manner:

How falls it out that this almighty grace
Which saves all, reiects the work it wrought,
When neither cause, condition, time, nor place
Can for a hindrance thereunto be brought?
And again:

What would you say when you do plainly see
How Christ his grace in twins a difference makes,
And those who at one time conceived be,
And whom the world into her bosom takes
It does distinguish, granting one heavens bliss
The other Hell, where grief and horror is?
To say the will directs, you speak amiss.
And again:

No man can hold them justly culpab^s
Or guilty of this sin to whom Gods might
Did never show it self so favorable
As to appear, no not in glimmering light.
Faustus the Semipelagian accused the Lib. 1. de lib, arb. cap. 19.
Catholics, in that they said that our Lord Jesus Christ did not take upon
him man's flesh for all men, nor died generally for all. And on the other side
the Catholics accuse the Pelagians, in that they say that God repelleth none
from eternal life, but is willing, Prosper. ep. ^d August.
indifferently that all men * should be saved and to come unto the knowledge of
the truth. And again: that they say that our Lord Jesus Christ died for all
mankind, and that no man is utterly exempted from the redemption of his blood,
although he lead all this his life estranged from him: because that the
sacrament of Gods grace appertains unto all men: whereby many are not
therefore regenerated: because they are foreknowne, that they have not a will
to be regenerated; and that therefore on Gods part, eternal life is prepared
for all men: but in respect of the freedom of the will, they say that they
only attain everlasting life who do of their own accord believe. And again
they say, that they will not admit of that exposition of that saying, which is
alleged out of Augustine: which is, that unless be will have all men to be
saved. And again: not only those which appertain unto the number 1. Tim. 2.
of the faints: but all men altogether, without exception of any.

I wish also that thing were marked: Hilar. epist. ad August.
namely that the Catholics are accused by the Pelagians, that under the name
of predestination they did establish a certain fatal necessity: and that
they made a kind of violent preordination. Which accusation has also been laid
against us. And the like crime shows the like cause.

Lastly, this platform does passing well agree with that doctrine concerning
predestination, which is generally maintained in the schools, and Synagogues
of the Papists: yea verily to speak the truth, it seems to be borrowed even
from thence. For if we well consider of the matter, what else has Pighius
taught? What else has Cartharinus maintained? and else at this day do the
gross fat Monckes maintain? who imparke Gods actions in the case of
predestination, within these pales. First, say they, God foresaw the natures
and sins of all men. Then prepared he Christ the redeemer; Afterward, he
willed for the merit of Christ foreseen to bestow sufficient helps of Grace
upon all men, whereby they might be saved through Christ: And he would it
even in this, so much as in him was, that all men might be saved, his will
preceding. Lasily, he did mercifully predestinate those, whom he did see would
end their lives in Gods favor: and he did justly reject othersome, either for
original or actual sins, in which he foresaw they would end their lives.

A Corolarie, or addition. A most certain theoreme or undoubted truth.
GOD HAS NOT REVEALED Christ unto all and every man.
The Proofs.
This is evident by Scriptures and experience. Isai. 52. 14. That which has
not bin told them, shall they see, and that which they have not heard, they
shall understand. Isai 55. 5. Behold thou shall call a nation, which thou have
not known: and nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee. Isai 65. 1. I
have bin sought of them, that asked not before, I was found of them, that
sought me not. Osec 1. 10. And in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are
not my people. Osec 2. 23. I will have mercy upon her that was not pitied, and
I will say to them which were not my people, thou art my people. Act. 14. 16.
God in times past suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own ways. Act.
71. 30. And the time of this ignorance God regarded not, but now he admonishes
all men euer^e where to repent. Romans 16. 25. 26. To him now that is of power to
establish you according to my Gospel and preaching of Jesus Christ, by the
revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, but
now is opened. Colos. 1. 26. 27. Which is the mystery hid since the world began
and from all ages, but now is made manifest to his saints, to whom God would
make known what is the riches of this glorious mystery among the Gentiles.
Ephesians. 2. 12. Ye were at that time without Christ, and had no hope, and were
Atheists or without God in the world. (...).
Ephesians. 3. 5. The mystery of Christ in other ages was not opened unto the
sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his holy Apostles. Psalm. 147. 19. 20.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel:
He has not dealt so with every nation, neither have they known his
judgments.

The most wise Philosophers among the Gentiles have indeed smattered many things
of God: but in the mean time what say they of Christ? why should they be so
exceeding silent in this point, if Christ were revealed unto all? Socrates
being ready to die said, I depart out of this life, and they do live with
whom I am thoroughly Lact. lib. 7. cap. 2.
to plead my cause: whether it be good the immortal Gods do know: and
indeed I think no man knows: And we owe (says he) O Crito a co^ke to
Aesculapius to pay the price of the potion. It is reported that Aristotle being
ready to die, cried out, O thou which art the chiefest thing of all things Ens
entium miserere mei.
which are, have mercy upon me.

The Gentiles knew not God that great benefactour, and therefore fained unto
themselves certain saviors, Castor, and Pollux, and Hercules, called (...),
that is, a helper in distress, or repeller of evils; and Aesculapius the
Physician. Solinus says, that there is not as yet any of Collectar. 5. cap. 7.
the Gentiles found, who has attained unto the height of felicity, and may
justly be accounted happy. Albinus speaks thus: When such like questions are
propounded, why one is judged thus, and another after another manner, why this
man is blinded God giving him over, and another enlightened through Gods
assistance, let not us presume or take upon us to judge of the judgment of so
great a Judge, but with trembling let us cry out with the Apostle, O the depth.

Consectarie I.
The promise concerning the seed of the woman belongs not to all and to every
one: For a promise to whom it is not revealed, is not actually a promise.

Consectarie II.
Howsoever the redemption, that is by Christ, belongs unto all, yet it
belongs not to all and to every one. For a benefit to be perceived or received
by a supernatural faith, if it be not revealed, is no benefit.

Consectarie III.
Vocation and universal saving grace belongs not to all and every particular
person; for God calls us by revealing and offering Christ to us.

Consectarie IIII.
The foreknowledge of faith in Christ, and of Contempt of the Gospel.
privative infidelity is not the square and rule according to which God has
ordained and disposed his predestination: because there be very many that
never so much as heard of Christ; in whom therefore there is neither faith in
Christ, nor privative infidelity, or contempt of the Gospel.

Trini-vni Deo gloria.

FINIS.

